



















































Hansard: February 03, 1947


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Fourth Session — Tenth Legislature 

3rd Day 

 

Monday, February 3, 1947. 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

Mr. J. Gibson (Morse) moved, seconded by Mr. H. L. Howell (Meadow Lake): 

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE REGINALD JOHN MARSDEN PARKER, Lieutenant 

Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 

 

We, His Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious speech which Your 

Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I want to voice thanks for the honor conferred upon me in being selected as the 

mover of this motion. I realize, of course, and appreciate the fact that the honor is not accorded me 

personally, but rather the people of the constituency of Morse who sent me to this Chamber to represent 

them for the remainder of the lifetime of this Legislature. 

 

The duty assigned me of moving this traditional motion is a difficult one. I come here a new Member, as 

yet uninformed of the ways of this Legislature, unschooled in its methods and procedures. Had the 

choice been left to me, I should have preferred at this first Session, to be a listener, a learner, an 

observer, leaving to the more skilled parliamentarians the conduct of the proceedings and of the debates. 

 

The moving of this motion will inaugurate proceedings in what I hope and anticipate will be an 

outstanding, even an historic, Session of the Saskatchewan Legislature — historic because of the 

Dominion-Provincial agreement this House will be asked to ratify, historic also because it will carry a 

step farther the Government’s “New Deal” for the people of this province. Speaking of the 

Government’s “New Deal”, I would like to take this opportunity to compliment the Government for the 

speed and efficiency with which it has enacted, or set about enacting, all of the CCF program as laid 

down for it by the rank and file of the CCF members at their annual conventions in this province. 

 

I would like to say that I fully endorse the actions of the Government to this time, and that I am proud to 

be a Member of this first Socialist Government in Canada. I am glad to know that the majority of the 

Members are farmers, for that is as it should be in a province where so much of our economy depends 

on 

agriculture. I would like to repeat, what has been said by many influential people and newspapers not 

only throughout Canada but from other parts of the world as well, not only by people and newspapers 

with a socialist viewpoint but also by people and newspapers with a decidedly capitalist viewpoint, that 



February 3, 1947 

this is the first Government in the history of this province to take its election pledges seriously, the first 

Government in the history of the province to enact so much of its election platform in so short a time. I 

want to make it clear also, at this time that I am ready to assist, and co-operate with any group or party 

in this House in the enactment of any legislation which I believe to be beneficial to the people of this 

province. 

 

As a farmer, I have always been keenly and actively interested in the struggle of farmers and labourers 

alike, in this province, to obtain for themselves a fairer share of the wealth which they produce. The 

farmers, I am sorry to say, have not been able to present the united front in this struggle which I should 

have liked to see them present. It is true they have built up their co-operatives and Wheat Pool, both of 

which are outstanding successes, and which have to some extent raised our standard of living; but many 

farmers still seem to be indifferent or reluctant to lend their support to some form of a national farmers’ 

union, while, on the other hand, all other major labor groups are yearly becoming more and more united. 

 

We have, in this province, the first Department of Co-operatives in any province of Canada. This 

Department has been of great assistance to the co-operative movement and we expect to see a further 

expansion of this assistance during the coming year, especially with the object of developing trade 

between the co-operatives of this province and the co-operatives of all other lands. To the end that 

Saskatchewan products may find world markets, the Government has appointed a commercial 

representative to London. We believe that we have been fortunate in gaining the services of Mr. Graham 

Spry for this post. Mr. Spry is thoroughly and intimately associated with the co-operative movement in 

this country, and although a western Canadian, he has a personal acquaintance with some members of 

the British Government and with members of the co-operative societies in Great Britain and in Europe, 

and we expect that this appointment will facilitate greatly the development of trade between Europe and 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Knowing as we do that the majority of people of Saskatchewan are of the working class, this 

Government, since taking office, has been greatly interested in the labor and workers’ movement. It has 

passed much legislation beneficial to the workers. Some of the Acts passed include: The Annual 

Holidays-With-Pay Act; The Trade Union Act; The Minimum Wage Act, and many other beneficial 

Acts, and in the Speech from the Throne we are informed that during this Session an Act will be 

introduced to further shorten the hours of labor in many types of businesses without in any way 

interfering with the efficiency of our agricultural economy. 

 

Our Natural Resources and Industrial Development Department has given much time and labor not only 

towards the development of our natural resources but towards their conservation for further use, 

especially in the timber areas which were very much depleted when this Government took office and 

which, in some cases, seem to have been almost wantonly destroyed. Great 

  



February 3, 1947 

15 

 

development has taken place in the northwest area of the province, in the gas fields in that area, during 

the past year, and the recent oil strike in the Lloydminster area shows great promise. The Government 

has set up an experimental oil refinery in Regina to establish a process of refining the special heavy 

crude oil from this area. 

 

The provincially-owned and operated industries which have been set up include a brick factory, a 

woollen mill, a shoe factory, a ceramics works, a tannery, two fish filleting plants, a timber marketing 

agency, a fur marketing service and the publicly-owned and operated transportation system which has 

operated buses in the province during the past year. The overall picture of these industries has exceeded 

all expectations, and although they have only been in operation for a short time, they show a balance on 

the credit side of the ledger. We expect further to develop those industries during the coming year. 

 

The heavy snow fall, with the accompanying high winds of this unusual winter, has created considerable 

hardship throughout the province. Roads have been blocked, even the railways have been blocked, and 

many towns have been short of necessary supplies. The Department of Highways, in attempting to keep 

some of those roads open — the necessary, vital, roads open — has found the task a very costly and well 

nigh impossible one, but I think most of the people of the province believe that the Department has done 

all that could be expected of it under the circumstances. During the past year over 400 miles of 

highways were built in the province, over 1,000 miles of roads were gravelled, and a program of 

hard-surfacing was commenced which will be carried on and enlarged during the present year. 

 

The new style of road being built by the Department of Highways is worthy of mention, with its wider 

right-of-way, its safety features such as longer sight lines and easier curves, its four-to-one slope on the 

embankments and three-to-one slope on the sides, all making for easier and safer driving as well as 

making provision for the heavier traffic to which we expect our roads to be subjected in the near future. 

 

Another new feature of the Highways Department of special interest to farmers is the seeding of road 

sides to grasses as the roads are built, thereby reducing the weed menace which, in the past, has been so 

dangerous to the surrounding country, and which was so hard to combat owing to the inaccessibility of 

the old type of ditch. 

 

Another feature is the policy of gravelling roads as soon as they are built, thereby reducing the danger of 

the roads being destroyed by traffic during wet spells before they are gravelled. 

 

In 1937, in this province, many thousands of farmers found that they were faced with an almost total 

crop failure, with the result that, in the spring of 1938, they found it necessary to get Government 

assistance to provide them with the necessary seed and seeding supplies for that year. In order to get this 

seed they had to sign a note for the amount. The price charged for this seed was some 40 to 50 per cent 

more than the price that this grain had been just a few months previous, and the crop which this seed 

yielded in most cases was so heavily infested with rust that it yielded little more than would pay the cost 

of harvesting and threshing, with the result that most of the farmers that year found themselves unable to 

do anything about 

  



February 3, 1947 

reducing this debt. Then, too, as some of us will well remember, we had a series of bad crops and low 

prices, until the farmers were faced with a debt which they did not think they would ever be able to pay. 

So, through their farm organizations, and especially through the Association of Rural Municipalities of 

Saskatchewan, they made representations to their governments to have some adjustment made on this 

seed grain debt. The adjustment suggested by the Rural Municipalities’ Association was that the 

Government accept 50 per cent of the principle amount as payment in full of this debt. This the Liberal 

Government of Saskatchewan, and the present Liberal Government at Ottawa steadfastly refused to do, 

and the farmers of the province had to await the election of the CCF Government in order to obtain this 

adjustment. This was one of the first things that this Government gave its attention to, with the result 

that some $3 million has been paid on this debt since the adjustments were made. This seed grain 

adjustment is expected to cost the Government some $12 million, and legislation is to be introduced at 

this Session to wipe off seed grain debts for 1935, 1936 and 1937. This is expected to involve a further 

sum of $21 million or a total seed grain adjustment of over $30 million. I can assure this House that the 

farmers of the province appreciate most highly what has been done for them in the adjustment of these 

old debts. As I have said over $30 million will be the cost of this adjustment. It is a lot of money. It will 

take a lot of Education Tax to add up to $30 million and a lot of three-cent gas tax to add up to it. It has 

been said that actions speak louder than words, and if we judge the Liberal Party in this country by their 

actions, then it is just $30 million more than the farmers of this province would have gotten from the 

Liberal Party. 

 

We have now some 45 larger school units organized and in operation in the province. This system of 

education has long been overdue in Saskatchewan. In the school unit district in which I reside (that is the 

Moose Jaw School Unit) and with which I am reasonably familiar, I find that the assessment values of 

the different school districts in that unit range from a low of $22,000 to a high of $483,000; and I find 

that the mill rate for 1945 (the year previous to the formation of the unit) ranged from nothing for some 

of the non-operating schools to rates of from 2 ½ to 27 mills for the operating schools. I ask you, how 

could we say that the children of the Province of Saskatchewan had equal education opportunities with 

such inequalities in assessment values and mill rates with the single unit of administration still in effect. 

The larger school unit provides educational facilities which we could not hope ever to have seen 

provided by the single unit. One of those facilities provided by some of the units is the “helping 

teacher”; quite a number of the units already have “helping teachers”. There is a very limited supply of 

those “helping teachers”. Then too, many of the units have audio-visual teachers. The audio-visual 

equipment, I might say at this time, has been provided at a very low cost by one of the Departments of 

the Government. This equipment was bought through the War Assets Corporation; it is new equipment, 

and it is being sold to the units at cost, very reasonable in fact. The Department has also a laboratory (a 

place at the back of the Legislative Building here, somewhere) to repair and make those audio-visual 

sets, and to keep the films in repair and in good shape. This is all done free of charge to the school units. 

Other educational facilities provided by some of the larger units by the most of them, I believe, include 

assistance to high school students. This in itself is very important, for there are 

  



February 3, 1947 

17 

 

many students today receiving high school assistance which was formerly denied them. Another service 

they are providing — a very efficient service — is the Travelling Library. I believe that most of the units 

intend to put this in operation shortly. This assures a frequent supply of new books to all the schools in 

the unit. The Department has a qualified librarian to assist the units in the choice of those books so that 

they can be co-ordinated with the curricula, and the Department also has provided facilities so that the 

school units can get those books at wholesale cost. 

 

The Government also has spent considerable sums of money in the northland. When this Government 

took over, educational facilities in the northland were practically non-existent. In a recent issue of the 

Regina Leader-Post, January 28th last, a brief summary was given of some of the work done by the 

Department of Education in the northland and considerable praise was given in that editorial to the 

Minister of Education for his work in this connection. 

 

It is regrettable that no mention has been made in the Dominion-Provincial Agreement of assistance for 

this building of national and international highways, nor of further assistance towards old age pensions, 

nor of the Dominion-Provincial health scheme, nor for aid to the unemployed. These are some of the 

social services which the Federal Government promised if all of the provinces signed the 

Dominion-Provincial Agreement. At the moment, several of the provinces have agreed to sign on the 

dotted line and we believe that most of the others will be compelled by pressure of public opinion to 

sign. We believe that it is not too much to hope that in the near future we may have in this province a 

Dominion-Provincial system of health insurance, and with this end in view the Government has assisted 

in the setting up of health regions throughout the province with the intentions of having them fit into this 

Dominion-Provincial health scheme if, and when, it comes into force. 

 

On the first of last month, The Provincial Hospitalization Act came into force. I am given to understand 

that since this Act came into force the hospitals have been filled to capacity. This in itself could well 

prove that this Act was long overdue. I see by a recent issue of the Leader-Post that the absentee leader 

of the Liberal Party in this province is quoted as having the services provided in this Act for $3 or less 

per year. I am sure the Members of the Government will be pleased to know that these services can be 

provided for this sum; but I am quite sure that there are very few Members, if any, in the Government, 

who believe they can be provided for the sum which the Government set out to be charged for them. I 

am wondering why, if the Liberals knew that these services could be provided for such a sum, the people 

of this province have been so long denied those services. 

 

When this Government took office, Saskatchewan bonds were selling well below cost and today the 

public are offering for the same bonds handsome premiums for their purchase and the credit of 

Saskatchewan today is the highest in the history of the province. The Government Automobile Insurance 

Act is one of the finest Acts passed by this Legislature. It provides insurance at the lowest rate for the 

same privilege, and, although accidents during the past year have increased and some 1,500 claims for 

compensation were received and paid, it will 

  



February 3, 1947 

still show a handsome balance on the credit side of the ledger. Other insurance business in which the 

Government is engaged takes in almost every type of insurance excepting life insurance. This business, 

too, is expanding rapidly, and like the automobile insurance, we expect further expansion in this field 

during the year. It is proposed, also, to give, during this session, a further coverage on the automobile 

insurance. 

 

Many thinking men and women today are very much concerned about the state of world affairs. Most of 

us thought that with the cessation of hostilities after the Second World War, we might be able to replace 

the old competitive system of trade and commerce between nations by a co-operative system. We have 

felt that perhaps we might be able to see in this world a co-operative commonwealth of nations, 

permanently in co-operation and at peace with each other. Instead, we find suspicion, war and rumors of 

war, and racial and religious intolerance rampant in many parts of the world; and it seems to me that, 

unless each and all of us do what we can to bring about co-operation and goodwill among the people of 

this world and among the nations of this world, we may well expect to find ourselves in the midst of 

another world war. 

 

In June last, there was a by-election held in the Morse constituency. It turned out to be a three-cornered 

fight: the Liberals had a candidate, the Conservatives had a candidate, and myself for the CCF. Both the 

Liberals and the Conservatives claimed that the issue in that by-election was Socialism versus 

Capitalism on free enterprise. Needless to say, we were more than willing to accept that issue. Our 

socialist Government had at that time been in office for nearly two years, and we had its record in office 

to assist us in the by-election. Among other things our political opponents spent a great deal of time in 

condemning the new Automobile Insurance Act which had just been enforced for a few short months. 

They said, among other things, that the Government knew nothing whatever about the insurance 

business and that, in short, the scheme was doomed to failure. Well, I think that perhaps their faces have 

reddened somewhat since, for we now have proof that this scheme has provided benefits, not only to 

those who suffered injury and received compensation, but to the taxpayers of this province, in general, 

by the increased revenues, and now with the possibility of increased coverage. This was the third 

by-election held in the province since this Government took office, and like the other two by-elections, 

this also proved to be an outstanding indication of the Government’s record. 

 

Crop conditions throughout the area in this constituency ranged from very poor to very good, depending 

on the rainfall. Much of this constituency is given over to mixed farming and ranching, and this has been 

a particularly hard year on this type of farming, and it is to be hoped that, another year, farmers and 

ranchers and municipalities alike will take greater advantage of the committees that have been set up by 

the Department of Agriculture to advise them on feed problems and to assist in the building up of feed 

banks for just such a winter as this. The Government Hospitalization scheme commends itself very 

highly to the people of the Morse constituency. There has been some friendly rivalry between 

communities in the constituency as to where the different union hospitals should be located, but I am 

satisfied that some amicable settlement can be reached for the mutual benefit of all. 

 

During the past year, the Government commenced the setting 

  



February 3, 1947 

19 

 

up, in the Morse constituency, a sodium sulphate plant. This plant is situated adjacent to the town of 

Chaplin and is bounded on the north side by No. 1 Highway and by the main line of the CPR. 

Considerable work was done in the development of this plant during the past summer. Huge ditches 

were dredged out away out into the lake; two very large reservoirs were erected; the pumping station 

was built, and the pumps installed. One of the reservoirs was filled and drained again (as it was meant to 

be) leaving a considerable amount of the raw product in the reservoir. Some buildings which had been 

purchased through a Department of the Government and the War Assets Corporation, were moved, I 

believe, from the Mossbank Airport and placed on foundations there, last fall. Others are to be moved 

there in the spring and it is expected that a spur track will be built from the main line of the CPR which 

is only a stone’s throw from these buildings, and operation is expected to be in full swing towards the 

end of this year. When the plant is operating at capacity, it is expected that it will employ at least 30 

men. 

 

It is my privilege therefore, to move, seconded by the Hon. Member for Meadow Lake, Mr. Howell: 

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

Mr. H. Howell (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, before discussing the subject matter of the Speech 

from the Throne, I should like, first of all, to congratulate the Member who has just spoken. First, I 

would like to congratulate him on his election to this Legislature and secondly, I would like to 

congratulate him on the very excellent address which he has just given. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that it is 

one of the finest addresses that I have listened to since I have been a Member of this House. He is by 

occupation a farmer, a representative of one of the southern constituencies. For my part, I am a retail 

merchant, a representative of one of the northern constituencies — a northern constituency which has 

within it a part of our agricultural frontier; a northern constituency which is vitally interested in the 

program for the rehabilitation of our fur industry, our fishing industry, and our timber industry. For that 

reason, I should like, this afternoon, to confine my remarks mainly to the measures which are now being 

taken to rehabilitate those three industries, and to contrast, as far as possible, present with past policies 

in that regard. 

 

In the case of the fur industry, I should like to point out some of the predominant features that prevailed 

before this Government took office. Prior to 1944, a few special trapping leases were granted here and 

there in the northern parts of the province. The person who obtained such a lease would usually hold it 

for a period of about ten years, and in return he would pay a nominal fee of somewhere around $25 a 

year for that privilege. But, by and large, the bulk of the trapping was carried on in what we might call a 

hit-and-miss fashion, or as it is better known among the trappers, in the way of “gypsy trapping”. 

 

Before I go into the new program, into the features of “gypsy” trapping and so on, I should like to say a 

little more about the policies of the old Government with respect to fur leases. Some of the policies in 

that regard, and some of the features were quite good, others, I believe, rather unfortunate. One of the 

unfortunate features was that the lessee got no 

  



February 3, 1947 

security whatsoever beyond the period (usually a ten-year period) of his lease. That is to say, if he were 

to build a home on that lease for himself and his family, he had no security whatsoever beyond the term 

of his lease; at the end of the period the home was no longer his and he did not even have the privilege 

of selling it to someone else if he did not wish to renew the lease. The lessee was required or expected to 

take certain fire prevention measures, and was, as far as possible, to eliminate any poaching on the lease. 

As a consequence these leases did aim at some degree of permanency in the fur industry. It was 

regrettable, however, that there was not enough territory to provide adequate trapping grounds for all the 

trappers who wanted them and near agricultural settlements many grievances arose. Young lads and 

farmers living on lands near a registered trap line or trapping lease were not able to go on that lease and 

do any trapping and as a result infractions of the law and grievances often arose. Probably one of the 

most unfortunate difficulties of these leases was the feature of absenteeism. In case of absenteeism, it 

was found that there was always less development on the one hand and more poaching on the other 

hand. It was found that many of the lessees turned out to be people living far away from their trap lines. 

Some of them were hotel-keepers, some were farmers, others were factory workers. 

 

Mr. Feeley: — All good Liberals, anyway. 

 

Mr. Howell: — These conditions did not make for the best in the fur industry. It is the policy of the 

Department of Natural Resources at the present time to recognize these leases, to insist that the trapper 

get on his lease, improve and look after it, and, further, to give him security for the improvements which 

he may place on the lease at any time, to give him security to the extant that, if he desires to retire or to 

sell his lease to someone else, or should the lease not be renewed, the Department of Natural Resources 

will purchase his equity and in turn sell it to someone else. 

 

The main feature, however, in the program for the rehabilitation of the fur industry is that of the 

establishment of the fur conservation blocks. In this case, the aims are to provide for more trapping, to 

make way for more trappers, to give permanency to the residents so far as the trapping industry is 

concerned and to end this so-called “gypsy” trapping. 

 

“Gypsy” trapping was the type of trapping in effect until a short time ago, whereby persons could get a 

trapping licence to go and trap anywhere, except on a registered trap line or game preserve, regardless of 

whether it was near his home or not, regardless of whether or not he was going into territory where 

residents had nurtured the fur harvest over a period of time. The tendency was, in cases like that, to trap 

out the last fur-bearing animal possible. The residents, as a result, found themselves in a rather awkward 

position; that is to say, if they realized that a person from the outside could come in and take the fur 

catch from their own district which they had protected, which they had nurtured by leaving plenty of 

seed for subsequent years, they would become careless, not through desire but by force of circumstances 

and would decide that if somebody else could come in from the outside and trap out all the muskrats for 

example, they might as well do so themselves. The result of that policy was intermittent years of closed 

and open seasons. Closed seasons were certainly very bad for the economy of the 

  



February 3, 1947 

21 

 

country, first of all for the resident trappers and secondly, for all those who were dependent on them 

which would include more or less everyone else in the trapping area. In the case of open and closed 

seasons we find that, if there is an open season in one part of the province, or in one province, and a 

closed season elsewhere, we get into problems of illegal trapping, bootlegging of furs and many other 

difficulties which a policy of annual trapping year after year would avoid. Just so that I may explain the 

policy of “Gypsy” trapping and what it involves, in agricultural terms, I would like to point out that we 

would have somewhat the reverse of that policy if we had ever had in Saskatchewan a condition 

whereby those of us in the North, feeling ourselves a little hard-pressed economically, could go to the 

South, take out a harvesting licence, harvest any of the crop near at hand without any regard for the 

people who had nurtured those crops, were allowed to sell for the whole crop, seed and all, and then go 

back North to retire for the winter leaving the Government to put the South on relief. Then we would 

have just about the opposite of the condition that we have had in effect in the North with respect to 

trapping rights up there, where people from other parts of the province have, until the last year or so, 

been allowed to go and trap out the harvest which the people in the North had nurtured. 

 

The keynote in the development of the fur conservation blocks (to which I have already made reference) 

is the setting up of a trappers’ council. The trappers themselves have an annual meeting at which they 

elect a council usually of five members. This council becomes the point of contact between the officer of 

the Department of Natural Resources and the trapper. The council assists the Natural Resources agent to 

set out the quota for the people in the area. It assists him to eliminate poaching and illegal sales. It assists 

fellow trappers to improve methods of trapping and makes recommendations to the Department of 

Natural Resources for the cancelling of licences for cause or for the extending of licences to new 

trappers when conditions warrant this. Indeed, I am pleased to say it is a policy which has proven 

satisfactory among the trappers. 

 

In order to give the Members here a testimony of what one of the trappers of the north country thinks, I 

would like to quote a little bit from what he says in a letter to the Minister of Natural Resources. I am 

going to quote from a trapper who is well known to the Members here, a trapper whose name has 

probably appeared on the front page of our leading newspapers more than that of any other trapper, this 

past year or probably in modern times. I am referring to Mr. Alfred W. Wilson who, I am very proud to 

say, is a resident of my constituency; a very fine gentleman. I do not know him personally, but I know 

many people who do, and they all speak very highly of him. This is what he says in respect to the fur 

conservation plan: 

 

I have read the Gazette of November 30, 1946, about your regulations governing the fur conservation 

block. I appreciate the soundness of policy and realize that it will increase the fur and distribute it 

more evenly to those that need it. 

 

This was dated December the 9th last. 

 

Mr. Procter: — Is he dealing with beaver there? 

  



February 3, 1947 

Mr. Howell: — All fur that might be involved in a fur conservation block is being considered. 

 

Since a lot has been said and written with respect to Mr. Wilson, I would like to give the Members a 

brief history of this so-called “Wilson case”. I want to point out, right at the start, that I do not regard 

Mr. Wilson in any sense of the term as being the villain in the plot. 

 

Some three or four years ago, possibly five years ago, he acquired a lease on about a township of land — 

which is the usual size. Possibly without even setting a trap he left and went to do war work. I do not 

think that, in his leaving like that, he had any intentions of becoming an absentee trapper for any length 

of time. I believe he went to British Columbia to get a job, to make a little bit of quick cash, if possible, 

hoping then to come back and re-establish himself on his trap line. That is my firm conviction. But he 

had no sooner acquired a position in British Columbia than he found himself “frozen” to the job by a 

Federal Order-in-Council. It is unfortunate that he did not pay his annual fee for the next four years and, 

last spring, when the Department of Natural Resources wrote to him at this last known address of Neeb 

(the address which he has on his contract) the letter was returned to the Department stamped “Address 

unknown”. The Department, as a result, took the only action, in my opinion, which it could take. It took 

action under an Order-in-Council passed by the previous administration back in 1943, which in part 

reads like this: 

 

In the absence of the lessee on account of sickness or for any other reason, the Minister may authorize 

any other person to trap in the area for such period as may be stipulated by him. 

 

As a consequence, under the provisions of that Order-in-Council, three temporary muskrat trapping 

licences were granted on the lease which Mr. Wilson had at one time taken out, and which was still his 

so far as the Department of Natural Resources was and is concerned. 

 

The three gentlemen who took out these temporary trapping leases, or got temporary trapping rights, did 

not by any stretch of imagination trap out the whole area. In fact I am informed by people who trap and 

live in that district that they did not even reach their quotas. On the last day of trapping, last year, Mr. 

Wilson reappeared in the district with the intention of looking over his lease, possibly doing some 

trapping if it were not too late and no doubt with the idea of seeing what he could do to re-establish 

himself on the lease. He was informed by a friend who was travelling on the train with him, that there 

were three people with temporary licences trapping on his lease. Mr. Wilson then decided, I think, quite 

naturally, to stay on the train and to come to Meadow Lake to look into the status of his own trapping 

lease. While he was there the ball was taken from his feet, and the case passed into the hands of 

scheming lawyers and unscrupulous politicians. 

 

Mr. Feeley: — Mr. Tucker? 

 

Mr. Howell: — No, he did not go to see Mr. Tucker first nor even last, but he did go to see Mr. H.L. 

Cathrea, one of the lawyers 

  



February 3, 1947 

23 

 

in Meadow Lake, who decided for him that he should press for $10,000 damages for some $300 worth 

of fur which was taken from his lease under the terms which I have already indicated. Mr. Cathrea 

naturally got in touch with the Department of Natural Resources and was informed on the legal matters 

involved. It was pointed out to Mr. Cathrea that his client had no case in law whatsoever and as a result, 

no fiat permitting him to take action against the province for the $10,000 would be granted. Mr. Cathrea 

then wrote a letter to Mr. Wilson, his client, recommending that, since the Government was not prepared 

to act, he should turn over the information to the leaders of the Liberal and the Conservative Parties in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Wilson, being the type of gentleman that he is, wrote back in opposition to that 

course, but his will did not prevail and Mr. Cathrea gave the information to Mr. Tucker who has since 

taken up the case with great zest. I wonder if Mr. Tucker has been serious in this case! I wonder if he 

really believes that Mr. Wilson should receive $10,000 for $300 worth of fur. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — There are lawyer’s fees of course. 

 

Mr. Howell: — Mr. Wilson in a recent communication with the Department said that $1,500 would be 

plenty. Again I ask, can Mr. Tucker be serious in this matter? If he were to give, for instance, $10,000 

for approximately $300 worth of fur, I want to suggest to the Members that, if he had the opportunity to 

carry on a program like that, he would very soon put our provincial debt back over the $200 million 

mark. If Mr. Tucker is not serious in this matter I wonder if he is just kidding people like Mr. Wilson 

and the public, in general — and I somewhat object to his kidding anybody in my constituency or 

anywhere else for that matter. 

 

I regret very much that Mr. Tucker is not here so that he can tell us exactly where he stands on this issue. 

I believe, however, that Mr. Tucker’s stand is taken, at the present time, somewhat on the grounds that 

the Government should issue a fiat to anyone who wants to take action against the province, whether he 

has a case in law or merely a grievance. This, however, is a new departure so far as jurisprudence is 

concerned. Previous governments of this province and of the Dominion have never at any time allowed 

the public, who had no case in law but merely grievances, to involve either the Provincial Government 

or the Federal Government in needless and expensive litigation and since Mr. Tucker has some new 

slant on jurisprudence, I think that he should first of all have it tried out with the Federal Government 

with which he is connected. 

 

There are several other steps that the Department of Natural Resources has taken to rehabilitate the fur 

industry. They have, for example, built a number of dams to raise water levels for the benefit of the 

muskrat trapping industry. In areas where trappers have benefited from this they return 20 per cent of the 

proceeds to the Department of Natural Resources to offset the cost of that construction. I am happy to 

say that I have talked with trappers in my own constituency who have benefited from this. Their 

unanimous verdict is that they have not only benefited themselves financially but that in their own areas 

it will be possible in the future for far more trappers to be involved in the industry. In areas where the 

Department of Natural Resources so far has not had the expense of construction of dams and so on, the 

trappers 

  



February 3, 1947 

merely turn over 10 per cent of their muskrat trapping proceeds. 

 

There are two other measures too that I do not want to overlook. One is the planting, on a large scale, of 

wild rice for the benefit of muskrats and possibly other water and semi-water life, and the second, the 

transporting of live beaver from places where there are too many to areas where there are too few. It 

would be hard to say too much in praise of that policy, for the beaver are aptly referred to as “Nature’s 

engineers”. By the raising of water levels they will have a very beneficial effect in preventing and 

making it easier to put out forest fires and at the same time in saving countless numbers of wild life who 

might be destroyed by these forest fires. 

 

So in concluding that part of my remarks, I would like to point out that we have in the fur industry now 

a planned economy for an expanding business. Secondly, we have an orderly marketing of the furs 

through the Fur Marketing Service. For these policies there is, I know, general approval and 

commendation from the people engaged in the trapping industry of this province. 

 

When it comes to discussing the fishing industry what I have said with respect to the fur industry and 

what I shall say later with respect to the timber industry, can be somewhat repeated. In each case we 

have the story of an industry that was neglected, wantonly exploited year after year; the story of an 

industry which in some cases had practically disappeared; the story of an industry which is now being 

built up and revived to take an ever-increasingly important place in our economy. In the days of free 

enterprise it would be typical for a town the size of Meadow Lake to have one or two fish buyers. These 

buyers would, in a typical case, have the fisherman who did the work out on the lake economically 

under their thumb. They would, as they say, “stake” the fisherman, and the fisherman in turn would be 

compelled to buy all their provisions through that particular warehouse or through that particular 

merchant and at the end of the season these fishermen typically would find themselves remaining in debt 

to the merchant with the prospect before them of going out the following year in hope of paying off the 

debt and probably finding the same result occurring again. It is something like the case of a farmer who 

decides to buy land in thirty or forty annual payments from the CPR or some other private corporation or 

individual who finds himself more or less permanently in debt to that private corporation or individual. 

It was unfortunate, too, that in the days when free enterprise had full sway, the fish were dumped on the 

market in a very short period of time, very often in the period of just a few weeks. I do not think that I 

need to elaborate this point, because farmer Members here and residents of the province interested in 

agriculture know what it was like before the days of the Wheat Pool, when the major portion of the 

farmer’s crop was thrown onto the market in a short period of time, in a few weeks after harvest, with 

devastating results to the price. That has been going on in the fishing industry up until it was reorganized 

recently by the Department of Natural Resources. The fish buyers, I must say, typically had a disregard 

for the future welfare of our export market; such disregard had they that it was their policy, very 

frequently to mix good fish with fish of a parasitic infection. As a consequence of that policy, or lack of 

a constructive policy, they certainly put the fishing industry in Saskatchewan on the toboggan slide and 

it ended in a crash-landing with the Liberal Government in the summer of 1944. During the very week 

that this Government took office several carloads of that mixed fish was 

  



February 3, 1947 

25 

 

shipped back to Saskatchewan from the export market. Certainly the industry was ruined; something had 

to be done about it. Certainly the results of that situation required that a new approach be made to our 

fishing problem and any talk that anyone might try to originate here or there about the Department of 

Natural Resources or the Minister of Natural Resources ruining the fishing industry is sheer nonsense. It 

was ruined before he took office and the industry that is still here is here due to the forceful and correct 

policies which he has instituted. Something had to be done, as I said, to revive the fishing industry. The 

first thing was to classify the lakes into “A” and “B” class lakes. Under an “A” class lake, the whitefish 

could be exported as round fish, but from the “B” class lakes, the whitefish could be exported only as 

filleted fish. But just to keep the records straight, I want to point out to Members that this policy was laid 

down by the Federal Department of Fisheries. The regulations requiring the classification of the lakes 

was laid down for the prairie provinces, but the Federal Government having gone that far left it to each 

individual province (and quite rightly so) to work out its own program within those regulations. The 

Provincial Government has taken up the case at that point. 

 

Since I have mentioned something about parasitic infection, I want to explain briefly just what that 

involves. Farmers, ranchers or dairy farmers know quite well the effect of warble fly infestation which 

may infect cattle if they are not properly protected. This is simply an example of a parasite which may 

attack cattle under certain circumstances. Similarly we have parasites of various kinds affecting different 

kinds of plant and animal life. It is not surprising then to expect that we may have several in the fishing 

industry; but all fish are not affected in the same way. In some cases they are affected in the fleshy part 

of the body, in other cases in the stomach, and in others again they attack the liver only and so on. But in 

the case of the whitefish the story is different. The parasite, as commonly is the case, goes through 

several stages of development. First of all, a water flea eats the tapeworm egg. The egg hatches in the 

body of the water flea. The water flea is eaten by a whitefish. The parasite then goes through another 

stage of development to appear as a small grub near the backbone of the whitefish. The whitefish then 

may be eaten by the jackfish causing the parasite to go through a further stage into adult life to become a 

tapeworm in the stomach of the jackfish. It does not hurt the jackfish any more than possibly to make 

him a little more hungry and more apt to eat some more whitefish. The problem is what can we do about 

it. We have several “B” class lakes which cannot be fished unless the whitefish are filleted and it is not 

economically sound to fish for other fish and throw the whitefish away or try to avoid catching them. 

There are two things possible and two things are being carried on at the same time. One is a long-ranged 

policy of trying to eliminate the parasite. Here I must commend the Minister of Natural Resources for 

acquiring the services of a full-time biologist to work out this and other problems. The second measure 

is to fillet the whitefish. Filleting in the case of whitefish, or any fish, is something like the candling of 

eggs. In both cases a high-powered light is used so that the person operating it can ascertain the quality 

of the product. If a fillet has one or two cysts within it, caused by this grub that I mentioned, the cysts 

are cut out and the fillet is regarded as wholesome food. If it has more than two cysts it is thrown away 

and discarded as far as human consumption is concerned. 

  



February 3, 1947 

Some very unfair comparisons have been made, some of which have appeared in the Press, between the 

prices for whitefish from “A” class lakes and “B” class lakes. But in the case of “B” class lakes it must 

be pointed out that there is considerable cost involved in filleting the fish. There is considerable waste 

involved. Many fish have to be entirely discarded. So it is most unfair to make comparisons between 

prices of whitefish from an “A” class lake with those from a “B” class lake because in so doing one is 

considering two things which differ very greatly. The second great measure, second to that of 

establishing of the filleting plants, is that of setting up a fish marketing board. Three-quarters of the 

fishermen of Saskatchewan have asked for this and as a result we now have the orderly marketing of our 

fish. The Marketing Board pays for the fish on a down-payment plan, just about the same way as the 

Wheat Pool did from 1924 until the end of that decade. As a consequence you can expect that there is 

the same confusion now among fishermen as there was among farmers back in 1924-1925 and 1926 and 

so on, when in the case of wheat farmers the Grain Exchange tried to kid then that their interim and final 

payments would be very little or practically non-existent and tried to point out that on payment of the 

Grain Exchange would be higher than all of the others put together. The same thing is occurring so far as 

the fishermen are concerned in the northern part of Saskatchewan. The Department of Natural Resources 

is carrying on a program, a planned policy of production. The opening and closing dates of lakes are 

looked into very carefully in order to take the best advantage of the market, to keep a regulated supply of 

fish and a regulated volume of work. In my opinion, no industry can successfully be developed (no large 

scale industry anyhow) in just a few weeks of the year. Now, we have the fishing season spread out 

through the summer as well as through the winter. This gives the people in the fishing industry an 

opportunity to make a living at the fishing business. 

 

The question has been asked several times: Are the fishermen of the province being squeezed too hard 

by the Fish Board? In my opinion, the answer is most certainly, no; for they are assured of a steadily 

growing, permanent, fishing industry. No longer are lakes over-fished as they were in the typical days of 

free enterprise when it was not uncommon to find the limit exceeded by probably 100 per cent. More 

people are employed now in the Meadow Lake area — to which I wish to refer later on. There were, this 

season, 600 licences taken out where a year ago there were only 300. Part of this is due to the opening of 

four “B” class lakes which could not have been opened had we not established in Meadow Lake a 

fish-filleting plant. The fishermen are also assured of honest weights and better prices. I have found 

among the fishermen so far a feeling of being, I might say, “beaten” with respect to weight — the same 

feeling as Hopkins Moorehouse, in his book “Deep Furrows”, tells us that the farmers had before they 

were organized. Farmers in those days (as no doubt all of us know from either experience or having had 

it told to us) felt that they frequently did not get their correct weights or their correct grades from the 

elevators; and the same conditions and the same suspicions have grown up over a period of years among 

many of the fishermen of the north country. Now a good morale, a feeling that they are being honestly 

dealt with is being built amongst them. So far as prices are concerned, the prices of the Fish Marketing 

Board are considerably better than those offered by private enterprise. In the winter of 1945-46 (a year 

ago), the free enterprise merchants, the fish buyers, paid about nine cents a pound for 

  



February 3, 1947 

27 

 

fresh whitefish. The Fish Board paid a total of 17 cents. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Is that from “A” or “B” lakes? That’s what I want to know. 

 

Mr. Howell: — “A” lakes. There were no “B” lakes open in that area last year. 

 

Another thing that the Fish Board is doing for the fishermen is to help them to get on an economically 

sound footing. Thanks to this policy, many fishermen for the first time own their own nets and 

equipment. Where a fisherman is unable to buy nets and provide himself with necessary equipment, the 

Fish Board supplies them. He, in turn delivers his produce to the Fish Board which deducts from it the 

price of the nets and equipment. The fisherman is then well away for the future owning of his own nets 

and equipment. 

 

Some complaints, of course, have arisen. Some of them have appeared in the press. No doubt all the 

Members have heard about them from time to time and wonder if there is any justification for them. My 

opinion is that whenever any Government makes any fundamental and important changes, 

misunderstandings and certain misgivings are bound to occur. I think that that can be expected. But 

added to this natural possibility for misunderstandings, we have operating here and there throughout the 

north country a certain political party which has carried on a propaganda campaign whose effectiveness 

is somewhat dwindling; but in some areas the campaign has been directed to increasing the confusion, 

the misunderstandings, or misgivings, resulting in propaganda value and sometimes nuisance value so 

far as that organization is concerned. Apparently that organization is more concerned with a return to 

power than it is with a proper reorganization of the fur industry, the fishing industry and other natural 

resources of this province. I don’t feel alarmed at all, I am not ashamed to admit, that possibly some 

errors have been made in carrying out this policy — minor errors, I do believe; but the greatest error of 

all, in my opinion, would have been to sit down and do absolutely nothing about it, which is what the 

old Government did. 

 

The Government policy is rapidly proving its worth and we will find our fishing industry rehabilitated in 

the very near future. Perhaps we can say that it is well rehabilitated now; but I know that as time moves 

on more and more improvements will take place. 

 

In the case of the timber industry, there are three main problems; one, is fire prevention; another is better 

forestry methods, and the third planning for a permanent forest industry. In the case of fire protection, I 

must mention the valuable contribution made by the use of air patrols, which are able to spot fires much 

more quickly which are able to direct men and equipment to the scene if necessary and which are able to 

direct ground crews. I have already mentioned the transplanting of live beaver from one area to another 

with beneficial effect on forest conservation. More fire guards and roads are being built to assist in this 

worthy cause. 

 

For years we have had far too many timber operators in the north country. And far too many of them 

have as their policy to 

  



February 3, 1947 

“cut out and get out”. As soon as they get all the timber cut down, they move out and go somewhere 

else. At the rate that the timber of the North was being cut down in the decade prior to 1944, it is safe to 

say that we would not have had a stand left in possibly three or four years time. Certainly some planning 

has had to be done. Planning is being done to reduce the number of operations to a point that will 

roughly be equivalent to the annual growth of the timber. In that way we will have a permanent timber 

industry. This last year in some areas thinning was carried on to accelerate growth. In other areas some 

assistance was given by way of reforestation, and throughout the forest area there is more economical 

cutting. No longer can a person go out and merely take one tie from a tree. No longer can a person go 

and cut ties from trees which should be cut and sawn into lumber. Instead, an attempt is being made to 

utilize each area of the forest most economically. What is useful for saw logs is taken out in that manner; 

what is left if useful for ties, box wood, or pulp wood will be used to the best advantage. Finally, what is 

left which has no better use may be taken out as fuel wood. 

 

Then we have, as in the case of the two industries I have already mentioned, a board set up to market the 

product. What the Fur Exchange has done for the trapper, what the Wheat Pool has done for the farmer, 

what the Fish Marketing Board has done for the fisherman in this province, our Timber Board will do 

for the timber operators and for the fuel wood and pulp wood producers of this province. The alternative 

to the problem I have talked about would be that of neglect and of letting the whole forest area be cut 

down as fast as the operators want it to be cut down. Then we would be in the position of having to 

import lumber from the United States to build our own homes and so on. If there is any political party in 

this province that thinks we should have a policy like that in effect, a policy of going ahead and cutting 

all the forest down as fast as possible and then later on importing lumber, I think that party should come 

out and say so very soon. If it does not think so, I think it should cease criticizing what is being done to 

maintain a permanent timber industry. 

 

As I said at the outset, in my constituency we have a part of the agricultural frontier. These later districts 

were settled in the latter part of the ’twenties and the early part of the ’thirties and the difficulties of 

these people were typical with those of pioneers in many other areas. They had to contend with poverty, 

with worn out equipment; they had to build roads, schools and so on. They had also to break the virgin 

soil. In many areas they had to contend with trees, windfalls and sometimes with rocks. During the 

period of the early ’thirties nothing was done whatever to assist them; that is in any large measure other 

than that of direct relief. The problem of the typical farmer was something like this: He would manage 

to build some log buildings, then work out for a while to make a living for himself and his family; he 

would try to save a little to come back to the farm and get a few acres broken on it to grow a garden, 

some hay or some grain, then leave again in the same quest in hope of one day getting to a point where 

he would have an opportunity to stay at home and make his living right on the farm. 

 

Now, under the policy being carried out by the Department of Municipal Affairs, assistance is being 

given to any farmer with five years’ residence qualifications living in the areas where the Department of 

Municipal Affairs operates — up to $5 an 

  



February 3, 1947 

29 

 

acre each year for the clearing of land and $7 an acre for breaking it, until he has a total of seventy acres 

broken. He cannot receive assistance on more than twenty acres each year. The farmers then who get 

that assistance agree to pay back to the Department the cost of the breaking from the crops which are 

derived from the area for which the assistance was received. I need not comment on this at any great 

length. I would merely like to state what the farmers in my constituency who have been helped think 

about it and I have testimonials like this not from one but from many who have said: “My, I wish that 

the old Government had done this, years ago, instead of giving us direct relief. Had they done so, we 

would have found ourselves rehabilitated and able to make our living on the farm years ago”. 

 

Along with the rehabilitation measures in the natural resources and the agricultural land up North, I want 

to point to the road development that has gone hand-in-hand to assist in northern development and also 

to assist in the establishment of a mining industry and to assist in building up the tourist trade. I am 

thinking first of all of the main north-south roads which will lead, when completed (some of them are 

completed now) to places like Flin Flon, Lac La Ronge, Big River, Meadow Lake, and Goodsoil. In 

addition to the operations of the Department of Highways, we have the Local Improvement Districts 

Branch (Department of Municipal Affairs) which has for its task the building of a large number of 

market roads leading into these highways. In the years to come, the Department of Municipal Affairs 

will be building more and more feeder roads to lead into the market roads and market roads to lead into 

the highways which are now built or under construction. 

 

From the remarks I have made this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, one might expect to find a healthy economic 

condition throughout the north country; one might expect to find the towns there in a thriving condition 

and might expect the towns to be reflecting that good economic condition. In this respect, I want to take 

some time to reply to an article which appeared in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix under date of December 

14 last. It is quoting here from a speech which Mr. Tucker made when he was in Meadow Lake. On that 

day, or the day before, he seemed to feel that everything was going to the dogs in the north country. This 

is what he said in part at Meadow Lake, and I quote: 

 

The situation in Meadow Lake had become so serious that the entire economy of the town and district 

had been seriously interfered with. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, anyone reading that who had not been in Meadow Lake, would expect to find a lot of 

boarded-up business houses, dilapidated buildings, cellars open to the air, sidewalks falling into 

disrepair, telephone or telegraph lines unused or broken down and desolation and despair more or less 

everywhere. That is what a person would expect to find; and if Mr. Tucker were right in his 

assumptions, that is what you would find in Meadow Lake. Of course, you do not find this condition in 

Meadow Lake, as I intend to show; but I do not want the Members here to take what I say as final. I do 

not want them to take what Mr. Tucker says either. I am going to tell you what is going on now in 

Meadow Lake which reflects this general prosperity and wellbeing of the North and let you judge for 

yourself. 

 

First of all, let us make the test from the point of view of population. In 1939, when the census was 

made, there were 

  



February 3, 1947 

approximately 1,250 people in Meadow lake, now there are 2,000. That is not bad, Mr. Speaker, for a 

town that the leader of the Liberal Party says is dwindling away due to the policies of the Minister of 

Natural Resources. I know when I was in Meadow Lake as a member of the High School staff, in 1944 

we had ten classrooms in operation and I know that today there are sixteen. That is not bad for a town 

where the population is supposed to be all moving out to Alberta and British Columbia. 

 

Mr. Procter: — Is that a new industry? 

 

Mr. Howell: — We might examine the situation from the point of view of new buildings. Last year 

there were just 135 building permits issued. That is quite a few for a town of about 2,000 population, 

and especially for a town that is reported by the leader of a political party to be ruined. These 135 

building permits have resulted in some of the following plus a lot more enterprises, business endeavours 

and so on. I am just going to list a few of them because you do not want me to list 135 things here. It 

would take me too long to do that, I am sure; but here are some of the main ones: There is the Timber 

Board; the Fish Board; there is the frozen food locker plant; there is the addition to the town hall — 

now, Mr. Tucker should know that no town which is ruined starts out to double the size of its town hall; 

there is a forage seed cleaning plant, built there by the Federal Elevator Company. It is a large plant. I 

am sorry that those who were with Mr. Tucker when he came to town and arranged his itinerary did not 

take him down to see that plant. Had they done so, I am sure he would not have told the people that this 

Government had driven free enterprise out of the province or that it was afraid to come here because 

there we had within a stone’s throw of where he made his speech, one of the finest examples of it right 

in the town of Meadow Lake and if he had turned and thrown the stone the other way it would have lit 

on another free enterprise organization, the frozen food locker plant. We have also a photo studio, a 

vulcanizing plant, a sporting goods store, a large rooming house, filleting plant, a taxi service (do we get 

a new taxi service when a town is all going to ruin?), a co-op store, and several other retail 

establishments. This is just a part of one year’s development. This did not take place over a period of 

years; it is just last year. In addition there was a ten-room school built, doctors’ offices, a tinsmith’s 

shop, two new garages (one of them cost $10,000), an electrical goods store, a public health centre, and 

a Bible college. I wonder if Mr. Tucker could not have seen or heard anything about these various 

endeavours and signs of progress in Meadow Lake when he was there! I do not mind, in the least bit, his 

reciting a bunch of nonsense like this to the good people of Meadow Lake who are right there, live in the 

town, know what is going on and are in a position to take it not merely with a pinch of salt but with a 

whole shaker of salt; but I resent very much his telling this to people of Saskatchewan, many of whom 

have not seen Meadow Lake. I have not, however, exhausted the list of improvements that have been 

carried on at Meadow Lake; there are quite a few of them yet. Recently the town council there launched 

a program to build cement sidewalks. Do towns which are falling into ruin and decay, which are 

economically ruined, launch a program like that? I don’t think so. Here are some of the building plans or 

some of the outstanding ones for 1947: A new skating rink (they are not built in decaying towns either); 

a $30,000 extension to the hospital and it is mooted that there might be another ten-room school built; 

the need is certainly there. Application has 

  



February 3, 1947 

31 

 

been made for the building of a $12,000 brick garage in addition to the large number we already have. 

Again, does this happen to a ruined town? And, again, it is unfortunate that Mr. Tucker is not here to 

cast his opinion. Of course, there are some other features yet which show that Mr. Tucker was still more 

ill-informed than ever on the growth and prosperity in Meadow Lake. There has been for several years a 

30 per cent annual increase in the output of electricity. The Department of Telephones on the other hand 

has been unable adequately to cope with the demands for new telephones, new telephone booths in the 

office and for the extension of telephone lines in the areas surrounding Meadow Lake. There is certainly, 

then, none of this decay which Mr. Tucker talks about — I wonder on what he based his conclusions! 

 

Mr. Douglas: — The Liberal organization. 

 

Mr. Howell: — Well, it could have been on the Liberal organization; but it seems that he got some of 

his ideas from the fact that some timber operators and people engaged in the timber industry had moved 

from Meadow Lake. Of course he applied to this his legal talent, his ability to arrive at stupendous 

conclusions from little or no evidence at all and arrived at the conclusion which I read to you a little 

while ago. I want to point out that some timber operators have left the Meadow Lake area. He is quite 

right there; but it is certainly not due to any mismanagement on the part of this Government. It is due 

entirely to the lack of a planned economy by the former Government, which allowed too many in there 

in the first place and it was only a matter of time (and a very short time) until many of them or all of 

them, perhaps, would have had to leave. To say that their going is due to the policies or misguided 

policies of this Government is also sheer nonsense, because applications have been received in Meadow 

Lake from operators in Alberta and British Columbia who would like to come in and operate there under 

the Timber Board. Unfortunately, there is not enough timber to allow them to come in and operate. This 

phenomenon, though, of people moving out of the district is nothing new. I daresay that people, in the 

last year have moved from places like Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Rosthern, Moosomin and 

Davidson. I venture to say, too, that other people have moved in to take their places and I venture to say 

still further that their going has not upset the economy of the various places I have mentioned. That is 

the situation insofar as Meadow Lake is concerned. As far as Meadow Lake is concerned it is now 

protected by the knowledge that we will have there, in the future, a continual forest industry. We will no 

longer be in the position of looking forward to an abrupt end to the whole timber industry. We will have 

now, instead a continuing industry. Mr. Tucker tells us (I don’t know where he got his figures) that 90 

people have left the Meadow Lake area and then of course to make it more emphatic he multiplied it by 

three to give us the number of people in terms of families or the total number in the families; but I want 

to point out that even in places like Meadow Lake we don’t normally refer to school children and 

pre-school children and their mothers as lumbermen. So I think that we should go right back to the 

original 90 instead of the 270 which Mr. Tucker arrived at; and I would like to point out that in arriving 

at that 90 he took in a very wide area. If he took in the same area at Regina, he would be including 

places like Moose Jaw, Weyburn, Indian Head, and Lumsden in his Regina orbit. Over the same area 

through which Mr. Tucker claims the 270 (we got it down to 90 people) we will find that there has 

probably been a score or so industrial replacements. That is to say, this year there are 

  



February 3, 1947 

people engaged in lumbering or allied industries that were not engaged in them a year ago or at any time 

previous. Leaving that aside let me point out that this year there were 600 fishing licences issued around 

Meadow Lake compared with 300 last year. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, in two industries we have a net 

gain in favour of Government policy of 210 or if we want to do like Mr. Tucker and multiply it by three 

for emphasis, we get 630. This phenomenon of “ghost” towns is not a new thing. Of course Meadow 

Lake is not a “ghost” town; but you would think so to read that article. British Columbia has plenty of 

them. Northern Ontario has plenty and the cause of this phenomenon is an unplanned economy. If we 

had a planned economy it would not happen in any place because we would build up throughout each 

area a permanent timber industry with a number of allied trades. I think it is generally known to the 

Members here that the town of Crooked River, Saskatchewan, was a “ghost” town back in the year 1919 

when we had the type of economy in effect that Mr. Tucker would like to go back to now. Crooked 

River was left a “ghost” town because the operators had come in, cut everything that was there and left 

abandoning the place. It is no longer a “ghost” town but it was in 1919. So far as Mr. Tucker’s outburst 

against Meadow Lake is concerned it appears to me that what he has said in effect to the people outside 

Meadow Lake is: “If you are interested in commerce, if you are interested in travel, don’t go to Meadow 

Lake, because it is ruined”. I say, Mr. Speaker, that was a very unfortunate stab in the back to a very 

thriving northern town, apparently done with an eagerness and a willingness to sell Meadow Lake down 

the river, if he could get any hope for political advantage out of it. Insofar as my constituents are 

concerned, I want them to know that I am prepared to challenge anybody who misrepresents the 

economy or the problems of any town, village, community or group in my constituency. Further, Mr. 

Speaker, I want the Members here to know and to realize that this anti-Government propaganda that has 

been carried on in the north country for a long time is tuckering out pretty fast. I have listened to the 

comments of individuals and organizations in opposition to this Government for a long time. I do not 

mind hearing criticisms. I think criticism forms an important part of a democratic society, if the criticism 

is done in the right way, with a constructive view behind it. I have found, however, that most of the 

criticisms against this Government tend to be of a minor nature. I recall, one time I happened to be 

addressing a meeting in the east-central part of the province. After the meeting a few individuals came to 

me and pointed out a grievance they had. It seemed that during the previous provincial election 

campaign the Liberal candidate had pointed out to them that if the CCF were to come into power it 

would take out fellows like him, the Liberal candidate, and shoot them. This district had taken him at his 

word and voted to have him shot, and were coming to me to point out that nothing had been done about 

it. Well, at first I did not know what to say. I felt that the only thing I could do was to point out to them 

(I wanted to defend the Government as well as I could) that this Government could not be expected to 

carry out pledges made on its behalf by irresponsible people and just to ameliorate the case a little more, 

I did suggest that if they could possibly get this particular individual in contact with one of the 

Department which the Provincial Treasurer looks after they could manage at least to get him half shot. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say again as I said last year that I believe the people of the north country are 

having their faith consolidated behind the Government. They have seen from day to 

  



February 3, 1947 

33 

 

day what is being done and I want to say again this year that more than ever the faith of the people of the 

north country is being consolidated behind this Government and behind the movement which this 

Government represents. It is because I am convinced from what has been done in the past and what the 

Throne Speech foreshadows for the future that these things will work out to the economic and social 

betterment of the common people of this country, that I am very pleased to second the motion for the 

Address-in-Reply which is now before the House. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:50 o’clock p.m. 


