



















































Hansard: March 12, 1947


765 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

Fourth Session – Tenth Legislature 

30
th

 Day 

 

Wednesday, March 12, 1947 

 

The assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

CORRECTION OF STATEMENT MADE IN BUDGET DEBATE ON 29
TH

 DAY 

 

Mr. W.J. Patterson (Leader of the Opposition):  Mr. Speaker, I wish to make a correction as to a 

statement I made in the Budget Debate of March 11, 1947. 

 

I think the provisions with respect to the Canadian Farm Loan Board, I answered by stating that the 

corporation was financed by an initial capital being advanced by the Government from the Consolidated 

Fund; and then subsequent financial requirements being obtained by the sale of debentures. Well I was 

in error in that respect, Sir. 

 

Chapter 15 of the Statutes of 1945, which provides first of all for the creation of the Central Mortgage 

and Housing Corporations states first of all: “that the Minister, at the request of the Corporation and with 

the approval of the Governor General in Council, may from time to time and so on, out of the 

Consolidated Revenue Fund pay to the Corporation an amount or amounts not exceeding a total amount 

of $25 million, which shall constitute the capital of the Corporation; “and further under Section 23, the 

Minister may at the request of the Corporation and with the approval of the Governor in Council on such 

terms and conditions as he may determine from time to time, advance to the Corporation out of 

unappropriated monies in the Consolidated Revenue Fund,” and so on; so that the financing of the 

activities of the Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation is to be financed out of the Consolidated 

Revenue Funds of the Dominion of Canada. 

 

I wish to make that correction, Sir. I misunderstood the Premier, Sir, in that I thought he was talking 

about the matter with reference to which I was speaking, the Central Housing and Mortgage 

Corporation; and in connection with its being financed by the Bank of Canada, I said that was not the 

case. My error was in suggesting that it would be financed in a different way from what the Act actually 

provides. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial 

Treasurer) that this Assembly do now resolve itself into a Committee of Supply. 

 

Hon. O.W. Valleau (Minister of Social Welfare):  Mr. Speaker, I think possibly the first thing I 

should do today is to assure the House that on this occasion I have no intention of talking about 

insurance. I think also, that possibly I should apologize to the House for the fact that on some of the 

material which I wish to give today, to the House, the information has not been as carefully prepared as I 

would 



March 12, 1947 

 766 

have liked, due to the fact that my time, over a major portion of this Session, has been fairly well 

preoccupied in dealing with the matter of insurance. 

 

Some of the hon. Members seem to take a very intense interest in the matter; an interest which 

sometimes, I must confess, reminded me of the interest which used to be taken by the hon. Member for 

the British Area, Mr. Valleau, Jr., in my work when he was about three years of age. I used to kid him 

along and let on that I appreciated his interest, exactly as I have been doing during the past week or so 

and eventually I found that, as he grew older, his ideas did have some value; in fact they sometimes 

were superior to my own. So I am rather hoping that those who were so very much interested in the 

insurance will in time learn something of the insurance business and that in future Sessions their interest 

may be developed to a point where it is of some value to the House. 

 

I would like to stick fairly closely, this afternoon, to the work of the other Departments which I have the 

privilege of administering. There are some of them that I do not recall having been mentioned in this 

House before: one a department which has been in existence for a considerable length of time – I believe 

for something like 25 years – the Provincial Secretary’s Department, which may be thought to have little 

interest to the House and yet out of which can be dug information which is of interest to the House. 

 

I can well remember, during the time when we sat in Opposition in this House, particularly the Hon. 

Minister of Natural Resources used to ask a number of questions involving registration of companies 

and partnerships and the amount of money involved and the capitalization and so on. He was always 

assured, Mr. Speaker, that that information could not be supplied without a tremendous amount of work, 

an amount of work which was entirely disproportionate to the value of the information. 

 

After having taken over the administration of the Provincial Secretary’s Department, I am quite prepared 

to agree that to have been able to dig any information out of that Department would have been a 

tremendous job. We have heard something in this House, Mr. Speaker, of the value of good 

administration. May I say, that, in some respects that Department was run in a worse manner than any 

farmer I ever saw run a quarter-section farm. 

 

Just recently, when we were considering setting up a trade mission in Great Britain under Mr. Spry, we 

tried to find out which of the number of companies which were organized in this province were 

wholesalers; and while they are all registered, we could get it and even an examination of the books and 

of the registrations of the companies, item by item, would have failed to reveal that information. Every 

company that has ever been registered in the Province of Saskatchewan is still on the books. Sometimes 

they have a red line drawn through the name; sometimes they have not and the information required 

before giving registration is certainly entirely inadequate. 

 

With the change in the top administration with the appointment of Mr. Young as Deputy Provincial 

Secretary, we have been, during the past summer and fall, working on plans by which we hope to make 

that information more readily available and of more value to the people of this pr and to this House. I 

have, 



March 12, 1947 

 767 

however, been able to get a little information which might be of some general interest. There have been 

a number of rumors – I do not know where they could possibly have originated, Mr. Speaker – 

circulated that business has come to a standstill in this Province of Saskatchewan since we took over 

administration and yet the registration of companies and so on does not seem to bear that out. In 1944, 

the revenue of the Provincial Secretary’s Office was $36,000 odd dollars. In 1945 it was $43,000. In 

1946, after two years of CCF administration, the revenue coming in from such things as registrations 

and licence fees had grown to $55,000. Then we come again to the … 

 

Mr. Procter:  You raised the fees. 

 

Mr. Valleau:  I will come to that. That is one of the things that I am very interested in: that it has 

been necessary, in some cases, to raise the fees because of the fact that entirely inadequate fees were 

being charged. For example, anyone who wished to know something of the work of the office in there 

and came in making enquiries, could take up the time of one of the girls in the office for fully half a day 

in making a search for the convenience of the individual, without any charge whatever being made. In 

those respects there have been adjustments made in the fees, so that the office could charge what could 

be considered a reasonable amount for the service rendered. For example, a similar condition existed in 

the Superintendent of Insurance office. The Hon. Members know that any insurance company doing 

business in the Province of Saskatchewan must deposit a certain amount of money, or bonds, or 

securities, before starting an insurance company. We found that, in the course of their business and in 

line with the interests of the company involved, frequently they wished to sell some of those bonds and 

to replace them with others. They would simply notify the Superintendent of Insurance; two members of 

the staff would go to the company’s bank and withdraw the securities, take them up to the office, record 

them, take them back down to our own safety deposit bank, deposit the new bonds, withdraw the old 

ones, take them back to the Superintendent’s office and check them out again and then deposit them in 

the bank of the company involved. They did all this work, which often times occupied two of the staff – 

because the amount involved was such that we did not care to send one person out on the streets with it 

– sometimes for a full half-day again, carrying $15,000, $20,000, or $25,000 around the streets, and no 

charge whatever being made. 

 

Now that may be the Hon. Member’s idea of efficient administration, but I must confess that it is not my 

idea. Today, we are making a charge – a minimum charge of $10 for transfer of securities, the amount 

rising with the additional amount involved. 

 

Coming to the companies incorporated in Saskatchewan: in 1944, there were 74 Saskatchewan 

companies incorporated, with a total capitalization of just under $3,000,000; in 1945, 108 Saskatchewan 

companies, with a total capitalization of over $9,000,000; but in 1946, the number of new Saskatchewan 

companies incorporated rose to 182, with a total capitalization of $24,500,000 – something over eight 

times the capitalization in 1946 that there was in 1944. 

 

This increased interest is not alone in Saskatchewan companies. It also shows in those which are 

registered under the term ‘extra-provincial’ which includes all of those from 



March 12, 1947 

 768 

other parts of Canada and foreign companies as well. In 1944, we had 16 registered, with a capitalization 

of $6,000,000. In 1946, 27 of those companies came in with a capitalization of over $20,000,000. 

 

I am particularly interested and I think the House will be in these next figures. The objective of this 

Government has always been to encourage the small business man. We have stressed that time and time 

again, and I think an indication of how successful we have been and of how much confidence the people 

of this province have in this Government, is represented in the registration of partnerships. Those are 

almost invariably small groups – one or two individuals who join together, who do not wish to go to the 

extend of organizing a joint stock company, but who do wish to go into business in some form or 

another as a partnership. In 1944, we had 201 such partnerships registered in this province, new 

partnerships. In 1946, the number was 754. 

 

Again, coming to the question of fees which interests my hon. friends so much, we found a considerable 

number of Mutual Insurance Companies registered in this Province of Saskatchewan, one of which, or 

two of which, are the largest companies, or doing the largest amount of business in the province, and 

ranging from that down to what really amounted to just, simply, little Community Mutual Associations. 

Yet we found that the same registration fee was being charged to the larger companies as was being 

charged to the very small community ones, namely a fee of $25. And for that fee, it was necessary that 

the Superintendent of Insurance should inspect the books and should make a record of them. The one in 

particular that I have in mind has its head office in Saskatoon and that $25 would not pay the cost of the 

man’s train fare to Saskatoon and his hotel bill while he was there. So we have changed those fees, 

putting them on the basis of the amount of business done and ranging from $25 to a maximum of $200. 

 

I do not think that the House will disagree with me when I suggest that a company that is taking in 

$300,000 or $400,000 a year in premiums should pay $200 for the service which is rendered to them by 

the Superintendent of Insurance. That is just about the taxes that a farmer would pay on a fair half 

section of land. 

 

Speaking a little further of the insurance companies – while we have been doing a great deal in this 

province to take over the insurance business, I make no apologies for that. However, we do find that our 

activities have increased the interest of the people of Saskatchewan in insurance to an extent that 

companies are coming into the province and registering here, who have never previously done business 

in the province. I do not know whether that is making progress in reverse or not. 

 

Going further and before I leave the matter of the Superintendent of Insurance, I would like to refer 

briefly to the man who was Superintendent of Insurance in this pr for, I believe, some 33 or 34 years, 

who was the first Superintendent of Insurance, and who continued in office until superannuated at the 

age of 70, on January 1
st
, 1946, Mr. Arthur Fisher. Mr. Fisher was known not only across Canada, but 

also across all of North America, as being one of the outstanding men in the insurance field. He was 

primarily responsible for the organization of the Association of Superintendents of Insurance, and 



March 12, 1947 

 769 

the work that has been done to make insurance law uniform across the Dominion of Canada – at least in 

the eight provinces. Since Quebec has a different civil code from ours, they do not enter into it, although 

their law does line up in many respects the same as the other eight provinces. 

 

As I say, Mr. Fisher was one of the outstanding insurance men in the Dominion of Canada and on his 

retirement he was kind enough to tell me that his services would be available at any time for the purpose 

of giving his advice to his successor, an offer which we appreciated very much and of which we made 

some use. It came as a distinct shock to us when, less than six months after taking his superannuation, 

Mr. Fisher died; possibly another case of a man having spent his entire life, entire thoughts and work on 

one line of work, but once he dropped away from that work then he apparently lost his grip on life itself. 

 

In Saskatchewan and in Alberta, the office of the Fire Commissioner is attached to that of the 

Superintendent of Insurance. I do not know that it is any too happy an arrangement, although at the 

present time we are organizing it so that it does work out fairly well in this province. While what I have 

said about the late Mr. Fisher in regard to insurance could be emphasized, the same is not correct in 

regard to his interest in the Fire commissioner’s office, and I found that, when I took over the 

Department, it was necessary, in my opinion, to make a complete re-organization of the work in the Fire 

Commissioner’s office. For that reason I followed the example which exists in Alberta for appointing a 

Superintendent of Insurance and Fire Commissioner and also as his assistant a deputy Superintendent 

Fire Commissioner, who would have the main charge and whose main job it would be to work on the 

fire prevention end. 

 

In organizing that office, I gave instructions that the first consideration on fire inspection and fire 

prevention work was to be given to the towns, villages and hamlets in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

We felt that the cities with their Fire Chiefs and well-organized Departments unquestionably were in a 

much better situation regarding fire prevention and education along these lines, than were the smaller 

towns and villages. 

 

During the past year, we started out with one man in the office, I might mention, who is now 63 years of 

age and whose only regret is that he has not another ten years to give us in this work, since now, for the 

first time, he feels that he is able to do the work for which he was paid. I put Mr. Tiffin in as Deputy 

Superintendent of Insurance. We were fortunate in being able to secure two other men who had had 

experience in Air Force in fire prevention work and had spent some years in that work. We were also 

fortunate, later on in the summer, in being able to engage the services of a man who was, I believe, at 

the time, the Fire Chief in one of the cities in the province. 

 

With this staff of four, which was not completed until well into the middle of the summer, we proceeded 

to do something that has never previously been done in this province; that is, to make a clear-cut 

inspection of the towns, villages and hamlets, the smaller urban areas. During the year, up until the 31
st
 

of December, we had gone through 579 towns, villages and hamlets. We hope to be able to finish that 

job in possibly another three or four months. In the course of that inspection, we went over 

approximately 6,800 different buildings and issued orders in respect of 2,200. 



March 12, 1947 

 770 

I might say here that we have had the most excellent co-operation from the Department of Public Health 

in regard to the hospitals. Every time we make an inspection of a hospital, a copy of our inspection goes 

to the Department of Public Health where they keep it on file to use in their classification of that 

hospital. The same can be said also of the Department of Education. They are very anxious and very 

co-operative so far as the inspection of schools are concerned. I can go down the line: the men who are 

working under the Department of labour in the Steam Boilers Act, in the inspection of theatres and halls, 

again, we have been able to work very closely with them and to co-ordinate our work to the advantage 

of both the people of the province and of the departments concerned. 

 

While we considered that our first job was to go through the smaller urban areas and make an 

inspection, our experience has shown us that, probably, a little different approach in future years will be 

of advantage. It is impossible for us to act as policemen. While we may give an order and clear up a 

town, we have no idea but what, the next day, the situation may develop to be possibly as bad as it was 

before. Since we are going to be unable to visit these towns on an average of more than once a year, it 

has largely become rather than a policeman’s job, a job of education and public relations. In this matter, 

with this in mind, we secured a small movie outfit and have held a number of public meetings in the 

province at which we displayed pictures dealing with fire prevention work. At the same time, the man in 

charge would give an address and would render assistance to the town council, giving them advice as to 

the sort of fire equipment they should have and the organization of their fire department. We hope, 

during the next summer, to be able to extend that work very considerably. 

 

The Provincial Film Board has also co-operated with us in putting on displays or pictures involving fire 

prevention, and we are informed that, during the past summer, approximately 95,000 people in the 

Province of Saskatchewan witnessed some of these films. I do not think that I can over-estimate the 

necessity of developing consciousness in the Province of Saskatchewan on the matter of fire. 

 

It is true that Saskatchewan has one of the lowest records in Canada – in fact we have almost invariably 

led Canada in the rate of fire loss per capita; but that still is not good enough. During the past year there 

was over $1,600,000 worth of loss caused by fire and what is still more regrettable, a loss of 

approximately 30 lives. I might point out here that we cannot again over-emphasize the danger of the 

misuse of gasoline. Fifteen of those 30 deaths were caused by such misuse. Already this year, although 

just over two months have passed, we have had 14 deaths by fire – five of which were caused by the 

misuse of gasoline. 

 

I might give one or two little illustrations for the interest of the House as to some of the things that we 

have discovered in our fire prevention work; some of the incidents which the staff has related to me. 

One, which I recall, was where they went into a small town where they were assured that the village had 

fire equipment all carefully locked up in a small building. They started to check it and it took them over 

on hour to find the key. The man who had been appointed as Fire Marshal had joined the Armed Forces, 

had passed the key to somebody else, who had, in turn, joined the Armed Forces and 



March 12, 1947 

 771 

passed it to somebody else. They did not even know where the key was. In another one, they had a fire 

hose and cart, but they admitted that no one could remember when the fire hose had been last inspected, 

probably four or five years before. The Board went into another hotel where the proprietor did not carry 

out his ashes; he simply piled them up on the floor and had a pile about four feet high and the far side of 

the pile was within two feet of a pile of boxes and rubbish which was in the cellar. Another couple of 

feet over and a fire probably would have taken place there. Another case was that of a school attended 

by more than 100 children, where the recreation rooms for the boys and girls – two rooms – were in the 

basement. These rooms had just ordinary three-pane cellar windows, permanently fastened, and the 

passageway from each of the rooms to the single stairway ran within two feet of the furnace. On some 

stormy day, when all the children were down in those recreation rooms, had something happened to the 

furnace and a fire had broken out, there would have been a tragedy which would have shocked all of 

Canada. We found, also, another case where a hospital was using gasoline stoves and they were storing a 

45-gallon drum of gasoline right inside of the hospital. That was one case where we did not give the 

usual 30 days to correct the fire hazard. They were instructed to remove that barrel of gasoline very 

promptly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if I might go from that across to the Department of Social Welfare, I would like to 

give to the House a little picture of the organization of that Department and the various branches and 

their function. As the Members will recall, this is a new department, which has gathered to itself other 

semi-independent branches and has attempted to co-ordinate under the one department the work of 

caring for those who are unable to care for themselves. Possibly the House would appreciate a little of 

the statistical background, especially in regard to the work of our field staff. 

 

When I took over the office, I found that the same field staff was doing the work for the Child Welfare 

Branch, which included the Mothers’ Allowance and also for the Old Age Pensions Branch. There was 

no co-ordination of that work. There was no central direction from the staff; each of the members of 

these semi-independent bodies sent out requests independently and sometimes they found that when 

they criticized a member of the field staff for not getting a report, he would simply ‘pass the buck’ by 

saying that he was doing work for the other branch. 

 

We have placed all our field staff in what we call the Welfare Division of the Department, all of whom 

report to one man, who is the Chief Inspector and all requests for information, investigation and so on 

from the various branches, go through the Chief Inspector. 

 

We have 29 districts in the province, each of which are occupied by one man. We also have two men 

whom we call Inspectors at Large, who are used when the others are on holidays – taking up the slack 

there – or when a man happens to be sick, or in the occasional case where a man gets behind in his work, 

we send one of these extra men in to render him some assistance. Those 29 men, in the last fiscal year – 

that is not this year, the one ending last March – made a total of 39,000 calls and turned in 27,000 

reports; almost 1,000 per man. Many of those, let me say, were routine inspections. We are supposed to 

make an annual inspection of every Old Age Pension case. We are supposed to make an annual 

inspection of every Mothers’ 



March 12, 1947 

 772 

Allowance case; but of the total of the reports which I have given you, nearly 6,000 were on new 

applications which required completely new investigations and could not be considered as routine 

matters at all. 

 

I might say, just here, that insofar as our reinspections are concerned, especially in the Old Age Pensions 

Branch, we are falling down rather badly. We are not getting a complete inspection each year and in my 

opinion, good administration would demand that we should have a complete inspection of every pension 

case each and every year. 

 

I have had the opportunity, during the past two years, of discussing Social Welfare work with many 

interested persons, particularly those in government services across Canada; and I find that the 

administrations in charge of this work in every province feel that they are case-loaded, that the number 

of cases that each of their field staff is carrying is too large; but probably we have a better reason to 

believe that, in this province, than in any other province in Canada. 

 

Our case-load on our general field staff at the present time is over 600, with annual new cases coming in 

of over 200, making a total of approximately 800 people. In some of the other provinces, on in particular 

that I have in mind, rather less than half of that is considered to be a full-time job and that is a province 

in which they do not have the distances to travel that we have here in Saskatchewan. Our child Welfare 

workers are carrying an average of about 145 each. I am told that 65 to 70 is supposed to be the 

maximum for a Child Welfare worker to carry. 

 

In the development of our work we have considered it advisable to start what might be termed 

sub-offices in various parts of the province. We have, of course, the head office here in Regina and have 

already established another office in Saskatoon. We have located in Province of Saskatchewan, North 

Battleford, Yorkton, Melfort, Swift Current, Weyburn, Moose Jaw and established offices there where 

two or more of our general field staff make their headquarters, and where we have also stationed usually 

one Child Welfare worker. We have been able to do this and to increase the efficiency of the staff. 

 

I must confess that I find myself somewhat amused and also irritated at times when I hear of the general 

efficiency which was exhibited in Government service before; but when I go into the old files I find the 

reports of the inspectors being written in long-hand and I can assure you that they were not always hired 

because they could write a clear, legible hand. The idea of the man who is possibly trying to make a 

thousand inspections and reports a year, occupying his time by sitting down and writing them out in 

long-hand, did not particularly appeal to me. So we have placed in these smaller offices a stenographer, 

who is present in the office during all working hours, is there to take phone calls and meet the public, 

who has an idea at all times as to where the people working out of the office can be found, in the event 

that we wish to get them on a quick call from the head office in Regina and who does send in typed 

reports, which I can assure you, are much easier reading and a much more efficient way of keeping track 

of the business of the Department and of those who come under our care. 

 

Also, I would like at this time to mention, if I may, 



March 12, 1947 

 773 

another class in the Province of Saskatchewan who come under our care, who have been – if we have 

such a thing in the province – possibly classified as one of the depressed classes and for whom, I was 

assured time and again when I first took office, nothing whatever could be done; it was just simply a 

case of shutting our eyes; that is, the Metis people. I am not going to suggest for one moment that we 

have settled the problem of the Metis people in the Province of Saskatchewan, but at least I am sure that 

we have a much better idea, today, than we had two years ago, of what can be done and what can be 

accomplished, by work with this people. 

 

On one of the first trips I took out in the country, I was down in the district south of Yorkton which is 

known as the Crescent Lake district. At that time I had the opportunity of visiting a considerable number 

of families and I must confess I was somewhat amazed to find that, in most cases, the fathers and 

mothers could read and write English, but I could not find a child under the age of 15 that could read or 

write. In other words, in the one generation there were, in place of coming ahead a little, actually going 

back. 

 

The objection was being raised by the trustees and parents in the neighboring schools that they did not 

desire to allow these children to attend school because of the prevalence of disease and of other things, 

and the children were to all intents and purposes being barred from the opportunity of acquiring an 

education. In the world we have today, if you take persons of mixed blood and turn them loose in the 

world without an education, they are suffering from a handicap that is quite impossible, in most cases, to 

overcome. 

 

With that in mind – the idea that we could at least help the younger people to an education – the Social 

Aid Branch of the Department of Social Welfare proceeded to build Crescent Lake School, down at 

Crescent Lake south of Yorkton, and, contrary to what I had been led to believe – that these children 

would not and their parents did not desire them, to attend school – I found the most intense interest 

among the Metis people in the building of that school as to when it would be open and how many it 

would accommodate, and while, when we built it, we thought we had built it large enough to 

accommodate all of those who might be present, we find that the school, almost immediately upon being 

opened, has been crowded to the very doors. 

 

While the school was built and the capital costs of building it and setting it up were undertaken, by the 

Department of Social Welfare, the administration and the operation of the school is being carried on by 

the Department of Education, which has, I believe, appointed their superintendent as official trustee for 

the school. 

 

At the same time, we were trying to do a little other work in the Lebret district in regard to rehabilitation 

of those of older years. I found that the previous Government had established a farm there in 

co-operation with the Oblate Fathers – a farm of some two sections, which was being operated 

presumably to rehabilitate these people. Yet, I must confess that as a farmer, I was rather shocked the 

first time that I visited the farm, for these men and growing boys – and there are a very considerable 

number of boys growing up on that place – were presumably being taught farming and yet they had none 

of the equipment which the ordinary farmer in the Province of Saskatchewan 



March 12, 1947 

 774 

today regards as being desirable or necessary. In other words, having spent their entire life on that place, 

they still would not be equipped by experience to go out and get a job on the average Saskatchewan 

farm. The ploughs being used were two old horse-drawn gangs with strung beams, the disc was a double 

disc with 15 or 18-inch discs on the front and the back ones worn down to about ten inches, and actually 

you did not need a seat on the disc; you could have ridden on the discs themselves without any danger of 

being cut; the seed drill, every pair of discs, the double disc drill – one could run one’s hand down 

through the discs without any trouble, to the front of the discs, and the entire equipment of the farm was 

just about along that line. 

 

I was especially intrigued by what they called “the shop.” It was a little poplar-pole, mud-plastered 

building with a dirt floor that had in it a couple of neck yokes and two or three broken double trees, a 

carpenter’s hammer and an agricultural monkey wrench. 

 

After we put our new manager on the place – and incidentally we hired him without him seeing the 

place, or I do not think he would have gone near it; but about a month after he went down there, he 

wrote back to the Department and said he wanted a motorcycle. One of the boys who got the letter in the 

Department did not have a sense of humor. He wrote back and wanted to know why he wanted a 

motorcycle. He said he wanted it so he could keep track of our monkey wrench. 

 

We have put up-to-date machinery on that place. They were raising stock, cattle and hogs and they were 

hauling water a distance of two miles; and I will guarantee that you cannot get a farmer anywhere in 

Saskatchewan who will tell you that you can successfully raise stock where you have to haul water, year 

in, year out, summer and winter, that distance. It is true that they had a dugout, they had a dugout with a 

very good water shed – the only difficulty was the water shed consisted of the barnyard, so that the 

dugout was utterly impossible to use for stock or anything else, even for the old tractor which they had 

for crushing grain. 

 

We have dug a well and have water. We have put up buildings. We put in there a truck and a tractor and 

I am sure that the Members of the House would be impressed if they were to see some of those boys, 17 

and 18 yeas old, of Metis blood, who handle that truck or tractor as good as anyone that you would wish 

to see and who unquestionably, today, can go out and get a job at farm work or at work along that line 

without any difficulty whatsoever. I do wish to again impress the House with the favourable impression 

which I have had of those young people who are growing up on that farm. 

 

We hope, during this current fiscal year, that this farm will carry itself. It will not carry the capital 

expenditure; but it will carry the current expenditure, and we have at the present time on the farm some 

65 people. Of the two sections of land, less than half is broke; but we hope to be able to break a good 

deal of the balance during the next year. 

 

I am not offering this as a solution, not at all. I do not believe that it is going to be possible for the 

Department of Social Welfare to buy enough farms to put all of these people on; but to me, at least, it 

has been an indication that, given 



March 12, 1947 

 775 

half a chance, these Metis people will do a reasonably good sound day’s work and that they have that 

thing which is of inestimable value to any person – personal pride in themselves, once they see a chance 

to make even a passing success of their lives. 

 

Reference was made in the House, the other day, by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition to the increased 

vote which is in the present estimates for the Home for the Infirm at Wolseley. I have no apologies 

whatever to make for that vote. None at all. But, again, I would like to mention to the House that, if what 

we found in the Home for the Infirm was evidence of good administration, I do not want to be connected 

with it. They had a Home there to start with. The water pumps and the piping in the Hone had gone to 

such an extent that it was necessary for the staff to carry water in pails to the top floor in order to flush 

the toilets. Part of the money which has been voted by this House and which we are asking for again this 

year, will go to bring up-to-date physical equipment to that Home, to render it as a place that is 

reasonably safe and decent in which people might spend their declining years. 

 

All of the piping in the Home had to be replaced; the pumps had to be taken out and overhauled; the 

sewerage is obsolete and condemned by the Department of Health and must be replaced. It was 

necessary for us to spend over $4,000 on paint alone; that is, on the cleaning of the woodwork and on 

painting it. We also found it desirable to put down marble linoleum on the floor and to put on such 

things as window curtains and window blinds in order to give the people a place in which you or I would 

be willing to spend, if necessary, our declining years. 

 

I have not yet brought that home to the standards that I would like and I intend to continue asking this 

House for enough money so that, eventually the Home at Wolseley and any other Home that may be 

operated by this Department, will be homes that you and I will be proud of, rather than homes that we 

will be ashamed of. 

 

I remember the Premier interjecting in the discussion the other day, something about feeding the people 

there. In 1943-44, the per diem cost for food was 25 cents a day. In 1946, it came up to 34 cents a day. 

At the present time, it is between 37 and 38 cents a day, an increase of more than 50 per cent in the costs 

of food alone; that is, the gross cost of the food coming in for those who are occupants of the Homes. 

 

In the city of Regina we established what, I think, most of the Members know as the ‘Babies’ Shelter’ 

on College Avenue. We did that in order to have a place in which we could place children, small 

children, up to three years of age and they come into that Home anywhere from ten days to three years 

and are there cared for. They are checked; any medical attention that they require may be given to them 

and they pass out of the Home usually into adoption, or into foster homes. 

 

The total number of babies that have gone through the Home up until the present time – it started 

approximately May 1
st
 last year or April 1

st
 before we finally got in operation. At the present time we 

have 35 babies there. In that time we have not had a serious epidemic, or an epidemic of any kind. We 

have not had any serious illness, with the exception of one 



March 12, 1947 

 776 

child who was brought in from the hospital where the doctors had stated that, in their opinion, the child 

could not possibly live. But it was brought in there and it came to our care since there was nothing 

further that could be done with it in the hospital. Outside of that one who did presently die, we have had 

no serious illnesses. Some of the children are wards; some of them simply are being cared for under 

foster home agreement. 

 

Out in the Industrial School, the same condition existed, to a very large extent, that I have described in 

the Home at Wolseley. The equipment of the Industrial School had dropped to a point where it was not 

even reasonably safe. The pumping plant was gone. We have finally managed – and it is very difficult to 

secure new equipment – to get an order through which will give us a reasonably good pump and a 

reasonably good water pressure in the school. We have also had to replace most of the piping in that 

school and, again, have had a very extensive job of redecorating, of painting, of cleaning up the grounds, 

of putting in added equipment. We were successful in getting hold of some very good lounge equipment 

to give the boys a chance to have a room which they could pretty nearly call their own, with some chairs 

and some lounges, and which is, to a certain extent, a privileged place. That is, that we use it to the 

extent that, when a boy is non-co-operative in the school, one of the privileges that is denied him is the 

privilege of using the lounge. It has been one of the very good things in securing discipline in the school. 

I would like a little later to deal with the actual care of the boys who are in that school. 

 

The Old Age Pensions Branch we have found – as I think all members are aware – certainly the census 

has given us the information – that the number of pensioners in the Province of Saskatchewan, or the 

number of people over the age of 70 is increasing by leaps and bounds. Next year – 1948 we will have 

approximately 35,000 people in this province who will be over 70. If at that time we reach the 50 per 

cent on Old Age Pension it will mean some 17,500 persons on pension. At the present time, we have 

more than 14,500 securing the pension, which is 1,500 more than we have ever had before in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I know that some of the Hon. Members sometimes wonder why it is that we say definitely that we like to 

have an application for pension come in at least three months before the pensioner is old enough to go 

on pension. I rather imagine some of the Hon. Members have wondered about that, and yet I would like 

to point out to them just a little of the volume of work which does go into the pension office. 

 

In the last fiscal year they received in the office over 69,000 letters and wrote out over 68,000 and 

probably 50 per cent of those letters that are written were individual typewritten letters. While a 

considerable number of the letters which came in were simply requests for application forms, which 

could be mailed out, yet the volume is very great and if the Hon. Members wish to do a little figuring, 

they can figure out just how many letters must be written in that Branch each and every day in order to 

keep up with that volume of work. 

 

During this present debate it has been announced in this House that we propose to increase the pension 

by $2 per month. I can assure the House – and I think, again, that the Members will agree with me – that 

that is not any too much; that, today, with increased costs, probably $30 is not a great deal better 



March 12, 1947 

 777 

than $28 was a year or two years ago. I can assure the House on behalf of myself and the Government, 

that we have every sympathy with the demands that are being made by the pensioners for a pension 

which is much in excess of the $30, which we will be paying as of April 1
st
. The first pension cheques 

on the new scale will go out as usual, being paid as usual in arrears and will be mailed to reach the 

pensioner on approximately May 1
st
. 

 

In the Social Aid Branch we are still following the plan of associating ourselves with the municipalities 

in the distribution of social aid where municipal residence can be shown; but I would like to point out, 

again, for the information of the House, that on the Social Aid expenditures of last year we spent 

$558,000 while the municipalities spent $224,000, a total of $782,000 spent on the Social Aid program, 

of which the Department spent approximately two-thirds and all of the municipalities, rural and urban 

combined, spent rather less than one-third. 

 

Also, in the Social Aid Branch they are doing a little, a very little, experimenting along a new line. I do 

not wish what I have to say to result in a flood of applications because, frankly, we have not the facilities 

or the money to take care of a much enlarged program. But we are at the present time doing some 

training work on approximately 56 disability cases: 12 amputation cases, 20 muscular or skeletal 

disability; one hearing disability and so on. We are feeling our way rather carefully here, finding out just 

what can be accomplished in this particular line. 

 

We had hoped to start our plan with about a dozen people, but as soon as some indication of what we are 

doing commenced to spread about, the number of cases that came to us asking for help increased very 

rapidly. We give these people – and in most cases they are the younger people – an aptitude test. We try 

to determine what class of work they would be suited for, what class they would like and we attempt to 

give them some training which will enable them to do that class of work within the limits of their 

physical disabilities. 

 

This work is being carried out again on a shareable basis as between ourselves and the municipality 

involved and I do wish to say that the municipalities have shown themselves very much interested in this 

work. I am sure that, had I the facilities to expand the work, we would find that the municipalities would 

in most cases come right along with us. 

 

The Social Aid Branch also administers the Mother’s Allowance. When we started to form the 

Department, we found the Mother’s Allowance being administered by the Child Welfare Branch, but in 

order to balance the Branches up properly so as to give the same volume of work to each of them, we 

transferred the administration of Mother’s Allowances to the Social Aid Branch. 

 

At the present time we have more than 2,300 mothers in receipt of Mother’s Allowance on behalf of 

themselves and their families, involving nearly 5,500 children, and I find one of the interesting things is 

the breakdown in the amounts which each Mother’s Allowance recipient has received. In April, 1944, 

the average rate per family, or the rate which we were paying to each mother, was $19.23. In May, 1944, 

-- that is just one month later, 1944 seemed to be a significant year, Mr. Speaker -- 



March 12, 1947 

 778 

the amount had risen from $19 to $25. But, under the present administration, it has now grown to an 

average payment per family of $35 and we are not facing an election either. 

 

One of the interesting features of this work has been the amendment which the House put into The 

Mother’s Allowance Act some two years ago, which allowed us to pay allowances to unmarried 

mothers. We have, at the present time, 189 such unmarried mothers receiving assistance. 

 

I would like to say here that some of these unmarried mothers deserve the greatest possible respect, 

consideration and admiration. They sacrifice, in many cases, their own chance of a normal life by 

insisting on retaining their child and of devoting their time and their life to the maintenance and to the 

case of that child. Where they are financially unable, but where they show themselves willing to work 

for the child and to maintain a decent home for the child, then we do and have, in 189 cases, stepped in 

and assisted with financial support. 

 

The Child Welfare Branch of the Department covers a number of different sub-branches. They are the 

ones who administer the care for the wards of the Minister of the Government. At the present time we 

have, as wards of the Department, almost 1,700 children and this in spite of the fact that we are putting 

through adoptions at the rate of more than one a day. Under that wardship we found originally – and I 

think most of the Members who have studied this question may remember something of the discussion 

we had when the Bill was passing – I would, again, like to refresh their memories on it – that originally 

the only way in which wardship could be taken was as a permanent wardship. Once the Order had gone 

through the parents lost all their right to the child. We amended the Act so as to provide that we can, 

today, take a 12-months wardship, that the child may become a ward of the Minister and at the end of 

the 12 months, we again have to go back to the Court, at which time the Court again makes a decision as 

to whether the child should be discharged back to its parents, or whether it should again be made a 

permanent ward of the Minister, or another wardship period of 12 months be established. By doing this 

we find that in many cases, we are able to straighten up the family life; that the removal of the children 

from the father and mother sometimes will lead them to settle the difficulties which often exist between 

themselves and to settle down and establish a home to which we are very pleased to return the child. 

 

We have also developed a third form of care. We are, under the Act, empowered to take a child at the 

request of its parents for a period not exceeding six months and then again for another period not 

exceeding six months. We do that in cases – and I think one of the commoner cases is where the mother 

of the family had died and while the father is just at his wits end to know what to do with the family 

when they are small, before he can make arrangements, we will take the children and care for them until 

he is again able to establish them in his own home. Occasionally, also, we do that with the mother who 

does not wish to surrender her child but who wishes to have a little time in which to work out her plans 

for her future life with the children. This is one of the things that we have found has worked out very, 

very well indeed. 

 

One of the items about which, possibly, the Members would know little, are the trust accounts which we 

keep in the 



March 12, 1947 

 779 

Department of Social Welfare for those of our wards who are of any age, usually those who are 

approaching maturity. The children remain as the wards of the Minister until they are 21 years of age in 

1941 – five years ago – there was $10,000 in trust accounts in the Department of Child Welfare. Today, 

we have over $65,000 in those trust accounts. We encourage the youngsters, on every occasion, to save 

their money. We look after it for them. We deliberately cultivate an interest in the children in placing 

money in our care in order that they may either have it for their further education, or for the time when 

they reach the age of 21. 

 

Also along that same line, which may be of some interest; in April 1941, under the Unmarried Parents 

Act, the Department of Child Welfare had $1,800 in trust. That was payments which had been made to 

the Department by those who are known as ‘putative’ fathers on behalf of the children. Five years later, 

today, we have $14,500 which we have taken in on exactly the same accounts. We are paying a great 

deal more attention to those cases; rendering assistance of the Department in almost every case that 

comes to us, where we think there is any possibility of getting a decision. 

 

I might just give you here that, last year, the Department of Child Welfare undertook almost one 

thousand UPA cases – 995 to be exact – under The Unmarried Parents Act, in which we rendered 

assistance and advice – financial assistance or otherwise – to some of these unmarried mothers. Out of 

those 995 cases, we assisted the mother in taking action against the putative father in no less than 560 

cases. 

 

In the field of juvenile delinquency, we are doing in the Department of Child Welfare, something of the 

same type of work which in other provinces is done by what is known as the ‘Family Court,” or the 

Juvenile Court. Any youngster who, today, is picked up on a charge, before that case can be tried by the 

Magistrate, the chief Probation Officer, who is a member of our staff, must be notified and must send his 

opinion to the magistrate of the Court before the case can be tried. I want to make it perfectly clear that 

the Probation officer does not try the case. The magistrate is at entire liberty to deal with the case as he 

feels it should be dealt with when it comes before him; but at least we insist that he must have the 

opinion of our chief Probation Officer in front of him before he actually tries the case. 

 

Last year, on the fiscal year ending April 1
st
 a year ago, there were 963 cases of juvenile delinquency 

come before the Court. By following the procedure which I have outlined briefly, we were able to have 

settled out of Court no less than 691 of those cases. In other words, in 690 cases out of the 960 we were 

able to settle the case without the boy or girl every actually going into court at all. Court action was 

taken in 229 cases and out of those 229, eleven were fined, 47 were warned and sent home, 110 were put 

out on probation to one of our probation officers – all of our field staff are probation officers – and in 

most of those 110 cases the youngster would be sent to its own home with orders to report once a week 

or every two weeks to one of our field staff; and we had 36 committals, so that we started out originally 

with 963 cases of juvenile delinquency and had 36 committals after the Department had done the work 

which is set out in the Act for them. 



March 12, 1947 

 780 

This, in my opinion, is one of the finest jobs that we are doing in the Department. With many of these 

youngsters, it is their first mistake. A warning, possibly being put out on probation with one of the 

officers of the field staff who have an opportunity of talking to the youngster every week or so for a 

period of some months, has saved these children from going into the Industrial School. I do not care how 

good an Industrial School you run, nor how good a goal system you run, or how much work you may do 

on the rehabilitation of prisoners; the best work that you can do is in saving them from becoming 

prisoners in the first place. 

 

Again, for the interest of the House, I would point out that last year we were instrumental, among others 

– not solely instrumental, but we did assist – in charging 113 adults with contributing to juvenile 

delinquency, and out of those we had 54 convictions. In other words we had more convictions of adults 

than actually there were convictions of children. 

 

The Child Welfare work is rather more difficult to set out on the basis of how much work each of our 

staff does, than is the general field staff. I might say here that there is again a certain amount of 

disagreement across Canada as to whether you should have one field staff, or whether there should be 

the two divisions which we are using here in this province. I was interested in discussing this matter 

with the Department officials in British Columbia. There they have followed the line of having one field 

staff who is trained to do all classes of welfare work; and yet, in actual practice, we find that they do not 

– that they specialize in one group or the other. 

 

The method which we have adopted here is that our general field staff are primarily responsible for 

investigations into pensions, new applications and re-inspections; in Mother’s Allowance, new 

applications and investigations; in Social Aid, in contacting the council in regard to Social Aid cases and 

in making the preliminary reports and investigations in Child Welfare. That is, a field officer travelling 

through his district, where it is reported to him that there is a Child Welfare case he will make the 

preliminary investigation and, in many cases, is able to settle that case without any further trouble; but 

where he finds that it is going to develop into a full-time Child Welfare case, then he turns the case over 

to one of the specialized Child Welfare workers. 

 

The reason we have done that is this: often some of these Child Welfare cases will involve work running 

for weeks, or possibly two or three months, before the case can be settled down and called a routine case 

and we felt that it was interrupting the work of the general field staff too seriously, that at no time would 

we be able to depend that they were doing the routine work which is in their districts. For that reason in 

these various sub-offices which we have established, we usually put in two of the men working their 

own districts with one Child Welfare worker covering the two districts. 

 

In regard to the wards, those children who become our wards, again, I would like to stress what we 

regard as the outstanding importance of not placing children in institutions. I have had the opportunity 

again of discussing this with many of those who are interested in welfare work across Canada and I am 

very pleased to say that the idea which we have, here, of getting the children out of institutions and into 

foster homes, is one which is being generally accepted clear across Canada. It is being 



March 12, 1947 

 781 

generally recognized that, no matter how good an institution you build, it is absolutely impossible to 

build an institution to provide the kind of home life to give the child a normal upbringing. The child 

brought up in an institution may be well fed and clothed, may be sent to school and have an excellent 

education, may have a good roof over its head; but it does not get the type of life which the child 

receives in your home or in mine, has not the opportunity of familiarizing itself, for example, with the 

problems of the adults which are normally discussed in the family home, of taking an interest in the 

affairs of the home, but, above all things, that child has not the opportunity of learning to be needed. It 

may be loved, but it is not needed – and one of the most valuable things in human life is that sense of 

being needed and required. 

 

Before closing, Mr. Speaker, I feel that I would be remiss if I did not take this opportunity of expressing 

my own very sincere appreciation of the work which has been done in this Department by the officials 

and staff of the Department. I am sure that no one has ever had the privilege of working with a more 

co-operative group of people than I have had during the past two and one-half years, or of ever working 

with a group which would give one any more loyal and sincere service than they have rendered to me 

and to the Department. It just came to my notice, yesterday, as an example – and the fact that it 

happened possibly a month ago and yet it was not carried to me, is an indication that it was possibly not 

out of the usual – that the Matron of our Babies’ Shelter over here on College Avenue, during the time 

of the blizzard, was very much concerned about leaving the Home at any time. Due to the difficulties of 

securing material we have not yet finished her Matron’s quarters, which we hope to put on the third 

floor so that she can stay in the Home, and I am informed that during the worst of that blizzard, she 

stayed in the Shelter 24 hours a day and what sleep she secured, she secured it by lying on the floor and 

snatching it at odd moments. That, I think is worthy of the appreciation of everyone in a person who 

sometimes might be regarded as only hired help. I do not regard them, any of them, as being simply 

employees. They are associates of myself and in the Department doing this work which does mark the 

civilized person apart from the uncivilized. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. M.J. Willis (Elrose):  Mr. Speaker, may I be permitted to digress a little from the motion before 

the House. It is certainly with a feeling of regret that I learned of the retirement of the Leader of the 

Opposition from active political life in this province. He has served this province for 25 years and, all of 

us must admit, through years in which the productivity of this province was at a very low ebb. 

Sometimes I think that men like my hon. friend are entitled to more than the plaudits of his fellow 

members – and that appears to be about all a Member receives in political life; but rather he should be 

entitled to some of the material things that doubtless he would have received had he taken a different 

vocation in life. I believe that leadership in a democracy, where it has been given, a more tangible gift of 

some of the material things should be bestowed upon a Member who has rendered long service if we are 

to get the best type of men to lead in democracy. On every hand in this age we hear that men have not 

time to give leadership. We hear very often that the business man says it is a waste of time. Now if 

democracy, 



March 12, 1947 

 782 

as I see it, is to thrive and is to lead to something worthwhile, we must as members of a democracy, 

recognize that leadership, and what I say on this side of the House I sincerely say to the Leader of the 

Opposition upon his decision to leave the active political life of this province. 

 

I must congratulate the Provincial Treasurer upon his find Budget Address and I am sure that the Hon. 

Member for Moosomin will agree with me that the ‘Land of the Buffalo’ produces stalwart sons. 

 

It is my privilege and honor to represent an agricultural constituency which is almost entirely 

mechanized and as I scrutinized the agricultural estimates, I was pleased to see the estimates increased 

for agriculture, nothing that since 1944, in which the estimate was $430,508.50 in the estimates brought 

down it is to be increased to $1,609,792. In the past this Government has been criticized by the 

opposition because of the amount spent on agriculture. 

 

I congratulate the Government and particularly the Department of Agriculture, upon its Agriculture 

Representative Service. It has come to my knowledge that, in areas where they have these new 

representatives, agricultural local committees have been set up. They are doing valuable work where 

formerly they only heard the name and did not make the acquaintance of those in the field. 

 

I believe, further, that farming in this scientific age must have available men trained in our university to 

aid in the greater production of foodstuffs. I feel quite sure that there never was in the history of 

mankind a surplus of foodstuffs; but the problem was purely that of distribution. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, of course, in his criticism of the estimates for agriculture says that there 

was no provision for irrigation. Now if it was not irrigation, it would be something else, some other wish 

that should have been in those estimates. I am reminded of the story of the lady who was sent to a 

maternity hospital and, after giving birth to a daughter, she was being tucked in by her nurse that first 

evening. Just as she was coming out of the local anaesthetic, the nurse was trying to comfort her and 

said: “Oh, now you will be all right. You have a lovely boy at home and now you have a lovely girl 

here.” The woman opened her eyes slowly and said: “I wish I had a washing machine!” It is always 

something else. When something is done, when this Government proposes something, it is just 

‘something else.’ 

 

It has been my lot to live along the bank of the South Saskatchewan and, for this last 17 years I have 

always heard about this great irrigation scheme that is going to take place on that river. Now, 17 years is 

quite a long time and the Leader of the Opposition was rather fortunate because his colleagues in power 

at Ottawa were of the same political stripe; so, consequently, surely if he was so interested in irrigation 

during those times, as we are led to believe now, it is queer that this scheme of irrigation on the south 

Saskatchewan had not had a beginning in those past years. However, we are told now that soundings 

have been made. Now that is one advance – at least the soundings have been made! 

 

Mr. M.H. Feeley:  More sound than anything else. 



March 12, 1947 

 783 

Mr. Willis:  The Hon. Member for Canora says ‘more sound.’ Well, we are quite used to it and we 

will believe there is something being done there when the workmen start working. We have heard that 

sound for a long, long time. 

 

In the field of rehabilitation of our veterans of World War II, I must congratulate this Government, 

particularly the Minister of Reconstruction and Rehabilitation, for his work in this respect. Countless 

times the Opposition has told people of this province that if the CCF got into power they would lose 

their land. The people have heard that so often and they have heeded very, very little, with the result that 

the CCF Government did come into office. I am sometimes reminded of a man trying to tell a 

hair-raising story to a bald-headed man. 

 

Now let us look at the facts, particularly in the Elrose constituency, as regards our Crown lands there. 

While allocation was being made of the few parcels that were in my constituency, veterans refused to 

file on land that was available under the Dominion Land Scheme, because several sections of CNR land 

were purchased by the Dominion Government in the vicinity of my home at Eston. It was only taken up 

– and to my knowledge, when I left Eston it was not all taken up – while the provincial land was being 

allocated. Now, let us face the facts. If these boys were frightened of this Government, why would they 

not take up the Federal land and not wait for the leased land of this Government? 

 

Mr. Danielson: Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. gentleman a question? 

 

Mr. Willis:  Oh, certainly. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Can he tell us if the Federal Government has any land at the present time; does the 

Federal Government own any land at the present time? 

 

Mr. Willis:  Mr. Speaker, in reply to the Hon. Member for Arm River, they purchased a large amount 

of land – eight and one half sections – in the vicinity of Eston. It was CNR land that was turned over to 

the Dominion Government for soldier settlement. So this rather explodes the premises of the Opposition 

that veterans wanted to purchase, rather than to lease, land as the Hon. Member for Arm River is always 

telling this House and that people are so frightened that we are going to socialize land. The veterans – 

and I leave it to their judgment – know that this provincial proposition was better than that offered by 

the Dominion Government. It convinces me further that the veterans were not frightened that this 

Government would take away their land. Furthermore … 

 

Mr. Danielson:  You cannot take away what you cannot get. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! 

 

Mr. Willis:  Furthermore, in my constituency, I am pleased to report that this Government has 

established a co-operative veterans’ farm about six miles southeast of Kyle, on what was known as the 

Matador Ranch. In this co-operative farm there are 



March 12, 1947 

 784 

17 veterans of this last War. The farmsteads have been planned according to the best community 

planning practice and four individual homes have been built for the married veterans. There is a 

dormitory, a barn and a workshop. These buildings were obtained from an airport northeast of Swift 

Current. A dam was constructed, last summer, with a potential of 320 acres of irrigation, with PFRA 

assistance. Last spring, 330 acres of land were broken early in the spring and sown to flax, yielding eight 

bushels per acre. Unfortunately an early frost cut the yield from an estimated 15 bushels per acre. 

During the summer, 2,700 acres were broken and worked down for crop for next spring; and with 

moisture conditions in the district never better, crop prospects are exceedingly bright. During this winter 

more buildings re being dismantled northeast of Swift Current, and other buildings will be built in the 

spring. I would like to extend an invitation to all the Hon. Members to visit this farm if they are ever in 

the vicinity of Kyle or in my constituency. 

 

This Government also recognized the necessity of spending more money on education and will spend a 

total of $6,880,154. Of this $1,120,000 will be for increased school grants. This will aid in helping 

poorer school districts to give those boys and girls an opportunity that they possibly would not have 

received. I commend the Department of Education on the establishment of 45 larger units and as we read 

about the programs outlined by some of those units, it is only with regret that the other 15 districts are 

not organized into larger units too. I believe that all of us are interested in technical education; and it is 

only in the larger units that provision can be made for it. 

 

I have had the pleasure, since coming to Regina, of visiting the Canadian Vocational School at the 

Regina airport; and I believe steps should be taken to retain those buildings and shops, so that our young 

people from the rural areas could take the course. Too often in the past the courses in our high schools 

have been purely academic with a view to university entrance. I was amazed at the accomplishment of 

the students at the school at the airport, in the courses that were lasting six to eight months; and one 

factor that struck me more than any other was the interest of the students in the work. There was no 

idleness, but genuine interest in the tasks undertaken. I could not help but think why had former 

governments not done something, some planning of this nature in the hungry ‘30s rather than herding 

our young people into relief camps. 

 

One problem in education that gives me a great concern is the shortage of teachers, particularly qualified 

high school teachers. In this province there are 499 high school teachers, or teachers with degrees. Of 

this number, 207 are in the large cities of Moose Jaw, Regina and Saskatoon; 58 are in the small cities 

and 234 are in the towns and villages outside the cities. 

 

I believe one reason for the exodus of the high school teachers from rural and small urban centres is that 

the high school teacher in the city or large urban centre has a different status. I mean by this that a high 

school teacher’s status changes due to his location. For instance, if a teacher is one of a staff of four, he 

is qualified to recommend grade 12 students; while an equally qualified teacher in a smaller high school 

has not that privilege. 

 

I, personally, do not think that smaller urban centres 



March 12, 1947 

 785 

should not have qualified teachers; but as long as these differences occur, teachers are going to go to the 

larger centres or to other provinces; yes, even going to the United States. I just met a friend of mine who 

had left the services, last July and I find now that there is no difficulty in qualified teachers gong to the 

State of California. Now, I am worried about this; I think that we should endeavor to retain these 

qualified high school teachers in this province. It has cost this province a lot to put them through 

university and many of them are experienced teachers. 

 

I believe that the Department would be well advised to grant certificates to those whose academic and 

teaching qualifications have a high rating, with the privilege of recommending without respect to 

location. I am cognizant of the fact that all high school teachers outside the cities are not first-class 

teachers; but I refuse to admit that all the teachers on city staffs are superior in every case to those in the 

smaller centres. 

 

It is encouraging to note that the Trustees’ Association and the STF and the Department have worked 

out a salary schedule. This can be more easily worked out, of course, where you have the larger unit of 

administration. I think it is a step in the right direction, because the large cities in this province have had 

a salary schedule and that was one of the reasons why teachers were anxious to leave the small towns 

and come to the cities. They had there a salary schedule and they were surer of tenure. I, again, 

congratulate the Government on the substantial grant they have made to education and I feel sure it will 

meet with the approval of the people of this province. 

 

I believe I would be remiss if I did not dwell, for a moment, on the Department of Highways. I must 

congratulate the Minister of Highways in that he has seen fit to build a road into a town of 1,100 that 

before always had been by-passed by the former Government. It is greatly appreciated by the people of 

the Eston district and I hope, now that they have found the way to bring in a highway construction outfit, 

that they will continue building that road so that the constituency of Elrose will have at least one road 

east and west. 

 

So, in closing, Mr. Speaker, I congratulate this Government on the advances made. I am not worried 

about the large budget, if – as I know they will – this Government can show where that money is being 

spent efficiently for the welfare of the people. Two years ago I said that we came into power with a 

motto ‘Humanity First.’ We are holding that flag high; we shall continue to hold it high. The people will 

not let us down. 

 

I, therefore, will support the motion. 

 

Mr. B. Putnam (Humboldt):  Mr. Speaker, while I am not making claim to any special ability as a 

financier, I shall endeavor to approach this Budget from a practical angle and try to discuss it from that 

standpoint. Much as I regret to admit it, I have lived my three score years. My memory is fairly good. I 

can look back through 50 yeas of past. I remember hearing the men talking, when I was a small child, 

and they said that taxes were too high. Mr. Speaker, they have been getting higher ever since. They are 

too high, today and I have just about given up hope that they will ever become any less. 



March 12, 1947 

 786 

Sometimes, when I stop to consider that we have less than 900,000 people in this province and consider 

what it costs to govern this province, I am just a little bit frightened after all, if we compare what it is 

costing to govern this province with the money we are spending for other things. 

 

It is estimated that in 1946 we spent $20,000,000 for alcoholic beverages in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. In 1944, the last year for which figures are available, we spent in Canada $223,000,000 

for tobacco in various forms. That increased 11 per cent from 1943. Assuming that that percentage 

increase has continued and taking very conservative figures – taking 8 per cent as Saskatchewan’s share 

– we spent another $20,000,000 for tobacco in various forms in 1946. If we add those two amounts 

together, Mr. Speaker, we have $40,000,000 and there may be a question in the mind of some people 

whether any or all of these expenditures are contributing very much to the welfare of the people of this 

province. We could go a little further, Mr. Speaker, and if we figure in what is spent for lipstick and 

rouge and other so-called beauty aids – and, Mr. Speaker, there may be a question in the minds of some 

people whether any or all of these are making anyone more beautiful – we are spending about 

$4,000,000 in the Province of Saskatchewan for cosmetics and so-called beauty aids. Adding that on to 

the $40,000,000 that we already had, if my arithmetic serves me correctly, we are spending about  

444,000,000 for – shall I say – personal luxuries. We could go further – I have not the figures. We could 

add on what the people are spending for quack cures and fake medicines and all that sort of thing and no 

doubt we would have a few more million dollars; but we will leave it at $44,000,000. 

 

I am not complaining about the people spending $44,000,000 on luxuries. It is their money, I hope. If we 

are spending that much for these things, can we find very much fault with a government which is taking, 

through taxation in various forms, $45,500,00 to give all the social services, to pay all the people who 

are working for the Government and all of the public works in a province of this kind? 

 

It has been said that in the West we judge men by what they can do. I believe and hope that that is 

correct, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to live in a part of the world where we do not judge people too much 

by the color of their clothes, by their family trees and by the place they hold in society. I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that the same thing applies to governments. I think that when the time comes for the people to 

judge this Government, they will judge it, not so much by what they have said, not so much by what 

they have spent, but by what they have done for the people by the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I notice that the Ministers have gone into detail considerably in connection with their 

Departments and I am not going to deal with those things at length at this time; only in a general way. It 

has been agreed by everyone who has mentioned in this Assembly that money spent for education is 

spent for a splendid cause and it is generally agreed that we must not go backward so far as education is 

concerned. We are spending during the coming year nearly $7,000,000 for education and I presume that 

no one would be willing to cut it very much. 



March 12, 1947 

 787 

Now, if we were to lop off several million dollars of the Budget, some of the hon. gentlemen who intend 

to oppose should tell us just where we should start in to reduce expenditures. We are spending about 

$5,500,000 for Public Health. I think it is generally conceded that we shall go forward in our health 

services. As time goes on we are going to give more and more to socialize health services for the people 

of our province. 

 

We have just listened to a splendid speech by the Minister of Social Welfare. His Department is going to 

require nearly $8,000,000 during the current year. Now shall we start in to make our reductions there? 

Does anyone want to reduce the Old Age Pensions, the Mothers’ Allowance? Do you want to spend less 

money for the children and young people the Minister has told us about this afternoon? I do not believe 

that you do. For a government which was elected with the motto of ‘Humanity first’ nailed at their 

masthead, I would say, Mr. Speaker, in the words of Martin Luther, when he said 400 years ago, “We 

can do no other.” 

 

Now, here are Highways. I notice that we are spending about $5,500,000 on highways during the 

coming year. Well, perhaps somebody would like to do something there; but if there is any Member of 

this Assembly that would like to reduce the expenditure that he hopes to have carried on in his 

constituency during the coming year, if they will just hold up their hands we will know where to begin. 

 

During the week when the municipal men were in the city, the Hon. Minister of Highways was almost 

mobbed by delegations, committees and individuals, who were coming to him demanding that they 

receive something in the way of attention in connection with their roads in their immediate vicinity. I 

venture to say that every Member of this Assembly sometime or other has come to this city with 

delegations to meet the Minister of Highways in an effort to get something for his particular part of the 

country. So, Mr. Speaker, I doubt if we can reduce the Budget very much on highways and please the 

people as a whole. 

 

The Hon. Leader of the Opposition in his speech the other day regretted very much that there was 

apparently no provision for pensions or allowances of some sort for the incapacitated persons of this 

province. Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that I regret that just as much as he does. In fact I would 

almost be ready, some place or other along the line, to slice off a half million dollars in order that we 

could make some provision for the most needy of these cases and I hope that the time is not too far 

distant when there can be ample provision made for these unfortunate people. 

 

Now I would like to say a few words, Mr. Speaker, concerning agriculture. The estimates indicate that 

there is an appropriation of $800,000 more for agriculture than we spent last year. It is true that about 

$400,000 of that will be to carry on the Lands Branch that has come over to the Department of 

Agriculture. However, we are spending more money for this important industry. Irrigation has been 

mentioned here. I do not know much about irrigation; but I believe, Mr. Speaker, when it comes time for 

the Provincial Government to grapple with irrigation that we must find money someplace or other than 

from current revenue. 

 

The Hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs outlined, yesterday, 



March 12, 1947 

 788 

the work that is being done through the Agricultural Representative Branch. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

believe that possibly I had a small part in outlining the furtherance of this work so far as the Agricultural 

Representatives are concerned. I think possibly that the hon. gentleman, who is now the Minister of 

Co-operatives, would be willing to give me a little bit of credit for what has been done towards 

increasing the efficiency of this Department, in bringing the knowledge in the Department of 

Agriculture and the University Department to the farmer on his own home grounds. I believe that in the 

near future we are going to have a far-reaching agricultural policy in this province. 

 

There is one thing, Mr. Speaker, that I believe that we of agriculture are going to have to grapple with in 

a big way in the very near future. It is estimated that in the Western provinces, weeds are taking a toll of 

$200,000,000 and I estimate that nearly half of that is falling on the Province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, that is too big an item to be ignored and to be passed by. 

 

Science has done a great deal for agriculture. Scientific research has overcome the rust hazards, it has 

about overcome the sawfly menace. Through new varieties, disease resistance varieties of grain, we 

have not nearly the hazards to contend with that we had in this province 25 years ago. But the menace of 

weeds is not lessening, it is increasing; and I believe, today, science has at its fingertips means whereby 

this can be materially reduced. I am referring especially to the weeds belonging to the mustard family 

and the so-called French Weed which is taking an enormous toll over large areas in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. Chemicals will destroy these weeds if applied at the proper time in only an hour or two; 

but, today, the equipment and the expense of using them on a large scale is prohibitive. I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that that is one thing we must tackle immediately and find ways and means of placing it in the 

reach of the farmer; because it is not only the poor farmer that is suffering this loss. These weeds that I 

have mentioned attack the good farmers, perhaps not to the same extent as the poor farmer, but he has 

them to contend with also and he has not been able to conquer them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in discussing agriculture and in passing at the moment, I want to drop a suggestion. 

It may be something new to the most of us. I am not going to press it at the time; I am not going to move 

a resolution advocating it; but I just want to leave it as something to think about. Our experimental farms 

have done and are doing a wonderful work; but I believe, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps the time has come 

when we should consider some arrangement or some agreement whereby our experimental farm will 

come more under the direction and the control of the Provincial Department of Agriculture. At the 

present time, they are controlled from Ottawa. The source of management is too far away and there may 

be some question as to whether the men who are directing the work are familiar with our local problems. 

I am just leaving it as something to think about, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps some day, something of this 

kind can be worked out. In the United States the agricultural experimental farms are state-owned and 

state-controlled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at one time I had some experience as a livestock judge, and in judging an animal we 

compared his good points with his poor points and tried to balance the one against the other, thereby 

deciding where that animal should be placed in 



March 12, 1947 

 789 

the ring. I would like to judge our provincial budget somewhat along the same line. There may be some 

things about it that we do not like. I will admit there are some things about it that I do not like; but when 

we come to balance the good points against the poor points, I believe that we have a very good specimen 

before us, today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I am always open for conviction and reserve the right to change my mind, I feel at 

the present time, that when the time arrives I think I shall support the budget. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. J.H. Sturdy (Minister of Reconstruction and Rehabilitation) moved second reading of Bill No. 57 – 

An Act to ratify an Agreement between the Government of Canada and the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: … with a view to getting the best possible deal we could on behalf of returning men who would 

be settling on provincial Crown lands. After considerable negotiation, it was agreed that the Veterans’ 

Land Act would advance a maximum of $2,320 by way of a free grant for each settler, that is, who 

settled on Provincial Crown lands. The agreement stipulates the manner in which this money may be 

expended. It may be expended for the purchase of stock, equipment, improvements and the Federal 

Government reserves the right to retain an interest in this investment during a period of 10 years. 

 

Thereafter the Federal Government’s right or interest in this grant disappears and the cattle and 

improvements purchased with the grant then becomes the sole property of the leasee or the veteran 

settler. 

 

Another feature of the agreement, in as far as this province is concerned, is that the lessee, in the person 

of the soldier settler, enters into an agreement with the Provincial Government on the basis of a 33-year 

lease. That lease, of course, is renewable, so that security of tenure is guaranteed to the soldier settler. 

As a matter of fact the lease can be assigned by will to the heirs of the settler. There is a rental charge of 

one-sixth to one-eighth of the crop produced. The lessee also has the land on which he is settled after a 

period of 10 years. The purchase price of the land is to be determined by the productive behavior of the 

land and the land in the area in which the farm is located. Now this pretty well outlines the serious 

features of the agreement. 

 

We can discuss this clause by clause in committee and with explanation, Mr. Speaker. I move second 

reading of this bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Biggar) moved second reading of Bill No. 56 – An Act to amend The Larger School 

Units Act, 1944. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I trust that most of the Bill can be dealt with adequately in Committee of the 

Whole. However, there is at 



March 12, 1947 

 790 

least one important change I thought might be discussed and one or two minor ones. 

 

The Bill does make provision for an increase in the number of days for which larger unit trustees may 

receive expense in connection with business as unit trustees. It also makes a provision whereby towns 

which come under the Act and for which a position requires a vote, the vote will be taken by secret 

ballot rather than by poll which was the situation previously. The major change in the Bill is with 

respect to the equalization grants which are paid. 

 

The members of the House perhaps remember that under the previous Bill, the equalization grant was 

paid to units on the following basis: program costs bases on $1,500 per public school room and $1,800 

per high school room was estimated. Compared to this were certain revenues which the unit received. 

The revenues were made up of the various grants which the unit received, plus estimated amount of 

money obtained by a rate of 9 mills of taxation on the rural areas of the unit and 14 mills on the urban. 

The change, which is being proposed is that the program costs will be based now, not on $1,500 per 

elementary room, but on $1,800 per elementary room and on $2,100 per high school room. We are 

proposing, also, Mr. Speaker, to eliminate the paying of equalization grants on behalf of school districts 

where such school districts are in a unit; and to consolidate the equalization grant to the unit. The other 

change in the basis of determining the grant is that instead of using 9 mills on the rural part of the unit, 

we propose to use 10 mills. I may say that the reason for increasing this basic figure was so that we 

might get a more adequate distribution for the more lowly assessed units. The total amount of money to 

be distributed in this way is roughly $650,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of the Bill. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  … established some five, six or seven years ago, will be continued to schools not 

included in larger units? 

 

Mr. Lloyd:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, that is the subject of another Act. We are proposing certain changes in 

that too. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  That’s the School Grants Act? 

 

Mr. Lloyd:  Yes. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:00 o’clock p.m. 


