



















































Hansard: February 11, 1947


205 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Fourth Session — Tenth Legislature 

9th Day 

 

Tuesday, February 11, 1947. 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. J. Gibson (Morse) for an 

Address-in-Reply. 

 

Mr. W. J. Arthurs (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, rising to speak in the Throne Speech I seem to be kind 

of put back a little bit through a special privilege granted here today. I notice that these galleries on both 

sides are filled up. I don’t know who I should give the credit to, whether it’s the press or who, but I have 

a very nice audience today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with those that spoke before me extending my congratulations to the 

Member for Morse, mover of the motion and the Member for Meadow Lake who seconded it. I think 

they did a wonderful job. Only carrying on as back benchers, I believe these Members have done very 

well in moving and seconding the Speech from the Throne at the first session, second session and third 

session. They were all good and I must say that these two Members have done a real good job again this 

year. 

 

I would like also to say a few words in regard to the Cabinet we have here. We were told in 1944 that if 

the CCF were elected what in the world were they going to do for Cabinet Ministers. After we were 

elected and the Premier had his Cabinet all picked they found that we had a better balanced Cabinet than 

they ever had in the Province of Saskatchewan. They said there must be just one or two Cabinet 

Ministers carrying the load for the whole works, but each one of our Cabinet Ministers is big enough to 

stand up and carry his own load. 

 

One thing I would like to mention is something that hasn’t been mentioned very much here and that is 

this education tax. I heard quite a bit of it in the country, and you will remember in 1944 before the 

election what the promises were. I don’t think any person will say that the Liberal Party said that they 

would take off the education tax if elected, and, of course, at that time they had pretty good ideas that 

they might be re-elected; and the Conservative Party said they would take it off. Well, they knew that 

they never would be elected so they could promise you anything. But the CCF said they would take off 

the education tax when they could find other taxes, other means of taxation to overcome it and they have 

been working along that line. I have been asked to get this tax off. I told the people in my constituency 

that it was a nuisance tax prior to election and still think it’s a nuisance tax. Talking with different 

restaurant people throughout the country, they said that this odd cent bothers us all the time. The people 

don’t like it. Well, last year we did take off the education tax on 

  



February 11, 1947 

206 

all meals and all food stuffs. But I find in Regina, though, when I go into the restaurants that the odd 

cent is still there 71, cents or 82 cents. The only conclusion that I could come to, Mr. Speaker, was that 

this Government can take off the education tax but these restaurant people still are going to insist on that 

few cents that they weren’t turning in to the Government under the education tax. 

 

Now, there’s been some mention here in regard to the old age pension and what this Government did. I 

want to tell this House that in all my travels every Old Age Pensioner that I’ve ever came in contact with 

is perfectly satisfied. You’re going to have an awful time to change those people from the opinion that 

they have at the present time of what this Government has done for the Old Age Pensioner in this 

province. 

 

Another point is this, it was only last night that I was talking to one of the crew that had had an accident 

out here at Franks Lake. They went on duty last Thursday night at 22 o’clock and were still on duty last 

night to give you some idea of what trouble these railroad men have in trying to keep the roads open. 

They had two engines behind the snow plow and that snow plow is off the right of way now. But 

yesterday morning the Saskatchewan Air ambulance was able to drop down out in that country and pick 

up four of them that were injured in the wreck and fetch them to the city. There can’t be too much said 

for the air ambulance that we have inaugurated in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Another thing that I would like to stress a little bit today is the market roads in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. The speaker said yesterday that he thought perhaps he had as much mileage as any 

person else in the form of provincial highways. That may be true, but I’m not up here trying to say that I 

have no provincial highways. In fact, in the Melville constituency we’ve got 225 miles of provincial 

highway but our trouble is with market roads to get to the provincial highways. Just to give you an 

instance, last summer a farmer up in the Finney district came to me. “Arthurs” he said, “I live a mile and 

a half from the highway here and when it rains it’s impossible for me to get out from the highway and I 

can’t get from my home to the highway. I’m prepared,” he said, “to write you a cheque for $800 (and I 

understand that it would cost $1,200 to gravel that piece of road, that mile and a half), I’m prepared to 

write you a cheque for $800 if you can get the other $400 so this piece of road can be gravelled.” That 

gives you an idea to what extent some of these farmers will go to get a road. I’m hoping that this year 

we’re going to have more money for market roads and so that we can help the different municipalities 

build up their market roads so that they can get on to the highways and be able to get to these towns. 

 

Another question in regard to these roads, not altogether market roads, but we’ve been told what a large 

tourist traffic we could have if we had the proper kind of roads and I’m referring now to down in the 

Qu’Appelle Valley. One of the speakers yesterday, I believe, was speaking of a summer resort up in the 

northern part of the province. My constituency is bounded on the south by about 104 miles of 

waterfront. I think that’s the best tourist place we have in the whole Province of Saskatchewan, that is 

the north bank of the Qu’Appelle River. That is where we would like this Government to do something 

for the tourist traffic, to get a road along this Valley so that we 

  



February 11, 1947 

207 

 

can get some of this tourist traffic that is waiting all the time from the country south of us. No doubt this 

is the closest summer resort of any extent for the American tourists coming from the south up into this 

beautiful Qu’Appelle Valley. But the day before the election in ’44 the Hon. J. G. Gardiner threw out 

quite a bait to the Melville constituency and especially to the town of Melville. He told them that there 

was going to be an egg plant built in Melville at a cost of about $225,000. Well this egg plant was built 

and it’s quite a memorial there but I must say it’s not running very often. It’s closed down at least ten 

months of the year. 

 

Also the other day I heard a lot said about the municipal elections in the different cities here but I notice 

that those speakers were kept away from the town of Melville. We haven’t got a city in our constituency 

but we have got the largest town in the province, but nobody ever mentioned the municipal elections in 

our town this year because if they had they would have found that they were just the very reverse. The 

labor representative in that town more than doubled the votes of his opponents. About the same time we 

had a young Liberals convention in the town of Melville, for two days. One thing that amused me (and 

Mr. Tucker was at Melville at that time, and the two resolutions were printed in the paper), what amused 

me was this — that one of these resolutions called for giving those 18 years of age a vote. They actually 

didn’t know that in the Province of Saskatchewan for practically a year that they had had a vote and 

we’re not worried very much about that though. 

 

I had the opportunity of meeting Mr. Tucker just a short time ago so when I found out who he was I held 

out my hand and said, “Mr. Tucker, my name is Arthurs from Melville” “Oh,” he said, “I’ve been to 

Melville a couple of times and they seem to be very uneasy down there.” “Well,” I said, “Mr. Tucker, 

perhaps I’m responsible for that.” Then he tumbled that I was the Member of this Legislature. He 

thought he was talking to some of his own Liberal friends. 

 

An amusing thing happened up in my room the other night. Harry, my roommate, got in ahead of me. 

When I got in there Harry was busy reading the Leader-Post. So, I said, “You’re reading that Liberal 

paper again.” “No,” he said, “this is not a Liberal paper, this is a CCF paper.” I said, “How do you get 

that way?” He said, “There was no other single factor more responsible for electing this Government 

than this paper.” But it is amusing to me to sit here in this House, I haven’t had very much to say, but 

doing a lot of listening and hearing the opposition to everything that comes up. They oppose everything. 

In fact, I was kind of amused the other day. The Member for Moosomin wound up by stating that he 

would not support the Budget, something that he had not heard yet. He had not heard the Budget yet. He 

was talking on the Throne Speech. If he thinks I’m kidding him at all, I’d advise him to go up to the 

boys upstairs and get them to run the record over. 

 

Also, comments he made on our Attorney General. I was kind of pleased, you know, the way he referred 

to him. Perhaps the Attorney General is quite a bit like I am. He has not got so much to say in the House 

but under our democratic system, most of our work is done in the caucus and there is quite a bit of 

thrashing out of legislation in caucus. But when he referred to the latter part of that, upon checking into 

it I found that our Attorney General is credited today with having the largest listening audience in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. We are 

  



February 11, 1947 

208 

talking about the air, Mr. Patterson. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — The work is all done in Cadbury’s office. 

 

Mr. Arthurs: — No, no, the work is not all done in Cadbury’s office. It is done in our caucus. That is 

the way it has always been under this democratic set-up that we’ve got in this province. 

 

Mr. Procter: — If that’s the present legislation, we might as well go home. 

 

Mr. Arthurs: — Well, that remark — in case the listening audience did not hear that, that was Mr. 

Proctor’s remark — the fellow that was Minister of Highways — so you can take it for what it is worth. 

 

But we heard so much here with regard to labor legislation that this Government had went out on a limb 

as far as labor legislation is concerned. Now, I’m a labor man, have been one for the last 35 years and 

we have passed some good legislation here for labor and I want to tell this House that there has not been 

one item of legislation, labor legislation, put through this House that has benefitted me as a railroad man 

in the position I hold — not one iota. They are only fixing up some of those other organizations that 

didn’t have the proper legislation and I might say that you have got to go a long way yet too to get your 

labor legislation up to what we’ve been enjoying for a number of years. I’m also pleased at the civil 

servants of this province that have been organized and put on a seniority basis. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:00 o’clock p.m. 

 


