



















































Hansard: March 18, 1947


945 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session – Tenth Legislature 

34
th

 Day 

 

Tuesday, March 18, 1947 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial 

Treasurer) that this Assembly do now resolve itself into a committee of Supply. 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): Mr. Speaker, it has been the custom of the other speakers who have 

taken part in this debate to compliment the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Fines) on the presentation of his 

Budget. I do not think there is any need for me to compliment him, but I do want to say that, when we 

took office in this province a little over two-and-a-half years ago, there were many dire forebodings 

about the portfolio of the Treasury. It was said that here was a group of visionaries and dreamers with no 

experience in the ways of finance, and that, in all probability, the province would soon be plunged into 

debt and its credit ruined. I had a great deal of confidence at the time in the man who was selected as 

Provincial Treasurer; I have a great deal more confidence in him, today. After two-and-a-half years, he 

is able to come before this House and show that this province has reduced its indebtedness by 

$72,000,000 has increased its position on the money market so that, today, bonds which were selling, 

when we took office, at $91 for a $100 bond, are selling, today, as $114 and $115. 

 

In the two-and-a-half years that he has occupied this position, the Provincial Treasurer and myself have 

had occasion many times to go to Ottawa to meet with the officials of the various provinces, to meet 

with the Minister of Finance (both Mr. Ilsley and, later, Mr. Abbott) and with their Deputies and with 

Mr. Towers, the Governor of the Bank of Canada; and I want to say, quite frankly, that after watching 

the Provincial Treasurer in action alongside some of the best financial minds in the Dominion of 

Canada, I am proud to be able to state here, today, that in my opinion we have one of the best Provincial 

Treasurers in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget of a Government is a most important document because the budget sets forth 

the objects of the Government and asks the Legislature to vote the money in order that the Government 

may carry out the policies which it has outlined. A vote against the budget, of course, is a vote to 

withhold from the Government the money to carry out the policy which it has enunciated. 

 

We have had some criticism of this Budget, and nearly all of the criticism can be boiled down to one 

sentence, and that is that the Budget is much too large. That was the criticism of the official Opposition, 

the criticism of my friend, the Member for Last Mountain (Mr. J. Benson) and the criticism of the Hon. 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

946 

and gallant Member for the Mediterranean Area (Mr. Embury); that the Budget was too large. 

 

I want to take a few moments to deal with that statement. First of all, I want to remind the Assembly that 

we cannot fairly compare our budget with the budgets of the other western provinces. The comparison is 

not a fair one insofar as we are concerned, because, Alberta, Manitoba and British Columbia all give a 

‘net’ budget, whereas we give a ‘gross’ budget; that is, the money which they get from the Federal 

Government for old age pensions, or for venereal disease control, or for technical education, is not 

shown in their budgets. We, on the other hand, show it as coming into our revenue and as being spent as 

expenditures, so that our budget actually, in figures, is probably give or six million dollars higher 

because it is a ‘gross budget’ than if we were to place our budget on a ‘net’ basis as do the other western 

provinces. 

 

However, even ignoring that difference what do we find, this year? 

 

COMPARATIVE BUDGETS OF THE WESTERN PROVINCES 

 

 1946-47 1947-48 Increase Increase 

  $  $  $  % 

Alberta (Net) 32,981,325 47,002,734 14,021,409  42 

British Columbia 

(Net) 

42,089,508 58,781,334 16,691,726  40 

Manitoba (Net) 20,042,000 29,405,000  9,363,000  47 

Saskatchewan 

(Gross) 

39,996,889 45,571,114  5,574,225  14 

 

Note these percentages: Alberta is up 42 per cent; B.C. is up 40 per cent; Manitoba is up 47 per cent; 

and Saskatchewan is up 14 per cent. I almost feel that we are pikers; that we haven’t expanded 

sufficiently to meet the demands of the age in which we live, when we compare our expenditures with 

those of the other provinces in western Canada. 

 

Now this constant talk about ‘too big a budget’ is not put forward because they would like to create the 

impression that we are laying more and more taxes on the people’s backs. Yesterday the Hon. Member 

for Moosomin (Mr. Procter) quoted from the Table appearing at the back of the Budget Speech and 

although I tried two or three times to get him to say what this Table represented, he did not want to do 

so. This is a Table giving the ‘Comparative Statement of Gross Revenue on Revenue Account’ – ‘Gross 

revenues’, but he did not say that. 

 

Then he went one step further; he tried to compare the year ending April 30
th

, 1943, with this year. His 

Government was also in office on April 30
th

, 1944; but if we take even the gross revenue (not the taxes, 

but the gross revenue) what do we find? We find that the revenue in 1936 was $17,31 per person and 

that in 1944 (when this Government was still in office), it grew to $40.65 – from $17 to $40 an increase 

of 250 per cent! At the present time it is $47.70 – that is at April 30
th

, 1946. For the present fiscal year it 

will be down. Even referring to last year’s figures, however, whereas my hon. friend’s revenues went up 

$23 per person, it has gone up only $7 per person on gross revenues during this administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, gross revenues do not indicate an accurate picture. The impression my friend was trying to 

create was that 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

947 

this $47 per capita consisted of taxes collected from the people of the province. This Table, which he 

quoted from, is broken down as to taxes. If the Hon. Member will look at this Table, he will see that it 

specifies as one item. Let us look at these taxes. The taxes are broken down and show that, in 1944 (the 

last budget which the Liberals brought in) the per capita taxes were $13.36 and that the per capita taxes 

at the end of April 1946, were $15.58. But my hon. friend’s taxes had gone up considerably. In 1936, the 

per capita taxation was $6.11. It increased up to $13. That is, they doubled in amount between 1936 and 

1944. Taxes doubled in that time. The increase since we took office has been only some $2 per capita. 

 

If we go below and look at licences (there has been a great deal of talk about increased licences), we 

find that licence revenues are down one million dollars as compared to the last budget which my hon. 

friends brought in. 

 

Now let us look at this question of taxation. My hon. friends always want to create the impression that 

total revenue represents total taxation as it falls on the ‘man in the street.’ The other day, when the 

Leader of the Opposition was speaking, he paid me the compliment of saying that I was a much better 

orator than I was a mathematician. I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, that I cannot compliment him on either 

score, because he made the statement that whereas I had said that the Education Tax had been cut 40 per 

cent, the amount which we were receiving from the Education Tax was as much as ever. Of course, that 

is understandable. The volume of purchasing has increased, but he knows – no one in this House knows 

better – that the amount of Education Tax which we would be collecting today, would be higher, 

although we are levying 40 per cent less by virtue of the fact that this Legislature, last year, took the 

Education Tax off foodstuffs and off meals. 

 

As a mathematician my friend interested me, because one of the statements in his speech was that when 

his Government left office in 1944, it left no unpaid accounts. That was interesting. It was interesting 

because, within a few weeks after taken office, we were down in Ottawa wrestling with the fact that his 

Government had $83 million worth of Treasury Bills lying in the hands of the Government at Ottawa. 

Within the first twelve months that we were in office, we had our hands full trying to meet some of the 

debts which my hon. friend had incurred. If my friend does not call $83 million worth of Treasury Bills, 

1938 seed grain, 1935, 1936 and 1937 seed grain and relief accounts, which the province had promised 

to pay as outstanding accounts, as liabilities which had to be met, then I do not know what an 

outstanding obligation is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we come to the question of taxes, we do not need to look at total revenues, all we need 

do is to look at the estimates (and my hon. friends have no doubt done so), and, on page 14, they will 

find the taxes which are to be collected in this financial year, beginning April 1
st
, in the Province of 

Saskatchewan by the Government. The total amount of those taxes as is shown there, is $13,593,800 and 

not $47,000,000 – the fantastic figure that the Member for Moosomin tried to pile up yesterday: $260 

per family. Just $13,593,800 and, Mr. Speaker, I ask the Hon. Members to compare those taxes to be 

collected with the taxes collected under the same items in the last budget which my hon. friends 

presented before leaving office. Their taxation at that time was $14,300,000. Actually, in terms of taxes 

collected under these items, this Government is collecting 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

948 

$800,000 less in taxes than my hon. friends were to collect in the last budget they brought down. 

 

I know that the Member for Moosomin is going to say, “Ah! but the Hospital Tax should be added to 

this!” The Hospital Tax does not come in to consolidated revenue, and if my hon. friend wants to add 

the Hospital Tax as a tax collected by the Government, he must put over on the other side of the ledger, 

the fact that the people of Saskatchewan, last year, paid five and one-quarter million dollars in hospital 

bills which they will not be paying this year. So, when my friends go out into the country and try to tell 

people that this Government piled up taxes, I want them also to tell them that, on these items, on this 

amount of money collected by taxes under these estimates, we will be collecting $800,000 less than they 

estimated they would collect in the last budget which they presented in this province. 

 

Mr. Procter:  You’ll have a time telling them. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  When the hon. gentlemen opposite criticized the budget for being too large, I noticed 

that they were very careful not to tell us where they thought it ought to be reduced. The member for Last 

Mountain thought that a $35 million budget was big enough. Well, that means a cut of 25 per cent right 

down the line. How do we go about cutting a budget 25 per cent? The Hon. Member suggested some of 

the things he wanted to commend the Government for doing. Well, Mr. Speaker, those very things that 

he was commending the Government for doing would have to be cut out if we were to reduce the budget 

to $35 million. You can’t eat your cake and have it too. 

 

We can very easily have a smaller budget. You can have a smaller budget by stopping the medical, 

hospital and dental care for old age pensioners, for mother’s allowance cases, for the blind. You can 

have it by reducing the old age pensions. You can have it by stopping grants to municipalities to hire 

municipal doctors. You can have it by stopping the grants to communities to build hospitals in 

sparsely-settled areas. You can reduce your budget by discontinuing equalization grants for education to 

help the backward districts and communities in a financially difficult position. It certainly can be done. 

 

My hon. friends have not said where they would like to reduce this budget except in two particulars. In 

two matters they said they were willing to cut the budget. The first thing they objected to was the size of 

the staff, the size of the Civil Service. They said that it has grown alarmingly and they objected to its 

growth. They also objected to the increased salaries for the Civil Service, which it is estimated will cost 

in the neighborhood of a million dollars this year. 

 

Let us look at these two matters. Mr. Speaker, the people of this province, I think, recognize that you 

cannot have service without personnel. What did we find when we took office? The Minister of Natural 

Resources (Mr. Phelps) and myself went up to northern Saskatchewan; we found whole areas had never 

been supervised by an inspector of the Natural Resources Department; we found cases of companies that 

were supposed to have been paying royalties, whose books had not been checked since 1931. In the 

Department of Child Welfare, when this Government took office the whole of the social services in this 

province were in a deplorable condition. They were turned over to the present 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

949 

Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. Valleau) and organized into a Department. He has had to hire trained 

social workers; he has not enough yet, but he has had to add considerably to his staff. He had to hire 

trained personnel and I believe sufficiently in the boys and the girls and the men and women he is 

looking after, to believe it is a good investment to spend money on the kind of staff that he is bringing 

into the Department of Social Welfare. 

 

In agriculture, there was not enough staff to give a proper agricultural representative service; we had to 

increase staff. 

 

I come to my own Department, Public Health Nurses, at one time were so few, that we enjoyed the 

services of only ten in this province and when we took office there were 21. Twenty-one to cover a 

province the size of Saskatchewan! Today, there are 56 and there still aren’t half enough. The Leader of 

the Opposition complained the other day about the number of cars purchased; every one of these nurses 

required a car. We did not have enough sanitary inspectors. 

 

We came to the Mental Hospitals, Mr. Speaker, one could write a book about the Mental Hospitals: they 

were overcrowded and in deplorable condition; psychotics and defectives were herded together like 

cattle; staff was overworked and there was not sufficient staff; wards carried on with one girl on duty 

alone – if anything happened to her, no one was there to get her out; doors were locked and there were 

no means of communication. People worked in those wards for twelve hours a day, and my hon. friends 

at one time paid them the magnificent salary of $65 a month for a married man starting to work in a 

mental hospital on shifts of 72 hours a week – and then they talk against an increased staff! 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not believe the people of this province want services on that basis. If we are going to 

take care of our mentally ill, if we are going to take care of our old people, then surely, we have a duty 

first of all to pay decent wages to those that care for them, to demand that those who look after them 

shall be properly trained and properly qualified and to see to it that the hospitals, where these people are 

kept, are clean and as homelike as it is possible to make them. That is why the staff has increased. 

 

In the case of mental hospitals, the employees of which were on a twelve-hour day, we reduced hours to 

an eight-hour day; instead of two shifts of twelve hours each in every 24 hours, completely new staff 

right throughout both mental hospitals. We took the defectives out of the mental hospitals and placed 

them in a separate institution. That meant a completely new staff. Mr. Speaker, the last things that I am 

going to apologize for are: first, providing some room and some decent care for the people who are 

mentally ill; and the second thing I am not going to apologize for, is paying reasonable wages to those 

who look after them. 

 

Because we are paying decent wages, and because our employees work decent hours, we are able to set 

high standards. We are able to say that we are not going to allow anybody at all to push these patients 

around. We are able to say: “Before you become a mental hospital nurse, you must take examinations 

and you must write examinations each year. We will give you training; but if you are not able to 

progress and learn how to do 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

950 

this work sympathetically, and give these people the best possible kind of care, we do not want you in 

the service”, and because this work is now financially attractive, we are able to pick and choose and get 

the right kind of staff. 

 

The second thing my hon. friend objected to was not only the size of the civil Service but the additional 

money we were going to pay the service. Again I do not apologize for that. The cost of living has gone 

up. Our civil servants of this province will be interested to know that, if the Liberal Party ever gets back 

into office, one of the first things they will do is cut their salaries down to where they were when they 

left office. No, Mr. Speaker, when you come to talk about more people to man our mental hospitals, our 

old folks’ homes, our jails, our agricultural services, more persons to provide health service, public 

health nursing services, cancer treatment – when you talk about those things, it is not a matter of 

whether we can afford to pay more; it is that we cannot afford not to pay more! We cannot afford to 

allow these services to go back to the deplorable conditions in which we found them in July, 1944. 

 

Of course, the Opposition did not only fail to tell us how they would reduce this budget, they even went 

on and told us how we ought to spend more money. The Leader of the Opposition told us that the budget 

is too big, but incidentally, asked: “Why don’t you give a wool bonus?”, “why don’t you give a hog 

bonus?”, “why don’t you give a milk subsidy?” Of course he was careful not to say that he never gave 

them when he sat over here. But now he says, “why don’t you do it? I want the budget down; but I want 

you to spend more money!” Nobody has ever been able to solve that one. Houdini used to pull rabbits 

out of a hat, but he never tried to make a living out of selling them when he had pulled them out of the 

hat. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in this discussion of the budget, we have had a chance to see the real difference in 

the political philosophies the Liberal Party and of the Government. The Leader of the Opposition 

summed it up far better than I could do, when he said this in the course of his speech: 

 

It is rather disconcerting to see the very considerable percentage of the total expenditures of the 

province that are being provided for a comparatively limited number of percentage of the population. 

 

There it is in a nutshell, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition had just been talking about the old 

age pensions’ increase, and about the health services for these people. The Leader of the Opposition 

feels that it is disconcerting to see the large amount of money that we are going to spend on a relatively 

small group of people. After all, if the rest of us can get by, if we do not need security for our old age, if 

we do not need insurance against an automobile accident, if we are always able to pay our hospital bills, 

why should we be taxed to help somebody that cannot pay those bills? 

 

That was the attitude of the Leader of the Opposition, when, the other day, he talked about the home for 

the Infirm at Wolseley, and about the increase in the cost of operating that home. When I interrupted and 

said that we were feeding them now, this was the reply of the Leader of the Opposition: “The response 

of the Premier is typical of his approach to the practical problem of finance.” 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

951 

Mr. Speaker, that is the greatest compliment that has ever been paid me in my public life. I take it as a 

compliment that in facing the practical problems of finance, I insist first and foremost that the people 

shall be fed, and particularly the aged people who have served this province so long. But here, Mr. 

Speaker, we have the kernel of the whole question. My hon. friends do not like, and their friends do not 

like, having to help pay taxes to look after the needy, and the sick and the aged, and the orphans, and the 

widows. If they can get by, why should they have to be concerned about other people! 

 

Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the frankness of the Leader of the Opposition and also the frankness of the 

Member for Moosomin, because they have shown us Liberalism with the mask off: the Member for 

Moosomin, who talked about the creation and sharing of idleness, which, he said, was becoming an 

established practice in Saskatchewan, and the Leader of the Opposition who said, “The farmer of this 

province is beginning to appreciate that he is being compelled to pay for many privileges and many 

benefits which he cannot possibly enjoy. He cannot have a 40-hour week. He cannot have 

one-day’s-rest-in-seven. He cannot have time-and-a-half for working so many hours a day.” 

 

That is the official Opposition; but Mr. Tucker wants something for everybody and on page 28 of the 

“Liberal Program” (very suitably bound in red) this is what they say: they pledge themselves to: 

 

The enactment of such legislation, applicable to the industrial and service employment so as to 

encourage the bringing about of the 40-hour week. 

 

The 40-hour week no less! The Liberal Party is for the 40-hour week on the platform, but, in the 

Legislature, the Leader of the Opposition says the farmer does not get a 40-hour week, and the farmer is 

beginning to realize that he is having to pay for a lot of services which other people get and which he 

cannot enjoy. 

 

How are we supposed to reconcile these statements? Mr. Tucker, the reformer: Mr. Tucker for a 40-hour 

week; yet, over here, the gentlemen in Opposition are opposed to a 40-hour week. They are opposed to 

taxation, which, as the -Leader of the Opposition says, helps only a certain small fixed percentage of our 

people! 

 

Mr. Speaker, there you have the difference between the Liberal and the CCF philosophies of life. The 

Liberal Party takes what I consider the callous and selfish position: those that can get by should get by; 

as for those that cannot get by, it does not matter. It is every man for himself – as the elephant said as he 

was dancing among the chicks! It is very nice if you happen to be an elephant; but it is pretty tough if 

you happen to be one of the chickens. 

 

Over against that philosophy of life stand the CCF philosophy of life. We believe that every man is his 

brother’s keeper. We believe that those that are strong ought to help bear the burdens of the weak. We 

believe that any society, most of all a Christian society, is measured by what it does for the aged, for the 

sick, the orphans and the less fortunate who live in our midst. That is the policy of ‘Humanity First’ and, 

Mr. Speaker, by that policy this Government is prepared to either stand or fall. 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

952 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that not only have we no apologies to make for this budget; we are going to 

leave the apologizing to the people who vote against this budget. The time has come, Mr. Speaker, to 

‘stand up and be counted’, as Mr. Trestrail likes to say. Only, I want the people of this country to know 

that a vote against this budget is a vote against those things that have made necessary increases in the 

budget. 

 

The reason this budget is larger than the budget of my hon. friend is that it provides new services and 

those who vote against this budget are voting against those new services. When my hon. friends register 

their vote against this budget they are registering their vote against the increase in old age pensions. You 

cannot have increased old age pensions unless they are provided for by these increases in the budget. 

When they register their vote, against this budget, they really register against over $1 million in this 

budget to provide for medical care and hospital care and dental care and optometrical care for our old 

people, for the widows and the orphans and the blind people of the province. Over $1 million is in the 

budget for that purpose because others will be added this year and the cost is growing and will continue 

to grow. Those who vote against the budget will vote against the grants for municipal doctors which are 

provided in this budget. 

 

Another reason for an increase arises from the cost of providing a cancer service. Cancer services now 

cost at least half a million dollars a year, because the number of people going through our cancer clinics 

is steadily increasing and because the kind of service we are giving is steadily improving. That is the 

reason for these increases. My hon. friends oppose the increased costs, then they must oppose the 

increased services which are provided in that vote. They are casting their vote against a million dollar 

increase in grants for education; against a quarter of a million dollars for irrigation and conservation of 

feed; against the building of a medical school, a university hospital, to give us a medical centre in this 

province to give our people adequate care without having to travel long distances as they do today; 

against providing an agricultural building at the university, which we need if we are to have proper 

agricultural training. To vote against this budget is to vote against increased power facilities being 

provided here, to help take over certain power lines and to integrate the power system for the Province 

of Saskatchewan. To vote against this budget is to vote against increased highway expenditures – money 

provided for hard-surfacing highways in the province long neglected by my hon. friends and badly 

needed today. A vote against this budget is a vote to say, “we do not want that.” It is a vote against a 

new mental hospital to permit us to take care of people who are mentally ill; against building a new ld 

folks’ home so that we can take care of many old people who have no one to turn to and no place to go. 

 

I am not, for a moment, Mr. Speaker, apologizing to anyone for this budget. What we say is that those 

who vote against this budget had better do the apologizing, because they are voting against a budget that 

will do more to help the common people of this province than any budget that has ever been introduced 

in this Legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn to the remarks which were made yesterday by the Hon. Member for the 

Mediterranean Area. The Hon. Member, yesterday, read to this House an essay that, 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

953 

in my opinion, almost bordered on the psychoneurotic. We have all heard of such people as are 

mentioned in the song: “Pink elephants on the ceiling; Pink elephants on the floor. He saw them coming 

in the window; He saw them coming in the door.” Well, my hon. friend sees Reds everywhere; he sees 

communists at every turn … 

 

Mr. Embury:  I do, from here! 

 

Mr. Douglas:  … and I think that that is a pretty unfortunate state of mind to be in. Now the attack of 

my hon. friend, yesterday, on this group – accusing them of being communists and Communist 

controlled and having Communist tendencies – that, of course, is not a new thing at all. I do not think 

the people of this province will be greatly perturbed about these charges and certainly the Members of 

this group are not gong to be greatly perturbed about them. 

 

Mr. Embury:  You seemed to be worried about them. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  They worried you. 

 

Mr. Embury:  You were worried, yesterday. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Well my hon. friend will certainly be worried before I am through. 

 

Between 1934 to 1944, for ten years, the people of this province were subjected, about three times a 

week, to radio broadcasts by a gentleman called Mr. W.F. Kerr, and the same sort of story was told to 

the people day after day, week after week. People soon got wise to that. The Hearst Press has been 

carrying on the same sort of campaign for years and everybody they disagree with is a Communist, or is 

Communist-controlled; every organization they do not like is Communist-dominated. One has only to 

read, for instance ‘Mein-Kampf’ – Hitler used to do the same thing. He called the Socialists, 

‘Communist’. After he pretty well had all the Socialists in concentration camps, he started to call the 

Liberals, ‘Communists.’ He finally wound up by calling the Catholic Church, ‘Communist’, and he 

closed the Masonic Lodges because there were supposed to be Communist meetings going on in the 

Masonic Lodge. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, it is always true, either of an individual or a party, that, whenever they become 

bankrupt of ideas, they resort to witch-hunting and Red-baiting. It is a sure sign of bankruptcy – 

whenever a person has not the capacity to be for something, then he is always sure to be against 

something. We have had very good examples of this in this province over the years. 

 

My hon. friend came in, yesterday, with a carefully written speech, made charges which he could not 

substantiate; charged my deskmate here, with having been Chairman (I think) for Tim Buck’s meetings. 

I do not know who told him that. I do not know who wrote it for him, or who persuaded him to put it 

down; but certainly it was not true. The hon. gentleman might have tried to find out the facts, but that is 

not his characteristic: you make the charge first and then you find out about the facts afterwards. 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

954 

Now how did all this come about? I am sorry that it happened, but this is how it happened. The other 

day, my hon. friend made the charge across the floor that there were Communists in this Party and I 

invited him to tell us who they were. I invited him to name them and he said he would. 

 

Mr. Embury:  On a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker, I did not say I’d name them. If we must have this 

continual distortion of the facts by the Hon. Premier – I never said that I would name them. I asked him 

to name them. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Will the hon. Member state his Point of Order? 

 

Mr. Embury:  The point is – I suppose it is a Point of Privilege. In any event he has misquoted me in 

saying that I would name them. I never said I would name them. I said he should name them. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  I’ll leave it to the record of the House Mr. Speaker. 

 

My hon. friend was going to tell me who they were and when he got up yesterday, after a great deal of 

bluster and shaking of his fist and going through considerable histrionics, all he could tell me was that it 

was up to me. He said, (using the rather coarse metaphor) that since I was ‘sleeping’ with them it was up 

to me to name them. Well, Mr. Speaker, I do not need to name them, because I am not associating with 

any communists – and what is more, I am not, while posing as a Soldier Representative, going about the 

province clandestinely trying to get myself nominated as a Coalition candidate for the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Embury:  On a Point of order, Mr. Speaker. The hon. gentleman has suggested – and I take it 

that the same rules that applied to me, also apply to him; he has suggested that I am posing, and that I 

am here pretending to be something different. I’ll ask that that be withdrawn, if the same rule applies to 

both sides of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  The Hon. member should confine himself to the Point of Order and not try to show me 

my duty. 

 

Mr. Embury:  He told me I was posing as a soldier representative! 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, if it will soothe the hon. gentleman, I will withdraw the word ‘posing’, if 

it will make my hon. friend feel better. One of the characteristics of his class is that they can hand it out 

but they can’t take it. I have always noticed that. 

 

Mr. Embury:  I did not notice you take it, yesterday. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  I want to say this and I want to repeat it so that my hon. friend will get it -- that I am 

not associating with Communists. 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

955 

Mr. Embury:  You seem to be. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  But neither am I, while a Soldiers’ Representative, going about the city under 

sponsorship of the Editor of the Regina Leader-Post trying to get myself nominated as a Coalition 

candidate for the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Procter:  No, you didn’t make such a good job as a soldier representative, did you? 

 

Mr. Embury:  And you are not fooling anybody either. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  I do not know who my hon. friend thinks he is, but the CCF is a party with nearly a 

million supporters in the Dominion of Canada, which has laid out its program year after year, and made 

perfectly clear its stand; and the moment my hon. friend requests that we should suddenly denounce 

Communism, he expects us to drop everything else and hasten to acquiesce in his request! Because we 

have not denounced Communism the moment that he suggests we should, my hon. friend concludes that 

the CCF is Communist. 

 

Now, I am going to tell my hon. friend and I will take a few moments to do so, although I do not like to 

take the time in the Budget Debate; but since he has brought it up several times now, I am prepared to 

tell my hon. friend and to relate to him just where the CCF Party has stood over the years with reference 

to both the Communist Party and the capitalist parties in the Dominion of Canada. The only difference 

between my hon. friend and myself, so far as being opposed to the Communist Party is concerned, may I 

tell him, is that I know why I am opposed to the Communist Party. I have studied the Communist Party. 

I have studied Karl Marx. I know something about their philosophy. I believe it is wrong. I believe it is 

unsound economically, morally and sociologically. My hon. friend is not so much opposed to any 

change which he thinks will take away the special privileges of the kind of people that he represents. 

 

Mr. Procter:  He represents a pretty fair bunch. 

 

Mr. Embury:  Not a bad lot. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Now, let us look at the CCF record with reference to Communism. 

 

Mr. Embury:  Well, it’s the same as yours. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order, order! 

 

Mr. Douglas:  The CCF was formed in 1932. Its manifesto was laid down at the Regina Convention 

in 1933. Anyone who cares to follow the history of the CCF Movement knows perfectly well that 

throughout the first six or seven years of its existence, while there were large distances between our 

scattered organizations, we had to fight at almost every turn to prevent infiltration by members 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

956 

of the Communist Party, to prevent them from boring in as they always do into trade unions, into labor 

movements, into anything and everything, with a view to disrupting whatever organization they bore 

into. Twice, Mr. Woodworth, then National President of the CCF, disbanded the entire Ontario 

organization and started over again, once he disbanded the British Columbia organization and started 

over again, because the Communists had made such inroads that it was almost impossible to carry on the 

organization on a democratic basis. I say that very frankly. There was a constituency in this province, 

where, back in the latter part of the 1930s they had also bored in and where Mr. George H. Williams, 

former Provincial Leader, had to put some members out of the organization, with the consent, of course, 

of that organization and the Provincial Council, because the Communists were doing the same thing 

there. 

 

Mr. Embury:  My point, exactly. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Ah, yes, but my friend does not stop there. After having put these people out, what has 

been the story from there on? When the war came about, there was no group in Canada more vigorously 

attacked by the Communists than the CCF. At a meeting which I held here in the city of Regina, the 

Communists stood at the back of the hall and handed out pamphlets accusing Mr. Coldwell and myself 

of having betrayed the working people because he had voted for a declaration of war, whereas, Mr. 

Woodsworth had voted against it. Communists were opposed to the war. They helped to defeat a good 

many CCF candidates by some of the misrepresentations they circulated in Ontario and British 

Columbia in the 1940 Dominion election. 

 

In 1941, Russia came into the war. The whole picture changed. The Communist party was not 

supporting the war. They came out of hiding, many of them. They had been a banned organization. They 

changed their name to the labour-progressive party and were allowed to continue to organize although 

the ban on the Communist Party still continued by order-in-Council. Then they decided to make love to 

the Liberal party and … 

 

Mr. Procter:  They didn’t have much success there. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Oh? They had some wonderful success! Mr. Tim Buck and ‘Mitch’ Hepburn had a 

‘love feast’ in the maple Leaf Gardens, and Mr. Tim Buck came out here in 1944 and put a half-page 

advertisement in The Leader-Post, five days before the last provincial election, telling the people of 

Saskatchewan to vote for my hon. friend, the Leader of the Opposition. In 1945, we had the amazing 

spectacle of Labour-Liberal and Liberal-Labour candidates springing up in various industrial centres, 

especially in two-member seats. In Windsor and in Hamilton, we had a Liberal and a Communist 

running side by side. Why, when I went down to Windsor, I was surprised to see the big sign telling 

people to vote for the Labour-Progressive candidate (who was, at that time, President of the United 

Automobile Worker’s Union) and to vote for Mr. Paul Martin, who is now the Minister of National 

Health and Welfare. There they were, side by side! 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Same as in Saskatoon in the 1944 election. 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

957 

Mr. Douglas: There they were, happy as a couple of bugs in a rug. There was no question, then, of 

denouncing the Communists! 

 

Mr. Procter:  Now, tell us about Mrs. Neilson. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  I will tell my hon. friend something. He said that we had not denounced the 

communists. Let me refer him to a newspaper report and this since he has come back from overseas. 

Some of these other things he might not know about, but this has happened within recent months. Here 

is the Leader-Post of October 18
th

, 1946: 

 

Labour-Progressives spurned by Douglas. 

 

That is the heading of a reference which I made in the Portage by-election. 

 

Mr. Embury:  That’s the other way round. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Winnipeg Free Press, October 18, 1946: 

 

Mr. Douglas refuses LPP aid and attacks two other parties. Toronto Daily Star, October 18, 1946: 

 

Douglas feels okay of LPP attempt to embarrass us. 

 

And so on – so that if my hon. friend will take the trouble to go back over the history of CCF he will 

find that our stand with reference to Communism is a stand for which we need apologize to no man. 

 

Mr. Procter:  Now’s the time for you to do what Woodsworth and Williams did. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  The difference between the CCF and the Communist Party is well known to any 

person who will take the trouble to read the program of the CCF. 

 

Mr. Embury:  What is it? 

 

Mr. Douglas:  I am coming around to that. I shall tell it to my friend, I will not guarantee that he will 

understand it, but I will certainly be glad to tell it to him. 

 

I would say that there are four main things in our program. The first is that we differ as to the method by 

which a better society can be brought about. 

 

Mr. Embury:  What, with murder? 

 

Mr. Douglas:  We believe, that a new society can be brought about by democratic means. I have here 

our Manifesto which says: 

 

The CCF is a federation of organizations whose 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

958 

purpose is the establishment, in Canada, of a Co-operative Commonwealth in which the principle 

regulating production, distribution and exchange will be the supplying of human needs and not the 

making of profits. 

 

We aim to replace the present capitalistic system, with its inherent injustice and inhumanity, by a 

social order from which the domination and exploitation of one class by another will be eliminated, in 

which economic planning will supersede unregulated private enterprise and competition, and in which 

genuine democratic self-government, based upon economic equality, will be possible. 

 

Mr. Embury:  Will the Hon. Minister permit me a question? 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Yes, certainly. 

 

Mr. Embury:  You read there an article saying that you proposed to do these things by peaceful 

means. Do you concur with the Hon. Minister of Labour, when he condones a wicked murder? 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member knows better than I do that there was no attempt to 

condone a murder, but I have noticed … 

 

Mr. Embury:  The Minister did exactly that. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  He did not. But, I have noticed that when the same Mr. McNair whose thugs murdered 

some of his workers who were out on strike for nothing else but the right to eat the bread they earned by 

the seat of their brow, my friend never made one reference to the fact that these workers were killed. He 

is only interested in the fact that somebody shot Mr. McNair. Now, I am sorry that somebody shot Mr. 

McNair, but I am saying that my friend has shown little or no sympathy for the workers who were 

murdered by Mr. McNair’s thugs … 

 

Mr. Embury:  I only referred to the statement of the Minister of Labour. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  … and he has not, for a single moment, said that he is interested. My impression is that 

he is not interested at all. 

 

Now may I go on with my reading in which I was so rudely interrupted, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Procter:  Well, you ought to recognize a rude interruption. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  This is from ‘Left Turn Canada’. 

 

The new social order (the CCF Manifesto says) at which we aim, is not one in which individuality will 

be crushed out by a system of regimentation. Nor shall we interfere with cultural rights of racial or 

religious minorities. What we seek is a proper collective 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

959 

organization of our economic resources, such as will make possible a much greater guarantee of 

leisure and a much richer individual life for every citizen. This social and economic transformation 

can be brought about by political action through the election of a government inspired by the ideal of a 

Co-operative Commonwealth, and supported by a majority of the people. We do not believe in change 

by violence. 

 

There is the CCF manifesto. This is what we believe and this is where we think Karl Marx and those 

who follow him are wrong. Karl Marx, living in the days of Bismarck, felt that democracy was 

something that the ruling classes would take away the moment that the common people started to use it 

to secure economic democracy; and, of course, in Germany, that is exactly what happened. But, we 

believe that our political and democratic institutions are so firmly rooted in our social life, that they 

cannot be taken away, and that it is possible to have a revolution by ballot. They had it in New Zealand; 

in Australia. In 1945, they had a revolution by ballot in Great Britain. In 1944, we had a peaceful social 

revolution here in Saskatchewan, when the common people turned out of office the ‘choreboys’ of the 

vested interests, and themselves took control of their own affairs in this province. 

 

We believe in change by democratic procedure and we think that these democratic processes which are 

here and which are ours, can be used to bring about a new society without violence and without 

resorting to violence. 

 

The second difference, Mr. Speaker, is that in the new kind of society that we wish to see, we do not 

think, as the Communists do, that there should exist a one-party government. The Communists believe 

that they should have one party; that there should be democratic procedure within that party, but that 

only one party should exercise control. The Communists have a lot of arguments (which I shall not go 

into) as to why that is the only kind of society that is desirable. We do not believe that. We believe that 

society moves forward best when there is some conflict of opinion, where there is an opportunity for a 

difference of view, where there exists the greatest amount of freedom, both of expression and of 

thought. For that reason, we do not believe in one-party government; nor do we believe in a dictatorship 

of the proletariat which too often becomes a dictatorship for the proletariat. 

 

Mr. Procter:  You practise dictatorship, though. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  The third difference, I would say, is that we do not believe that the end justifies the 

means, because the means determine the end. If you use the wrong kind of means to get an end, the end 

itself will be wrong when you get it. If you use vicious means and immoral means to gain a certain end, 

you will have destroyed the end when you have reached it. If you use bloodshed and oppression to form 

a new society, the kind of society you get will be based, not on reason, not on brotherhood, but on 

bloodshed and oppression. We have never believed that the means justify the end. We believe that the 

means determine the end. 

 

The final difference and this applies to a great many of us, I think – is that we believe fundamentally in 

the tenets of 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

960 

the Christian Church. My hon. friend over here, the Minister of Agriculture, whom my friend, yesterday, 

said had Communist tendencies, is a member of a church which has condemned the tenets of 

communism. There are many of us who are socialists across the world, who are not only democratic 

Socialists, but who also claim to be Christian Socialists; people who believe that there is a Power not of 

ourselves that makes for righteousness; that the world is not merely a play of blind chance, and of forces 

that move hither and yon without guidance; that there is working through the lives and minds of men, a 

force that is gradually pushing mankind upward and onward toward what we believe ultimately will be 

the Kingdom of God. Believing that, and believing that Socialism, rather than being incompatible with 

Christianity, is inseparable from Christianity and is the application of Christianity to our everyday lives, 

we cannot, at the same time, accept the purely materialistic doctrine of the Communists. 

 

I want to say to my hon. friend, and I say it with all possible kindness, that when he comes into this 

House, as he did yesterday, and when he uses the terms ‘Socialist’ and ‘Communist’ interchangeably, 

when he labels a man like Dr. Harry Laidler – one of the greatest professors on this continent; one of the 

greatest scholars on this continent – labels people of that calibre ‘Communist’ and says, in essence, that 

Communism and Socialism are one and the same thing, he is not just insulting the members of this 

group. I do not care about anyone insulting us here; we can take care of ourselves. But he is insulting 

Socialists all over the world. He is insulting the people of some of the Scandinavian countries and of 

Holland Belgium and New Zealand and Australia and in the United Kingdom, the Mother of 

parliaments, where today we have a Socialist Government. There, they have the people of Great Britain 

solidly behind that go, as its by-elections have shown, seeking to work out their economic salvation in a 

very difficult time. Their stand in Greta Britain with reference to the communists is well known, as my 

hon. friend admitted yesterday. When anyone tars every Socialist with the Communist brush, he is not 

just insulting the small group here; he is insulting a growing body of opinion all over the world which is 

moving and marching forward under the banner of Socialism. 

 

When I look at the men who are leading the British Government, leading some of the other 

Governments of the world, who are proud to call themselves Socialist, I have very little regard for the 

taunts of the gentleman opposite. But I want to tell my hon. friend that he not only insults these people, 

he insults some of the men who had the privilege of fighting with him and under him – who fought for 

some of the things that this Government is trying to bring about. The men who went to fight in this war, 

did not go to fight to make the world safe for Tories or for Toryism … 

 

Mr. Embury:  Did I say they did, Mr. Premier? 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Many of them spent time in the Bennett ‘concentration camps’ at twenty cents a day, 

and Tory treatment; many were run down asking their inalienable right to work and to live. They went to 

war. They went to war because they believed that out of the war would come a better society, a society 

in which unemployment and insecurity would be abolished. 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

961 

All of us know some of these young men. I can think of one of them, one I knew quite well. My hon. 

friend knew him too. I can think of a chap like young Jack Western – born in this province; went 

through the bad times of the ‘30s as most of these boys did; went overseas; became a lieutenant – in fact 

an officer in the Saskatoon light Infantry, in my hon. friend’s unit. He became a candidate, as a matter of 

fact, in the 1944 election. 

 

Mr. Embury:  He was a great friend of mine. I had just as much admiration for Jack Western as the 

Hon. Premier had. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  I am quite sure my hon. friend had. He was a candidate, in 1944, as was my hon. 

friend. He was transferred from my hon. friend’s unit to another unit as a reinforcement officer, and was 

killed before the election came; otherwise, he might have been sitting in this House. But, before he went 

into action, before he was killed, he sent some letters back to Canada: the House would be interested in 

hearing them, but I am not going to weary the House with them now. But he knew what he was fighting 

for. He was not fighting to maintain the world as it was; was not fighting to maintain the status quo. He 

was fighting because he hoped and believed that, out of the war in which he ultimately was to give his 

life, there would come a better society. Jack Western was a Socialist, and when my hon. friend stands up 

here and calls socialism ‘Communism’, he is casting reflections on some of these men, some of his own 

comrades, who gave their lives because they hoped that, some day, we would see in this world the kind 

of society that this Government is seeking to realize. 

 

I do not want to spend any more time on this matter, except to say to my hon. friend that when he came 

to this House, two years ago, I think all of us treated him with every courtesy and every respect. We had 

a high regard for him, not only for himself, but for the men whom he would represent. The first two 

years my hon. friend was here, he supported the Government’s Speech from the Throne. He said, last 

year, from his place in this House, that the Government ought to stay in power if for nothing else than to 

keep the Liberals out. 

 

Mr. Embury:  A lot of people woke up with me! 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Now, Mr. Speaker, the Government has not changed. The policies we are carrying out, 

today, were in the very Speech from the Throne for which my hon. friend voted. 

 

Mr. Embury:  You have changed your tactics. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  The Hon. Member, however, has changed. The Government has not changed; my hon. 

friend has changed. My hon. friend, who came back with a desire to do something for the men he 

represented, has been finding that, in the interim, if you are going to be a successful lawyer and if you 

ever hope to get on the bench, you had better support the status quo. 

 

Mr. Embury:  I speak to a Point of Order, that the Premier suggested that I have personal motives 

and some personal interest in expressing the views that I do in this House. I would thank him to 

withdraw that, Mr. Speaker. 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

962 

Mr. Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, I certainly want to hasten to assure my hon. friend that I was not 

suggesting for a moment that he had any personal aims in view at all. I will withdraw what hurts my 

hon. friend’s feelings, certainly. But, I am suggesting to my hon. friend that he is a very different person, 

today … 

 

Mr. Embury:  You are different! 

 

Mr. Douglas:  … from what he was two years ago. 

 

Mr. Embury:  That’s your fault. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  I will tell my hon. friend whose fault it is. On the day when my hon. friend stood up in 

this House and said, “I was a Tory before, and likely when I’m over being a soldier’s representative, I’ll 

be a Tory again,” my hon. friend revealed once and for all, that you cannot be a Tory before and a Tory 

after without being a Tory all the way through. You cannot change your convictions like you change 

your shirt. 

 

Mr. Embury:  You cannot change your communism either. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  My friend has always been a Tory and as far as my hon. friend is concerned, in this 

House, he has made it perfectly clear, as far as I am concerned, that he is now, in the main, not speaking 

for the veterans (many of whom wanted a new society), but he is speaking for the Tories who, 

throughout the years of this country, have opposed every kind of social change that would take away 

from the privileged classes any of the privileges which they have enjoyed. 

 

Mr. Embury:  Would you mind adding, he got wise to the CCF party? 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, a great deal has been said – and I regret to be talking so long: but a great 

deal has been said about international affairs. There has been an attempt to create an impression that the 

CCF is anti-American. Repeatedly, statements have been pulled out of their context and this idea has 

been very carefully and assiduously created and propagated across Canada by the daily press. I want to 

say, that, as far as the CCF is concerned, we are not ‘anti’ anything. We are not against ideas or objects; 

we are for certain very real and important things. We are for world peace based on collective security, 

based on collective action. That is what we are for. 

 

We recognize, however, what some of the dangers are in the post-war world. One of the dangers of the 

post-war world arises from some people on this continent who, for their own sinister motives, would like 

to keep us in a constant state of war-hysteria, keep us constantly fighting somebody or something. When 

you secure a spirit of war-hysteria, you can always get away with reactionary measures at home that 

would not be tolerated at any other time. There are those who constantly want to bring out and parade 

the ‘bogeyman’ of Russia. and this is the case, not so much in this country as in the great Republic to the 

south of us. This attitude does, however, apply to some extent in this country as well. 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

963 

Now let us state the facts. The fact, first of all, is that in spite of all the propaganda, the Soviet Union 

(men like Leland Stowe and other very reputable journalists tell us) is not in a position to fight a war 

with any major power. If the Soviet Union, in the war now ended, has had exactly one-half of its people 

left homeless, has lost eleven million of its people by killing, we all realize that it will take the Soviet 

Union anywhere from 15 to 25 years to become re-organized, to rehabilitate its economy and to reach 

the point where it could face the prospect of any major conflict. One of the things we should seek to 

present, it seems to me, is the constant attempt, in various parts of the world, by sinister forces, to work 

up a war-hysteria. 

 

There are three attitudes, it seems to me, which can be taken to this problem. The first is the attitude of 

those who accept the inevitability of war between the Soviet Union and the Western democracies. If we 

take that view, the inevitable end is war, and what has been said is true, that Canada would, in all 

probability, become the Belgium, or one of the Belgiums, of the next war, if war should come. I, 

personally, am not prepared to accept the inevitability of war between the Soviet Union and the Western 

democracies. 

 

The second attitude, which I think is equally wrong, is that we should supinely acquiesce in all Russian 

aggrandisements; that whenever Russia wants to acquire any small neighboring state, we should all 

either clap our hands or just look the other way. I am equally opposed to that point of view. I have held, 

throughout my adult life, that the greatest force for peace was laid down in the fourteen points of Wilson 

for the League of Nations, the principal one being the self-determination of small nations. I believe that 

small nations have as much right to self-determination where the Soviet Union is concerned, as they 

have where Britain is concerned or America is concerned, or turkey is concerned. I believe in the 

self-determination of small nations. I am opposed to large nations being allowed to gobble them up in a 

game of power politics and I refuse, simply because it is the soviet Union, to constantly acquiesce in a 

program of expansion if or when the soviet Union embarks upon such a program. 

 

I think there is a third course and that is the course that has been taken in the main, by the British Labour 

Party and particularly by the men who moved the amendment, recently, criticizing Mr. Bevin. Their 

position was simply this: that Britain is in a central geographic and political position; that we ought not 

to be tied to the American program supported by some who accept the inevitability of war between the 

Western democracies and the Soviet Union. We ought not, on the other hand accept the position that we 

should always acquiesce wherever Russia seeks to spread her frontiers, because Russia has become 

increasingly nationalistic as the years have gone by and more and more, the mantle of Peter the Great 

has fallen upon the shoulders of Stalin. The Socialists have taken the position that either of these courses 

leads inevitably to a war that will make the last war look like Bingo on Saturday night. 

 

Socialists believe that the solution lies in building a United Nations – a United Nations that will have its 

own Court of Justice and its own police force, that will exercise international control of the atomic 

bomb. Thus will the world secure the most potent weapon in the world by which the nations who want 

peace may collectively subdue and restrain any ‘gangster’ 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

964 

nation which insists upon using force to gain its own ends. 

 

That is the only way we can have peace and it is to that we refer when we, in this group, talk about 

refusing to be a party to any American imperialist ambitions. I am not saying that because we are 

anti-American. Personally, I owe a great debt to the American people; we all owe a great debt to the 

American people, and we all owe a great debt to the Russian people. Let us not forget that just a few 

years ago, when every paper off the press said that the Russians had stopped the Germans at Stalingrad 

or at Leningrad, we were cheering, because every time they inflicted loss upon the enemy, they were 

saving our lives and saving our future. We have no quarrel with the people of the Soviet Union nor with 

the people of the United States but we must take care that there are no sinister forces in any of these 

countries, who seek to lead us into war – a war whose only result can be to destroy civilization and all its 

works. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, having said these few words about foreign policy, I wonder if I may very briefly 

trespass upon the patience of the House to say a few words about my own Department. I must apologize 

for talking so long but I think that I can cover the work of my Department fairly quickly. 

 

May I say first of all, that the work of my Department can be divided roughly into two categories. On 

the one hand, there is the traditional work of the established Department: looking after established 

institutions; providing certain fixed services; carrying on a program of prevention and hygiene. On the 

other hand, there is the Health Services Planning Commission, whose task it is to survey the whole field 

of public health and to bring into operation new curative services, the expansion of health insurance, 

thus making available to the people of the province the health services which they so urgently need and I 

think, so greatly desire. I mean to deal first of all, with the Department itself and then, for a few 

moments, with the work of the Planning Commission. 

 

With reference to the Department, I will run over, briefly, its Branches. 

 

The first is, the Air Ambulance: The Air Ambulance now consists, as most Members know, of two 

Norsemen situated here in Regina. We had some difficulty in securing space and because the CPA were 

moving out and we were renting space from them, we have had to take over the entire hangar which has 

involved considerable expense and means that we will have to supply gasoline and refuelling facilities at 

the airport for other planes that come in and so there has been a considerable expense involved. The Air 

Ambulance has done a remarkably good job in the little more than a year that it has been operating. The 

service has, in all, made about 427 flights. In 17 of those flights, plasma or some other drug that was 

urgently required, was carried; and 410 of those were actual ‘mercy flights’ to bring one or more 

patients into hospitals. 

 

I think I explained to the House, last year, that we operate in the following manner: we bring patients 

from anywhere in the province, for a flat fee of $25. Of course, $25 does not pay for much more than 

taking the plane off the ground: it can never pay for the whole service. But we feel that people will 

appreciate the service more, if they make some nominal payment for it. Of course, if anyone cannot pay, 

there is no hesitation and we carry the patient in any event. If they can pay, they do pay; but if 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

965 

any person is in financial difficulties, the question of money is never raised. 

 

Then, I want to say a word about the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission. We have clinics both here in 

Regina at the Grey Nuns’ Hospital and the City Hospital in Saskatoon. During the last year (that, the 

calendar year) there were 3,295 cases of new admissions, an increase of 507 during that period. That is a 

very remarkable increase. There was also, an increase of 1,430 patients who came back for 

re-examination during the year 1946; that is, we are most anxious not only that patients shall come early 

to these two clinics for whatever treatment or surgery they may require, but that, when they are 

discharged, they will come to the clinic regularly, every six months or every year as ordered by the 

doctor, to make sure that the cancer does not recur. The costs, of course, for providing surgery and 

providing hospitalization for these people who go through the Cancer Clinic, is increasing very rapidly 

and, as I intimated to the House earlier, this year, our cancer program will probably cost in the 

neighborhood of half-a-million dollars. 

 

We are, as most Members know, having built for us a Cancer Clinic here in the city of Regina. It is now 

under construction. We are hoping it will be opened either in July or September of this year and when 

we have that new clinic, it will also house the Provincial Laboratory. We will be able to give even better 

service than has been given in the past. A new Cancer Clinic will be built in Saskatoon on the University 

campus close to the Medical School and close to the University Hospital. When these two Cancer 

Clinics are constructed, I have not any hesitation in saying that we will have one of the best cancer 

organizations to be found anywhere on this continent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are extremely fortunate, in so far as cancer is concerned, in having at the head of our 

program. Dr. Allan W. Blair. Dr. Blair is considered one of the outstanding men on the North American 

continent in the field of cancer research and treatment. This is indicated by the fact that, the other day, 

when the Canadian Cancer Institute was formed, he was named its provisional president. We have good 

reason to be proud of him. Dr. Blair is a Regina boy, a Saskatchewan boy, who spent seven years 

overseas doing post-graduate work in cancer research and is now considered to an outstanding authority 

in the field. He could leave this province and receive several times the salary which we are able to pay 

him. He has stayed here out of loyalty and also because he feels that he is being given an opportunity to 

provide a cancer program the like of which is not to be found anywhere else on this continent. 

 

I would like to say a word, now, about the Division of Communicable Diseases. There have been 9,872 

cases of communicable disease reported during the year 1946, which is an increase of 4,244 over the 

previous year. This large increase is mainly due to measles and mumps, which are not generally 

regarded as serious disease, although, of course, they can be. The total cost of vaccines and serums for 

1946, was $44,041.20, which is an increase of $9,947 – almost $10,000 more than the previous year. 

There has been a constant demand for an increase of immunization and with the opening of Regions, 

further increase is expected. 

 

I would like to say just a word about the question of 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

966 

immunization, Mr. Speaker. As the hon. members know, we provide vaccines and sera for 

immunization, so that any person can go to their doctor and have their children immunized against a 

communicable disease, or, where there is a public health nurse, the public health nurse will immunize 

children without any cost whatever to the individual. We supply the service and we supply the vaccine, 

or the serum. This is one of the many cases where a stitch in time saves nine and where a dollar invested 

in immunization can save a hundred dollars in medical or hospital care. One of the sad things is that we 

get tremendously excited about things like poliomyelitis, of which we have only a relatively small 

number each year in the province and about which we can do relatively little, as I shall explain in a 

moment; but about simple things like whooping cough, mumps, scarlet fever and diphtheria, for which 

we can do a great deal, it is difficult to get many people to do anything. It is inexcusable, for instance 

that any children should die in this -province, from whooping cough, as it costs nothing at all to have 

children immunized against whooping cough; and it is inexcusable that children should have died from 

diphtheria when they could be immunized against diphtheria. 

 

One of the reasons why I mention this, is because I am asking the co-operation of the Hon. Members 

and the co-operation of the general public, now that these facilities and these vaccines are available, that 

they be made use of. We cannot blame ourselves if somebody contracts an incurable disease but we can 

blame ourselves if they contract a disease against which there is almost perfect immunization. We ought 

to be making the fullest possible use of these facilities. 

 

I want to say a word about poliomyelitis, because infantile paralysis is something which has been given 

prominence in the press, and about which people are always very much concerned. Last year, the United 

States experienced one of its worst epidemics in a decade and eastern Canada suffered very heavily. 

Saskatchewan was fortunate, with only some 33 cases. 

 

We have an infantile paralysis, or poliomyelitis, clinic at Saskatoon, where such patients are treated. We 

have nurses there, who have been trained at the Kenny Institute, in a modified method of treatment for 

poliomyelitis. Last year, four cases remained from 1945; 28 acute cases were admitted to the clinic, 

during 1946. There occurred one death, leaving 31 acute cases treated during the whole of 1946. Of 

these, 24 have been discharged. I ask the Hon. Members to note that, of these 31 cases which were 

looked after during 1946, 24 have been discharged with without any brace or support. Of the remaining 

seven, it is estimated that only three all need orthopaedic appliances. This fact speaks for the excellence 

of the treatment which is being provided. 

 

I say that, because I think we should allay some of the fears which people have about poliomyelitis. I am 

not trying to belittle the seriousness of the disease; but if, out of 31 patients whom we looked after last 

year, there are only three who, we estimate, will require orthopaedic appliances and that 24 have walked 

out apparently unretarded by their illness, it means that if the parents throughout the province who have 

children who, particularly in the season when poliomyelitis is prevalent (which is August and September 

and early October) have any of the symptoms of infantile paralysis, they should co-operate by 

immediately calling their doctor and having that child taken by Air Ambulance (if the Air Ambulance is 

available) to 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

967 

Saskatoon and admitted to the clinic. Early treatment is the answer, and in the few cases where braces 

and appliances were necessary, they were found to be where a good deal of delay was occasioned before 

the patient was brought into the clinic. For the sake of the children and for the sake of these who are 

trying to help them, every possible step should be taken to bring them to the clinic as quickly as 

possible. 

 

I am not going to say much about the Division of Health Education. A program of health education is 

being carried on throughout the province by our Department with very limited funds. We could do much 

more. There is much more to be done; but we have limited financial resources in that Branch. This 

Branch has been carrying on, throughout the year, a Food Handlers’ School. Some of you may have read 

the article in Maclean’s Magazine about restaurants. If you have not read it, I suggest that those of you 

who have to eat in restaurants do not red it until the Session is over, because it is an article which tells 

you some home-truths about some of the poor conditions in many restaurants. 

 

We have in this province one of the best epidemiologists in Canada. We were fortunate in persuading 

Dr. Doyle to come here, and he has been doing very excellent work. With his co-operation, the 

Sanitation Branch has been inspecting restaurants and doing more than inspecting them by trying to 

make certain that they are clean and sanitary. They have been conducting schools for the people who 

work in restaurants so that they may learn the latest methods of taking care of food. We had a very bad 

epidemic in Province of Saskatchewan, I think last fall. I do not think any people died – they all 

recovered but there were over 125 persons ill, very seriously ill and it was not because of any dirt; it was 

simply because of the process by which the food had been prepared and stored. Certain cream pies had 

been prepared hot and left out hot all night and then hot meringue had been placed on the top of them, 

and that hot cream, covered over by meringue, made a perfect breeding-place for streptococci. We had 

there a very serious situation, not because of dirt, but simply because people did not have the knowledge 

that food should not be prepared in that particular manner. Therefore, Food Handlers’ Schools have been 

held all over the province. I have heard people say: “What’s the Government doing wasting money 

holding these schools?” Well, if we save 20 or 30 lives and if we save a lot of people from ill health 

from food poisoning, I think that the small amount of money that it has taken to hold these Food 

handlers’ Schools is well spent. 

 

The Health Education Branch has carried on a good deal of publicity with reference to venereal disease. 

It has carried on a good deal of educational work, also, with reference to pasteurization, and that is 

something again on which I am hoping we will get the co-operation of the Hon. Members. In certain 

communities, there is a prejudice against pasteurization. Sometimes, it is occasioned by people who 

want to sell milk but who have no pasteurization plant, and do not wish to go to the expense of 

purchasing one. At other times, it is people who have been reading articles which tell them that 

pasteurization takes all the good out of the milk; but I would suggest to any of my friends who are 

interested, that they get all the literature which the Branch of Health Education can give them on 

pasteurization and compare the figures, which will show that where pasteurization has taken place, the 

amount of illness and the number of deaths, among children particularly, are immediately reduced; on 

the 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

968 

other hand, in the places where there has been no pasteurization, of where pasteurization has been 

discontinued, a very serious situation has generally developed. 

 

Pasteurization is not something that we can force upon the people of Saskatchewan. It is something that 

will come in Saskatchewan only when we have had sufficient health education that the people 

themselves ask for it and I am delighted when, once a week or once every two or three weeks, a letter 

comes in from some community telling us that they have passed a pasteurization bylaw. It is a forward 

step, and shows that our people are raising their sights; but there is a long way to go yet and I think the 

Hon. Members could help a good deal in that regard. 

 

We also have carried on programs of education with reference to cancer, to acquaint people with its 

symptoms. Similarly, with mental illness, in order that people may become familiar with the symptoms 

and may take steps to have those who show symptoms of mental illness immediately treated. 

 

Then we have the Division of Industrial hygiene, which is organized in conjunction with the Federal 

Government. The Federal Government supplies us with the personnel, with Dr. Rogers, a very excellent 

hygienist and we supply the space and the rest of the staff and the equipment. Their job is to see what 

occupations are hazardous to health and discover what safeguards can be taken in making those 

occupations less hazardous. 

 

We have the Provincial Laboratory, which is upstairs (as most Members know) and which, as I said, will 

be removed later on, into the new cancer clinic in Regina when it is completed. They are doing very 

excellent work. The Hon. Members will be glad to know that since the legislation that the House passed 

last year, making blood test compulsory before marriage, the laboratories have been able to handle quite 

well, the extra volume of work, and I do not think any great inconvenience has been occasioned. We 

have been able to help many people who, otherwise, might have gone into matrimony without knowing 

the exact condition of their own health. 

 

Then, as I said in my earlier remarks, we are continuing, this year, to provide all health services for the 

old people, the blind and the mothers’ allowance cases and so we estimate the cost, this year, will be 

$1,044,002.36. 

 

We are embarking upon what is a fairly ambitious Mental Hygiene Program, Mr. Speaker. We have 

been extremely fortunate in persuading to come to the province one of the outstanding psychiatrists in 

Canada. That has been told to me on all sides, and I have had occasion to hear it again since Dr. 

McKerracher came here. Dr. McKerracher is proceeding to organize what will be an up-to-date mental 

hygiene program. We have the hospital at North Battleford and at the airport at Weyburn we have the 

training school, and we hope later to have a mental hospital on the University Campus near the Medical 

School in Saskatoon. To us, however, what is the more important thing, more important than the 

institutions where treatment is given, will be the Mental Hygiene Clinics which we hope will act as 

screening places to help pick up cases in their early stages and provide early treatment. Many cases can, 

if dealt with early, be prevented from reaching an institution at all; other cases can be treated in the local 

hospital, so that they never need reach the stage 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

969 

where institutional treatment is required. 

 

May I say a word about the Nutrition Division. One of the Members from Saskatoon, yesterday, referred 

to it and I agree with him that there is a tremendous need for expanding this Division. I may say that it 

did not exist when we took office. It is now at the point where we have three nutritionists. It could be 

larger, but in this, as in everything else, we have had to go only as quickly as we felt we could provide 

revenue and that we could justly ask for finances. I would have liked, this year, to have established a 

Dental Hygiene Program and a Maternal Hygiene Program, both of which we had to abandon for lack of 

funds. The same is true of the nutritional program. It could be expanded, of course, but finances are such 

that we can only expand at a given rate. Nevertheless, the Division had done an excellent job. Miss 

Oddie, the Head Nutritionist, has worked very closely with the Department of Education. Forty-four 

schools were visited, last year, in connection with school lunch work: 26 rural, 10 town and village 

schools and 8 city schools. She makes visits to the Normal School and lectures to the teachers on the 

matter of dietetics; attends teachers’ conventions and so on. 

 

One of the important things I would like to mention is that the Federal Government sent a team out here, 

last year, which, along with our own Nutritional Branch, made a nutritional survey of some 1,500 

children in the province. These were very carefully selected; there were some children from the cities, 

some from the towns and villages, some from the heavy land area and so on, in order to secure 

representative groups. These children were included in a nutritional survey, last April, with a follow-up 

survey, last October. Blood tests were taken, an outline of the meals they had for a given period of time 

was made and I think the Hon. Members will be interested to know that there, in the Province of 

Saskatchewan (the bread-basket of the world) we had definite signs of malnutrition, not from 

insufficient food, but because of faulty selection of foods. There were cases of vitamin deficiency, cases 

of thyroid conditions in a good number of children and it showed that there is need for a very definite 

job to be done in nutrition. 

 

The schools and the homes are the two places that can play an important part in this matter. Work is 

being done, as I said, through the teachers at the Normal Schools. I think there are now something over 

500 schools throughout the province – individual schools – where there are hot lunches being served. 

There should be a great many more, not because the children are not getting enough to eat, but because 

they are not getting the kind of balanced diet necessary to build healthy bodies and to give them 

resistance against disease. 

 

In the matter of Public Health Nursing, I think I have already mentioned that we now have some 56 

nurses and that they are extending their work all over the province and are doing a very excellent job. 

 

I mentioned the matter of the Division of Sanitation and the Food Handlers’ Schools – some 21 schools 

were held last year. This Department has made some 16,600 inspections, and has given over 2,641 

opinions on the condition of water and sources of water supplies. 

 

The Division of Venereal Disease received 2,769 reports of 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

970 

cases during 1946, as compared with 2,289 the year before, an increase of 408. Some 267 doctors 

reported venereal disease cases, as compared with 203 the year before. One of the important things in 

dealing with venereal disease is the follow-up of contacts and 392 contacts were located, of which 50 

had syphilis and 207 gonorrhoea. 

 

That is an unpleasant type of work, Mr. Speaker, and yet very essential work which we are now 

providing. Thus, when some person is reported as having venereal disease, we now go out and try to 

find out from whom it was contracted. The person responsible may be totally unaware that he or she is 

suffering from the disease. As a result of tracing down contacts, last year alone we located 50 cases of 

syphilis and 207 cases of gonorrhoea in people who had infected another person, but who, themselves, 

were not taking any treatment. 

 

In the year 1946, we distributed 1,172,800,000 units of penicillin compared to 390 million the year 

before, an increase of about three times. We distribute free penicillin to make it possible for any person 

to go either to one of the five clinics that we have established and receive treatment there, or go to any 

physician in the province, who can use this free penicillin which we make available to treat the patient 

immediately. Penicillin has been a great boon in speedy, and, apparently, effective treatment. It has not 

been in use long enough for anyone to know whether or not the cure is permanent, but certainly its 

immediate results are apparently good. 

 

Mr. Valleau (A.S.V.R.):  Will the Hon. Premier permit a question? 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Certainly. 

 

Mr. Valleau:  Have you any reports as to whether or not the penicillin being used is losing its 

effectiveness? 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Yes, the reports of the biochemists and chemotherapists is that there seems to be a 

tendency of the bacteria in the human body to build up a resistance and that they appear to be building a 

resistance in the case of those who have received penicillin, so that it is having less effect because the 

bacteria have built up a resistance against it. One of the reasons, as a matter of fact, why the Department 

of Health stopped drug stores from selling penicillin without a prescription, was just that very reason. A 

lot of people were taking penicillin pills every time they had the sniffles, with the result that when that 

person took seriously ill and the doctor sought to administer penicillin, the small amount of penicillin 

had acted as a vaccine and the patient built up immunization, so that when they really needed penicillin, 

the penicillin would not act. It is true that a person who has been receiving it, may first find that the 

bacteria have built up resistance against it, just as they do against any of the other sera that are injected 

into the body. 

 

That is all I have to say about my Department, Mr. Speaker. I do not think there is need for me to say 

very much about the Health Services Planning Commission; I can say more about that when the 

legislation concerning it is before the House. Its 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

971 

work is largely, as I said, divided into two parts. We have organized Health Regions. There are four 

Health Regions now operating; there are two more which have been voted for and which are being set 

up. That will be six health Regions which will be operating this summer. 

 

We have had requests from a great many other area asking that Health Regions be established. Of 

course, the setting up of health Regions is dependent upon our being able to get enough Medical Health 

Officers, enough Public Health Nurses (and they are very hard to get) and enough Sanitary Inspectors 

(and they are equally hard to get) to staff a region. The hold-up is, therefore personnel and also, of 

course, there is the question of finance, because in the Public Health Regions we pay two-thirds of the 

preventive costs and 50 per cent of all the diagnostic costs and services. There is, therefore, a very 

considerable outlay involved and we cannot expand too quickly although we think that we are 

expanding as quickly as staff is available. 

 

On the other hand, the Planning Commission’s task is to expand health facilities. This House authorized, 

two years ago, $150,000 towards the construction of hospitals. Last year, it authorized $250,000 and this 

year we are asking for $300,000. That will be $650,000 in all, that will have gone out in three years 

toward the construction of hospitals in those areas where the people cannot finance the building of a new 

hospital, or the extension of the hospital they have, without some financial assistance from the 

Government. I believe that those grants have made possible the opening of hospitals that would not have 

been operating and the building of hospitals that otherwise would not have been erected. 

 

The Commission also is engaged in helping regions which desire to experiment in health schemes. 

Region No. 1 is trying a complete Health Insurance scheme, and Region No. 3, last year, for six months 

tried out a hospital scheme before the provincial hospital scheme came into operation. I am hoping that 

some of the other regions may try out some health scheme under the supervision of the Health Services 

Planning Commission, because it does two things for us: first, it gives us some experience in 

establishing that kind of work, and secondly, it gives us some statistical data with reference to costs. 

 

The Federal Government has been extremely interested in these schemes in the regions and they are very 

much interested in our hospitalization scheme. They have asked us to give them all of our data, and they 

have made available some of their statistical machines to help us in correlating that data. This will be the 

first time in Canada that we have been able to obtain specific figures on what it does cost to provide 

health services for a large number of people. 

 

Our Hospitalization Scheme – the Hon. Members know enough about that; I need hardly say anything 

about it. There is legislation to come before you with reference to the plan. I know there will be many 

questions you will want to ask. I would like to say this about the scheme: on behalf of the commission, 

on behalf of the Government, I would like to express our thanks to the municipal secretaries, particularly 

and to the town clerks, throughout the province, for the very marvellous response which we received and 

the excellent co-operation we enjoyed, from them and from the general public, last fall, in collecting the 

Hospital Tax. We thought that we would be lucky 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

972 

if we collected seventy per cent of the tax. At the present moment, there has been more than that 

received and some has been paid in advance, which is not due until next June. There has been paid about 

$3.5 million which is three-quarters of a million dollars more than we expected to have to date and there 

are still many who have more than $15 to pay for their family, who do not have to pay the balance until 

next June; yet many have already paid in full, and there will be more received in June. 

 

The co-operation has been excellent; people paid and paid willingly; municipalities collected and money 

has been forwarded; cards have gone out. In some cases, there has been delay about sending cards, 

because for example, initials were not filled in properly, or addresses were not filled in properly. We are 

making it clear to the general public that their receipt, when they paid their money, will be regarded as a 

card if they have to be admitted to a hospital. 

 

The co-operation of the hospitals has been very commendable and they are doing an excellent job. I do 

not mean by that, that there are not cases of misunderstanding. Sometimes, a hospital will charge a 

patient for x-rays when x-rays are included as part of the service, or some other little misunderstanding 

will occur. But in the main, these difficulties are being ironed out and when we consider that this was a 

scheme covering over 800,000 people, that nowhere on this continent had a scheme been attempted 

which would provide for as many people at as low a cost, I think that the success which it has enjoyed to 

date, is a fine tribute both to the people who are operating the scheme and to the people who are working 

with them, namely the general public, the municipal secretaries and the town clerks. 

 

That, I think, fairly well completes the report for my Department, Mr. Speaker. I would like to say, in 

closing that there has been a great deal of talk throughout this debate, about a big budget and about high 

costs. I want to say that the greatness of a society cannot be measured by its skyscrapers, cannot be 

measured by its fine-looking residential districts, cannot be measured by its great cities. One of the 

important tests of a beneficent society is the health of its people. Many of those civilizations that have 

vanished disappeared because there had been too little concern for the health and well-being of its 

people, too little attention paid to both preventive health measures and curative health facilities. If in this 

province with the limited facilities that we have and our limited natural resources, we are spending a 

considerable amount of money in health, I suggest to this House, Mr. Speaker, that these expenditures 

are the best investment that the people of this people[r have ever made. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS -- 42 

 

Douglas (Weyburn Williams Putnam 

Wellbelove Boyle Houze 

Valleau (Melfort) Daniels Burgess 

Fines Darling Howell 

Corman Stone Wooff 

Phelps Heming Cuming 

Feeley Harris Swallow 

Trew (Mrs.) Howe Van Eaton 

 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

973 

 

Buchanan Willis Brown 

Hansen Aitken Connon 

Nollet Thair Arthurs 

Douglas (Rosetown) Murray Dewhurst 

Lloyd Lazorko Gibson 

Sturdy Lee Valleau (A.S.V.R.) 

 

NAYS – 7 

 

Patterson Danielson Embury 

Procter Marion Dobie 

Hooge   

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

RESOLUTION – MUNICIPALITIES RESERVE ACCOUNT 
 

Mr. W.J. Patterson (Cannington) moved, seconded by Mr. Danielson (Arm River): 

 

That, in the opinion of this Legislature, the Government of Saskatchewan should give early 

consideration to determining and putting into operation a plan for the equitable distribution to the 

municipalities of Saskatchewan of the $1,260,192.27 now held in a Reserve Account to provide for an 

adjustment of public revenues to equalize the levies made following the reassessment of Rural 

-Municipalities commended in 1938. 

 

He said: The above Resolution should not have been necessary because by this time the matter involved 

should have been determined by the Government and some policy and action should have been taken. 

However, that has not been done and consequently I felt that I should bring the matter to the attention of 

the House. 

 

Prior to the formation of the province and during the early years of the province the levying of, at least 

the assessment of lands in the rural districts and the levying of taxes was based on what was generally 

called a flat rate. By that I mean that it was on an acreage basis. Two men in the same municipality or in 

the same school district, if one happened to own a section of land he paid twice as much taxes as another 

resident who happened to own a half section, without any regard to the value or the productivity of the 

land involved. That unfairness was recognized and after a good deal of debate and controversy in 1922 

the assessment and levying of taxes in rural areas was based on what is called the equalized assessment. 

That is where land is valued on various factors, its quality, its productivity and matters of that kind and 

naturally this change-over created a good deal of controversy and a good deal of debate and 

dissatisfaction. But considerable credit is due to the success with which the change-over was 

accomplished through the work of a former citizen of Saskatchewan, unfortunately now deceased, a man 

who in his day was Reeve of his municipality and chairman of the Association of Rural Municipalities 

and ultimately a Member of this Legislature. I refer to the late Murdo Cameron. We in Saskatchewan 

owe a considerable debt to him because of 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

974 

his sound practical methods and his sound practical approach to a question that has long ceased to be a 

matter of serious controversy but which in its day did agitate the minds of many people in this province. 

 

Now, the equalized assessment as I have stated was established in the year 1922, that was just following 

the boom period of the latter part of the First War and immediately following it and naturally land values 

established at that time were rather high. At the time they were acceptable but as we went through a 

more difficult period in the late twenties and the 1930s a great deal of dissatisfaction arose throughout 

the province because of the high level of rural assessments, the assessment of rural lands, and this matter 

was brought to the attention of the government of that day on a number of occasions by the 

representatives of the rural municipalities through their provincial executive. In 1938 the government of 

that day agreed that the question should receive not only study but should receive action and the 

government agreed that there would be a general re-assessment commenced in 1939. At the time that it 

was undertaken it was recognized that it couldn’t be done in a year or two years and the representatives 

of the rural municipalities agreed to that and accepted that. It was agreed that it might take probably five 

years to complete an entire re-assessment of the rural areas of the province to create an equalized 

assessment on a basis more comparable with the values of that day. Actually the reassessment I think 

took just a little longer than that although it was completed in the main in about six years. 

 

Before undertaking this general re-assessment the government had a very careful study made and a basis 

of valuation very carefully worked out. Again we were fortunate in this instance in that the Minister in 

charge of Municipal Affairs at that time, now his Hon. the Lieutenant Governor of the Province of 

Saskatchewan was a sound, practical, successful farmer with long municipal experience both as reeve of 

his municipality and as a member of the executive of the Municipal Association. Naturally, in carrying 

out the work certain difficulties arose, certain differences in opinion arose, but I think we could properly 

say and truthfully say that the carrying out is a rather large undertaking and rather important 

undertaking. The job was accomplished with a minimum of objection because before it was undertaken 

the proper preliminary steps were taken to train assessors to set up a proper schedule or standard upon 

which the valuation of the land or the assessment of the land could be established. Such matters as the 

crop record or the distance from markets and freight rates and many other factors would enter into and 

should properly enter into, in proper and fair assessment of rural land. 

 

When the assessment was first promised and undertaken, it was generally expected that it would result 

in a reduction of the total assessment over the whole province and in the case of most municipalities, 

there ere odd exceptions of perhaps 20 per cent to 25 per cent but I think the final figures will show that, 

that original estimate was fairly accurate, taking all the factors into consideration. While with this very 

early evidence of those who are interested in the matter, that insofar as the public revenue levies were 

concerned (which is a tax imposed by the Government of the province on land values at 2 mills) insofar 

as rural areas are concerned there is early evidence that 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

975 

this was going to result in an overall or a total reduction of 20 per cent or 25 per cent. There would be an 

unfairness as between those municipalities that were reassessed at the beginning of the plan and those 

which were not reassessed until later years. Naturally, as the reassessment was completed the public 

revenue that was paid by a municipality which had its assessment reduced by 20 per cent or 25 per cent 

and I think in some cases as much as 30 per cent; and naturally those people began to pay a lower 

contribution to the Provincial Treasurer in the form of the Public Revenue Tax. Again this problem was 

discussed with the Government by the municipal executors and the inequity or the unfairness was quite 

evident to anyone, as I say, who had given any thought or study to it. It was agreed that when the 

reassessment was completed an adjustment would be made as between those municipalities that enjoyed 

an early decrease of their total assessment as compared with those which were not reassessed until a 

later date. I quite appreciate, Sir, that the present Government is not bound by the promise of the 

undertaking that was given at that time. It was never in the form of a Statute or in the form of a law, it 

was merely an agreement between the Government of the day and the representatives of the 

municipalities. 

 

An Hon. Member:  There was no written agreement. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  No, I quite agree there is no written agreement and I doubt if there is any 

correspondence, although there may have been a letter written but I do not remember it. But, the matter 

was brought up, not once but on several occasions and a development which I will refer to subsequently, 

in a few moments, or with the process of that development it was explained to these representatives from 

year to year. 

 

Now, as I say, I quite appreciate and quite realize that the Government of this day is not bound by that 

agreement or that promise, we might suggest of course, that they had plenty of their own promises to 

fulfil without asking them to carry out those made by the previous Government. But, in this particular 

case, that I am going to explain very shortly, we promised to do this and the agreement can be carried 

out and completed without any strain or without imposing any additional charge on the people of this 

province. For this reason, having given this undertaking and having made this promise in 1941, the 

Government of the day set up a reserve to accumulate the funds anticipating that this reassessment 

would be completed about 1944 and 1945. They set up a reserve to provide for the readjustments when 

the time came to carry out the terms of the agreement. A certain amount was added, I think the first year, 

again I am speaking from memory, I think the first year $250,000 was set aside and each year from then 

on, as long as the former government was in office, additions were made to this reserve. The result was 

that in 1944, on July 10
th

, there was a reserve of $1,145,000 standing in a trust account or a reserve 

account or whatever you like to call it, its actually in the public accounts under trusts, I think, if I 

remember correctly, anyway there was $1,145,000 on deposits or in reserve to enable this adjustment to 

be made when the time came. But today, according to information given in answer to a question that 

sum has grown to $1,260,000. Again, I am not certain but I imagine that the increase is the interest that 

has been earned, certain part of this reserve is invested in Dominion Government bonds and I imagine 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

976 

the increase is the interest that has been earned. 

 

As I say the amount standing to the credit of this reserve or trust as listed in the public accounts of 

1945-46. Under the schedule of trust accounts, it is on page 37 with the Roman numerals. Now, there are 

303 rural municipalities and there are, of course, a certain number of Local Improvement Districts that 

are interested in this question. I do not know how many Local Improvement Districts are concerned but 

suppose we leave the $260,000 for them, it would leave the million dollars to be distributed among 303 

municipalities or an average of $3,000 a municipality. I am not suggesting, Sir, that the sum should be 

distributed on that basis because that of course would not be fair, having in mind the original intention 

and the purpose of unjust conditions that the adjustment was intended to correct. According to our 

municipal reports, apparently the average assessment in rural municipalities in Saskatchewan is 

approximately two million dollars. I presume these figures are on the completion of the reassessment 

and before the reassessment was undertaken the average assessment of the rural municipalities would be 

somewhat higher. 25 per cent of the average assessment would be $2,500,000. For the reasons which I 

have tried to explain, a municipality which did not have a reassessment until the fifth or sixth year in the 

general undertaking of reassessment, would of course, be entitled to a substantial amount. Whereas the 

municipality which was reassessed in the first year would not be entitled to anything, they immediately 

got the benefit of the reduction in their total assessment. So you can’t figure it out on an average basis 

but, that’s what it would amount to if it was to be distributed so much per municipality, or it may be that 

some of the details of this reassessment have not been completed. I do not know, if there is anything still 

to be done. It must be of a very minor nature and the general reassessment has been completed now for a 

sufficient length of time to enable the Government to undertake the distribution, that is providing that 

they want to carry out the agreement we made or the undertaking we gave the municipalities back in 

1940 or thereabouts. 

 

A question naturally arises on what basis should adjustment be made and I am quite willing to admit, 

Mr. Speaker, that it is not an easy matter to determine just how it should be done. It’s not a difficult 

matter at all, at least it may require some accounting and some studying of figures, it should not be a 

difficult matter at all to determine what share belongs to each municipality. If a municipality has been 

five years as compared with another one that’s been four years, another one that’s been three years, 

longer in getting reassessments taking into account the amount by which their total assessment has been 

reduced, I say it is a comparatively easy matter to determine how much of this fund each particular 

municipality is entitled to. The question arises as to how it’s best applied. That is, suppose this 

municipality that was only assessed in 1944 or 1945, if it’s established that it has seven or eight 

thousand dollars coming to it, how best to pay that or how best to get that benefit back to the people in 

that municipality. On the other hand, the municipality that only waited one year to have its assessment 

reduced it might only have a thousand dollars coming, many have even less than that or maybe a little 

more but as I say it shouldn’t be difficult, it should not be impossible at all, to establish with a very 

definite degree of accuracy just how much of this is coming to each particular municipality in the 

province. 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

977 

During the time that this reserve was being built up, during the time when the question of this 

adjustment was first raised and it was brought up every year because the representatives of the 

municipalities used to bring the matter up every year to insure that we were still continuing what we had 

undertaken to do and various proposals were made as to how the adjustment of the money should be 

passed back to the municipality. Now, I think it will be agreed in general, Sir, that the men who should 

as far as possible get the benefits are the men who paid the taxes in the year when the assessment was 

higher than it should have been and I quite agree that in order to pass the benefits back to the individual 

land owner might present considerable difficulty. However, there was one municipal secretary, if I 

remember rightly, it’s some time ago now, who lived in the northwestern part of the -province who 

submitted his ideas and I might say incidentally that I asked the municipal men and the municipal 

secretaries to give some study to try and work out a practical and reasonable scheme. It would be 

manifestly impractical and at a totally prohibited cost to attempt to return 20 or 30 or 40 or 50 or 60 or 

70 cents of taxes or even two or three dollars to the individual taxpayers. The Government today has an 

Advisory Board, that they might if they wished refer the question to and get the benefit of their opinion 

but the Resolution is merely asking that some action be taken, some definite specific action be taken. 

 

I was going to explain this one proposal that was made and it seems to me it’s the most feasible one; 

here is a municipality, we’ll say, under this plan to have $3,000 returned to it; it’s public revenue levy 

for the current year is $6,000; allow that municipality for the current year instead of levying two mills 

levy one mill. The levy of one mill plus the adjustment that is coming to the municipality will meet the 

public revenue levy of that municipality for the current year. That has this advantage, Sir, that it passes 

the adjustments back to the men who originally paid the taxes with this one exception, that if a change of 

ownership has taken place in the interval, it’s the present owner of the land who will get the benefit 

rather than the original owner who paid the taxes in the first case. Now, there is another way and it 

amounts to approximately the same thing. If this municipality has we will say, $5,000 coming to it, 

leave the public revenue the same for the current year or for the next year but pay that municipality that 

amount and let it reduce its municipal levy correspondingly and then again in that respect the benefit 

goes back as much as can be attained to the men who originally paid the excessive amount. 

 

Thee are suggestions that the amount should be put in a fund to be expended on road work and I think 

some municipal men would accept the proposal that this money be paid back to the municipalities for 

them to expend and I haven’t any great criticism of that provided that the fundamental idea is 

maintained that out of this fund the money goes back to the municipalities to which it is properly due or 

properly owned. That is, that it would be entirely unfair to take this million dollars and say to every 

municipality in the province; here is $3,000 to build roads because that is not the basis or not the 

purpose for which it was primarily established. There may be a technical argument as to who this money 

belongs to. There is no argument as to who has it, the public accounts show it, there has been no 

disputing that. There may be some argument as to whether it’s a trust fund or a contingent liability or 

what have you, I’m not going to argue the merits of that particular 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

978 

question. The fact remains, Sir, as I have said, that the money has been set aside from year to year. The 

fund was established for a specific purpose and the time has come when that purpose can be carried out 

and the promise or the undertaking that was given to these people can be complied with. As I said a few 

moments ago I’m not greatly concerned. I think it will be possible to work out a scheme or a plan, first 

of all, without difficulty, as to the exact amount of this reserve or this trust which is coming to each 

particular municipality. A little more difficulty may present itself in determining how that adjustment or 

that return can get as nearly as possible 100 per cent back to the people who created it or paid it in. 

 

Mr. Fines:  Mr. Speaker, might I ask the Hon. Member a question at this point? What was the plan 

that your government had in mind to carry out this? 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I must say that we hadn’t fixed a plan. We were concerned at that 

time with establishing so that when the day came that conditions would permit us to make an adjustment 

that it wouldn’t be any strain or any burden on the finances of the province in that particular year. 

Money wasn’t as buoyant or as plentiful then and we didn’t want to approach the completion of the 

reassessment and find ourselves faced with having to dip into the public treasury for a million or a 

million and one-half. We didn’t know how much would be required actually, we figured it out as closely 

as we could but we wanted to be in a position when the reassessment was completed that the fund would 

be there, the money would be there to enable us to make this adjustment. Now as I say, I am quite frank, 

we hadn’t worked out a definite plan but what was in the back of my mind and probably I had more to 

do with it, although the Minister of Municipal Affairs was intensely interested but some scheme or some 

plan along the line that I have suggested. We realize as every practical person realizes that in some cases 

where the reduction in the assessment of land is only $100 or $200 that two mills on the dollar even over 

four or five years doesn’t amount to very much. It would be impractical to try and convey back to each 

individual the few cents or the few dollars or in some cases a considerable number of dollars that might 

be specifically due that particular person. But either one of the alternatives that I have suggested would 

accomplish that result without a lot of bookkeeping. The only measure of unfairness that I can see about 

it is, as I say, where the land has changed hands the immediate reduction in the levy either for public 

revenue purposes or for general municipal purposes it would be the present owner of the land who 

would benefit rather than the original owner who was originally assessed at the higher rate. Now I don‘t 

know any practical way of getting around that. That is, any workable or sensible way. I propose to move 

the Resolution, seconded by Mr. Danielson, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer):  I want at the outset to say that with a great deal of what the 

Hon. Member has said I am in agreement. First of all, that this question should have been settled long 

ago by the government and that his motion should not be necessary. I would remind the House that this 

was decided upon in 1938, that is from 1938 to 1944, six years that we had a Liberal Government. Why 

was the policy not settled? We are told today 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

979 

even … 

 

Mr. Patterson:  … wasn’t completed in 1946. 

 

Mr. Fines:  Well, Mr. Speaker, surely my hon. friend would not make an agreement. Now he is the 

only one that I have been able to find that knows of this. I have discussed this matter with all the 

officials of the Treasury, the men he had with him and they can tell me of no agreement, they know 

nothing about it, of the details of this particular agreement. In other words I rather suspect that … 

 

Mr. Patterson:  The Deputy Provincial Treasurer knows it. 

 

Mr. Fines:  He doesn’t The Deputy Provincial Treasurer does not know of the terms of this 

agreement or any manner by which this money should be repaid. Now, Mr. Speaker, I am thoroughly 

confused with all this after listening to him today and reading his statement, but I don’t know what to 

about it, so I am going to wait for further enlightenment. 

 

Debate adjourned on the motion of Mr. Aitken. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

RESOLUTION – CONSTRUCTION OF SASKATCHEWAN LANDING BRIDGE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Gibbs (Swift Current): 

 

That this Assembly urge the Dominion Government to commence immediate construction of a bridge 

at Saskatchewan Landing, as a part of the South Saskatchewan River development programme, in 

order that existing facilities of transport across the south Saskatchewan River at that point may not be 

interrupted when the proposed dam at Elbow is completed. 

 

Mr. D.M. Lazorko (Redberry):  By asking the Federal Government for the construction of a bridge at 

Saskatchewan Landing, I can see a parallel which we had in paralleling the necessities of a similar 

bridge in the northwestern part of the province, where a bridge has been built in the past, a parallel to the 

necessity of a bridge at Saskatchewan Landing. I refer to the important bridge on the North 

Saskatchewan River between North Battleford and Saskatoon on the No. 5 Highway. From the year 

1931 we saw a total of 35,000 passengers go over the ferry at that time and in 1936 the total went up to 

77,000. The cars, in 1931 from 20,000 went up to 31,000 in 1936. All the traffic from the northwestern 

parts of the province and all the traffic from Highway No. 4, No. 26, No. 55 and eventually down on No. 

5, crossing the river and out towards Saskatoon and other parts of the province the vital necessities to the 

people in the northwestern part of the province. 

 

I would like to draw to the attention of the House, that 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

980 

while we did have this necessity, we had a bridge, in North Battleford sixty miles to the northwest and 

another one at Province of Saskatchewan, merely another hundred miles or little more to the northeast. 

A bridge at Saskatchewan Landing would double the traffic of Highway No. 26, No. 40 and No. 55. We 

have no bridge west of the Saskatchewan Landing. The Hon. Member for Moosomin, using the report of 

the Department of Highways for 1945-46, argued that if we take the number of vehicles crossing any 

ferry, we should have a bridge built soon at the Saskatchewan landing. I would also like to draw to the 

attention of the House that the two ferries situated about six miles apart carried a total of about 93,000 

passengers but they are only about 30 miles from the Boyden Bridge and about 80 miles from the 

Province of Saskatchewan Bridge. 

 

I do not believe that we should look at the Saskatchewan Landing Bridge from the stand point of the 

number of vehicles crossing this ferry or any others, or the number of passengers using this ferry or any 

others, but we should look at it from the stand point of necessity that will service a large portion of our 

province. The Hon. Member for Moosomin also, stated in this House during the debate of this motion 

that the Saskatchewan Landing Bridge would have been built had the Liberal go been returned in 1944. I 

remember by a good many other similar statements in our constituencies and similar promises. We have 

an unfinished branch of the CPR which had been promised to the people of Redberry constituency for a 

good many years in the past. We have also had the promise of a highway between No. 40 and No. 55 

every election that I can remember in the past. I believe the Members will also remember similar 

promises that have been made by Members in our province only during election. I would say that a good 

many Members in the past have coasted eagerly into their provincial and federal seats over promises of 

roads that never have been built and I’ll add to this that in 1944 the last Government went out on those 

roads and bridges which they built only during election. 

 

As I stated before, the Hon. Member for Moosomin said that this bridge would have been built if the last 

Government had been returned in 1944. I’ll venture to say that there was no intention of doing this. 

First, there was no provision in that estimate for a bridge at Saskatchewan Landing. The other, we all 

know, we couldn’t get cement, we couldn’t get steel, we couldn’t get other building material. We found 

that out since we’ve started building hospitals and other things throughout the -province over the last 

number of years. And further, had they built a low level bridge at Saskatchewan landing, when a dam 

had been completed at Elbow this low level bridge would be flooded and useless again to the people of 

that part of the province and I’d say that to have built a low level bridge knowing that at some time a 

dam will be built at Elbow that that would have been poor judgment both on the part of the federal and 

provincial governments. 

 

The Hon. Member for Moosomin also stated that we should go ahead and build a temporary bridge, 

using lumber to finish off the crossing on top, which incidentally when the dam at Elbow had been built 

would stand a very good chance of floating down the river. He also stated that the PFRA would pay all 

additional 



 

March 18, 1947 

 

981 

costs of building or completing a high level bridge when the dam had been built. Then further on, he 

went on to say, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government will not hand over two million dollars to a 

provincial government for a bridge at the Saskatchewan Landing. I would like to ask on what authority 

these statements were made, that the PFRA would pay the additional cost of the bridge and the PFRA 

would pay the damage to highways and other flooded area and also on what authority the statement was 

made that the federal government will not hand the two million dollars to the provincial government for 

a bridge at Saskatchewan landing. 

 

The Hon. Member for Moosomin also stated that he could see no reason why the provincial government 

cannot go ahead and build a high level bridge at Stewart Valley. He also stated that his Department in 

the last Government estimated the cost of such a bridge, a low level bridge at $437,000. A low level 

bridge would have had a span of some 1,200 feet, a high level bridge would be with a span of over 3,000 

feet, two and one-half times as long and with an additional elevation of 53 feet. I venture to say that with 

the estimates given by him and the additional size of the bridge that this bridge will cost in the 

neighborhood of $2 million. The Hon. Member for Moosomin having stated that he can see no reason 

why this Government cannot go ahead with building this bridge, I would like to know why the last 

Government did not go ahead with the building of this bridge and also why they didn’t go ahead with 

similar projects in the province financed by the province alone. 

 

The bridge at Outlook was built with the province paying only ten per cent of the cost of the bridge. The 

Broadway bridge in Saskatoon was built on a similar basis; the Borden bridge, costing $322,120, the 

province paid only ten per cent, a sum of $32,202; even a little railway overhead bridge in our 

constituency which today, from the past experience we have had in using it over the last ten years or so, 

we can see, especially the people living around Krydor, that is what we may call a white elephant, left as 

a monument to the blundering of the last Government. Even this little undertaking costing $16,878, the 

province paid only 25 per cent of the cost of this overhead bridge. The last Government as I have tried to 

show by these few examples, the last Government did not under any circumstances even where small 

expenditures were concerned go ahead on its own to build any bridges on a large scale or anything else 

and finance that by themselves. 

 

In supporting this Resolution, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Federal Government should commence the 

immediate constituency of a high level bridge at Saskatchewan landing because this crossing is of vital 

importance to all the people in the west, central and the southwestern part of our province and also 

important to all the tourists --- trade and tourists coming in from south across the border and going to the 

northern parts of our province through the western part of our province. This bridge being important as it 

is to the people and the tourists will be a dozen ferries or more will be out of commission, then a high 

level bridge at the Saskatchewan landing will be of vital importance and a vital necessity to all the 

people in the southwest part of the province. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:25 o’clock p.m. 


