



















































Hansard: March 10, 1947


678 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session – Tenth Legislature 

28
th

 Day 

 

Monday, March 10, 1947 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial 

Treasurer) that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the Committee of Supply. 

 

Mr. W.J. Patterson (Leader of the Opposition):  Mr. Speaker, may I first extend my 

congratulations to the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. C.M. Fines) for the very clear, concise, interesting and 

well-delivered Budget Address which he presented to this Legislature on Thursday evening. His remarks 

and his statements contained parts that we can accept; contained statements and ideas with which we 

disagree. From the statement submitted as to present financial position, and future policies, we may 

arrive at Different conclusions; but my congratulations to him are not for that reason any the less sincere 

or any the less genuine. 

 

We may also congratulate the citizens of the Province of Saskatchewan for the fortunate and happy 

position in which the province finds itself financially at this time and also on the generally prosperous 

condition that exists throughout the province insofar as its residents are concerned. To what extent those 

conditions are due to the activities and the policies of this Government, and to what extent they are due 

to the work and the exertions of the citizens of the province – their payment of taxes, their contribution 

to provincial production – that is, of course, a matter upon which I do not suppose the Provincial 

Treasurer and myself would agree. 

 

As might be expected, this Budget provides for a substantial increase of provincial expenditures and for 

a further increase of provincial taxation. Possibly in this respect we may regard ourselves as fortunate 

that both of these increases are not greater than those submitted to us. The last budget presented in this 

Legislature by a Liberal Government called for a total expenditure of $34,000,000. The first budget 

presented by the present Provincial Treasurer increased that amount to $42,000,000; the second to 

$53,000,000, and this present one (or third budget) to $58,000,000. On that basis it will just take one 

more year until provincial expenditures in the Province of Saskatchewan will have doubled in 

comparison with the last budget presented by the previous administration. 

 

This naturally brings to the minds of serious-minded, practical and thoughtful citizens, particularly those 

who have to pay the major part of the taxation required to produce this amount, the natural question, 

“just how long can this progressive increase be maintained?” 

 

Actually, Sir, the position is rather worse than I have indicated. The estimates as presented to this 

Legislature call for a total provincial expenditure of $58,000,000; but they do 



March 10, 1947 

 679 

not include the revenues to be collected under the Hospitalization Tax, or the expenditures to be made 

under the Hospitalization Plan. If these are included it brings the total up to $65,000,000 rather than 

$58,000,000. It also does not include the tax imposed upon the automobile operators and owners of this 

province of $1,500,000. In all fairness, in presenting a budget and presenting estimates, the Provincial 

Treasurer should include all of those amounts which are to be collected from the amounts which are to 

be spent from the Provincial Treasury. I repeat, Mr. Speaker, that this Budget is not, as it appears to be, a 

$58,000,000 budget, but is, actually, a $65,000,000 budget as compared with the $34,000,000 of three 

years ago. 

 

Prior to the election of 1944 we heard a great deal about services being provided without money and 

without price, or, in the more recent alternative, “ask and ye shall receive.” Those promises and those 

expectations are not working out as might have been anticipated by many who accepted them as the 

principle upon which government expenditures could be based; and, as I have already said, the extent to 

which we have gone in the Province of Saskatchewan, in three short years, in the increasing of the 

amounts which the tax-paying citizens have to pay to maintain the activities of this Government is rather 

startling and considerably disconcerting to those who realize that this “ask and ye shall receive” does not 

work out as many of them anticipated. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank:  Not with the Liberal Government at Ottawa anyway. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Theirs are going down and your are going up. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! order! 

 

Mr. Patterson:  The Budget Debate, Mr. Speaker, is one of the two major debates which take place 

during the Budget Debate, to introduce any matter, or to discuss any subject, in which he may be 

interested; but, because of the nature of the debate, it is the general practice to confine addresses and 

discussions to matters of more direct provincial concern. 

 

In the Budget Debate it has been the general practice, in the past, for Ministers to review the activities 

and the policies of their Departments; and I am sincerely hoping that, in this Session, that practice will 

be resumed. We remember that, last year, many of the Ministers of the Cabinet devoted their time to a 

discussion of political affairs, of political theories and political ideas and seemed to forget that they had 

a Department for which they were responsible. They seemed to forget that the people of the Province of 

Saskatchewan who were paying the taxes which paid the operation and administration of their 

Departments had some interest, at least, in knowing what the particular Department was doing. We 

remember… 

 

Mr. Phelps:  Will the hon. gentleman permit a question? 

 

Mr. Patterson:  No, not just now. We remember that, at the last session, 



March 10, 1947 

 

 680 

a good many Members of the Government did not bother to speak in the Budget Debate and 

consequently, we had no information as to what they were doing and even less as to what they were 

thinking. Much of the time of this Session and particularly that part of the House proceedings which is 

broadcast over the air, has been devoted to a discussion about what the Government of Canada ought to 

do: whether they should do this or do that or do something else. Let us hope, and let us expect, Mr. 

Speaker, that in this Budget Debate we will have a little more time devoted to those things which the 

Legislature and the Government of the Province of Saskatchewan have some responsibility for doing; 

and let us have some information about what the Members of this Government propose to do – what 

they have in mind to do – for the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The estimates have been submitted, this year, in a somewhat different form from that to which we have 

been accustomed. I have no particular objection, Mr. Speaker. It would appear to me that the experts and 

the planners have been turned in on the preparation of the estimates. I am not suggesting for one 

moment that there is any misrepresentation or any attempt to deceive; but I am suggesting that, for the 

average layman throughout the length and breadth of the -province, who is somewhat concerned about 

how the $65,000,000 that this Government is going to spend this year is going to be raised and how it is 

going to be spent, the estimates as submitted to us do not afford him a very simple or a very easy 

opportunity of getting the information which he most desires. 

 

The cash farm income for this province for 1946, approximately $400,000,000, was slightly less than the 

corresponding figure for the previous year. As the Provincial Treasurer says (and I agree), the recession 

is comparatively slight; but that figure, compared with the other figures he quoted to us, demonstrates 

and confirms how greatly we in this province are dependent upon agriculture and upon its success. Take 

the figures quoted for mineral production, coal production, timber production, fish production, fur 

production, and, altogether, Sir, they hardly represent ten per cent of the value of agricultural 

production. It is an even lesser percentage if we take into account the value of farm production including 

that part of it which is consumed on the farm. We were not supplied with figures regarding the value of 

manufactured products; but, after all, the very great proportion of manufactured goods produced in 

Saskatchewan are made from agricultural products. So, when I say these things I am not suggesting for a 

moment that the development of our natural resources or the development of industry and manufacturing 

are not important. What I am stressing is that it continues to be true at the present as it has been in the 

past and will undoubtedly be in the future, that the whole economy of the Province of Saskatchewan is 

primarily dependent upon farm production. Two or three or four bushels more of wheat per acre is any 

season far outweighs, and far out-values, all other production. 

 

That also means, Sir, that money spent to improve the position of agriculture, to increase its production, 

to make it worth more, is money well and soundly and properly spent. But the farmer of this province is 

beginning to appreciate that he is being compelled to pay for many privileges and many benefits which 

he cannot possibly enjoy. He cannot have a 40 hour week. He cannot have one-day’s rest in seven. He 

cannot ask time-and-a-half for working more than so many hours a day; but he may, 



March 10, 1947 

 681 

and does, approve of the principle of fair treatment for other sections of the population. He is, as I say, 

beginning to realize that he has to pay the bill for all of these things, and that that bill will be 

considerably increased if the trend presently being followed in the Province of Saskatchewan is to be 

continued and if and when the controls established under wartime restrictions are removed. 

 

Now, the present Government of Saskatchewan is extremely fortunate. It took office under favourable 

conditions. The previous Government left it substantial bank balances. It left no unpaid accounts other 

than the current accounts which are inevitable and follow in any business transaction. This Government 

has enjoyed a period of very general prosperity; of buoyant revenues. There has been no need for seed 

grain assistance. I understand that, this year and last, the Government spent nothing, or gave no 

guarantees, for seed grain assistance, or if it did, it was for very minor amounts. There has been no 

serious measure of unemployment or relief assistance necessary. There has, on the contrary, been a 

tremendous amount repaid upon the farm loans made by the province in previous years. There has been 

a tremendous payment of tax arrears which had accumulated. There has been increasing activities in 

connection with timbering and mining, and things of that kind, which have increased the Government 

revenue. Under these conditions only an incompetent and inefficient government would not have been 

able to make, or would not have made, provision for increases of services, debt reduction and tax 

reduction. The present Government has done something with respect to the first tow, but in respect to 

the third no action has been taken. 

 

The last budget which I presented, was in the 1944 session. It called for an expenditure in the following 

fiscal year of $31,000,000. The actual expenditure in that year, about three-fourths or four-fifths of 

which was under the present Government, was a trifle more than the estimated expenditures, and the 

revenues were rather better, so that the Government of that year ended up with a very handsome surplus. 

In the year 1945-46, that is the fiscal year which closed on April 30
th

 last, the estimates for which were 

prepared entirely by the present Government, and the administration of which was completely under the 

present Government, the actual expenditures exceeded the estimates by some $3,000,000. Fortunately 

for the Provincial Treasurer, the revenues for that year also were greater than expectations; but, in order 

to present a balance at the end of the year, he found it necessary to take some $4,000,000 out of liquor 

profits to put into the ordinary provincial revenues. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer tells us that for the fiscal year in which we are now operating and which will 

close on March 31
st
 next, the revenues are exceeding expectations. In view of our experience in the past, 

we would be interested to know whether the expenditures are exceeding expectations, and to what extent 

we may be presented with Supplementary Estimates, at this Session of the Legislature, to add to, or to 

provide for excessive expenditures over and above, the estimates presented to us one year ago. Now it is 

perfectly true that, under present conditions, the financing of provincial expenditures does not occasion 

any great worry or concern as compared with the condition just ten years ago. It is a matter of some 

interest, however, and we may very well ask ourselves, when we remember that, for this coming year, 

the Government proposes to increase provincial expenditures from $39,000,000 to $52,000,000, how 

long can this 



March 10, 1947 

 

 682 

be maintained and what will the end be! 

 

A Dominion-Provincial agreement, completed last fall, adds $7,000,000 to the revenue of the province. 

Other than that, the increase in provincial expenditures must be collected from the people of the business 

of the province, and to a very large extent it will have to be paid by you, Sir, and by myself, and by 

others – average citizens, the ‘man on the street’, the ordinary rank and file citizen of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. We have to pay a little more for our truck licences. We have to pay considerably more 

for our gas tax. We have to insure our car. If we happen to be in the lumber business or the fur business 

or the fish business, we have to pay increased or new taxes imposed upon those particular industries. All 

in all, we have all to make our contributions to the very substantial measure of increased provincial 

taxation which must be applied in this province, notwithstanding, and over and above, the increased 

subsidies which the Federal-Provincial agreement makes available to us. 

 

If you examine the estimated revenues you will seen, Sir, that the revenue from Public Revenue Tax is 

to be reduced, not because there has been any reduction in the tax, but because large amounts of arrears 

are not being paid up and the revenue is approaching more closely the annual levy under this particular 

tax. You will find that, notwithstanding the Premier’s claim that the Education Tax has been reduced by 

40 per cent, the revenue from that particular tax still is comparable to what it formerly was. Between us, 

-- when I say between us, Sir, I speak of ourselves as citizens of the Province of Saskatchewan – over 

and above the additional subsidy which Ottawa has provided, the people of the province and the 

business which is done in the province will have to produce $12,000,000 more in order that the policies 

and the ideas of this Government may be continued in operation. And that, Sir, involves an average tax 

on all of the people of the Province of Saskatchewan, men, women and children, or $15 apiece. 

 

Something was said with respect to the comparison of expenditures made in the province with those of 

other provinces. Much may be gained in administering governments by making comparisons with what 

is done in other jurisdictions. At the same time, the primary responsibility of any government is so to 

administer and adjust its activities and its operations as to best meet the conditions which exist in that 

particular jurisdiction. For many years we claimed in this province, and rightly, to be third in point of 

population in the Dominion of Canada – third only to Ontario and Quebec – and in those years the 

Province of British Columbia and the Province of Alberta were considerably behind us in point of 

population. Now that condition is changing. It may be true, today, that British Columbia actually 

exceeds Saskatchewan, and certainly it is true that Alberta is coming very close. There is, however, the 

further difference that both I British Columbia particularly, and in Alberta to a very considerable extent, 

the sources of revenue available to the Governments of those provinces, and the diversity of interest, are 

very much greater than is the case in the Province of Saskatchewan. If they have increased their 

provincial expenditures (and they have), they are very fortunate in having many greater avenues, or 

many more avenues, to which they can have recourse to raise those amounts, and our comparison with 

these provinces is not such a favourable one if you want to take the proportion of the provincial revenues 

that they spend on Education or on 



March 10, 1947 

 683 

Highways as compared with what is spent in this province on those two particular services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are here to manage the affairs of this province and as I have already pointed out the 

whole framework of the economy of the Province of Saskatchewan is dependent upon that backbone, or 

that major factor, agriculture. That is not true in British Columbia and it is not true in Alberta, to nearly 

the extent that it is true in Saskatchewan. Let us examine our record with respect to that particular 

industry in our own province. 

 

We, in the Opposition, have long claimed that the present Government of Saskatchewan has been 

grossly negligent in its treatment of this industry in the amount that it has made available for the 

Department of Agriculture, particularly in relation to the greatly accelerated increases which have been 

taking place in respect to other departmental expenditures. Apparently this criticism has finally had 

some effect, for the estimates which are submitted to us appear to provide for this Department an 

increased –exp of approximately $800,000. Like many other promises and allurements of the CCF, 

however, on examination this increase is more apparent than real. Over one-half of it is constituted by 

the transfer of the administration of the Crown Lands of the province, or the public lands of the 

province, from the Department of Natural Resources to the Department of Agriculture. Insofar as the 

agricultural industry of the Province of Saskatchewan is concerned, that does not make a five-cent piece 

difference to that industry, with this reservation, Mr. Speaker: if the Minister of Agriculture who, from 

this time forward, is to administer the Crown Lands of Saskatchewan, will the administration of the 

Crown Lands, if he will adopt and institute policies that will remove the uncertainty and the concern 

which is general throughout the pr on the part of men who have grazing or cultivation leases on Crown 

Lands, then he will make some contribution insofar as those people are concerned; but so far as 

Agriculture on the whole is concerned, over one-half of this much-vaunted increase does not amount to 

anything. 

 

We are to have $100,000 more for Agricultural Representatives do very excellent work. They make a 

very useful contribution. But it would appear that, again, the economic planners and advisers are more 

concerned about engaging planners and experts to tell the workers what they should do than they are 

about making provision for practical policies for the improvement of our major industry. 

 

The estimates as submitted to us make no provision for a milk subsidy for our milk producers, and there 

is very good reason why that should at least be considered and put into operation. There is no indication 

that there is any proposal, or any consideration, to subsidize or to bonus the hog producers which might 

be regarded by this Government as rather backward provinces but which, nevertheless, have adopted 

that practical policy. There is no indication that any provision has been made, or any policy enunciated 

or determined, with respect to the development of irrigation. There is no provision to assist the young 

man who, because of the provisions of The Farm Security Act, is not in a position to establish himself 

on his own behalf, buy his own farm and become a private owner or operator, or to assist the man who is 

operating on a small scale and wants to 



March 10, 1947 

 

 684 

extend somewhat his farming activities; no evidence of any consideration or any provision being made 

for these practical and definite policies which would do something to improve agriculture, and the 

position of agriculture, in this province. 

 

There is provision for $180,000 to create a ‘feed bank’. As is very well known, there was, in the year 

1946, a serious crop failure over a considerable area in the southwestern part of the province. I think, in 

fact, that the failure extended a good distance up the west side of the-province. That, in some areas, had 

been preceded by a similar failure in 1945, and in some areas it was the third disaster of the kind they 

had experienced. I was rather surprised, therefore, that the Member for Maple Creek, the Member for 

Gull Lake, the Members for Swift Current, Kindersley, Bengough, Notukeu, Gravelbourg and Morse, all 

of them representatives from these areas, so far in the present Session of this Legislature have all 

expressed their supreme and complete satisfaction with the things that are being done in the province by 

the present Government. All their difficulties and all their problems have been solved. They have 

nothing to worry about except the things they want Ottawa to settle for them. Not a word did they say of 

fodder shortage or grain shortage or those practical things which are worrying and concerning residents 

of their areas now – not next year; not a year form now or five years from now, but right now. Not one 

of these Members had any complaint to make, any fault to find. 

 

The other day, in a question answered in this House, the Minister of Agriculture quoted, I think, fifteen 

points covering the record of his Department in meeting the feed and fodder situation in the southwest, 

or the crop failure, area of Saskatchewan. The Speech from the Throne told us that this Government 

proposed to conserve feed; they have not as yet told us anything about what they were doing to provide 

feed! 

 

Now I would have expected, as I have said, that the Members from these areas where this problem is of 

urgent importance, might have expressed their opinions, might have given us some idea of how serious 

or how urgent it was; but, as I have said, they saw fit to find everything satisfactory, everything fine; all 

their difficulties and problems were settled; there was nothing of any immediate concern and worry in 

their particular community. 

 

Mr. Procter:  Smart bunch you boys are! 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Well, now, when this crop failure and fodder shortage developed last year the 

Government stepped into the picture; but again in accordance with Socialistic policy, they insisted that, 

where they were gong to render any assistance, all orders for feed should be made through the 

Government, and to that extent discouraged local individuals from attempting to seek and find supplies 

for themselves. I have a concrete case, Sir, of a rancher who operates in the Fir Mountain district – his 

name is Leopold Fiset. He operates quite a large-scale ranch. On November 22
nd

 last, he ordered three 

cars of hay from the Local Improvement district representative in that section; and, what is more, he 

gave that gentleman a cheque for $396 to pay for the hay. He got the first car, ordered on November 

22
nd

, on February 28
th

, 1947, exactly three months afterwards. 

 

Now, there was not any question about his willingness to 



March 10, 1947 

 685 

pay for it. I have his cheque, here. It was issued, as I say, on November 22
nd

, and was cleared through 

the Department of Municipal Affairs’ Trust Account on December 3
rd

. In the meantime, this gentleman 

lost over half of the cattle that he was running on his ranch. I understand that there are other similar 

cases in that area. But you will remember, Sir, that all of these men – are dependent upon leases from 

the Department of Natural Resources formerly, now from the Department of Agriculture, to enable them 

to carry on their operations. As we were told a year or so ago, being ‘socially-minded’ was one of the 

qualifications for getting a contract or a lease or any agreement with the Government. I presume many 

of them are reluctant to express their criticism if similar happenings have occurred to them; otherwise 

they are likely to be . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank:  I wonder would the Hon. Leader of the Opposition give me that name again, and 

the details. I would like to check up on that. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  The name is Leopold Fiset. His Post Office address is Fir Mountain, and his 

application was made on November 22
nd

, accompanied by a cheque for $396. On December 18
th

, he 

gave another cheque to pay the freight of $198; and, as I say, the first car supplied to him reached his 

station (I presume, Fir Mountain) on February 28
th

. Now I quite realize . . . 

 

Mr. Houze:  I would like to ask the Hon. Member if this man ever had any land of his own in the Fir 

Mountain district? 

 

Mr. Patterson: Well, he had enough of a ranch to own some 500 to 600 head of cattle, and to pay 

$396 and $198 cash money for the hay he ordered, and he had enough ranch to lose over 300 head this 

winter! Now we know this has been a difficult winter; but surely when orders made early in the season, 

and paid for, were so long delayed in being received and as far as I know he has not got the other two 

carloads yet. 

 

As I have said agriculture in Saskatchewan does not so greatly require the theorists and the advisers and 

the experts as it requires the application of sound, practical, businesslike policies that will increase 

production, raise quality, reduce costs, and meet the problems that are inherent under the conditions 

under which we live. We have heard a great deal about New Zealand; of what wonderful things are 

being done by the ‘planners’ and the Socialists in that Dominion. It is a surprising thing that in the last 

election held in New Zealand, this Socialist Government which had been so successful (as we are told) 

in the application of its policies, its plans and its theories, did not elect a single member from a rural 

constituency! That is what is going to happen in the Province of Saskatchewan if the practical problems 

of agriculture are going to be neglected for theories and ideas and suggestions, and if the administration 

of these matters is going to be turned over to the theorists and the planners. 

 

The estimates for next year provide an increase in school grants of $1,100,000. With that increase we are 

all in agreement. We may be interested (and I suppose we will be told in due course) whether this 

increase in school grants is to be paid 



March 10, 1947 

 

 686 

only to those schools which have been established in larger school units. In other words, is it a condition 

of receiving additional assistance from the Provincial Treasury that the local school express its 

willingness to be included under the form of administration which the Minister of Education prefers? 

 

Several of the present larger school units have already indicated that it will be necessary for them to 

increase their levy in the year 1947. It is to be hoped that the increased grant which is to be made 

available will make it unnecessary for these larger -school units to make the increases of local taxation 

which, up to the moment, they have regarded as likely to be necessary. 

 

The increase in the expenditure for Education has been substantial. When I say that, I am referring to the 

Provincial Government’s expenditure. Recent statistics are not readily available. The reports of the 

Department of Municipal Affairs and the Department of Education do not come up-to-date – I think the 

latest is for some two years ago. But I venture to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the increase in local taxation 

to meet educational expenditures is very much greater that the increase in provincial expenditures for 

this purpose. If that is the case, the increased grants which are being provided by the Government are not 

providing any substantial measure of relief for the local taxing bodies. 

 

I find, Sir, a growing dissatisfaction in the country in connection with the administration of the larger 

-school units. Possibly some of these grievances can be eliminated; possibly they will be when the Bill 

to amend the Act is before the Legislature. So far as I can learn, and so far as the average ratepayer in 

the country can ascertain, there is no method by which he can discover or obtain information as to the 

financial revenues and expenditures of the larger school unit in which he is situated – what it has cost to 

build, or to move, or to repair, the various schools in that larger unit. As I say, that information does not 

appear to be available to the local ratepayer who pays the bill. In the past, if he was interested, he went 

to the meeting of his local school board and there the annual financial statement of the district was read 

to him. There is no such opportunity, and apparently there is no provision (as there is in The Rural 

Municipalities Act) for the printing and distribution, or the publication in the form of an advertisement, 

of the revenues and expenditures, the assets and liabilities of the larger school units. 

 

There is some concern in local districts that have been included in larger school units as to the 

disposition of the cash balances which they turned over and the adjustment of the amounts owing to the 

local districts by the municipality, or owing by the school district to the municipality. I have in mind one 

district that turned over some $2,500 of a cash balance. That particular school district happened to be in 

two municipalities. One of these municipalities owed the school district about $400, and in the other 

municipality the reverse condition existed; that is, the municipality had overpaid the district $400. The 

larger school unit board in that particular district ruled that the amount owing by the municipality to the 

particular local school district is an asset of the larger school unit board, but that the contra account, 

where the local board owes the municipality, is a liability of the local board. These things are creating a 

good deal of uncertainty and a good deal of worry. 



March 10, 1947 

 687 

Another thing that is arising, is that a great many of our local schools which were turned into larger 

school units had substantial cash balances. Theoretically, these are supposed to be held as a trust, or to 

the credit, of the local school district. but it is generally believed (and I think there is not very much 

doubt about it) that these cash balances are being used by the larger school unit boards to finance their 

activities and their operations, and the concern on the part of the local boards is this: presuming that we 

have a time when taxes are not so easy to collect, when a local board wants to utilize some of this cash 

reserve it had built up, what provision is going to be made to ensure that it will be available to them. 

Once it has been spent, how is it to be recovered? There are criticisms from communities where the 

larger school unit board has closed the local school and left the children resident in the district to find 

their own way to some adjoining school. 

 

By and large the people of the Province of Saskatchewan are prepared to pay very substantial taxes to 

support education, to provide any real improvements, practical and sound improvements, to benefit their 

children. What they are criticizing, and what they are concerned about, is the increase of local taxation 

that is taking place for which they see very little advantage or very little improvement. 

 

They are equally concerned about the increasing expenditures of the Provincial Government to provide 

them with ‘Lighted Schools’, ‘Study Action Groups’, “Adult Education’, ‘Radio Newspaper’ or ‘Living 

Newspaper’, ‘Radio College’, and all that sort of thing. The people of this province have been in the 

past, are at the present, and will be in the future, willing to contribute till it hurts if the benefits of their 

contribution and the value received from their contribution or their taxation, has produced a sound 

practical educational advantage. 

 

We are making very little progress in the Province of Saskatchewan, in spite of all the quoting of figures 

about the tremendous increase in the Education expenditures, towards the fulfillment of the promise 

made to us, prior to the election, that a CCF Government would make Education a provincial 

responsibility. On the contrary, Sir, the financial responsibility in so far as local taxpayers are concerned 

is increasing rather than decreasing. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer tells that there have been three objections to the Education Tax: one, that it was 

regressive; two, that it was a nuisance and three, that it was not used for education. I suppose the first 

two criticisms or objections could be registered to a greater or less extend against most taxes. All of us 

regard any taxes that we have to pay as bearing rather unduly upon us as compared with other people. 

Paying them sometimes is much more than a nuisance, Mr. Speaker; sometimes it becomes a problem. 

The third criticism – that it was not used for education – was one that was created purely by his Party 

prior to the election of 1944 and raised exclusively for political purposes. We have not heard a word 

about it since, although the Education Tax administration and the Education Fund administration, is 

exactly the same, today, as it was prior to the 1944 election, with this one exception: the money is now 

being used to erect buildings at the University and elsewhere, where formerly it was used entirely for the 

ordinary current expenditures on this particular service. 

 

The Education tax was established in 1937, and the total 



March 10, 1947 

 

 688 

revenue of the Province of Saskatchewan in that year was $19,000,000. The first full year the tax was 

collected it brought in $2,347,000 and was about two-thirds of the total expenditure that was made on 

Education in that year. I quote these figures, Sir, for the purpose of indicating the need for the tax at that 

time. Now, as time went along, the revenue from the tax gradually increased. It increased much faster 

than the increase of Education expenditures. If you look at the Public Accounts that were presented to 

us, this Session, you will find that, in the fiscal year 1945-46, the Provincial Treasurer collected more 

from the Education Tax alone than he spent for Education; and from the figures which he gave us in his 

Budget Address, we are likely to collect $6,000,000 from this tax in the current fiscal year, which again 

will be more than the total expenditures by the Department of Education. 

 

The Premier told us, some time ago (not in the House), that this Government had reduced the Education 

Tax by 40 per cent. Well, he is a much better orator than he is a mathematician, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  We took it off foodstuffs and off meals, making it 40 per cent below what it was when 

brought in. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Well, isn’t it a surprising thing that after the Government reduces it 40 per cent the 

total revenue is a million dollars more than it was before? Now, as I say, if you can work that our 

mathematically, I shall accept the explanation. However, we welcome the exemptions that are going to 

be extended again, this year. They do not amount to very much: if you add the exemptions that are to be 

made, this year, with the exemptions that were made last year, it still won’t be 40 per cent; but whatever 

it is, it is welcome. 

 

The question is whether the time has come when the tax could be abolished. The Provincial Treasurer 

says, “No. The time has come to popularize the tax rather than to abolish it.” Well, now, there are many 

CCF Members sitting here that will find it a little awkward, a little embarrassing, when they go out on 

the platform when the next election is held and instead of promising to abolish the Education Tax, set 

themselves out to ‘popularize’ it. However, that is their responsibility and their duty, not mine. 

 

For the third time, Mr. Speaker, the Government at this Session has promised to reform the Civil 

Service. Every Speech from the Throne that we have had has intimated that they are going to do 

something to reform the Civil Service, to take it out of politics. Well, apparently, the way to take it out 

of political influence and control is to practically double the number of employees – and that is a very 

satisfactory solution, but certainly a very different one from what the people of the province expected in 

1944. On June 30
th

, 1944, the Government of Saskatchewan employed 4,103 people. On December 31, 

1946, according to a Return that was submitted to us, they employed 5,900 people. That is just short of a 

50 per cent increase and I suppose, when the increase is 100 per cent that will represent complete 

removal of political influence in the Civil Service of the province. 

 

The estimates provide a million dollar increase for Civil 



March 10, 1947 

 689 

Servants’ salaries. I don’t know of any reasonable man or woman in the Province of Saskatchewan, who 

does not want to see the people who work for us in the public service properly remunerated: but a 

substantial part of this increase in the cost of the Civil Service is by reason of this more than 40 per cent 

increase in the numbers employed. 

 

Mr. Fines:  No, that’s not right! 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Well, if you can increase the numbers of employees in two years from 4,000 to 

practically 6,000 without paying them more salary, that’s another case of mathematics. 

 

Mr. Fines:  Mr. Speaker, does the Hon. Member not realize that this increase of a million dollars is 

entirely due to the pay plan which provides for increases and has nothing whatsoever to do with the 

increased number of employees! 

 

Mr. Patterson:  We’ll agree with that, Mr. Speaker. But, if the Civil Service was at its former figure, 

it would not take anything like a million dollars to provide this increase. The Provincial Treasurer can 

take it whichever way he likes. It is a fact that part of this tremendous increase in Government cost in 

the Province of Saskatchewan is due to the greatly increased number of Civil Servants employed by the 

province. And I’m not talking now about those (I think it is some 600) who are reported to be employed 

by the Crown Corporations. Of course, we have removed the political influence from the Civil Service 

in the Province of Saskatchewan to a very large degree, Sir, by picking out former CCF candidates in 

British Columbia and Manitoba and other parts of the Dominion and bringing them in here and 

employing them. That all tends to raise the atmosphere and remove any political considerations from the 

Provincial Civil Service. 

 

We have recently appointed a Trade Commissioner to Great Britain. His qualification for the position is 

that he was here and helped to draft the “Regina Manifesto”, back in 1930. We were told before the last 

election that, if this Government got into power, they were going to dismiss a civil servant who was on 

“leave and engaged in political activities”. Well, they did not have to dismiss that particular gentleman, 

because he was not employed; he was not on leave. He has resigned from the service. Apparently, 

however, they finally found it necessary to dismiss one of their own appointees – the only Deputy 

Minister in the history of the Province of Saskatchewan who every appeared on a political platform in 

this province in a political campaign. 

 

On top of that, Sir, there is another reason why the costs of government are going up. A Return was filed 

here a day or two ago, that was asked for at the last Session. It showed that this Government bought 105 

automobiles in the first year, or the first 15 months it was in office. So far as I can learn, Sir, the 

purchases are very much greater for the last year. I don’t suppose we will be able to find out about that 

until one year form now. 

 

We have a Bureau of Publications. It used to cost $40,000. The estimates for the next year are $130,000; 

and this Bureau has had at times as many as 60 temporary employees parked along the corridors of this 

building, sending out political propaganda paid for by the taxpayers of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

On 



March 10, 1947 

 

 690 

top of that, Sir, when we find that some of this political propaganda publishes matter or material or 

statements which are thought to be not in accordance with the facts, the person who feels aggrieved has 

no recourse or no remedy to correct any misstatement or wrong allegation that is made with respect to 

him. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  The Sifton Press does it for them. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Oh yes, that’s your propaganda. 

 

Just as another comparatively minor example of Government policy, there is a Home for the Infirm at 

Wolseley. I think it has about 80 or 90 inmates. Five years ago the cost of operation was $43,000. The 

estimate for the coming year is $100,000. 

 

Mr. Douglas: They are feeding them there now. 

 

Mr. Procter:  Well, thank God they’re feeding somebody. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  They don’t go without butter any more. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  The response, or the repartee of the Premier is typical of his approach to the practical 

problem of finance . . . 

 

Mr. Douglas: It certainly is. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  . . . and the costs of government of the province of Saskatchewan. It represents a very 

sound and a very careful consideration of the problems and the difficulties that are facing the people of 

this province, who, in this next year, are going to be asked to raise ten or twelve million dollars more by 

way of provincial taxation than they were, last year, and if the costs of this thing and that thing and the 

other thing are to be allowed to go up and up and up without any regard for what is practical and what is 

sound. For instance, we were told during the election of 1944 that this Government would abolish 

bureaus and commissions and committees and things of that kind. They did, in theory, abolish two of the 

five old Boards and created a department in the Provincial Treasury Department that cost approximately 

as much. They abolished the Tax Commission and made it a =de of the Treasury at practically the same 

cost; but they have added one commission and board and advisory committee after another. There has 

not been a session that three or four of these has not been provided for. 

 

You remember how they used to criticize Royal Commissions: those were bodies that were set up by 

governments that wanted to evade their responsibilities. I have not checked them up, but I think, Sir, 

there have been almost as many Royal Commissions appointed in the province of Saskatchewan since 

this Government took office as were appointed in all the previous years of the history of this province. 

We have had Royal Commissions on fish and on fur, and everything you can think of – yet we used to 

be told that these were a waste of public funds; that this was something that was done by a government 

to evade its responsibilities! Nobody has utilized that subterfuge more frequently 



March 10, 1947 

 691 

than the present Government. 

 

We have in the =province of Saskatchewan the Health Services Planning Commission and as I have 

already pointed out, the revenues and the expenditures of this Commission are not included in the 

estimates presented to us. It is quite true that in a Trust Fund; and it is quite true that the Bill, as passed, 

made the Commission’s expenditures a statutory appropriation. But, Sir, is it not fair and just and proper 

that moneys that are collected from the people of the Province of Saskatchewan by a tax (and The 

Hospital Services Act says it is a tax) should not appear in the public revenues? Is it not proper and just 

that the expenditures that are made of moneys that are collected in the form of the tax, no matter for 

what purpose they are expended, should be provided for in the estimates of expenditure? And if, as the 

Premier has told us, this service is going to cost the Provincial Treasury $2,000,.000, should not that 

deficit in the operation of this particular Government activity be reported – should it not be included in 

the estimates submitted to us? 

 

The Power Commission may be referred to. The Power Commission collects revenues from subscribers 

or customers to whom it supplies a specific service. Any money that the Power commission of 

Saskatchewan has ever spent that has come out of the public treasury, has been voted by this 

Legislature, and the estimates now before us provide for an expenditure of that nature again. The Local 

Government Board handles hundreds of thousands of dollars in trust funds; but the administration 

expenses, the money that the Local Government Board expends, that actually is taken out of the public 

treasury, out of the taxes collected from the people and is voted by this Legislature. That should equally 

apply to the Health Services Planning Commission. However, you can take it that, as I have already 

stated, Sir, the inclusion of these figures – the receipts which are borne entirely by taxes, either levied 

directly for that specific purpose or out of the general revenues of the province – make this a 

$65,000,000 budget. 

 

In his discussion of the Health and Social Welfare Services of the Government for the coming year, the 

Provincial Treasurer made rather limited remarks, primarily, I presume, because major expenditures are 

not in his estimates, and to have referred to them would have drawn attention to that omission. We are in 

agreement with the provision for an increase of Old Age Pensions. I presume this will apply also to 

blind pensioners. It is, of course, rather disconcerting to see the amount to which the total expenditure 

for this purpose is reaching and the very considerable percentage of the total expenditures of the 

province that are being provided for a comparatively limited number or percentage of the population. 

However, as I say, that is not a criticism – it is merely an observation. We are in agreement . . . 

 

Mr. Feeley:  Oh! oh! 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Well, that’s all right. I mean it is something that sound men will observe who realize 

that every dollar that they spend has to be collected from somebody: it may be from the clerk who is 

working in a store for $60, or $70, or $80 a month; it may be from a man who is working in a garage for 

$125 a month; it may be from a man who works in some larger institution and gets $150 a month; 

maybe from some people who receive a 



March 10, 1947 

 

 692 

larger income – but the $35,000,000 that this Government has to collect this next year has to be 

collected from the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. They are the people who have to pay the 

bill. True, the Provincial Treasurer is going to get $15,000,000 from Ottawa, but he has to get the rest 

from us. 

 

Mr. Fines:  Oh, no, no! 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Well, all right then, just show us where you are going to get it . . . 

 

Mr. Fines:  On a Point of Privilege, Mr. Speaker, the statement has been made that we collect 

$15,000,000 from Ottawa and the other $30,000,000 comes out of taxes. Now the position is, as my hon. 

friend knows only too well, that approximately $15,000,000 to $16,000,000 comes out of taxes and the 

other comes out of the contribution for Old Age Pensions from Ottawa, about $6,000,000 for interest 

and all these other dozens and dozens of things that have nothing to do with taxes at all. He knows that 

only too well. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Well, the fact remains, Sir, certain amount of money and we are going to get a 

certain amount of it from Ottawa; and remember, Sir, that we have to pay our share of that. It doesn’t 

come ‘out of the blue’ any more than the $30,000,000 that is collected in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Feeley:  We don’t believe in Santa Claus. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Well, we did prior to July 1944, but we are getting cured so rapidly that I would not 

be surprised if, in a couple of years, Santa Claus will disappear in the Province of Saskatchewan. Even 

the kids won’t believe it. 

 

Mr. Phelps:  Disappear, just the same as the Liberals. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  And talking about Santa Claus – the cripples and the deaf and the other 

physically-handicapped who were promised in 1944 that a CCF Government would provide pensions for 

them, are still waiting for “Santa Claus. He isn’t even around the corner so far as they are concerned. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  He’ll arrive and you’ll object when we do it. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  The Provincial Treasurer tells us that the Crown Corporations serve a ‘social’ 

purpose. Well, perhaps the one person who is employed as a night-watchman down at Estevan, or the 

three or four that are employed up at Chaplin, may regard it as a social service; but, as I say, the cripples 

and the deaf and the other physically-handicapped are still waiting for Santa Claus or fulfilment of the 

definite promise that was made to them of what would be done and the assistance that would be 

provided to them, after the CCF Government was elected. 



March 10, 1947 

 693 

Now about these Crown Corporations. We have had a number of reports submitted – some eleven, if I 

remember correctly – all of them for the fiscal year ending March 31
st
, 1946, which is just a month short 

of one year ago. I quite admit that, in respect to many of them, the report submitted applies only to part 

of a year’s operations. Some of them had hardly begun to operate at all. I do suggest, that The Crown 

Corporations Act might very well be amended to provide that their fiscal year should correspond with 

the calendar year, that their books should close on December 31
st
, and that these reports should be 

submitted to the Legislature at its next session. The Power Commission, which is a much larger 

organization in every way than any of these or all of them put together, finds it possible to do that. ‘Big 

Business’, so often maligned, finds it possible to close its books, have a meeting of its shareholders and 

present them with printed reports of the year’s operations within a month or two after the books have 

been closed. It does seem to me that it is rather futile for the members of this Legislature to try to 

analyse, or discuss, or to find out what is actually going on in connection with these Crown 

Corporations, on the basis of the reports for nearly one year ago. 

 

Now, with regard to the reports that have been submitted to us, to analyse each one separately would 

take all of the time that I would wish to take this afternoon and as I have said, made for that. For 

instance, the Transportation Company: I think there was only one bus going at the time its first annual 

report was submitted; but that is only an argument why these reports should be brought up to date and 

the books should be closed on December 31, as is done in connection with the Power Commission. You 

may say the fiscal accounts of the province are a year old when they come to the Public Accounts 

Committee, and that is true; but the fiscal accounts of the province are presented in a mass of detail. 

These reports, after all, are merely a statement of revenues and expenditures, assets and liabilities, and 

any company that is properly administered can get out a statement of that kind within a couple of weeks. 

If we are going to allow these concerns a year to get their statements in to us, then we shall have to insist 

that they give us information more comparable to, and more in line with, those that are supplied to us by 

the Departments of Government. 

 

Of the eleven reports that were submitted to us, eight show a loss and three show a profit. Those 

showing a profit were the fur Marketing Agency, the Government Insurance Plan and the Printing Plant. 

Now all of these activities, both those that showed a profit and those that showed a loss, enjoy two 

tremendous advantages insofar as commercial operations are concerned. First of all, they are entirely 

free from municipal and Federal taxation and, second, the capital and working advances they required 

were provided for them without interest and without cost. Take, for instance, the Fur Marketing Agency; 

it claims a profit of $1,642. If that was a private operation it would have paid the city of Regina taxes on 

the property it occupies of $600; it would have paid a business tax of $560, or a total of $1,160. It had 

$55,000 advanced to it from the Treasury; it would have paid at least $2,000 as interest on those 

advances. How much it might have paid the Federal Government for Income or Corporation Tax, I don’t 

know. 

 

Now, if this Fur Marketing Agency made $1,642 in the year ending March 31, 1946, it made $1,260 at 

the cost of the taxpayers of the city of Regina. All of us who own property in 



March 10, 1947 

 

 694 

the city of Regina made a little contribution so that the Minister’s pet scheme of fur marketing might 

show a profit of $1,642. All of us, as taxpayers of the Province of Saskatchewan, paid the interest on the 

$55,000, which this Marketing Agency was using, of our tax money or money that has been borrowed 

and on which we were paying the interest, in order that it might enjoy a profit. 

 

The Printing Plant shows a very substantial margin of profit. It, too, enjoys the benefits that I have 

already explained: no Federal taxation; no city taxation. In addition to that it enjoys the advantage (a 

very material one of a business) that the Government can feed it all the business it can take all the time. 

It does not have to worry about any slack period, or anything of that kind. Now it claims to have made a 

profit of $6,400. Well, the people of Regina, the taxpayers of Regina, those of us who happen to own 

property in Regina and pay the taxes to keep this city going, we contributed $1,460 of that, indirectly, 

because, if that had been a private business that is the amount it would have paid into the coffers of the 

city; and because it did not pay it, the rest of us had to make it up. 

 

Mr. Fines:  What was the total of the profit? 

 

Mr. Patterson:  $6,400. 

 

Mr. Fines:  $25,000 – a slight error! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank:  Oh, well, it’s 25 per cent correct! 

 

Mr. Patterson: Like everything else the CCF puts up, it’s mighty hard to find where it is. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  We probably overrated the intelligence of some people. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  I must apologize: I quoted the provision for ‘Depreciation’ 

. I extended the wrong line in the account. 

 

Mr. Fines:  $25,000, isn’t it? 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Yes. The profit, it is true, is $25,000; but I just want to say that, in this particular 

concern (and I want to give vision for depreciation (that is why I quoted the amount, $6,400) on an 

investment of about $90,000. I would regard that as a good business practice; but I do repeat that the 

citizens of Regina, and the Dominion of Canada taxpayers, through the exemption from Federal tax, 

contributed a substantial proportion of the profit made by this concern. But, and again I want to be 

perfectly fair, I want to stress the depreciation in this particular case, because I am going to mention 

some other factors in depreciation. 

 

Now we have the Box Factory. Here the Government took over not a new business but a going concern 

about November 1
st
, 1945. There was no interruption of operations. As a matter of fact, shortly after the 

Government took over there were stories about the additional business they were doing – and in five 

months they had run up a loss of $7,800! I do not know how much taxes 



March 10, 1947 

 695 

this concern would have paid the city of Prince Albert had it continued to be operated by a private 

owner; but I do know the Box Factory is allowed depreciation of $1,400 on a total investment of 

$70,000. Now that is in contrast to the allowance of $6,400 for depreciation made by my hon. friend’s 

Printing Plant. It has $125,000 advanced to it from the Provincial Treasury for which no interest nor 

return has been paid. The Brick-yards show a loss of $770. Again I have no information as to the taxes 

paid to the municipality when it was privately owned. I note that they have made provision for 

depreciation of $13. That is how much the Brick-yards depreciated the coal and the clay that was taken 

from it in its operations, last year. It has advances from the Provincial Treasurer of $237,000. 

 

So we can go down the list. The Shoe Factory, with an investment of $40,000, has provided depreciation 

of $1,360. The Wool Factory, with an investment of $280,000 has provided for depreciation of $2,200. 

The Timber Board, with an investment or inventory (they have no buildings, but they have $90,000 

worth of lumber and other assets scattered around the country), has provided for depreciation of $32. A 

windstorm would wipe that depreciation out in the first blow. 

 

Mr. Phelps:  It is insured. 

 

Mr. Patterson: We are told that these activities have done much better in the first six months of the 

present year. Well, we will analyse that when the Government is prepared to bring us the reports of just 

what they have done – and as I say, that can be very largely corrected by moving up the dates for closing 

the reports and the statements of these Crown Corporations. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer tells us that the people of Saskatchewan are the shareholders in these 

corporations. Well, on that basis, they have been the shareholders in the Telephone Department and the 

Power Commission for many years; but on any money that has been advanced to those organizations, or 

those activities, the interest which it would cost the Provincial Treasury has been repaid by those 

particular activities, and you can say, by and large, that over all of the years every nickel or every cent 

that the Telephone Department or the Power Commission has cost the province, or the people of the 

province, hardly a sufficient answer to say that the brickyards or the sodium sulphate plant or the 

woollen mill or the shoe factory are serving a distinct ‘social’ purpose. 

 

Now, how was this Government going to finance its activities and its increased services before it took 

office? Well, several Members have expressed their opinion. The Premier on June 17
th

, 1944, at 

Weyburn. (We haven’t heard any of these promises since that year). You can figure . . . 

 

Mr. Douglas:  What date did my friend give, what was the date? 

 

Mr. Patterson:  June 17
th

, 1944. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  That was two days after the election in 1944. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Sure, this is what you were 



March 10, 1947 

 

 696 

going to do after the election. 

 

Mr. Douglas: Oh, this is after the election. Well, we couldn’t be trying to get votes then. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  I’m going to quote in a minute what you did say to get votes. In 1944, at Weyburn, 

the Premier was going into establishments for the manufacture of grain alcohol, wheat starch, wheat 

syrup, glycol, plastics, and into development of flax crushing plants. Then he went on to say that he was 

going to set to distribution agencies to sell petroleum and other products. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  It’s all good anyway. You can read it all. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Here it is, in the “CCF Program for Saskatchewan.” 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Now we are getting to real sense. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Here it is: 

 

The CCF Government can obtain revenue from the wholesale distribution of petroleum products, 

setting up a Government Fuel and Petroleum Board to handle the wholesaling of gasoline and fuel 

oils. The CCF Government can obtain revenue from the wholesale distribution of other staple 

commodities, say food or machinery, along the lines indicated above for petroleum products. The CCF 

Government can raise money from the development of natural resources under public ownership, (and 

so on). 

 

Mr. Phelps:  We are doing it. 

 

Mr. Patterson: The Hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs was going to raise money by taking over the 

banks. 

 

Here is the Weyburn speech, prior to the election, of the Premier – Weyburn, June 13
th

, 1944: 

 

Mr. Douglas suggested ways in which the CCF proposed to get money to pay for its social services 

program. It was going to take the Civil Service out of politics . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Out of politics? 

 

Mr. Fines:  We’ve done that. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  

 

. . . by setting up a Purchasing board to buy Government supplies . . . 

 

Mr. Fines:  We’ve done that. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  

 

. . . raising of revenue by the Government engaging in 



March 10, 1947 

 697 

revenue-producing business; (what one are we in?); by setting up commodity boards to sell goods now 

being sold by monopolies. 

 

On this occasion he went a little further afield: he was going to handle cement; the taxing of interest 

payable to corporations outside the province; the development of natural resources by public or 

co-operatives ownership; the establishment of secondary industries such as grain alcohol and protein 

feed cake, wheat starch, wheat syrup, synthetic rubber, plastics, glycol, anti-freeze, and linseed oil. 

 

Now here was the Minister of Social Welfare, in March, 1944: 

 

We propose to take over the large corporations, the banks, the large companies, and the large 

insurance companies. 

 

Then the Minister of Municipal Affairs: he was telling about all the things they were going to take over 

and then he told about the things they were not going to control. He said that a farm privately operated 

was definitely a social institution; and he said the local realtors and local garages were also examples of 

social ownership by individuals. That is in comparison with the present intention of the Insurance 

Department to engage in the garage business. 

 

Now the result is, Sir, that the increase of expenditures in this province has been tremendous, and there 

is not a nickel of the money coming from these sources from which the people were led to expect it 

could be obtained. The increased expenditures are coming from taxing the people, in one form or 

another, to meet the expenditures that are proposed. 

 

The attitude of the Government towards Crown Corporations is rather uncertain. We were told before 

the election that, by going into these businesses, revenues could be raised and taxes would not have to be 

increased – in fact, they were to be reduced. But, when the Provincial Treasurer was in Calgary, in 

September last, he told his audience there, according to the newspaper report, that the Government did 

not go into business to make money; they were not hoping to make money. For instance, he told that 

audience, according to the newspaper: 

 

The Government paid several times that the box factory at Prince Albert was worth, to make The Trade 

Union Act stick. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Have you authority for that statement? 

 

Mr. Patterson:  My authority is the Calgary Herald, of September 30
th

. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Would the hon. gentlemen read it, I wonder? 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Sure, I will be glad to read it: 

 

Mr. Fines was also asked about the Government’s expropriation of the box factory at Prince Albert, 

because the owners would not recognize the Union employees. 



March 10, 1947 

 

 698 

Mr. Fines had previously explained that the Government had paid several times what it was worth by 

order of the Courts. He admitted that the Government had paid $55,000 for a plant worth not more 

than $15,000 to $20,000; but it was worth it to make The Trade Union Act stick, he explained. 

 

Mr. Fines:  That’s not a CCF paper is it? 

 

Mr. Patterson:  No, but if the Hon. Minister says he didn’t say it. 

 

Mr. Procter:  That’s just what you did say and you know it! 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Incidentally, this report winds up by saying: 

 

The chairman of the meeting announced that Ministers of the Saskatchewan Government promised to 

come to Calgary every two weeks. 

 

Mr. Feeley:  That’s something they never asked the Liberals to do when they were here. 

 

Mr. Patterson: Now I am going to repeat a criticism that I have made before, and it is this: we are in 

some 10 or 12 Government activities represented by Crown Corporations and with one exception which 

I shall mention, the $3,000,000 that has been used by these Corporations was never specifically voted by 

this Legislature for the purpose for which it was used. This Legislature never voted one dollar for the 

box factory at Prince Albert as such, or for the brickyard at Estevan as such, or for the woollen mill as 

such, or for the shoe factory as such. True, we did vote hundreds of thousands of dollars in ‘blanket’ 

votes, and usually when the Government was asked, when those votes were being put through, for what 

purpose they were going to be used, we were not given the information. Whether it was because they 

just would not tell us or because the Government did not know, I cannot say; but the fact remains that 

there was never one dollar specifically voted by this Legislature, earmarked for any of these activities. 

 

Now, as I said, there was one exception. At the session one year ago, $750,000 was voted in a 

supplementary estimate for the Saskatchewan Transportation Company, after the Government had gone 

into the business. After it had made that decision, this House did vote $750,000 for that specific purpose. 

If you look up the estimates for the coming year there is no indication there of what particular activity 

this Government proposes to embark upon. There are certain capital votes for this, and certain capital 

votes for that; but again we have to leave the decision in the matter to the judgment of the Economic 

Planning Board and the Government. 

 

We are told that the Government is going into a rock-wool mill, or rock-wool production. Where in the 

estimates is there an amount designated for that purpose? We are told that the Government is 

contemplating going into the gas-line business. Where in the estimates is there any amount provided for 

that purpose? 



March 10, 1947 

 699 

Mr. Procter:  The boys in the back room will fix that up for them. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  During the past year two developments have taken place: first, the Government has 

gone into the production of sodium sulphate at Chaplin. The Premier tells us that is because this 

province has a monopoly on the source of supply for this particular product. Now, I don’t suppose there 

is a ton of this particular product used in Saskatchewan in the course of a year. On the other hand, the 

discovery was made in Saskatchewan of a product that practically every citizen of the province uses to a 

greater or lesser extent; but the production of that particular commodity was turned over to private 

interests. We do have some difficulty in seeing any consistency, or any definite policy being followed by 

this Government in the development of our natural resources about which we have heard so much. 

 

To summarize insofar as these Crown Corporations are concerned: they have had $3,000,000 of public 

money and have not paid a nickel interest; they have not paid any municipal taxes; they have not paid 

any federal taxes – and at that, so far as the records that are available to us show, they have been far 

from a success. In addition to that, certain officials are being paid from the Provincial Treasury. It is 

hard, from the questions we have asked and the information that has been given, to establish just to what 

extent; maybe it doesn’t amount to very much. The general secretary of all these Crown Corporations, 

for example, his salary (which normally, of course, would be paid by any company that he worked for) 

appear to be paid out of the Provincial Treasury. Similarly with certain other officials. The gentleman 

who is the chief industrial executive officer to the chief industrial executive officer (whatever his title 

happens to be), certainly part of his salary also appears to be paid from the Public Treasury; and these 

corporations are saved expense to that extent. 

 

The Public Debt in Saskatchewan has been reduced substantially in the last two-and-a-half years, and I 

am willing to give the Provincial Treasurer a full measure of credit for what has been accomplished in 

that respect. I am not going to enter into any argument with him about whether contingent, or indirect, 

liabilities should be included or excluded. I am quite willing to take his own figures. If he had to include 

the contingent liability on June 30
th

, 1944, to make a good showing for himself, it was largely because of 

CCF policy in respect to seed grain advances, which made what should have been a substantial asset 

worth little or nothing. Naturally if you tell people, who owe the Government something, that they won’t 

have to pay, it ceases to be an asset; and that is what happened in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I am glad to see that he has discontinued the practice of including bank balances. Why, on some 

occasions the Provincial Treasurer included $3,00,000 of investments that belonged to the Education 

Fund in his figures to show what a splendid reduction he had made in the Public Debt. However, he has 

discontinued including the current liabilities or accounts payable, and I have no great criticism of that. 

Under present conditions the amount does not vary very much. It was not always the case. When the 

former Liberal Government came into power the province had unpaid accounts of $5,000,000 that 

definitely were a very substantial part of the Public Debt. However, as I say, we’ll 



March 10, 1947 

 

 700 

take his figures; we’ll accept them on that basis that he starts from. 

 

Now on June 30
th

, 1944, the Public Debt of Saskatchewan, including contingent liabilities, but excluding 

current accounts payable, and allowing for sinking funds, was $209,000,000. On December 31
st
 last, on 

the same basis, it was $187,000,000, a reduction of $21,000,000; and I say that I give the Provincial 

Treasurer credit for every dollar of that reduction. But I also say this; there was not one dollar of that 

reduction made by reason of any economies, or reductions in expenditures, that he practised. 

 

Where did he get the money? Well, the first year he was in office he had a revenue surplus of 

$2,200,000; the second year, he had a revenue surplus of $500,000. The first year, he was in office he 

had Liquor Board profits of $3,770,000; last year, of $6,600,000. The first year he was in office, the 

Farm Loan Board’s borrowers repaid nearly $4,000,000, and last year, they repaid $1,500,000. In 

1944-45, the wheat Pool . . . 

 

Mr. Fines:  Might I just correct my hon. friend: he pointed out that $6,600,000 was taken into the 

revenue, last year . . . 

 

Mr. Patterson:  . . . I have already mentioned, and which I am going to deal with in a minute . . . the 

Wheat pool, almost $800,000 a year for each of these two years; Telephones, $500,000 one year, and 

$400,000 the next; Co-operative Creameries, $125,000 one year and $115,000 the next; and on top of 

that any collections that were made in respect to seed grain. In other words, the Provincial Treasurer had 

collected, or has had available from these sources, something over $20,000,000 which was available to 

him to use in the reduction of Public Debt. 

 

Now, it is quite true that of the liquor profits for `1945-46, over $4,000,000 was taken into revenue; but 

that was the first time that use has been made of the liquor profits for Revenue Account, since 1941-42; 

and even yet there is a liquor profit reserve of $8,000,000 – far more than the amount which the Hon. 

Member took out of liquor profits for last year. Then, on top of that the Provincial Treasurer has 

whatever he has collected from these sources since the first of the current fiscal year, up until December 

31
st
, 1946. 

 

Now, I am not criticizing; but if he had not utilized these receipts for either paying off the Public Debt or 

paying them into sinking funds, then there would have been criticism – and he would be properly subject 

to criticism for taking, shall we say, repayments from the Farm Loan Board, from the Wheat Pool, or 

from the Telephone Department, and using them for any other purpose. Here is where the money came 

from – not from economies, not from reducing expenditures, but from repayments which properly could 

and should be utilized for this purpose. 

 

Mr. Fines:  What would my hon. friend have done about it? 

 

Mr. Patterson:  What would I have done about it? Well I would have reduced the Public Debt and I 

would have kept expenditures down to a reasonable figure so that we would not have found it necessary 

to continually and excessively increase taxation. 



March 10, 1947 

 701 

Mr. Douglas:  Old age pensions would have stayed at $25. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Now on the figures regarding bond prices and bond sales and refunding, I would go a 

little further than congratulating the Provincial Treasurer; I rather envy him. Conditions have been so 

much easier, so much more pleasant and so much less difficult for him than I found them in my time, 

that I can find myself wishing that I had had a few years of conditions such as we have had since 1944; 

and I suggest that this is not only to his credit, but also to the credit of the people of the Province of 

Saskatchewan – perhaps more to their credit than to the government’s or to that of any Member of the 

Government. 

 

Now the Public Debt reduction, the cancellation of Treasury Bills, and the adjustment of these old 

claims is welcome to us as Members of this Legislature and to the people of the province. I think we 

could say that it was a pretty generous gesture on the part of the Government of Canada to make the 

concessions they did, and that some credit can go to them and perhaps some credit can go to the 

Province of Saskatchewan for negotiating this agreement. As I understand it other provinces have 

received a somewhat similar settlement. 

 

I am not sure that I am so enthusiastic (shall I say) about the acceptance of the award of the Royal 

Commission which was appointed to deal with the matter of the -natural resources. That Commission 

made a report – a majority report and a minority report. The minority report was made by Mr. Justice 

Bigelow. It is some time now since I read the report but the minority report made by Mr. Justice 

Bigelow, at that time, would, I think, impress any unbiased or impartial student that he had made a much 

more complete and exhaustive, and a much more factual study of the loss which this province had 

suffered by reason of the natural resources being retained by the Government of Canada. However, the 

Provincial Government has seen fit to accept the majority award, and I presume it was some factor in 

obtaining this cancellation of our Treasury Bill debts. For that reason I am not going to be too critical, or 

say that it is not entirely satisfactory. I am rather sorry, however, in this respect: I think we had a much 

stronger case than perhaps a casual examination of the report of that Commission would indicate. 

 

In connection with the Seed Grain adjustment, I am not going to express any sympathy or any sorrow 

for the Provincial Treasurer because he finds it necessary to pay Ottawa so much a year to settle for seed 

grain. That is a condition which he has brought upon himself. I should not say that, personally; but his 

Party has brought that condition upon him and upon that Party. As I say, if you go up and down the 

province (this province or any other province, Saskatchewan is no different) and say, “Put us in power, 

and you won’t have to pay certain debts that you owe”, you cannot expect anything else but that people 

will take you at your word and not pay the debts. 

 

As a matter of fact, even after making the 1938 adjustment on seed grain, the collections have not been 

as good as they should have been – and that also is in part, if not very largely, due to the attitude toward 

these debts created by the political propaganda put out by the CCF Party prior to the election, when they 

induced the people of the province to support them. Now, they are paying off that promise with the 

money of the public. 



March 10, 1947 

 

 702 

So, as I say, the Provincial Treasurer cannot expect me to be too sympathetic, or to shed any tears, 

because he finds now that he has to make provision to pay some moneys to Ottawa to secure settlement 

of the amount outstanding under the seed grain. 

 

The question of private capital in Saskatchewan received a good deal of consideration by the Provincial 

Treasurer in his Budget Address. The position of those who are interested in Legislature almost exactly 

one year ago, the Premier of the Province of Saskatchewan stood up in his place and said: “We will not 

rest until capitalism has been eradicated in Saskatchewan.” Now the Provincial Treasurer says that they 

welcome private capital, and they are going to have it. The Minister of Reconstruction says: “We wish 

we had a ‘Silkin’s Bill’ in Saskatchewan.” Well, they can have it. It is within their authority to pass a 

‘Silkin’s Bill’ in Saskatchewan. If they want it so much, maybe we will have it. 

 

As I have already pointed out, the development of one natural resources is undertaken by the province, 

another one that, so far as the people of Saskatchewan are concerned, is of tremendously greater 

importance, is turned over to a private company. Is it any wonder, Sir, that the people of this province 

are at a loss to know, that they are uncertain as to what the attitude of this Government really is with 

respect to industry and private business and private enterprise generally? Is it any wonder that people are 

doubtful and are hesitant to invest their money to any substantial undertaking, when they face daily the 

possibility of the Government expropriating it, or of the Government entering into competition – the 

Government competition with the advantage of exemption from taxation and of public finances, makes 

it practically impossible for the person in private industry to carry on in competition? As I say, this 

makes it difficult for private industry, private development to know just where they stand. 

 

The budget itself is somewhat difficult to understand. The Federal leader of the CCF Party has been 

going up and down the country of recent months proclaiming depression, unemployment, hard times; 

very pessimistic. The Premier of the Province of Saskatchewan has been doing considerable of the same 

things: a good deal of propaganda about future depression and unemployment and difficult times. Some 

of the lesser lights of the party are greatly concerned about our relationship with the United States; what 

might happen to us, or the possibility of conflict with our neighboring country. Yet the Provincial 

Treasurer brings in a budget and says that the people of Saskatchewan have no concern about a budget 

of $60,000,000, and, as I have already pointed out, while a part of this is being supplied from the Federal 

Treasury, a much greater part of it has to be put up by the people of Saskatchewan. In other words, there 

is a complete contrast between the pessimism displayed by Mr. Coldwell and the Premier of 

Saskatchewan and the optimism displayed by the Provincial Treasurer of Saskatchewan. 

 

But, surely, Mr. Speaker, if this Provincial Government can lay its hands on millions of dollars, such as 

it intends to, or anticipates doing, in the coming year, it might have made some provision, it should and 

could have made some provision for easing the burden of taxation on the junior governments that 

operate under it and help to make it possible for them to function! There is no indication of their 

intention of doing 



March 10, 1947 

 703 

anything. There is a substantial increase only with respect to one particular tax, but we may find in the 

future that, by Order in Council, this fee is increased and that fee is increased, or some other royalty is 

increased, so that we have no means of knowing whether this particular increase of tax is the only one 

that we shall have to face during the coming year. There is no indication that we can expect any return 

(the budget does not provide for one cent of revenue) from these eleven ‘so successful’ Crown 

Corporations which are using $3,000,000 of public money. There is no attempt to prepare for this 

depression, or this period of bad times, that the Premier forecast. The budget is an extravagant and an 

unjustifiable one, and I shall not support it. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:00 o’clock p.m. 


