



















































Hansard: February 25, 1947


416 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session – Tenth Legislature 

19th Day 

 

February 25, 1947. 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

STATEMENT 

 

GASOLINE TAX 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Abbot stated that the gasoline tax was 

more logically a tax for the province that was responsible for the construction and the maintenance of 

highways. In Saskatchewan we recognize that the rural municipalities have a great responsibility in 

providing main market roads and bridges. In recent years the Provincial Government has been receiving 

increasing requests from the Municipalities for assistance to enable them to undertake this responsibility. 

Unlike some other provinces, Saskatchewan has never levied a tax on gasoline used for agricultural 

purposes. Since the Federal Government is now withdrawing from the field of taxation on the 31st of 

March, the provinces could very well have used this additional revenue but is prepared to allow the 

municipalities to do so. We recognize that it would be administratively difficult for the municipalities to 

collect this tax. 

 

The Government is, therefore, prepared to undertake the collection and the distribution of this money if 

such action is requested by the municipalities and if the Legislature concurs. We are prepared to collect 

a tax of .02 cents per gallon all diesel fuel and distillate, as well as on purple gas. The proceeds from this 

tax would be used by the municipalities and the local improvement districts for the purpose of 

construction and maintenance of main market roads and bridges. It is our hope, Mr. Speaker, that this 

matter will be considered by the delegates to the Rural Municipal Convention meeting next week in 

Regina. I hope, in the meantime, the delegates to the Rural Municipal Convention will have an 

opportunity of discussing this with their councils and with their ratepayers. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did I understand him to say that a .02 cent tax on purpose gas would be collected 

as well? 

 

Mr. Fines: — If the municipalities desire, we are prepared to levy this tax, collect it and distribute it to 

the municipalities for use in construction and maintenance of market roads and bridges. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did the Minister consider the point that the purple gas is practically all bought by 

the residents of the municipality and there is no relief in it? 

 

Mr. Fines: — That is correct. 



February 25, 1947 

417 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

RESOLUTION – ASSISTANCE TO VETERINARY SCIENCE STUDENTS 

 

Mr. H.E. Houze (Gravelbourg) moved, seconded by Mr. Thair (Lumsden): 

 

That this Assembly, realizing the very great danger of disease of animals in relationship to human 

beings, and that producers of livestock and livestock associations over Canada are giving much 

attention to methods of controlling these diseases, particularly Bang’s Disease and Tuberculosis, 

request the Government of Saskatchewan to seek the co-operation of the Federal Government with the 

Provincial Governments in giving more consideration to methods of controlling those diseases; giving 

more assistance to young men and women who are desirous of taking up the profession of veterinary 

science, and in the setting up of a higher scale of remuneration in order to make this profession more 

attractive. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this Resolution and as the motion implies, I will be dealing with 

just a few of the diseases of animals which bear some relationship to those of human beings and those 

affecting the livestock industries and possibly help us humans. In addition to this, in order to have 

healthy people it is essential that we must have the best of health in our livestock. Canada, and 

Saskatchewan in particular, is very fortunate in having possibly the highest standard of health in their 

livestock of any country in the world. This, however, does not happen by chance, it is only by the 

vigilance of the inspectors in the Health of Animals Branch and the practitioners who are scattered and 

hard worked in the province. If a constant vigilance and watch was not kept up and a quarantine 

maintained, in a short time we could possibly lose millions of dollars for a start and perhaps human 

lives. 

 

We have had a gradual decrease in the number of veterinary surgeons in the Province of Saskatchewan 

for many years due to the high cost of travelling expenses, high cost of living and the cost of medicine, 

etc. and many of our best men have taken up more remunerated positions. However, at present a few are 

again looking to the field and the attendance at the Ontario Veterinary College is much higher this year 

than it has been for some time. We have set up the Veterinary Service Society which an advance 

allowed will be a safeguard for the continuation of the work, but we have not gone far enough in this 

field. In order to secure adequate service I think the remuneration should be raised and it was regrettable 

that through the ’30s veterinarians were given little recognition in this province. 

 

There are many phases of veterinary science and medicine today which did not exist 30 years ago and 

this science has advanced with others and possibly exceeded them. We now find many disease now 

affecting man traceable directly to animals, either through contact, milk or meat products. I do not want 

to burden you with a lot of detail, but have you realized the importance of this work and in my opinion 

its future development? 

 

I will only mention a few of the diseases, briefly, and describe most of them in a preventable way all 

transmittable to 



February 25, 1947 

418 

humans. First I would like to outline some of the milk borne diseases and milk is the best human food 

that we have today which probably is not realized. It can be dispensed in two ways, one is the good way 

and the other is the other way. It requires a high standard of supervision – first of healthy cows, sanitary 

stables and good clean equipment. Disease can be spread from milk, such as cow pox, lump jaw, 

Tuberculosis, sceptic sore throats, diptheria, dysentery or Brucellosis, commonly called Bang’s disease 

of which we hear so much about today. 

 

Now all of those portrayed can be prevented by proper precaution. Meat inspection should be carried on 

in rural areas by the people in this country, if personnel were available. TB is probably one of the most 

common diseases which affect cattle and which affect human beings and it is only through vigilance that 

we can keep pace with this disease. Some of the common ailments and practices are condemned in 

stockyards, the biggest percentage are from this disease, also from abscessed liver and bruises. 

Encephalomyelitis in horses, of which we had a severe outbreak a few years ago, is also preventable and 

while this disease has not been properly traced as to its origin, yet nevertheless it is a very bad disease 

when it attacks human beings. 

 

Another disease, Trichinosis, found in meat products is dangerous to humans, especially in meat not 

sufficiently cooked. There are many things which meat may have which affect humans. Tapeworms are 

constantly watched for and every precaution taken for those handling animals and animal products to 

man. The hooked tapeworm is one of the most dangerous found in pork and it is rare due to rigid 

inspection in slaughter houses. Swineine syphilis is another common disease that we have in the 

province today. People, who have sores on their hands and are handling this product may contact it and 

while it isn’t very stable, causes a great amount of annoyance and a long time in the convalescent state. 

 

Actinomycosis or lumpy jaw in Havannah, which is quite common in this country, is not regarded now 

as such a serious disease in cattle because they can be stamped from the abattoir and the meat is still sold 

for human consumption, but nevertheless, there are many people today who are suffering from this 

disease in their tongue and jaws. 

 

Skin diseases are transmitted, and to mention some of the ordinary ones, ring worm, which is spread at 

times in serious proportions. It is caused by a germ and many people are scarred for life and several can 

credit this germ to the loss of their hair. Fowl diseases of which little has been done in the past, has been 

increasing by leaps and bounds for the last 15 years and it is safe to say at the present time that probably 

40 per cent of the flocks of poultry in this province come under this category. Wild animals in captivity 

are now combating diseases by reason of their changed environment and we are pleased with the 

research work which now is receiving attention. Valuable work and preventive medicine and new drugs, 

particularly a hormone, are showing excellent results. 

 

We must have an increase in livestock production in this province or many diseases will develop from 

malnutrition. Although Rabies in dogs are not common it is a very serious and important thing and many 

people do contact this disease. In the 



February 25, 1947 

419 

view of the above it would appear in the best interest of the livestock production that the field in 

Veterinary medicine be given serious consideration. At the present time advance education in training 

and a reasonable remuneration for same will add greatly to the health of our livestock. 

 

Now I am not going to burden you with a lot of figures, but I would like to say that the testing of cattle 

in Saskatchewan has not received the attention that it should have received during the last few years on 

account of the War and other things of very short interest in Veterinary medicine. But I am going to give 

you a few figures and make some reference in regard to what has happened with some of these diseases 

and what has happened particularly in the last 25 years in this province. I will try to give you a few facts 

and figures in regard to them. 

 

We have the healthiest livestock with regard to tuberculosis in Saskatchewan and Alberta of any 

province in the Dominion. It seems that tuberculosis in cattle is at the same level as what it was 25 years 

ago. Tuberculosis in hogs has increased about 15 or 20 per cent in the last 25 years and tuberculosis in 

poultry has come to an alarming compulsion. Conservative estimates would say that a great number of 

them are affected but tuberculosis is not near as severe in poultry as it is in animals. Bang’s disease, 

which we hear so much about and which there is a certain amount of disagreement over the means of 

transmitting it from one animal to another, has received a lot of attention and I don’t think that there is 

any disease that probably the producer has taken a bigger loss with than he has with this particular 

disease. We have, at the present time, some serious outbreaks of this disease in the province and stock 

men are more or less reluctant to notify the proper authorities due in great measure to the embarrassment 

they are put to and the financial loss which they receive. Many methods have been tried in connection 

with this disease but authorities are somewhat in disagreement regarding this disease. They hurriedly 

have a severe outbreak of this disease and run along for three or four years and have a more serious loss 

and all at once he finds the disease has disappeared and the cattle are free from the disease. Now those 

cattle will not show a reaction to blood tests and they will pass any inspection, but there is a certain 

amount of danger in regard to the milk of these animals. 

 

Now there are a great many methods as to what should be done to eradicate this disease from animals 

and there are a great many authorities who differ as to the best method. Calves can be tested from four 

days to a month of age and it is generally recognized after a number of years that you can stamp out this 

disease. Although this, Mr. Speaker, has its drawback because a man who is in the livestock business, a 

producer or farmer, whatever he is, he probably wants to sell his cattle and they will not stand up to a 

test after having been vaccinated for quite a considerable time. It is to be believed that probably for eight 

months after they have been vaccinated they will still react to blood tests and show times of having the 

disease when actually they were healthy animals before. 

 

I am going to quote, Mr. Speaker, on the matter of testing cattle and how tests have proven to be 

efficient all over Canada. 

 

We come to the Province of Quebec and we find that a great percentage of the cattle there, probably 

higher than in any other province in the Dominion, have this disease. Then we come into 



February 25, 1947 

420 

Ontario and probably they are not so badly infected as they are in Quebec, yet nevertheless, we have a 

serious situation there. We come to Manitoba and in the dairy herds around Winnipeg and in and around 

some of those municipalities we have a big percentage of tuberculosis. We come to Saskatchewan and 

probably we have the lowest TB rate among our cattle than any place on the continent. Alberta is about 

the same and I do not know much about British Columbia. I am going to show to you, that testing, if 

properly done and kept up over a number of years, will eradicate this disease to a great extent, so I am 

going to deal with some of the provinces where they have tested. 

 

I am going to give you a county in Quebec, a county of Roeville. In 1928 this county had 15,694 cattle 

tested. There were 3,057 that reacted to the test. They tested continually from 1928 to 1945; in 1945 

they tested 21,143 head of cattle and 154 reacted. 

 

Another county in Sheffard and they started testing in 1928 and they tested 40,433 cattle and 7,476 

reacted to the test or 18.5 per cent and these cattle were tested continually until 1940 when 41,240 cattle 

were tested and there were just 54 that reacted. 

 

Now there is another county in Quebec where 27,621 cattle were tested and 8,435 reacted. They were 

continually tested until 1942 when there was 30,551 head of cattle tested and 37 reacted in the whole lot. 

That is what happened in the Province of Quebec. Now in Ontario we have not got quite as bad an 

outbreak of TB, but I am going to quote some of the counties in there. One is the county of 

Marlborough. In 1935 there were 10,158 head of cattle tested and 286 reacted. In 1945 there were 

11,305 head of cattle tested and one reacted. In the county of Dundas in 1930, there were 38,598 cattle 

tested of which 8,637 reacted or 22.4 per cent. In 1940 and they had been tested every year, there were 

37,107 cattle tested and 56 reacted. 

 

I think this conclusively proves that by constant vigilance on the part of the inspectors in the Health of 

Animal Branch that this disease eventually could be practically wiped out. 

 

In 1945, the last report I have, in the county of York 52,258 were tested, 8,297 reacted or 15.9 per cent 

and in 1945 after they had been tested for a number of years, 42,000 were tested and 528 reacted. 

 

In Manitoba, which is getting close to home, in different places there, tests have been carried on more 

particularly than they have in the province here. But in Portage La Prairie, in 1929, 11,670 cattle were 

tested with 979 reacters and in 1943, 17,800 cattle were tested and only 13 reacted. The same applies all 

through Manitoba where they have tests made every year, the decrease in tuberculosis was remarkable. 

Now in our own Province of Saskatchewan, there has not been much testing of cattle done, but in the 

rural municipality of Abernethy there were 3,287 cattle tested and 68 reacted. Now in a later test where 

5,535 cattle were tested there were 15 reacters. There has not been testing carried on in Saskatchewan as 

there has been in the other provinces, but this will show you that by having those cattle tested every 

couple of years and eradicate the ones that show, that react to the test, we can completely rid ourselves, 

or 



February 25, 1947 

421 

almost entirely rid ourselves of this disease in the province. 

 

Agricultural representatives can do a great deal in the way of protective measures by advising farmers 

and stockmen on how to prevent these diseases and advise us to the best feeding methods, balanced 

rations and most important that of the surroundings, as good sanitary surroundings and properly cleaned 

housing accommodations means a lot and will go far in eradicating any disease. I don’t think they 

should try to do much in the field of veterinary requirements, as that belongs to more skilful 

practitioners and in conversation at different times with agricultural representatives, I believe they were 

trying to take in probably a little too large a scope. This is a reason there is, a reason why we have not 

had more veterinarians staying in this province in practice compared with the other provinces. It is only 

since this Government came into power that this profession has had much recognition. 

 

I remember in the early ’20s when this province flourished and during the severe ’30s no recognition 

was made to veterinarians and they received no assistance at all. Consequently, there was no 

encouragement for young men or women to enter this field. 

 

During this last Session, this last year, scholarships have been given to certain young men of certain 

standards to go and take up this profession and as a result the attendance at the Veterinary College in 

Ontario has increased. But in order to have those people stay in this province, we must consider that we 

must make it more attractive for them. Under this Veterinary Services Act which was put in last year, it 

guarantees a certain amount of safeguard to the veterinarian and also as a great help to the livestock 

producers and may meet with the requirements of being able to keep young men here in the province 

and give them a decent standard of living for their services. But I do not think, taking into comparison 

the amount of stocks that we find in the municipality as certain estimates would say, that we have 

probably three to four thousand head of stock in each municipality. I cannot see where a veterinarian can 

give service to probably, say four municipalities and drive this hard and give them proper services for 

the amount of remuneration which is offered. I think this grant to those veterinarians will have to be set 

up if we hope, in the near future, to have young men and young women who are desirous of taking up 

this profession stay in this province and practice. 

 

I have much pleasure, Mr. Speaker, in moving this Resolution. 

 

Mr. W.S. Thair (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Gravelbourg – and by the way the 

only veterinarian in the House – has ably discussed his address based on this Resolution, of all forms of 

disease of farm animals, as well as fowl, and their relationship to diseases of human beings which is 

perhaps one of the most important parts of this Resolution. However, I would like to add a few words 

even if I repeat some of the statements made by the Hon. Member. I would like to add a few words to 

what has already been said with reference to diseases of cattle and I prefer to deal with TB and Bang’s 

Disease and Mastitis, with special reference to these. 

 

I might say a few words with regard to Bang’s Disease or 



February 25, 1947 

422 

contagious abortion in cows, with an economic standpoint and possibly a word regarding the present 

policy of the Government this past year. 

 

At the present time tuberculosis is controlled entirely by the TB control policy operating under the 

Federal Government and Health of Animals Branch. We have the accredited Herd Plan and I will deal 

briefly with these. The policy allows only the owner of high-ranking herds to sell just direct to United 

States breeders and is a policy intended for the purebred breeders entirely. There is the TB pre-area plan 

for the municipality or sometimes a number of municipalities in the unit. This Plan has not been used 

much in recent years perhaps because of the War, but on the other hand because of the lack of 

veterinarians under the federal field staff. As I said before, this is a federal policy. 

 

Then there is a supervised Herd Plan, which is paid by the Federal Government, but no compensation is 

allowed for reactors and I might say that under this Plan there has been a good deal or work done in past 

years, or some work at least. Under the Plan 2,500 herds have been tested, but because of the lack of 

veterinarians, as I said before, and because of the War, it was discontinued and nothing has been done 

since the War in this regard by the Federal Government. There are applications at the present time, I 

believe, from breeders of 2,000 herd of cattle who desire to have their herds tests for TB. Now, the 

Bang’s Disease or Brucellosis, is the cause of undulant fever in human beings and is a very insidious 

disease. It is commonly referred to as contagious abortion. Quoting from a magazine – a farm magazine 

– ‘it causes very heavy losses to the cattle through the loss of calves by premature births; through the 

temporary or permanent sterility that may follow infection; the shrinkage of beef in the beef animals; 

and there is also the financial loss which the breeders suffer in trying to build up a purebred herd of 

cattle and until Bang’s Disease in cattle is stamped out there is no hope of preventing undulant fever in 

human beings.’ 

 

It is very difficult to estimate the economic loss through contagious abortion or Bang’s Disease. The 

stockmen even in Saskatchewan believe as is pointed out by the Hon. Member, that there is a decided 

increase in this disease. The figures are not available up here in Saskatchewan or Canada to any extent, 

but our provincial veterinarians believe that the total loss for one year is considerable and some owners 

of purebred herds for one year is considerable and some owners of purebred herds in this province are 

almost ruined financially by the loss from Bang’s disease. I might quote here, or give you the figures 

from an actual case in Saskatchewan in 1945, I believe it is, or 1944, where a remarkable, fine purebred 

dairy herd of 50 pregnant female cows showed a loss of 45 out of 50 calves in one year, which was a 

financial blow to this purebred breeder. 

 

The United States has more statistics on this disease than Canada and there is some interesting figures 

regarding this economic loss and I quote from the 1942 Year Book of the United States Department of 

Agriculture, which is entitled, “Keeping Livestock Healthy.” They claim that way back in 1941 – there 

have been no figures, I believe, or additional figures since the War – the economic loss of young calves 

in the United States runs from 30 to 40 million annually; that the reduced milk reduction cause from this 

disease in dairy herds may run as 



February 25, 1947 

423 

high as $100 to $200 per cow per year and the sterility in females following this disease is considerable 

and costly. 

 

There has been a large number of cases in the United States particularly and in Canada increasingly so, a 

large number of cases of undulant fever contracted from raw milk containing Brucalla abortus have been 

reported. The handling of infected pork products is also a means by which undulant fever is transmitted 

to men. This has been found out in investigations in packing houses, of workers in packing houses. The 

simple precautions, of course, were possible to have proper pasteurization of milk and in cooking the 

meat and making these foods safe for human consumption. But I would like to say something very 

interesting that is happening right here in our own province in our provincial laboratories, the work 

being done by Dr. Riddell, the last two years. 

 

I was interviewing Dr. Riddell the other day and he had taken, for other purposes, some 11,500 blood 

tests and he analyzed these for germ of undulant fever and six per cent of these showed positive 

reaction. I believe two years ago an opinion was expressed in this province that perhaps not more than 

one per cent of these cases would have undulant fever but the positive germs of undulant fever were 

found in six per cent of these cases. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say a word about our sales of cattle. Spring sales of purebred 

stock in the various large centers in the past in this province and up to the present time do not have to be 

sold on a Bang’s free certificate basis. But, I believe this coming spring, from what I can learn from 

stockmen, the sales of purebred cattle are to be made with the understanding that if not accompanied by 

a Bang’s free certificate the sale will be at the risk of the purchaser. I have before me a copy of a motion 

passed at the annual meeting of the Saskatchewan Cattle Breeders Association held in Saskatoon in 

January 1947 and I quote: 

 

That all animals entered in the 1948 purebred cattle sale must carry a Bang’s free certificate before 

they can get through the ring. 

 

Without any adverse criticism or compulsion of any kind it was passed unanimously. So you will see 

that we are making some progress along the eradication of Bang’s disease and this hasn’t been brought 

to my attention by anyone or any official in the House, or a Department of Government, that it was the 

sale, the actual sale. 

 

Another contributing factor to the spread of Bang’s disease across the province in the last few years has 

been the so-called dispersive sales of purebred cattle, which in some cases have been affected with this 

lotus. It actually has been possible in many areas in this province where these purebred sires had been 

sold at sales. Trace it right across the province. This is a great economic loss to breeders who are 

endeavoring to build up a purebred herd of cattle. At the present time the export of purebred cattle to the 

United States is prohibited unless accompanied by a Bang’s free certificate and in the very near future 

all the sales of purebred cattle in this province and possibly across Canada as well dispersive sales will 

have to be accompanied by a Bang’s free certificate. 



February 25, 1947 

424 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is to me in my own constituency a noticeable interest in the public mind across 

this province, in pure milk free from both TB infection and Brucellosis possibly even mastitis and I 

noticed on the map down in the office of the provincial veterinarian, the number of inspections that have 

been made this past year and I am going to refer to some of these later. 

 

I needn’t go at any length into the methods of combating Bang’s disease. It has been outlined by the 

Hon. Member for Gravelbourg when he spoke of calfhood vaccination and also the testing, but I might 

give you some figures in this regard that you might be interested in. I don’t think they have been given 

before. 

 

There has been a considerable increase in calfhood vaccination, at least there has been some increase 

during the past two years and particularly this last year. The number of calves vaccinated under the 

policy in 1944 was 389, in 1946 it was 1,063 and was used on 225 farms or premises in the province. 

But we, I might say, are still a long way behind Ontario where last year 92,000 calves were given 

calfhood vaccination. In the testing of older cattle for Bang’s disease, the Provincial Department of 

Agriculture will provide the following services. First, the veterinary services for the collection of blood 

samples and, second, the free testing of blood samples in the laboratory. Both these services, I believe, 

to be a fee of $1 per head for the first five head and 50 cents per head for any additional animals for any 

of the herd and also probably a cheaper rate if there are a large number in the herd. This policy went into 

effect May 1st and the summary includes a breakdown of all the cattle tested up to December 31, 1946, 

that is from the last of May, 1946 to December 31st. 

 

The total number of herds tested under this plan in that short space of time was 99, the total number of 

cattle over 7,000. The number of animals given positive reactions 454, percentage of infected cattle of 

over 8 per cent. This shows that there is, as the Hon. Member has spoken of, an increase in Bang’s 

disease. Now the great problem of diseases of animals to me is the lack of veterinarians, possibly the 

all-important one. No control can be exercised over either TB, Bang’s disease or mastitis to any extent 

unless we have sufficient veterinarians. At the present time the Dominion Government Service, I 

understand, claim that they need 100 vets in order to take care of the field services and meat inspection 

work across Canada. This is a statement from the office of the Federal Department of Agriculture. 

 

The Provincial Government has been giving some encouragement to student veterinarians of the 

province through a system of scholarships and I believe that in 1946, $3,000 or $3,100 was paid out in 

some ten scholarships. In this present year, as the Hon. Member pointed out across the House, I believe 

they will get ten scholarships at around $300 each and possibly ten scholarships at $200 each to 

encourage young veterinarians to enter the profession. This is the statement I received from Dr. Millar. 

 

The budget for the Health of Animals Branch, as I have looked into it, I mean a budget under this 

Department, the Veterinarian Department in 1942, was approximately $6,000 and the estimates so far as 

I can find out, they haven’t come down yet but I am making a guess, will be probably $40,000 in the 



February 25, 1947 

425 

veterinary budget, that is an increase from $6,000 to $40,000 in the veterinary budget. Now I am not 

going to say anything about the increase in veterinarians’ salaries; that has been gone into. I just want to 

say that I believe they started out years ago, five or ten years ago, at $1,800 and the most they ever got 

after five years practice was $2,520. Today, this Government has started them out at $2,580, that was 

more than they got after years and years of practice, years ago, and after one year it stepped up to $3,000 

and later on to $3,600 with expenses paid, that is those in the Department of Agriculture. Now the lack 

of veterinarians, again, I say is really affecting the health of the whole nation and particularly our most 

valuable assets, the boys and girls under 16. In reality this lack of veterinarians is the only reason today, 

as I stated before, that we are not making more rapid progress and I think almost the only reason this 

Government is willing to take every step possible. The lack of veterinarians is the only reason, today, 

that we are not making more rapid progress in setting up a TB program and in controlling and extending 

Bang’s disease inoculation. The Saskatchewan Government is giving a service and financial assistance 

in clearing up Bang’s disease. It is also giving assistance to young men who desire to enter this 

profession by giving scholarships, by increased salaries and by setting up and assisting veterinary 

service areas. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that our objective as farmers in the dairy and beef cattle 

business should be to reach a point where we have a province whose cattle industry is practically free 

from TB, Bang’s disease and mastitis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am glad to second this motion. 

 

Mr. Houze: — Mr. Speaker, in closing this debate there are a few remarks I want to make in connection 

with the financial loss sustained in animals through the packing plant and I am going to make my 

remarks very brief. 

 

This is for the year 1946 and the cattle that were condemned in packing plants across Canada amounted 

to 16,987 head. Calves amounted to 12,975 head, sheep 4,781 and swine 14,117. So you see the 

financial loss that has been incurred through this Department alone in the matter of carcass condemned. 

We had some 20,485 head of poultry condemned as unfit for human food and in all we had 71,420 head 

of stock across Canada that were condemned and unfit for human consumption. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION – MORE ADEQUATE HOUSING PROVISION BY FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 

 

Mr. D.A. Daniels (Pelly) moved, seconded by Mr. Cuming (Souris-Estevan): 

 

That this Assembly recommend that the Provincial Government urgently request the Federal 

Government to provide more adequate housing in Canada by: 

 

(1) granting subsidies to citizens in the lower income brackets where rental costs exceed one-fifth of 

the gross income; 

 

(2) according housing corporations, set up by Co-operatives and Provincial and Municipal 

Governments, the 



February 25, 1947 

426 

same terms under the National Housing Act as are granted to the corporations set up by lending 

institutions; and 

 

(3) extending credits through the Bank of Canada at low rates of interest to citizens who desire to build 

homes for themselves. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in rising to move this Resolution regarding the housing situation in Canada, I wish 

first of all to remind Hon. Members of something of the background of what makes it necessary for us to 

push for this aid to the different institutions here. 

 

Looking back into the ten years prior to the War we find at the depth of the depression of the hungry 

’30s the Canadian income hit a low of $2,800,000,000. In the year 1935 just before the outbreak of 

hostilities it rose a little to $3,900,000,000, then during the War years, the height of prosperity due to the 

War, it rose to $8,400,000,000. During all this time that the War was on and the income grew all over 

the length and breadth of Canada and during the period prior to the War there was very little in the way 

of building of houses for the people. Needless to say during the time that the depression was on, people 

were not able to build any homes, they didn’t have the money, they by the thousands, young men and 

young women, too, wandered up and down the length and breadth of this country looking for jobs that 

couldn’t be found and because they had no jobs they had no chance to settle down to build homes for 

themselves, to get married and live in those homes, as was often desired by these people, quite naturally. 

Because of this and then of the subsequent war years, when every effort was directed to the channel of 

winning the War, the building of homes was somewhat forgotten. It is only in a few isolated instances 

where people, who had more money, who were better off, that they were able to build homes, but this 

does not take care of that terrific back-log of home needs that accumulated throughout the 17 or 18 years 

of depression and War. And while the War was on you would have thought that some definite plans 

would have been laid so that as soon as the War was over, the housing situation could have been coped 

with efficiently and well without any delay. Instead of that, in spite of the fact that some Commission or 

some housing authorities were set up to deal with this question, yet it was only a matter of putting a 

whole bunch of reports on paper. 

 

When the War was over there was very little in the way of a definite program to go into housing and 

construction to take up that terrific need of homes. The amounts that were earned during the War, 

terrific rise in the national income of Canada, I think that Hon. Members will agree, did not all go into 

the hands of the workers who worked so hard, whether it was on the farm or in the factories, to help win 

the War. A great deal of this income, no doubt, went into the hands of financiers or the owners of large 

industries, of the War contractors and so on. I am satisfied that the ownership class got the large share of 

this. 

 

Many have stated that some 30 or 40 new millionaires were created in our own land during that war. 

This, of course, did not put a great deal of purchasing power into the hands of the people who needed the 

homes, they worked and had pretty fair 



February 25, 1947 

427 

wages, I must admit, but the cost of living in the cities where they worked had risen to considerable 

height and therefore the salaries that they got, the wages that they earned, were quickly swallowed up, 

either by having to pay off some debt incurred during the prewar years or by the high cost of living that 

was theirs in the cities to which they had migrated to help in the War effort. And all through those long 

years of war they got by as best they could, in trailers, in tenement houses, renting a little cubby hole of 

a room somewhere at terrific rates in spite of regulations in many cases, in order to be able to survive 

and to live and to work. In any case the conditions were almost unbearable and everywhere you find the 

situation where the need is simply so great that one doesn’t know where to start. 

 

Now it is true that the housing corporation has tried something in the way of guaranteeing these lending 

institutions and so on, to do something with it; the National Housing Act has made some attempt at 

rectifying this problem that we have but it has certainly not been adequate at all. And that is why I feel 

that something more should be done as soon as possible in order to facilitate and expedite this building 

of homes. There is something to be said for the province to have a fair share in the planning and building 

of these homes, not only the province, but other local governments, such as municipalities and cities; 

they are there on the ground floor; they know the conditions locally and very often many, many factors 

enter into the picture which if left to Ottawa cannot be understood as well as it would be locally. 

 

The regulations are such that prevent the provinces or the municipalities from getting loans on the same 

basis as other housing organizations and, therefore, there is sort of a holdback on this whole thing. Now 

the free enterprisers will keep on saying that if they have a chance to really go ahead without any 

regulations or restrictions to stop them, they would really show what they could do. 

 

I will attempt to show, in the next few minutes, that this has not altered the case even though, in some 

instances, they have had a free hand to go ahead, they have not taken advantage of it. They made a lot of 

noise about removing regulations and the Wartime Prices and Trade Board, not so long ago, did remove 

some of those regulations and what was the result? 

 

Soon as quarters or priorities on building materials were eased up somewhat, we find immediately that 

those with an almost unlimited amount of capital behind them, those with a great deal of organization 

for construction behind them, immediately gobbled up everything that there was on the market. They not 

only bought everything that there was available, but I am sure they put in advance orders for anything 

that would become available in the next several months, or even a year or more. This left, of course, 

small private respective home builder and owner in the lurch. To him were left, in the lumber yards, just 

a few culls of lumber that would not build a good hen coop even, the absence of cement and other 

building materials, hardware and so on, was something that was never known of before in the 

proportions it is found in now. Lumber yards were found empty all over our province and I am sure it 

was so elsewhere in Canada too. 

 

The much wanted boast of the Federal Government that they have the Wartime Prices and Trade Board 

to regulate the price 



February 25, 1947 

428 

of material is in many cases just a joke. Price ceiling has been so riddled with prices growing through 

that price ceiling that it looks more like a sieve than a ceiling and we find that prices for building 

materials, today, are in many instances double or more than double what they were in the prewar years. 

Not only that, but the quality of material is certainly not there and we find, also, that in the first nine 

months of 1946 out of all the expenditures on building, on construction in Canada, only $32.50 out of 

every $100, or 32 1/2 per cent was spent in building homes, the rest of the money out of every $100 was 

spent in building something else. Why was this? Free enterprise found that it might be much more 

profitable to them to spend their money in building theatres, bowling alleys, large business places here 

and there and they didn’t care about those people that were homeless, what they cared for, what they 

were looking forward to is to invest their money in something that would bring them larger returns. 

 

The fact that there were homeless children; the fact that there were many of the returning boys coming 

from overseas and waiting for their brides, hoping to be able to build a home for them when they came 

from there, or coming back, after a long period of years in the services, back home to find that there is 

no place that they could really call home. There is no house for them to live in, not even a room that they 

could rent and so, oh, we find something in statistics regarding that. The Hon. C.D. Howell, the Minister 

in charge of Housing at the time stated, on the 21st of November, 1946: ‘It is the obvious administrative 

ability of any group of government officials to decide what is essential and what is a non-essential 

building.’ I wonder how many agree with that. Surely at a time like that, a home is the most important of 

all. Surely the need of a place for these young people who, not only the ones – and they are the ones that 

we must consider most – who fought and came back here and want to settle down into a home, but also 

those who helped in many other ways during the War years – they are entitled to a little better 

consideration. Then his second in command, Major General H.A. Young had a different alibi. 

 

Speaking the next day he said more houses would be built if construction control was more effective, but 

public opinion has not backed completely the proposal to postpone construction of theatres, bowling 

alleys and other non-essentials. Public opinion may be all right in some cases, but I am sure that if the 

Government at Ottawa had taken a firm stand and said that priority should come to home builders first, 

that public opinion would have been definitely behind the Government on that. When the Government 

stands back, in their usual ‘don’t care’ methods and allow these large corporations to grab off everything 

that there was on the markets, then naturally public opinion would not have been aroused very much, 

because people who need homes out on the farm, or out in the villages, towns and cities, don’t know 

how much material is available, don’t know where it is all going, but the Government does know. I say 

that the Government at Ottawa, through its wartime regulations that were held over, and rightly so, for 

some time after the War, should have taken that in hand and done something about it. 

 

Major General Young blames the public for the Government’s lack of action. He is perhaps referring to 

those organizations of the public such as the Retail Lumber Dealers’ Association, the delegates to its 

Eastern Ontario Association meeting were determined that if the Federal Government took immediate 

steps 



February 25, 1947 

429 

to wind up Wartime Housing Limited and if no priorities were given to any Crown company or 

Government agency engaged in the building industry, free enterprise would then be given an 

opportunity to prove that it can and will supply human needs efficiently and in the fullest possible 

measure for all – as reported in the Ottawa Journal, November 22, 1946. And then even when housing 

has been built, it has sometimes been an non-essential type of building, even though it was a residential 

building. 

 

The village of Forest Hill, Toronto, suburb of that city, reports that during the first 10 months of this 

year it issued 116 permits for houses valued at $2,092,050, or an average per unit of these different 

homes of $18,035. Now compare that, Mr. Speaker, with the type of home that is usually built 

throughout the West. A house that is anywhere near $8,000 today is considered a pretty fair sized home. 

$6,000 will build a very decent kind of home. When you consider that a home here built for $18,000 you 

could have built, if regulations were enforced, three homes to house three families or maybe more than 

three families – that’s what was done here. Not only were these houses extremely large and expensively 

built, but remember this, that in every home that is being constructed today the thing that is holding up 

the building of that home is the lack of plumbing, hardware, doors, windows and so on. When you have 

a home that is an $18,000 home you can pretty well expect that there will be two or three bathrooms in 

there with all the fancy fixtures on each flight of these floors in the home. But some homes have to go 

absolutely without them because of that particular type of building that has gone on. The present day 

homes built on that scale are absolutely out of reach of the average wage earner. 

 

The Curtis report, which I have before me, recommends that a home which takes more out of the wages 

of any person than 20 per cent of his gross earning is out of his reach. That is if a person pays more than 

$20 out of every $100 cheque that he gets for rental of a home, then to that extent will his members of 

the family and himself suffer in the lack of wood, clothing or other necessities of life, if he pays more 

than the 20 per cent of his income for rental? For that reason it is important and we, therefore, urge 

through this Resolution, that some aid be given to those whose earnings do not permit them to have a 

home which they need, but where the rental is higher than that 20 per cent I mentioned and where the 

rental of a home is, say $30 per month and he can only afford to pay according to these figures the sum 

of $20 per month, then it should be up to the Government, to the Federal Government, to give assistance 

to subsidize to the extent of $10 per month so that this person will not suffer for the other things that he 

has to have for his family. 

 

In many provinces, particularly the Eastern provinces, co-operatives have established building 

organizations and there have been a number of them who have done a splendid job on housing. They are 

on the ground floor, they know something of the conditions prevailing regarding the purchasing of land 

such as the suitability of the location, planning locally for other things in that community; for a school, 

church, recreational hall and other things of that type that are essential in the planning of all our new 

towns or new sections of towns and even in the rural planning too. And so the co-operatives and the 

municipal and provincial authorities should be given that responsibility. 



February 25, 1947 

430 

They should be given the chance to get these loans or work on the same basis as the housing 

corporation; given the same chance through the lending institutions of the country to have money made 

payable so that they could carry out their housing project. 

 

Many citizens also, especially the returned men, have expressed to me and to other Members of this 

House the desire to borrow money on their own without having to go into what is commonly known as a 

small holding. There is a great deal of red tape connected with this. And so for that reason they would 

like to borrow some money on their own and build themselves a home according to their own plans, 

according to their own needs. Quite often they have a little nest egg laid by and would like to 

supplement that with a loan at a low interest rate so that they will not be held down to a long term loan, 

which so many people fear because of what has happened in the years gone by and so they would rather 

borrow this through the medium of the Bank of Canada or through any bank backed by the Bank of 

Canada at these low interest rates and go on with their own building. 

 

Small holdings are not so favorable as some people think. Some of the young men who have come back 

to the town of Kamsack had considerable trouble in getting their small holdings through and are not 

finished with that yet. There is only the hope that something will be done for them next year. 

 

Now then just to show you what is in this report. There is something more that I want to add regarding 

the co-operatives. What they have been doing in the Province of Nova Scotia. The favorite houses in 

Nova Scotia are detached single family homes while these are designed for manual workers, their 

standards are above many of those that are in existence and it is established that they would sell on the 

market at prices from $3,000 to $4,000. That is below the figures which I quoted before, in regards to 

construction out here in the West today. They are of framed construction, have seven foot basements 

with ten inch concrete walls, excellent kitchen, living room, dining room, well appointed bathrooms and 

three, and sometimes, four bedrooms. In size they are 24 by 26; in some cases larger and have an 

average cubic measurement of 1600 cubic feet. A desirable element of individuality is secured by 

making possible the choice of 20 or more low-cost housing desires, which have been prepared by the 

commission, while further differences are contributed to the variations in gables and paint. The cost of 

these projects are remarkably low. One project involves monthly amortization payments at only $9.65 

. . . of interest, insurance and taxes. Those built since the beginning of the War range from $14.91 to 

$16.41 reflecting an increase in the building material costs. 

 

Universal experience is that payments are made with punctuality and care and the program so far has 

required administrative costs of less than $5,000 a year. That is on the co-operative’s records, that the 

cost of administrating all this housing of theirs, through co-operative channels, is very, very low in cost. 

It is important to add that the scale of development is still comparatively small. The total of dwelling 

units built since the implementation of the scheme is 81, in seven localities. Now we have some 

co-operatives in the West, in many cases they are planning and working toward building their houses. I 

am sure that if some loans were made available to some of these institutions in our own province that 

they would supplement certain housing plans to a large extent too. 



February 25, 1947 

431 

Now there is another paragraph I would like to read for the information of the Members. If mortgage 

insurance provisions are incorporated in the National Housing Act housing built by or with the aid of 

co-operative organizations might very well be of special beneficiary of such provisions. It would be, of 

course, necessary to have a proper definition of a housing co-operative. In the provinces where 

legislation already exists authorizing or protecting the setup of co-operatives for housing or for other 

purposes, these definitions could probably be made acceptable. It is necessary, however, that the general 

principles of co-operative organizations should be set up and probably by-laws and general procedures 

of the bona fide co-operative should be outlined in regulations under the Act. In those provinces, in 

which housing legislation already exists, it should be possible for federal assistance to be extended for 

the purpose of stimulating co-operative housing enterprises, with the more direct administration of the 

project left under provincial auspices. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, no one questions the need, everyone realizes that things have been going much too 

slowly in the field of housing, the provision of homes for our young people. Unless we have homes, as it 

is often spoke of, the home is the foundation stone of any nation. Unless you have a home in which you 

can live happily, in which you can house the members of your families, which you can feel that it is your 

own, or where you are secure in it, people cannot be happy. Happiness is one of the things in life that 

everyone seeks most. Without happiness there can be no real efficiency in the work that people do 

whatever their tasks are. 

 

And so I would like to move this Resolution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — There are several questions I would like to have the privilege of asking the Member. 

The Hon. Member speaking quoted from what he stated was the Ottawa Journal. Was it a part from the 

Ottawa Journal or was it from the News Commentator? 

 

Mr. Daniels: — It was an extract from a copy of the Ottawa Journal, Mr. Speaker, which was published 

in another publication. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — Did I understand him to say, Mr. Speaker, that it was his idea, under paragraph one, 

that the granting of subsidies to citizens in the lower income brackets would be in the form of the 

Federal Government paying a part of the monthly rent to supplement the rent paid by the house 

occupier? 

 

Mr. Daniels: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, as I tried to explain that in the case of the subsidy wherever the 

income of a person was low so that 20 per cent of his income was not sufficient to provide the rental of a 

home, for a reasonable home, I don’t mean to say that they should want to live in an $18,000 home like I 

live in, that I mentioned here, but where he wants a home of an ordinary type to suit his family, then the 

Federal Government should subsidize him to the extent of what the difference is between 20 per cent of 

his income and the rental required for that home, the reasonable rental for that home. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — If I understand the Hon. 



February 25, 1947 

432 

Member, his idea of this subsidy then is a monthly contribution by the Federal Government to assist in 

paying the rent of the householder. Well then the second point was in connection with the alleged 

disadvantages that the co-operative and provincial and municipal housing units suffer compared with 

corporations set up by lending institutions. Now, I had expected the Hon. Member to outline some of 

these disadvantages or differences between the treatment accorded to national housing corporations set 

up by lending institutions and this other group. 

 

My question is: What were the differences that were accorded, what different conditions applied to 

corporations set up by lending institutions and those set up under these other various forms? The 

Resolution infers that there is a difference, but the Hon. Member didn’t tell us what they were. I am 

asking what they are. 

 

Mr. Daniels: — I think if the Hon. Member will look at the Resolution he will find that we are asking 

for these to be set up. As far as I know there isn’t anything set up so far to provide for the same 

treatment given to co-operatives, municipal or provincial housing schemes that are now set up under the 

federal regulations for other lending institutions and these private lending institutions to go into housing 

on a large scale. 

 

Hon. J.H. Sturdy (Minister of Reconstruction and Rehabilitation): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

commence my remarks on this Resolution by reading a statement made by Sir John Orr in his 

publication on Housing and Health, in which he states this: 

 

The possibility of obtaining full physical and mental development are controlled first and foremost by 

our environment, by the homes and communities in which we live. Neither physical nor mental 

development can be unimpeded in overcrowded, unhealthy, gloomy and noisy surroundings. We must 

make for ourselves and for everyone else, good homes and healthy work places, The materials, both 

economical and technical, are in existence to do that now, to pass smoothly from war to reconstruction. 

 

That is the statement by Sir John Boyd Orr. No one has greater knowledge of the subject and no one will 

gainsay the truth of his statements. To my mind no country in the world is better supplied with lumber 

and building materials of all kinds than is this country of ours. No country is in a position, in a better 

position financially and by virtue of unlifted potential supplies of materials than is Canada in giving to 

her people the best homes in the world. 

 

Now, Canada at war, Mr. Speaker, demonstrated her ability to produce food stuffs, armaments and war 

supplies of all kinds in a manner that amazed the world. But unfortunately her inability to cope with so 

fundamental a national service as housing, her inability, I say, also amazes the world. I would ask you to 

contrast Canada with its vast population, with its unlimited natural resources and the fact that her homes 

and her industries are untouched by war, with Britain, where one million homes alone were damaged or 

destroyed by the German blitz, where industry was disrupted and building supplies non-existent and yet 

with all these handicaps, which also include may I point out, 



February 25, 1947 

433 

Mr. Speaker, the inherited inefficiency and empire-wide accumulated chaos of colonial 

maladministration under previous Tory Governments. Yet Britain is facing up to the housing problem 

and solving it in a way that puts this country to shame. 

 

We are told on the other hand that the state of the nation is determined by the quality of its homes. We 

are told that the home is the very foundation of our civilization. Now, to my mind, Mr. Speaker, that 

foundation is very precarious, indeed according to the Curtis Report, 25 per cent of our Canadian people 

cannot afford rentals in excess of $12.50 per month. That is assuming, as Mr. Curtis assumes, that only 

one-fifth of the workers’ income should be devoted to the payment of rentals on homes. He also makes 

this statement in his report on which my hon. friend has also quoted, that three-quarters of the people of 

Canada need housing costing from $12 to $25 per month. Now quoting further from this report, 

“between 600,000 and 750,000 new urban homes are required. 125,000 new farm dwellings and in 

addition to this, 543,000 homes require substantial support to make them properly passable.” 

 

This means that a total of 1,383,000 homes do not exist in this country or else require very substantial 

repairs in a country whose population is somewhere around 12 million people. Now, the absolute 

minimum replacements estimated in this report, that is the annual replacements, is 27,000 homes a year, 

besides 30,000 homes to provide for normal population increases. And yet according to Mr. Howe’s 

most optimistic promises about less than 60,000, around 50,000 homes will be provided each year. This 

will never enable us to catch up to the lag, never enable us to provide any more than present 

replacements and homes to take care of the normal increase in population. 

 

I would like to deal for a moment, Mr. Speaker, with the plight of the married veterans. May I say that 

tens of thousands have been unable to resume normal home lives since the end of the War. We have 

much to be ashamed of in our failure to provide these men, who kept us free, from decent homes today. 

The record is going to be one of broken homes. It was so after the last War. Homes broken due to 

overcrowded, unsanitary conditions, unhealthy basement rooms, living in garages, living with in-laws, 

veterans compelled to dissipate their gratuities and their savings in expensive hotels and boarding 

houses. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that veterans cannot afford to build or to own homes at 

the present inflated building costs. 

 

As far as our provincial policy is concerned, we have as practically as possible converted suitable 

buildings into suites at low rates. Our purpose is to provide veterans with very satisfactory emergency 

housing until such time as they are permanently rehabilitated and until such time as housing costs are 

reduced to a figure that will enable them to build or acquire homes of their own. 

 

I am sorry that we cannot recommend to the veterans, but under these inflated costs of building 

materials, construction costs of all sorts and under the scarcity prevailing, we cannot recommend and, 

indeed, it is impossible for them to go out and build or purchase homes of their own. Out of these we 

have provided some 600 of these family units and I would ask the Legislative Committee on Veterans 

Affairs to inspect these suites which we have provided and contrast them with other types of emergency 

housing. It is certainly not our intention that these 



February 25, 1947 

434 

emergency suites which we have provided should become permanent domiciles. They are, however, 

fairly adequate for the emergency period, they are equipped with central heating, light and power, 

plumbing and laundries. 

 

I am not going to be too critical of the emergency shelters provided by municipalities in this province, 

but they are not good enough for Canadian returned men and for Canadian people generally, even during 

an emergency period. Why do people live in these two-room unmodern shacks? Well, I suppose the 

answer is this, Mr. Speaker, when people are hungry they do not question the nutritional value of food, 

they eat what they can get and an analogy can be applied to the current housing situation, particularly in 

the large cities of this province. People have stopped thinking in terms of what is necessary in housing 

for health, family living and proper home surroundings. They have become desperate for a roof and four 

walls regardless of the sociology of living under unhealthy conditions. Nationally, this problem has not 

been attacked and already the federal authorities seem to have forgotten that as high as 52 per cent of all 

young Canadian citizens enlisting in certain branches of the Armed Forces at the time of the War, were 

turned down due to health disabilities and these health disabilities were in large measure due to 

unsatisfactory, unhygienic homes in which they had been born and raised. 

 

Just a word respecting the responsibility of the so-called private enterprise. Now private enterprise has 

never been able to provide decent and adequate homes for more than 25 per cent of the people of 

Canada. An absolute minimum is required in this province of ours alone and many of the existing homes 

are a disgrace in a civilized community. As an example, of the 122,000 farm homes in rural 

Saskatchewan, only 1 per cent are equipped with running water; 7 per cent of the homes have inside 

hand pumps and 92 per cent of all rural homes have only an outside source of water supply. Only 12 per 

cent of all rural homes are equipped with furnaces and 82 per cent have no means of refrigeration 

whatsoever. Now, building under so-called private enterprise is the most retardant of all industries. 

There have been little or no improvements as they affect the ordinary citizen for the past quarter of a 

century. 

 

I will contrast the improvements, say in building construction, home construction, with that of the car 

industry, aeroplanes, the atomic bomb and so on. The building lags hopelessly and helplessly far behind. 

It is in a chaotic condition, indeed, with little progress in building technique, improved building 

materials and streamline methods of construction, costs remain exorbitantly high. A great deal of 

research is required in the whole building field and supplies of all kinds, electrical, plumbing, etc., must 

be taken out of the hands, out of the control of combined and monopolistic corporations which they 

presently control. 

 

Our national government must recognize that housing is a national responsibility, has long since been 

recognized, in such countries as New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Denmark and, indeed, Britain, nor can 

provincial governments or municipalities escape their responsibility. In as far as this Government is 

concerned, besides our emergency program, we are prepared to go into the permanent housing field. We 

have passed legislation and have made representations to the Federal Government for homes under the 

National Housing Act, under the same terms and conditions as have been granted to mortgage 

companies, insurance 



February 25, 1947 

435 

companies and other types of lending institutions. 

 

The Hon. Member, the Leader of the Opposition raised this question. He wanted to know what was 

granted to lending institutions that was not granted under the National Housing Act to co-operatives and 

provincial and municipal governments. Well, simply this: lending institutions, approved lending 

institutions which included the banks, insurance companies, loan companies, may set up two types of 

housing corporations, the Limited Dividend Housing Corporation and the Institutional Housing 

Corporation. They may go to the Federal Government, to the National Housing Act, which is now 

administered by the Federal Mortgage and Housing Corporation and they may get a loan up to 90 per 

cent of the capital invested at the rate of 3 per cent per annum to be payable over a period of 50 years. 

The municipality, the co-operatives or the provincial governments cannot have access to funds under the 

National Housing Act. As I have stated, last year we passed enabling legislation. It didn’t do us very 

much good however. 

 

On July 1st – you have it on record – I wrote to the Hon. C.D. Howe informing him of what we were 

doing in the province in the way of providing emergency shelter and informing him that we were 

prepared to go further into the permanent housing field and I shall quote, in part, from my letter to him, 

after outlining what we have done and may I on this occasion make this statement: that we have worked 

very closely with the Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation at Ottawa and they have granted to us 

up to the present time, the sum of $93,400 to assist us in providing these family units or the conversion 

of suitable buildings. Quoting from my letter to Mr. Howe, I have outlined the great need for housing in 

the province: 

 

The situation therefore compels us to examine other possibilities for the alleviation of the housing 

situation. It is in this regard that the Saskatchewan Government seeks the assistance of the Dominion 

Government in providing additional housing accommodation for the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

On August 5, 1945, the Minister of Finance made the following statement in the House of Commons 

while speaking on the National Housing Act. 

 

The Bill provides that a low dividend Housing Corporation or a life insurance company may undertake 

the loan and if it does it may do so under the terms set out in the Bill. If it is a Limited Dividend 

Housing Corporation the Dominion Government will lend 19 per cent of the cost of the program at 3 

per cent on certain conditions, the conditions being that the low dividend corporation can make no 

capital gain out of the venture, that the rates of return will be limited . . . 

 

On September the 13, 1945, the Minister of Finance, in replying to a question in the House of Commons 

concerning the possibility of provincial and municipal governments being permitted the opportunity of 

having within the framework of the Act for the purposes meeting the housing emergency, made the 

following statement: 

 

The time may come, before very long, when that type of corporation will be approved, would be 

expanded on . . . 



February 25, 1947 

436 

matters to see if it qualifies. There is nothing in the Act which excludes . . . if they are in the form of 

limited dividends, housing corporations. 

 

The Provincial Government in providing between five and six hundred family units without interfering 

with building supplies that would go into private homes and so on, by undertaking and proving our good 

faith in entering the housing field and spending several hundred thousand dollars on emergency housing, 

that this type qualifies for a loan under the National Housing Act. 

 

To go on with this letter: 

 

We are extremely pleased to see that the Minister of Finance has left the door open through which the 

Saskatchewan Government may enter the housing field and thus co-operate with your department in a 

joint effort to meet the housing situation. I have mentioned before, the Saskatchewan Government has 

established the Saskatchewan Reconstruction Housing Corporation which has helped in meeting the 

housing emergency. We are extremely anxious to expand the activity of this Corporation in order that 

more people in Saskatchewan may be provided with comfortable low rental housing. We, therefore, 

request that you consider the Saskatchewan Reconstruction Housing Corporation as a Limited 

Dividend Housing Corporation for the purpose of developing low rental housing projects. 

 

The Saskatchewan Government further request that a loan be made to the Saskatchewan 

Reconstruction Housing Corporation under the same terms and conditions as are being given to other 

Limited Dividend Housing Corporations already engaged in projects of this nature. The initial projects 

to be undertaken by the Saskatchewan Reconstruction Housing Corporation in the low rental housing 

field would be located in the city of Regina and would include 100 homes. It should be mentioned at 

this point that some of the most favourable building sites in the city of Regina would be available for 

this project. I would also point out that the Reconstruction Housing Corporation is most anxious, not 

only to conform with the city zoning regulations, but also to offer every possible assistance in the 

development of a master plan which is apparently being prepared in the Regina Town Planning 

Committee. 

 

It is quite possible the Saskatchewan Reconstruction Housing Corporation is not at the present time so 

constituted as to come within the framework or definition of a Limited Dividend Housing Corporation. 

If this should prove the case, then we are quite prepared to bring the Housing Corporation into 

conformity with the regulations required under the National Housing Act. 

 

The Members of the Saskatchewan Government appreciate your effort to meet the current national 

housing emergency. May I, therefore, suggest that sufficient money is to be made available. 

 

My reply to Mr. Howell under date of July 17th was as follows: 

 

I have given various careful consideration to your helpful letter of July 4th. We appreciate the 

difficulties of 



February 25, 1947 

437 

the present situation and the possibility of new housing being created by a vote under Section 9 of the 

National Housing Act to the Saskatchewan Reconstruction Housing Corporation. We are grateful for 

the activities of your Government in assisting the Dominion to meet the current national housing 

emergency. 

 

You may look forward to our continuing the work with you towards the same and it is true that the 

Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation which has been set up under Mr. Howell’s Department, to 

administer the National Housing Act has co-operated with us very closely. Our relationships have been 

cordial and satisfactory with respect to emergency housing. 

 

To go on: 

 

There are as you know good reasons why the Dominion at this time find it difficult to make a loan 

under Section 9 to a province or municipality. Past experience with loans of this type does not lend 

much encouragement. To my absolute knowledge no loans have ever been made in this province or to 

any municipality in this province. Facilities for such loans would have to be extended to all provinces 

and municipalities. Materials are in very short supply for even our current housing program. Loans to 

provincial or municipal housing authorities would merely develop a transfer of housing from one type 

to another rather than add to our new supply. 

 

All these reasons lead me to believe that it is not a propitious moment to enter this new field of 

finance. I would prefer to leave the matter as outlined by the Minister of Finance in the House of 

Commons on September 13, 1945. 

 

If you have occasion to be in Ottawa again, I would be very happy to have a chat with you about this 

situation and at that time we can explore the subject more thoroughly. I do not think, however, that 

until conditions change we should alter our present policy. 

 

Since the writing of that letter, further representations have been made but unfortunately we have not got 

very far in this matter of securing assistance under the National Housing Act. 

 

Now, to my mind, Mr. Speaker, housing, health and education constitute the three most important social 

services that any country can give to its people and it is significant that our National Government has 

neither a department on housing, has neither a department of education and it is true it has more or less 

initiated a Department of Health. I do think the National Government has been remiss in its 

responsibility with respect to these three most important services, the housing of our people, providing 

adequately for their health and also for their education. The only time that they ever take these three 

services at all serious is when a war is in ending or in progress and then without any thought for 

expenditure they can go all out. Now if the health and the education and the housing of our people are 

good in times of war, they are equally good in times of peace and in my humble opinion, Mr. Speaker, 

the Federal Government should have established there a Department of Government, a federal planning 

and housing department under the 



February 25, 1947 

438 

Cabinet and that should be a full time job and not be allocated to a corporation as it is at the present 

time. 

 

There are many fields that this Department could concern itself, that of regional and community 

planning. I wish we had a similar provision in the Dominion of Canada. Something that would enable us 

to go into planning of our towns and our cities and thus rapidly developing a proud young country of 

ours and avoid our getting into the hopeless, helpless, chaotic position that Britain was in before the 

introduction of the Community Planning and Housing Act, which incidentally was introduced by the 

Tory Government prior to the introduction of the Silken Bill. The Act merely concerns itself with 

making it possible to provide the towns and cities of Britain with the planning of their various 

communities with the provision of forestry or park belts around their towns and cities, and surely the 

Members of this Opposition know that the deeds of property in the old country are so entailed they go 

back to the Dooms Day Book, to William the Conqueror, that it was absolutely impossible for that 

country to do anything effective in the way of plans, even of building roads through certain parts of that 

country due to the entailed condition of the ownership of land. I would point this out, Mr. Speaker, that 

1 per cent of the people of Britain own 57 per cent of the land. Maybe in the opinion of the Opposition 

that is a healthy condition and maybe something that they would welcome in this country. While there is 

nothing in the Silkien Bill, however, that deals with the confiscation of land, it provides, however, for 

the appropriation of lands in order that they can take care of the health and housing of their people. 

 

Besides the Dominion Department of Housing, I do think that the province should assume its full 

responsibility with respect to housing and there should be a department of government responsible for 

community planning and housing in the province and, indeed, that the province should be divided into 

community planning and housing zones. An attack on this whole problem of community planning and 

housing must and should be made. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Mr. Speaker, before the hon. gentleman proceeds, he has now made a break, will the 

Hon. Member tell us whether he thinks it possible that Mr. Howe had in mind that the Seed Grain 

difficulty over that loan and that may have been what he was thinking of? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Our record wasn’t very clean you know. 

 

Mr. Sturdy: — Well, I’d say this, that if they were as careless with the disposition or the final 

agreement with respect to the Seed Grain as they are about housing, we will not get very far with 

housing. 

 

This housing crisis can be met in this province and in the Dominion of Canada by overall planning and 

action similar to the technique of our war effort. Housing in the Dominion of Canada is just as serious as 

anything can be and we should apply to it some of the positive action, some of the planning that we 

applied to our war effort. 

 

At the present time the Federal Government is providing an overall program to meet the needs. We 

consider that three-quarters of the people of Canada need housing, costing from 



February 25, 1947 

439 

$12 to $25.50 a month. 

 

According to the Curtis Report we haven’t begun to attack this problem of low rental houses. The Hon. 

Member, Leader of the Opposition asked us what method of subsidizing rents or what method we used 

in providing low rental houses. Well, the way it is carried out in the countries, notably New Zealand, 

Norway, Sweden and Britain, the low rental housing, subsidized rental, is provided in a lesser degree 

possibly than we would like to see. The renter pays approximately a fifth of his income. What he can 

afford or what he should be assessed and if that is $25 a month and yet the rental required on that 

housing project, to liquidate it over a period of years, say 50 years, amounted to $30 a month, then the 

National Government pays the difference between that $25 and the $30. And that is what we mean by 

subsidized low rental houses. 

 

Now there are a lot of things that I might recommend that should be done to meet the critical housing 

situation which still continues to exist after a couple of years have gone, after the War has been over for 

a couple of years. We are thinking in fact, on this problem in any way that will ever solve it. 

 

To conclude this, Mr. Speaker, as a matter of concern we learn today that certain records had been 

increased in commercial buildings, hotels, the rentals that have been permitted to go up ten per cent. I 

sincerely hope that that is not a forecast of what may happen in housing. If rental control comes off 

housing in this province and in the Dominion of Canada I hate to think what the situation will be. I think 

the persuasion should be brought to bear on the federal authorities to prevent the removal of rental 

control. 

 

I support this Resolution. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, speaking on this Resolution, I think it is a very 

important Resolution. I believe it is one that is of great concern to a good many of the people in the 

province and all over Canada. I am willing to give all the credit in the world to the Minister of 

Reconstruction for what has been done in this Province of Saskatchewan. He said there has been 

provided during the period up to this present time between 500 and 600 units for people who were up 

against it and had no place to live. That is all to the good, Mr. Speaker, and I give him credit for what he 

has done. 

 

Much has been said in regard to the advancing cost of constructing houses. It has also had the effect that 

many men, particularly in the lower income bracket, who have intended to build their own houses, they 

find now that their income and the resources has made that intention practically impossible. This has 

been brought about by many things, mostly, Mr. Speaker, by increased costs of materials. The increased 

costs of materials has been brought about by increased labor costs and all these things that go with it. 

 

Well, the Premier is probably an expert on these things. I know that less than six months ago, now there 

was a strike in the lumber industry in British Columbia, not only for shorter hours per week, but for 

much higher wages. Then knowing something about shipping in all the carloads and all the lumber we 

could possibly get, they haven’t got enough of it, from the 



February 25, 1947 

440 

co-operative organization there who were subject to the increase, I know something about the increase 

of the cost of lumber, probably more than the Premier does and I don’t know whether he likes this or 

not, but I think I do, so what I am saying is true and that’s not the only thing, Mr. Speaker, something 

was said about bath fixtures, plumbing fixtures, piping, hardwood for doors and windows and all these 

things that go into a house. Well, there is a steel strike on in the United States and in eastern Canada. We 

increased the price of all these products every one of them. We look at the invoice that we get now, that 

we only got a year ago, Mr. Speaker, and we find that there is a remarkable difference in the price that 

we have to pay. We pass these increases on to these people who are building homes and repairing 

buildings and such as that. 

 

The cost of living in the United States and in Canada is crawling upwards, and increasing every day and 

will inevitably in time start that vicious circle that has no ending except in an inflation which is ruin for 

everybody. Now I am not sure who is to blame for this, but it is a sure thing that if there is anyone to 

blame, it is not the farmers of this country and must be placed on the people who control and work in the 

industry. I am not going to try pushing the blame, but there is where it comes from. 

 

There has been many things said here this afternoon. I want to say this, that the Federal Government had 

constructed, in the last few years, about 300,000 houses in Canada, that is in accordance with Mr. 

Caldwell’s statement on the floor of the House a few days ago. He said there should have been about 

475,000. That may be true, of the student and its problem, if there had been 675,000, Mr. Speaker, it 

would have been still better. But I know this, that all over this province and I think the rest of Canada, 

last year and for the last three years, there has been an enormous demand for material and it is a tragedy 

that billions of pieces of lumber has gone into construction of houses that were not fit to go there. They 

were not seasoned, they were raw, green, or the wrong materials and today you have been going to some 

of these new houses. 

 

I can do it in my own home town, but they paid the highest price, but they were not seasoned and, today, 

houses – you can see out through the doors, the doors, yes, and the windows and thousands of dollars 

will need to be spent, hundreds of dollars on individual houses and more will need to be spent to 

recondition these houses to make them fit to live in. That is one of the conditions. 

 

I say, again, that I am willing to give the Hon. Minister credit for what he has done in Saskatchewan, but 

I just wonder if everything has been done that could be done. Subject, of course, to the same limitations 

that everybody else had been subjected to, namely this shortage of materials which has hampered, not 

only the individual, not only the corporations which you hear so much about, but the Government itself. 

 

Oh, we might think that all the lumber in Canada has been shipped out to the United States, it is not so 

either. Only 18 per cent of the lumber, that is so far as British Columbia is concerned, has been exported 

to the United States and that has been under some agreement whereby we have received from the United 

States certain products essential to all building industry, which we might not otherwise have received. 

So there 



February 25, 1947 

441 

I think, is a problem or proposition of give and take which has been working out very satisfactorily. 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before my hon. friend goes on, I was interested in his 

quotation of 18 per cent of British Columbia lumber that went to the United States and may I ask the 

basis of that statement, the authority of that statement? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, I haven’t got it with me, but I know it is correct. I know more than one place 

that statement has been made. I believe, if I remember correctly, it was made by Mr. Hall himself, 

Minister of Reconstruction, in the Government of Canada. 

 

I said I have just wondered what the Province of Saskatchewan has done, what it might have done, along 

this line, subject of course, as I have said, to the circumstances and to the limitations so far as material is 

available. That is something which we should not forget either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t think that the Province of Saskatchewan could probably do any more than what was done last 

year due to not being able to get laborers, who were skilled in the industry and could properly be 

employed for certain types of work. Now that is probably true, at least that is my opinion, that all the 

skilled labor in the Province of Saskatchewan, maybe in the Dominion of Canada, was employed in that 

work which could very well be employed. 

 

The Province of Saskatchewan, or this Government, when it went to the people before 1944, did certain 

improvements on housing and I was kind of amused listening to my friend this afternoon because he 

hadn’t said anything about it and it might be well to refresh his memory of what some of these programs 

were. 

 

In 1943 – the Annual Convention of the CCF Party, he said this, this is one of the planks in the platform, 

adequate housing for the thousands of families that are now living in slum areas, any crowded tenements 

in our cities and that this improvement also included the re-housing of our citizens of the rural areas. 

The Minister mentioned that this afternoon too and that is very well; there is lots of buildings needed in 

the rural areas, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t think that it is so urgent and so terribly important as to get more 

houses in the urban areas of this province, and that our natural resources be developed to the fullest 

extent to bring this about; the development of the vast north lands, so that the tremendous wealth in 

lumber, minerals and water power which now lies undeveloped, can be brought into full production. 

That was one of the planks of the CCF platform. It is three years since they came into power. There is 

another one, as a matter of fact I shall give the Hon. gentleman this resolution of the CCF Convention in 

1943. 

 

Another one, adequate housing for thousands of families that are now living in slum areas and in 

crowded tenements in our cities, etc., it is the same as the other one, but it starts from the CCF progress 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

In the Saskatchewan Commonwealth, May 24, 1944, just a few days before the election, it said there 

should be adequate housing for thousands of families which are now living in slum 



February 25, 1947 

442 

areas and in crowded tenements in our cities, and that this program would include the rehousing of our 

citizens in our rural areas and that our natural resources would be developed to the fullest extent to bring 

this about. 

 

Now that’s your own program and I suggest that what may help the people of the Province of 

Saskatchewan in the time of war, should not end in elections; it is equal important in time of war and 

after elections, would you agree with that Mr. Minister? You have been three years in office now. 

 

Then here is another one: Article Embetterments in Saskatchewan Commonwealth, May 26, 1943, the 

machinery of battlement will be in the hands of those who found the first CCF Legislature, a housing 

information must study the separation of organ and rule of earth, make an estimate of the needs and 

offer a solution for such. We could work on the individual basis somewhat similar to our recent national 

housing scheme; in this way a considerable number would someday have decent homes and they could 

look and they could own them. An estimate would be given to remodel, renovate and make their homes 

more comfortable as the years went by. That is 1943. 

 

This Government, the CCF Government, if assumed office, they were to do certain things; appoint a 

National Housing Scheme. Oh, they were going to work in co-operation, if there was a National 

Housing Scheme. They were going to bring the resources of the northland, develop it in such a way that 

it would assist in tearing out the program. There is no reference in this lecture of promises by the party 

which was represented in this Government, that the Dominion Government was going to do anything, 

you were going to do it, and no one else. Mr. Speaker, this Government . . . 

 

Mr. Sturdy: — Tell us what you fellows built. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — We will tell you when the time comes. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The time is past, it will never come. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You are the party in the seat. You are not an Opposition any longer. You are on the 

spot too. 

 

An Hon. Member: — For a long time to come. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, this Government has never tackled the basic problem which they 

promised to do. They have done, and I give them credit for what they have done, in a temporary way 

through getting control of certain Air Force buildings and one thing or another, has done creditable work 

so far as it goes. I want to be fair to this Government, in providing temporary housing for these men who 

need it so badly, but there has been nothing done by this Government in tackling the problems that really 

exist. Now they are demanding, demanding and demanding something from the Dominion Government. 

Now the Dominion Government has taken action; they have constructed hundreds of buildings. 



February 25, 1947 

443 

An Hon. Member: — Where? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, I don’t think I need to tell the Premier where, he knows that. 

 

Now here is February 20, 1947 and it says this: The Canadian Government has not built a single house 

of comparable type by comparing it with New Zealand. Comparable type in this class rental or the price 

and furthermore during the same ten year period New Zealand has built over 48,000 housing units of all 

types equivalent to 417,000 in Canada on the basis of population. Then he goes on to say, in the same 

period only 300,000, and many of them of wartime inferior types, has been built by . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — By what? Finish the sentence, built by what? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He is talking to the Minister on the floor of the House. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, I am very familiar with that statement and it hasn’t been read in its 

entirety. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, it is quite in the point of purpose, the Hon. Member can’t misquote 

something. I am quite familiar with the quotation he is making. He is talking about the total number of 

houses built in Canada, not built by the Federal Government. The Federal Government doesn’t build 

houses, it has a loaning system by which lending institutions build houses. The hon. gentleman is 

twisting a quotation. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, I must insist that the hon. gentleman withdraw that. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Privilege . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must ask the gentleman to withdraw the statement that the Hon. Member from Arm 

River has twisted the statement. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I am very glad to bow to your ruling, Mr. Speaker, and to withdraw the term 

“twisting” but I do insist that the hon. gentleman is quoting something out of context, which is not 

giving the proper facts which are contained in the statement. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, this is the total quotation, the whole article cut out of the Press this 

morning and I am going to read this whole article and if there is any more to it it is not in the Press. I am 

going to read it to the Premier so that he won’t have any doubt in his mind whether I am twisting 

anything or not. I’ll leave that type of weasel work to him, I am not doing that. I am probably a little too 

forthright in my statements. 



February 25, 1947 

444 

Mr. Speaker, with your permission I am going to read the whole article and it is a very short one: On 

February the 20th: 

 

Canada has been nearly 40 per cent slower than New Zealand in providing shelter for her people, M.J. 

Coldwell, national CCF leader contended Wednesday night in an address prepared for delivery on a 

CBC free-time political broadcast. 

 

Picking up government statements that Canada’s homebuilding record was unsurpassed, Mr. Coldwell 

recalled that Reconstruction Minister Howe ‘proposes for 1947 the building of standard four-room 

units to rent at $70 per month’ . . . According to the Curtis Report on housing in 1943, two-thirds of 

the Canadian people cannot afford rentals of more than $25 a month. 

 

In the 10 years in which the Labor Government has been in power, ending in 1946, New Zealand built 

23,000 well constructed permanent homes which rent for the equivalent of $18.25 a month. Now 

comparing the population of Canada with that of New Zealand, this is equivalent to our building over 

150,000 homes within reach of the lower income brackets. 

 

The Canadian Government has not built a single house of comparable type in this class for rental at or 

near that price. Furthermore, during the same 10-year period, New Zealand built over 58,000 housing 

units of all types, equivalent to 417,000 in Canada, whereas we actually built during the same period 

only 300,000 and many of them of wartime inferior types. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s right, built by private enterprise. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, it doesn’t say that. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It wasn’t built by the Government. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — My interpretation of that thing is just as correct as yours. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I heard the broadcast. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You will not make a statement to suit your own purpose so long as I am standing in 

my seat in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! You . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, and so is the Premier. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The Canadian Government hasn’t built one house. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — So, Mr. speaker, is the Premier and I say that my interpretation is just as correct as 

his. Now, Mr. Speaker, I say to this Government that they should get busy now and do something as far 

as housing accommodation is concerned in the Province of 



February 25, 1947 

445 

Saskatchewan. We had a notice in this House, of Bills to be brought down to lend money to private 

enterprise and co-operative organizations, but I am sure that nobody ever asked this Government to lend 

money to any of them or bring down any Bills to set up money or machinery to lend money. Now then, 

here is your opportunity, Mr. Speaker, if this Government is in possession of funds and credit to the 

extent that they can actually help business people in this province to go and start up a new business and 

co-operative organizations who have more money than they know what to do with, I make that 

statement and I’m going to prove it to you if you want it when the time comes. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Prove it to the co-ops as well as proving it to us. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I say that it is co-operative organizations in the Province of Saskatchewan who are 

asking governments, today, to set up a lending organization for their purpose. Now then, when we have 

in liquor profits $6.5 million in this province, when we have money piled up in $6 or $8 million in 

education tax fund, isn’t housing just as necessary, Mr. Speaker, to use the money for that as to build 

public buildings up at the University that they are doing now? Quit blaming somebody else and get 

down to business on your own and show the people that you can do something, not demanding and 

trying to belittle the effort of our Government at Ottawa. That is what I ask this Government to do. Get 

down to business on your own and show the people that you are ready to do what you promised them 

you would do before the election. The people’s welfare in regard to housing and health and everything 

else is just as important now as it was at election time. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That’s right and you haven’t done anything to remedy that problem or even assist in 

remedying it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The people don’t think so. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, on general principle, I am going to support this Resolution. On general 

principle, I said. Yes, I am going to do that. I am going to support it on general principle because one 

principle in this Resolution is that we should have more houses and better houses. I agree with the 100 

per cent but what this Government is trying to do, by this Resolution, of bringing it about is to escape 

the responsibility that is squarely on their shoulder and I am not agreeing with that, but I agree with the 

main principle of the Resolution and, therefore, I am going to support it. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:45 o’clock p.m. 


