



















































Hansard: March 24, 1947


1070 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session – Tenth Legislature 

38
th

 Day 

 

Monday, March 24, 1947 

 

The Assembly met at 11:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer) moved second reading of Bill No. 61 – An Act respecting the 

Creation of Corporations for Certain Purposes 

 

He said: This Bill would repeal The Crown Corporations Act of 1945 and substitute the new Act. As 

Hon. Members will have noticed it is divided into three parts, first the organization of Crown 

Corporations, which is very much the same as under the 1945 Act. It does however, make provision for 

the setting up of superannuation funds for employees and existing corporations have continued under 

this Act. The second part deals with the Government Finance office. Now this is a new part, Sir, and is 

designed to facilitate the financing of industrial corporations. Under the provisions this Central Office 

assume the liability for advances which will be made henceforth to Crown Corporations. It will receive 

such monies as may be voted from time to time by this Assembly. It will also receive such monies, 

(profits) as may be made by the individual Crown Corporations set up and then from the monies so 

received they may disburse them to the Crown Corporations. 

 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, that the Treasury Board will regulate all procedures of this office and it will be 

responsible to the Provincial Treasurer. 

 

The third is the establishment of the Industrial Development Fund. The purpose of this is to encourage 

the establishment and development of new industries in the province. The Government may make 

advances to individuals, private corporations, to municipalities, to co-operative organizations and with 

the passage of this, we are asking for $2 million to be raised and put into a special fund to be 

administered by the Government Finance Office and then further monies may be appropriated by the 

Legislature from time to time. I would like to say in this connection that neighboring provinces have had 

this, in fact, I think that every province of Canada has an Industrial Development Fund, which they use 

to assist industries coming into their province. Now, this is bringing us in line with what is in practice in 

other places. I move second reading, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer) moved second reading of Bill No. 84 – An Act respecting The 

Public Service. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this is an Act respecting the Public Service. It is similar in many respects to the 

old Act but there are a great many changes, particularly those that were 



 

March 24, 1947 

 

1071 

necessary to introduce this Act, upon completion of our classification and establishment of a pay plan. 

The Bill is inclined to fit in with the procedure which has been established and which has been 

recommended to be established. I might say, that this Bill which is being introduced is based upon a Bill 

which has been worked out by the organization of governments all over the United States and Canada, 

the Public Services Assembly. This Bill is based upon it with, of course, such things as are necessary for 

local conditions. The purpose of it is to remove the public service entirely from the field of politics and 

to endeavor to set up a civil service which will be permanent, in which people will devote their lives to 

their work and get the highest possible qualities of people recruited for the service. I would move second 

reading of this Bill. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour):  there is a certain point in regard to pensions payable to 

widows or widows with children. At the present time the rate is $40 per month for widows and is raised 

to $45 to a widow who is alone. If she has one child it will be raised to $57 and if more than one child 

$65 shall be the absolute minimum. We have to bring that in, $65 per month in the event of the 

employee being a married person. We are also bringing in the status of a common-law wife, entitling her 

to pension, where the workman has been killed in industry and he has a common-law wife, with whom 

he must have lived at least seven years and must have had children. We feel that it is only reasonable 

that she would be entitled to the same. I might say that it will be at the discretion of the Board. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. J.L. Phelps (Minister of Natural Resources and Industrial Development) moved second reading of 

Bill No. 79 – An Act to amend The Power Commission Act. 

 

 

He said: The section dealing with the little things of time would be a point of the commissioners, 

making it possible now to appoint the commissioners by Order-in-Council. We think that is now 

necessary for practical purposes. The matter of filling vacancies and carrying on in the meantime and the 

matter of resignations or a vacancy on the Board will be provided for. The matter of stream-lining the 

signing authorities – at the present time the Act is rather cumbersome inasmuch as it provides that the 

Commissioner be chairman of the Commission and must sign all documents, that is when I say 

documents, operating papers, matters of crossings at railroads, and a lot of incidental matters that should 

not in the ordinary course of events, administrative purposes, burden a Commissioner in any way, shape 

or form. They are pure routine matters, but at the present time they must be signed according to the Act 

by the Commissioner. It has meant a great deal of time and his work is more valuable. We think that can 

be done by a responsible official of the department and is so provided. 

 

Another provision here is providing for division of cost as between the Administrator, a part of the Act, 

and the actual operating functions including the capital expense. At the present the Power Commission 

Act is really in two sections, one has to do with the administrative features, in connection with 

inspection and various other matters and the other section deals 



 

March 24, 1947 

 

1072 

with the operating section itself. A suggestion there, is to divide the cost for the two sections. 

 

There is another section dealing with the provision for clearing trees and obstructions which might grow 

up on the property. There has been some difficulty as the Act is not clear on that point whether its cross 

arms overhang the property and what obstruction may be removed. 

 

The other thing I would like to draw to the attention of the Committee is the section of the Bill making 

provision to change the Commission to a Crown Corporation, if it is felt desirable to do so. Those are 

the main items in the Bill, Mr. Speaker. Any other matters might be discussed in Committee. If there 

isn’t any question I will move second reading of the Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:00 o’clock p.m. 


