



















































Hansard: February 05, 1947


72 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Fourth Session — Tenth Legislature 

5th Day 

 

Wednesday, February 5, 1947. 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. J. Gibson (Morse) for an 

Address-in-Reply. 

 

Hon. T. C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before I proceed with the remarks I have to make on 

the motion, I should like on a question of privilege, to draw attention to a statement which appears in 

this morning’s Leader-Post, reporting some of my remarks of yesterday and stating that I gave a figure 

of $9.5 million spent, covering the National Film Board, the Wartime Information Board and Parliament 

Hill Broadcasts. 

 

I can understand an error like that can be quite easily made, but I want to make it perfectly clear that in 

the figures which I read — I have them here for three years, 1943, 1944 and 1945 — these figures 

covered three agencies of the Federal Government. I pointed out that there were many other agencies, 

but the three I was quoting were: The Canadian Travel Bureau Service, Wartime Information Board — 

later the Public Information Board — and the National Film Board. The totals for these three agencies 

were: 1943 — $3,457,744; 1944 — $3,138,311; and 1945 — $4,512, 272, making some $9.5 million 

during the last three years. These did not refer to the Parliament Hill Broadcasts, which, of course, are 

not provided by the Federal Government. In my reference to the Parliament Hill Broadcast, I was merely 

pointing out that here was a broadcast which, in my opinion at least, was very favorable to the Federal 

Government. I pointed out that had we been sponsoring a broadcast like that it would probably have 

been interpreted as propaganda. My criticism was not of having Parliament Hill Broadcasts nor of the 

National Film Board — both of which have done an excellent job, but pointing out rather that when the 

Federal Government or any of its friends draw attention to what they have done or attempted to do, we 

do not classify it at once as propaganda. Our friends across the way, however, when any agency of the 

Saskatchewan Government seeks to draw the attention of the public to what we are doing or trying to 

do, immediately label it propaganda. 

 

When the House adjourned, last night, I was endeavoring to reply to some of the criticism made by the 

Leader of the Opposition with regard to the present administration. I was pointing out that many of the 

charges of dictatorship which he has been levelling at the Government and which have been levelled by 

his supporters and heelers all across the province, are not particularly new. They levelled the same 

charges at the Anderson administration when the Liberals were sitting in Opposition; they levelled the 

same charges at the Bennett administration with the Liberal Party was in Opposition at Ottawa. 

Whenever the Liberal Party is in Opposition, all the rest of 

the people are dictators; but when they get into Government it is a very different story indeed. I was 

seeking to point out, also, that the real danger in a country like Canada and in a Province like 



February 5, 1947 

73 

 

Saskatchewan, is not the danger of dictatorship on the part of a government, which must come to the 

Legislature for its appropriations, which must be elected by the people, which must go to the polls in the 

event of by-elections and which at the end of its term must go to the public and receive endorsement or 

be removed from office. Any government in a democratic country like ours, always mindful of the fact 

that it must return for re-election, is not likely to become dictatorial. The real danger of dictatorship in 

Canada comes from those silent dictators, who stand behind governments all too often and, who, by 

control of the Press and of other media of propaganda, by the control of great corporations and great 

industrial concerns, are able to exercise tremendous power over the lives and often the thinking of 

millions of our fellow citizens, and that, Mr. Speaker, is the real danger of dictatorship in this country. 

 

The CCF came to power in this province for that very reason: because the people of Saskatchewan were 

convinced that we had a dictatorship, not in the Legislature, not in the Executive Council, but in the 

mortgage companies, in the person of certain vested and financial interests who were able to control 

government policy and who were able to control the destiny and the lives of many thousands of our 

citizens. 

 

Now, it is not my intention, this afternoon, to spend a lot of time dealing with the statements which have 

been made by my hon. friend, the Leader of the Opposition. The statements which he made, yesterday, 

are the same statements or the same kind of negative statements, which have been made by Liberal 

speakers and by the Liberal press for the past two and a half years. One would think that when a record 

has been played as often and as ceaselessly, as this record has been played, the needle would be 

beginning to wear a little dull. There has been nothing new in this criticism. It is the same kind of thing 

that they trot out on every occasion and, therefore, I do not propose to spend a lot of time answering that 

kind of criticism. 

 

We have a program which I want to expound; we have a policy which we have been following and we 

have proposals, which we want to make for the future; and I think that the people of Saskatchewan and 

the Members of this House would be much more interested in a constructive approach to these public 

questions than in merely going on the defensive and answering these oft-repeated negative criticisms. 

 

However, there were two things about which I think something should be said. The first is that anyone 

who listened to the Leader of the Opposition speaking here for some two hours, must have been struck 

with the fact that he really could not get his teeth into any real criticism. After going over the Speech 

from the Throne very carefully, he could find nothing with which he differed; the very best he could do 

was to suggest that some of the statements in the Speech from the Throne might be misunderstood, or 

that some slightly different interpretation might be taken from them than was intended. Well, if that is 

all my friend has to say in the matter of criticizing the Speech from the Throne, I, for one, am more than 

satisfied. But in criticizing, he did raise a matter which gives me a good deal of concern. He referred to 

some fictitious or ghostly 

  



February 5, 1947 

74 

person who left Rosetown, or some such place, and journeyed down to Regina and as a result of his visit 

a government policy was changed or the decisions of a certain board or tribunal were altered. Now, that 

is a very serious charge to make. My hon. friend was very careful not to make the charge until he was 

off the radio. It may be that people in parts of the province who would have heard the charge, might 

know just how fantastic it is. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — Mr. Speaker, I think I must ask the Hon. Premier to withdraw that inference; I was 

paying no attention to the radio at all. I delivered my speech in accordance with the way I had my notes 

arranged and it just happened that the radio was cut off — I understand, I was not aware of it — just 

about half-way through my reference to that particular matter. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, if my friend asks me to withdraw that inference, I should be very glad to 

do so. I simply want to say that it was, to me, rather strange that he should have made this statement at a 

time when he was off the radio. But I am not going to impute any motive; I simply want to point out, 

Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition yesterday made a definite charge. He said that a man 

came down from Rosetown to Regina and, of course, he did not see any Minister; he did not see any 

Deputy Minister; he did not, probably, come to the Buildings, but he came down to Regina, paid a visit 

here then went back to his home town and suddenly the allocation of land to veterans in that particular 

area was altered in certain respects. 

 

When I asked my hon. friend if he would substantiate his charge by giving the name of this ghostly 

individual, he refused to give the name. Now, Mr. Speaker, I do not know if my friend is seeing ghosts 

or whether this fictitious individual exists only in the minds of the Liberal advisers at Liberal 

headquarters, or whether this is one of the idle rumors that my friend has picked up on the street. But I 

want to say to him that as an old parliamentarian, he knows better than to come into this House and 

make as serious a charge as that without being prepared to place evidence before this Legislative 

Assembly. I want to tell him that the day when people could come down and influence government 

policy and get concessions for themselves, ended on the 10
th

 of July, 1944. 

 

I do not mind criticism, Mr. Speaker, but I do object to having the honesty and integrity of any member 

of this Government or those who work with them, called in question. About all that a public man has is 

his reputation. When I leave this scene I do not expect to leave my children very much of this world’s 

goods. I would like to leave them this, however, that wherever they go they can hold up their heads and 

say, “As long as my father was in public life he never betrayed a trust and that where principles were 

concerned, he would hew to the line and let the chips fall where they may.” 

 

If there has been any influence brought to bear on any member of the Government or any Member of 

this House, we should know. If any Member of this House has used his position to get concessions for 

his friends, that Member ought to resign. Has any member of the Government been guilty of such a 

thing, I want his resignation. Has any Deputy Minister been responsible, then I want his resignation. But 

I want it on a basis of substantiated 

  



February 5, 1947 

75 

 

facts. Now, I am making my friend an offer. If what he has said is not just idle rumor, I invite him to 

make a charge in this House, to name dates and places and to place his seat at the disposal of this House. 

If he is prepared to do that I am prepared to appoint a Committee of this House in which we will place 

every Member of the official Opposition, if they so desire and let the Committee of the House 

investigate, call witnesses, question them under oath or, if my friend has no confidence in a Committee 

of the House I am quite prepared to see a Royal Commission appointed and let them investigate this 

charge. The one thing we are not going to have is people making loose and irresponsible statements 

while they are not prepared to support them. My hon. friends can make that kind of statement in the 

hustings; no one can stop them. If they are going to make those statements here, however, let them make 

them as charges and let them be thoroughly investigated. The time has come, Mr. Speaker, in this 

province when the Liberal Party has either got to put up or shut up. 

 

The second thing I would like to draw attention to, Mr. Speaker, is that not only did the speech of the 

hon. gentleman, yesterday, deal almost entirely with details of word and phrase in the Speech from the 

Throne, but it was entirely negative. For two hours we listened to nothing but a story of what naughty 

boys there were in the CCF Government. Now, I think an hour of that would be understandable, 

followed by an hour devoted to telling us what the Liberal Party would do if they were elected to office; 

but we did not hear what the Liberal policy was. 

 

Mr. Feeley: — They haven’t got one. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — Someone says, “They haven’t got one,” but that is not correct, Mr. Speaker. They had 

a convention last summer and at that convention they approved a platform. Of course, they did not really 

need to pass that platform. I have in my hand here the platform they passed at their last convention in 

1931 and they could have used this platform. It is perfectly new. It has never been used. It is just as good 

as the day they passed it. They did not need a new one, but they thought they had better have a new one: 

“We’ve got a new leader; better get a new platform.” Of course 50 per cent of that platform is made up 

by saying how terrible the CCF Government is and the other 50 per cent says in how many instances 

they are prepared to go to Ottawa to ask Ottawa to do the things that Ottawa had been refusing to do 

during the last 11 years. Now, I had expected, having here on my desk this nice new Liberal platform 

passed in Saskatoon this past summer, that we would have had an exposition of the new program, but 

the Opposition Leader in this House spoke for two hours, yesterday, and never once mentioned the new 

Liberal platform. Of course, I can understand why: his party has always looked upon a political platform 

in the same way that people look on a railway platform — as something to get in on and get away from 

as quickly as you can. He forgot all about the ’31 platform when he was elected to office. He is prepared 

to forget about this one even before there is any chance of being elected to office because political 

platforms do not matter. They hope that they can win public support simply by carrying on a constant 

program of negative and destructive criticism. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I do not think that people will be very much impressed by merely a negative 

approach to these questions. 

  



February 5, 1947 

76 

That is why I propose to spend no more time dealing with these statements made by my hon. friend. I 

propose rather to turn to the economic picture in this province, to what the Government has done and 

what the Government proposes to do in the time that is still allotted to us before we go to the people to 

receive their decision at the polls. 

 

The first thing I want to discuss is the overall economic picture as it affects the Province of 

Saskatchewan. I have noticed a number of speeches which Mr. Tucker has made in various parts of the 

province — and I may say how sorry I am that Mr. Tucker is not here so that I might direct these 

remarks to him — but it is certainly not my fault, nor the Government’s fault, that he is not here. Mr. 

Tucker, as reported in the Leader-Post of November 26, 1946, said there had been a decline in the first 

year of the CCF administration in metallic minerals, coal, clay and clay products, saw-timber, railway 

ties, fuel wood, fish and furs. “In Saskatchewan’s main industry, agriculture, production was down in 

dairy products and in hogs.” 

 

Now, the Member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Howell) the other day expressed some surprise that Mr. 

Tucker should, when speaking in Saskatoon, have so decried conditions in Meadow Lake, because the 

Member for Meadow Lake thought conditions in his constituency were fairly good, but I can tell him 

that the Leader of the Liberal Party in this province does not hesitate at all about decrying and 

demeaning conditions in his own province, even though it may give his province a black eye in other 

parts of Canada, if he thinks to gain some political advantage thereby. As a matter of fact, one of the 

strangest things I have found is that when the Provincial Treasurer and myself went down to New York, 

last year, for the purpose of refunding some of the provincial debt at a lower rate of interest, we were 

confronted with a copy of Barron’s Weekly, a financial paper put out in the city of New York and in it 

was an article by a gentleman who wrote for the Regina Leader-Post. Here was an article which would 

have been laughed at had it been printed in Saskatchewan, an article which stated that this foolish 

Government had so little sense that it was helping to finance a horse processing plant, when everybody 

knows that nobody eats horsemeat here in Canada or in the United States. To these gentlemen in New 

York that seems a very plausible argument and they said: “Now, what are you doing? What are you 

wasting your money like this for?” When we explained the situation, explained the surplus of horses, 

explained the position the ranchers were in, explained that there were orders from countries in Europe 

and from UNRRA that would take horsemeat for many years to come, of course, they saw the picture in 

an entirely different light. What I want to draw to the attention of the House is this: the Liberal Party 

headed by Mr. Tucker, has never hesitated either to demean or decry their own province in the eyes of 

the rest of the world, if they thought it would bring them some political advantage. 

 

The position Mr. Tucker takes is that production is declining in Saskatchewan and, therefore, the 

Provincial Government is to blame. That is not a logical position. I am not going to say that when 

production goes up the Provincial Government should get the credit and that when production goes 

down the Provincial Government should accept the responsibility. There are too many factors involved 

in production: there is weather, for example; we have no control over freight rates, over marketing, over 

trade agreements, over tariffs, over foreign exchange. These are all factors which are not controlled 

  



February 5, 1947 

77 

 

by the Provincial Government and yet which can vitally affect production. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am 

not going to ask that the Saskatchewan Government get credit, certainly not all the credit, for any 

increase in production, but looking at it in Mr. Tucker’s own logic — and I think it is false logic — but 

taking it on his own terms if we are going to be blamed when production goes down then we ought to 

get credit when production goes up. 

 

Let us look at the overall economic picture of this province in the light of Mr. Tucker’s statement, which 

I just read. If we take the volume of business, as indicated by the cheques which passed through the 

bank — which is generally taken as a fairly good criterion, 80 per cent of our business being transacted 

by cheque — we find that in the 12-month period ending June, 1945, as compared with the previous 

year, there was a 6 per cent increase in business on the Prairies, that there was a 9 per cent increase in 

the Dominion of Canada and in the Province of Saskatchewan there was a 15 per cent increase. If we 

take the 12-month period ending June, 1946, we find while business in the entire prairie region had 

dropped, Saskatchewan, was still 10 per cent above June, 1944. Or, if we take as a criterion, the number 

of able-bodies persons employed in occupations other than agriculture, we find that in June, 1946 — two 

years after this Government came into office — in the Dominion of Canada there had been a fall in 

employment of 6 per cent, that there had been an increase on the Prairies of 6 per cent and that there had 

been an increase in Saskatchewan of 8 per cent. While the average for Canada went down some 6 per 

cent, the average for Saskatchewan had gone up 8 percent. If we take the latest available figures, which 

are November, 1946, compared to November, 1944, we find that employment in Canada went down in 

those two years 1 per cent; there was during the same time an increase in the Prairies generally of 10 per 

cent and an increase in Saskatchewan of 13 per cent. If we take the hog production in the field of 

agriculture — and agriculture we all know constitutes 80 per cent of our provincial income — and if we 

compare that last year in which the Liberal Party was in office with the two years that the present 

Government has been in office, this is what we find: 

 

June ending, 1943 — $254,000,000; June ending 1944 — $426,000,000 — not giving the odd hundred 

thousand, just giving the round figures — or an increase of 68 per cent over the previous year. In 1945 

— $496, 000,000, an increase of 95 per cent, and in 1946 — $364,000,000, an increase of 43 per cent. If 

we take land values — which are often considered as a fair criterion of prosperity, we find that the 

average value of land per acre in the Province of Saskatchewan, in 1941, was $14; in 1942, $15; in 

1943, $15; in 1944, $17; in 1945, $18; and this last year, 1946, $19. Worked out in index figures it 

means that a piece of land which, in 1941, was worth $73.68 would in 1946 be worth $100. 

 

Now turn to the production of minerals. In the first 12 months ending April 1945, immediately after the 

War when less minerals were being used for the manufacture of war materials and there was a decline of 

12 per cent, but in the 12 months ending April, 1946, there was an increase of 2 per cent over the 

previous. In coal production, the 12 months ending June, 1945, showed a 19 per cent increase and in the 

12 months ending June, 1946, there was a 1 per cent drop but production still continued above the June, 

1944, figure. I have the figures here in my 

  



February 5, 1947 

78 

hand if anyone is interested. In clay production, the 12 months ending April, 1945, showed a decrease; 

but in the 12 months ending April, 1946, production was actually doubled — and again I have the 

amounts; and the decrease in 1945 was 31 per cent, but in the last year, the increase was 95 per cent over 

the 12-month period ending April, 1944. Now take the production of natural gas. The first year this 

Government was in office there was an increase of 7 per cent; the second year an increase of 36 per cent, 

and again I have here the number of million cubic feet for each of the years 1944, 1945 and 1946. Now 

we come to crude oil. We have been told that crude oil has decreased. As a matter of fact before this 

Government came to power there was no production of crude oil in this province other than some 331 

barrels which had been produced on an experimental basis. In 1946, there was produced in the Province 

of Saskatchewan, 57,000 barrels of crude oil, making a total since this Government came into office of 

100,000 barrels of crude oil that have been produced. Now as I say, to be perfectly fair, Mr. Speaker, I 

am not trying to claim the credit for the Government of Saskatchewan because of these increases. There 

are too many factors which the Provincial Government cannot control; but when the Leader of the 

Liberal Party goes on the hustings and into the Press and tells people that this province is going to the 

dogs, well, according to the figures I have just quoted, the dogs are going to have a long time to wait. 

This province is not only a long way from ‘blue ruin,’ but this province has made very substantial 

economic progress under the leadership of this administration. 

 

I should like now, Mr. Speaker, to say something about the whole question of industrial development. 

Everyone, of course, is familiar with the argument, which most of us have heard here in this province for 

a quarter of a century, that what Saskatchewan needs and what the Prairies need, is more industry. 

Unfortunately, as Mark Twain said about the weather: “Everybody has talked about it, but nobody has 

done anything about it.” This Government was elected because we believed that something could be 

done about it and we have devoted a good deal of our time and a good deal of thought and energy to the 

question of industrial development for our province, because, when we came into office the figures 

showed that less than 2 per cent of the people employed in this province were employed in industrial 

enterprise and that less than 5 per cent of our provincial income came from industrial production. 

Therefore, there was a tremendous need for industrial development in the province insofar as that was 

economically and technically feasible. 

 

We recognized that there are three kinds of economic development: that sponsored by the Government 

itself, whether it is provincial, federal, or municipal; that which is sponsored by groups of people 

forming themselves into co-operatives and, finally, industry which is financed by individuals on a free 

enterprise basis in the hope of getting some financial return for the money which they invested. These 

three have a place. I propose to deal with them one by one. 

 

First of all there is the government-owned and government-sponsored industry. We believe, as a 

government and as a party, that there are fields in which development controlled by the people through 

their elected representatives is better than leaving industry in the hands of a small group of capitalists 

having profit as their only motive and incentive. Now, the Leader of the Opposition said, yesterday: 

“But there is no 

  



February 5, 1947 

79 

 

control by the people,” that “these industries that have been started by the Government of Saskatchewan, 

with the exception of the insurance company, were not started by Acts of the Legislature.” 

 

May I point out to you, Mr. Speaker, first of all that we are not the only Government which has 

government-owned and operated industries. The Government at Ottawa, during the War, had well over a 

hundred Crown companies. We are told now by Mr. Howe that there are 13 firms and Crown companies 

which are set up. The Government of Great Britain, under a Conservative administration and now more 

so under a Labour administration, are setting up Crown companies and the procedure which they follow 

is identical with the procedure which we are following here and which we propose to follow. It is wrong 

to say that there is no control. The money which is voted to set up these enterprises must be voted by 

this Legislature. The Act provides that 15 days after this House meets, the financial statements and the 

reports of the industries must be laid on the table; a Crown Corporations Committee is set up and that 

Committee is empowered to send for documents and for witnesses and to question them under oath and 

to make a thorough investigation into the financial position and the financial structure of these Crown 

companies. Members here have every control that they have anywhere else where Crown companies are 

managed by a government. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, yesterday, said something about the fact that when the Government goes 

into business people should have the right to sue it and obtain redress. As I pointed out to him, across the 

floor of the House, in the Crown Corporations Act it is stated that when the Government is in business 

any of these Crown companies has the right both to sue and to be sued. That right is there. My friend is 

talking about giving the people a right which they have had now for over two years. 

 

We believe there is a place for government in industry and particularly is there a place in a province like 

this, where private enterprise has failed lamentably of its own volition to develop the necessary 

industries for our province. 

 

I was very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to find that we had a convert in this regard. I noticed a speech which 

was made by the Right Hon. J. G. Gardiner, at Vancouver, January 13, 1947. This is what Mr. Gardiner 

is reported to have said: 

 

Developments from Vancouver to Winnipeg had to come and if the industrialists will not do it, the 

people will take over and see that it is done. 

 

Well, this is one convert we have waited for for a long time, but it was worth waiting, Mr. Speaker, and 

here he is at last. Mr. Gardiner said that often in the past, large industries bought up smaller localized 

industries and closed them up to provide selling fields for their own products, instead of opening up and 

developing new territory and new enterprise. 

 

Mr. Gardiner is quite right. We have all seen evidence of that. Then Mr. Gardiner says there is no use 

talking of private enterprise operating industry if it continues to carry on as it has in the past. He said, 

bluntly, that we need some sensible people in industry. 

  



February 5, 1947 

80 

Now I know, of course, that when he said that he had in mind the Saskatchewan Government and I am 

very glad that, after seeing the Saskatchewan Government in industry for two and a half years, Mr. 

Gardiner is now going up and down the length and breadth of the land acting as a spokesman and a 

champion of what we are seeking to do here in his home province. 

 

Now the kind of industry into which a Provincial Government should go can be divided into four kinds, 

that is: First, there are those industries for the processing and marketing of primary products. We already 

have, in this province, set up by the people themselves, their Wheat Pool and Livestock Pool and the 

Daily Pool, for the purpose of marketing their own products. We have simply carried that type of 

business one step further by the setting-up of the Timber Board and the Fish Board, the Fur Marketing 

Service and the processing of sodium sulphate. We are simply making it possible for the producer to 

help to process, or to market, his own primary product and to remove, insofar as it is possible, some of 

the intermediaries who have taken out a good bit of the cream when it was passing through their hands. 

 

I noticed in one of his speeches that Mr. Tucker said: “Why is everybody leaving the province? Even the 

fur-bearing animals are leaving Saskatchewan.” Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out that the only 

people who are leaving Saskatchewan are those who are trying to skin the non-fur-bearing animals. 

 

Now there is a good reason for going into industries that market and process primary products, because 

we all know that when you leave the processing of primary products entirely to private enterprise, there 

are two dangers: first, that they will not follow proper conservation methods. As the Reconstruction 

Council set up by my hon. friends said in their report, at the rate at which it is being wantonly destroyed, 

we have left only ten years’ timber in Saskatchewan. There is that great danger on the one hand. The 

other danger is that which Mr. Gardiner refers to: that certain corporations will deliberately prevent the 

development of our natural resources because of economic interests which they have elsewhere. That is 

the picture all across Canada, Mr. Speaker. We have not developed industry in Canada for the benefit of 

the people, nor have we developed natural resources where they are to be found. We need only one 

illustration: all over the world, coal is the basis of industrial development and industry moves to the 

coal; but not in Canada. In Canada, for years, the Federal Government has paid a subsidy to bring coal 

from Western Canada and coal from the Maritimes to the two Central provinces in order that industry 

might continue to be centralized in those two provinces and Western Canada and the Maritimes continue 

to remain undeveloped and exploited as they have been for the last half a century. So this Government 

believes that there is a place for government development of industry that will process and market our 

primary products. 

 

Then there is also a place for the Government in public utilities which are to provide public service. We 

have them in the Federal Government, which operates the Canadian national Railways, the TCA, the 

CBC and so on; and we have had them in this province, where for years the Government has owned and 

operated the telephone system and the Power Commission — except that it is to be noted that the present 

Government has greatly expanded the Power Commission. We have now purchased three private 

companies — there is only one private company left in 

  



February 5, 1947 

81 

 

the province — and the three private companies which have been purchased are being welded into a 

uniform provincial electric power system. 

 

While I am talking about the Power Commission, may I just refer to a statement made by my friend, the 

Leader of the Opposition, yesterday. He took exception to the statement in the Speech from the Throne 

which says that this last year was the first year in which the Power Commission had shown a profit and 

he went back and quoted the fact that there had been, in some previous years, operation profits. Now I 

do not need to draw this to the attention of my hon. friend. He was a Provincial Treasurer as well as 

Premier for a good many years and he knows the financial position of the Power Commission as well as 

anybody in this House. I do not know what his reason was; but the facts are these — and every Member 

I am sure knows them — there have been operating profits from the Commission, for instance, in the 

year 1943 there was an operating profit of $22,000 but there was an accumulated deficit of $263,000 

which wiped out the profit. In 1944, there was an operating profit of $32,000 but an accumulated deficit 

of $231,000. In 1945, there was an operating profit of $156,000 but there was an accumulated deficit of 

$74,000 and this last year there was an operating profit of $414,000 which, subtracting the accumulated 

deficit of $74,000 from the previous year, left for the first time the clear net profit of $339,000 for the 

Power Commission. 

 

So I say that the question of the Government going into the ownership of public utilities to serve the 

general public is not new. It has been established in Telephones and in the Power Commission, although 

as I say, we have extended very greatly the Power Commission. What the present Government has done 

is to extend that principle; to extend it to transportation by having now a Government Bus 

Transportation system operating on the highways; by having a provincially-owned insurance company 

carrying on insurance in every field except life insurance; by having a government-owned printing plant 

and by having a Reconstruction Corporation for the purpose of buying surplus war material and making 

that material available to the government or to municipalities or to any other public bodies that require 

it. I should point out, however, that the printing plant operates to serve the Government’s own needs and 

is not endangering any commercial enterprise. 

 

The third class of government business is the production of consumer’s goods. I remember well — as I 

am sure most Members will — how we were told, two years ago, that it was impossible to produce wool 

in Saskatchewan; that we had not the right kind of wool, that there was not the right kind of water. But 

we are producing woollen goods. They said we could not produce leather, could not tan Saskatchewan 

leather, that it was not the right kind and that we could not make shoes; we are making shoes and 

making good shoes. 

 

In this field we developed the woollen mill, the shoe factory, the tannery, the brick and ceramics 

products, all of which enable us to convert our primary commodities, such as the calf hides and cow 

hides, the wool from our sheep and the clay from our land and produce commodities which can be sold 

either to our own people or to markets anywhere in Canada or in the world. 

 

In the final class of government business is that kind of business which is set up purely to provide some 

social service 

  



February 5, 1947 

82 

and I refer here to two kinds, the two which we have set up: the first is the Housing Corporation. Now 

the Housing Corporation was never set up with the idea of making any money. As a matter of fact, it has 

not made any money; it has probably lost some money, because it was set up to take over surplus 

buildings at airports and army buildings and convert them into apartments mainly for returning veterans. 

In the case of the buildings at Saskatoon, where the veterans going to university are housed, we have a 

deficit for the very simple reason that we are providing not only homes but meals for veterans who have 

a very limited allowance and unless they got that assistance from the Provincial Government there are 

many who would not be able to go to the university at all. As the Member for Meadow Lake pointed out 

the other day, we set up the Government Fish Filleting plants, again, not with the idea of making money 

but because an industry was threatened. It was a matter of either establishing these plants or of obeying 

the Federal Government’s regulations to close all “B” lakes. If we closed all these “B” lakes — and 

there were all too many of them — there would be no whitefish caught in those lakes, they could not be 

marketed and the fishermen would be without a means of livelihood. The only alternative was to set up 

fish filleting plants that would enable us to fillet those fish, to take out those that were infected with 

parasites in order to be able to say to those who bought our fish that these fish had been individually 

examined, that we can vouch for them and that they are Grade A fish. In that way we were able to 

salvage something out of a very serious commercial situation. We have spent some money in doing that 

job, purely as a social service and we make no apology. We think it is better to put some money into 

helping returned veterans and put some money into salvaging what might have become a bankrupt 

industry, than to put people on relief and spend money for which we would get nothing back. 

 

These then are the different tracks upon which government industrial development has come. Now, in 

giving to the House the picture of our industrial development program, there are one or two things which 

I want to say quite frankly. I am not going to try to give this House a sense of false optimism. Starting 

new industry by a government or by anyone else means facing up to some very serious problems. We 

had a number of problems. We faced the problems of having to train practically all of our employees. 

There are few, if any, people in Saskatchewan who had made blankets, or who had made shoes or were 

familiar with making pottery. We had to bring a small group in, in some cases only two or three, who 

then proceeded to train our own workers. In the shoe factory, there were mostly returned men. We found 

that in the early stages, the amount of leather spoiled would be considerable, that the rate of production 

was very slow, but I do want to say it is to the everlasting credit of the type of citizens we have in these 

prairies, that in a remarkably short time they brought the rate of production up to the place where it 

compared very favorably with factories in other parts of Canada. But we had to face that problem and 

we had to go through that experience. We had to train the technical staff, had to train management 

because we lack trained staff at the outset. We started work on these industries at a time when it was 

very difficult to obtain equipment and when there was the greatest shortage of machinery. Some 

equipment had to be brought from a considerable distance; some required a great deal of waiting. My 

friend, yesterday, said: “Where is the pulp mill?” If my friend can tell us where to find the equipment for 

a pulp mill, at a reasonable price, we would soon be interested in a pulp 

  



February 5, 1947 

83 

 

mill; but you just can’t send to Eaton’s Mail Order house and order one pulp mill. That kind of 

equipment is very difficult to get. We have been fighting against shortages not only of equipment but 

shortages of supplies. 

 

Before dealing with the overall financial picture, I want to remind you of one other thing: that very few 

private businesses in the first two or three years of their operation expect immediately to go into the 

making of large profits. Many of them expect to run for two or three years and not make any profits at 

all; and when we give the House a financial picture, I am asking the House to keep one or two things in 

mind: to keep in mind, for instance, that at the end of our fiscal year, last March, many of the companies 

that I shall list had been set up and had considerable investments, but had not yet turned a wheel, or if 

they had begun to operate, had not yet sold their goods. 

 

Last March, for instance, we had spent some money in the acquiring of buses, but the buses did not 

begin to operate on the highways until June. At the present time we have spent considerable money on 

the sodium sulphate plant in draining, in brine and in preparing reservoirs; but it will be, probably, 

nearly a year before that brine will be ready for market. The Timber Board buys quantities of timber but 

that timber has to be piled, it has to be sun dried and it will probably be a year later before revenue starts 

to come back in. I am not saying these things to make any apology in talking about Government 

industry. I am saying these things because I am asking the House to take a realistic and a frank view. 

 

Mr. G. H. Danielson (Arm River): — Letting us down easy? 

 

Mr. Douglas: — No, my friend, there is no one less uneasy than I. The only person who need be uneasy 

is the kind of person like my hon. friend, who sat two and one-half years ago and said it couldn’t be 

done and is now confronted with the fact that it has been done. 

 

Now I want to submit to the House, Mr. Speaker, with your permission, the report on the operation of 

the 13 industries and commercial enterprises set up by this administration and of the Saskatchewan 

Power Commission whose activities have been greatly extended since this Government took office, 

because as I pointed out before, the three private companies which have been bought, of course, had to 

be purchased out of government funds and are part of the whole industrial picture. The figures which I 

am going to give include the general operation of the Insurance Office, but do not include the 

Automobile Accident Insurance operation, as the surplus in this fund is considered to be ear-marked for 

use in automobile accident insurance only. For the year ending March 31, 1946 — and as I pointed out 

that is the period when a good many of these industries had been started but were not yet operating, or 

had not yet sold any of their products — the total operating profits for all of these, summed up in round 

figures, was $374,000 before setting up reserves for depreciation of plant and equipment. During the 

six-month period, April 1 to September 30, 1946, these same enterprises showed operating profits of 

$497,500 or nearly half a million dollars, before setting aside reserve for depreciation. 

 

The 13 enterprises started wholly by the present administration are: the wool products, the shoe factory, 

the tannery, 

  



February 5, 1947 

84 

clay products, box factory, Timber Board, Fish Board, Fur Marketing Service, Transportation Company, 

Reconstruction Corporation, Housing Corporation, Printing Company and the Insurance Office. Taking 

only these 13 and excluding the Power Commission, up to March 31, 1946, when most of these had 

been operating only a few months and in some cases not at all, they showed an operating profit of 

$19,500 before setting aside reserves for depreciation. During the six-month period, April 1 to 

September 30, 1946, the same 13 enterprises showed an operating profit of $282,000 before 

depreciation. Now it is very difficult to estimate depreciation accurately and it is generally taken at a 

highly arbitrary figure. In some of our industries where used machinery had to be purchased, the cost of 

operation and repair is high, but the actual depreciation in value is very low. In fact, in some cases, 

where many new parts had to be added, the equipment is more valuable now than it was before 

operation began. Nevertheless, on the books of these enterprises, we are generally charging the full rate 

of depreciation allowed private companies by the Income Tax Division of the Federal Government. On 

this basis, the depreciation in all these industries, including the Power Commission, for the year ending 

March 31, 1946, was $146,000 leaving a net profit after depreciation of $228,000. On the same basis the 

depreciation for the six-month period, April 1 to September 30, 1946, comes to nearly $168,000 leaving 

a net profit after depreciation of $329,500. 

 

Turning, again, to the 13 companies started wholly by this administration, excluding the Power 

Commission, the depreciation on the basis explained above for the period ending March 31.. 

 

Mr. Procter: — Would you be good enough to give us the breakdown of those figures between the 

different companies? 

 

Mr. Douglas: — I’ll come to that in a moment, if I may finish the statement I was making. 

 

Mr. Procter: — I am sorry, I thought you had reached a point where you could stop. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — Returning again to the 13 enterprises started wholly by this administration and 

excluding the Power Commission, the depreciation on the basis explained above for the period which 

ended March 31, comes to nearly $20,000, leaving a net loss of only about $500. During the six-month 

period, April 1 to September 30, 1946, the depreciation on the 13 companies, not including the Power 

Commission, comes to $92,000, leaving a net profit for the half-year after depreciation of $190,000. 

This, Mr. Speaker, represents a return of nearly 13 per cent per annum on the monies advanced by the 

Provincial Treasurer for setting up these enterprises. 

 

If all of the above is fairly considered, it cannot be denied that, during the first year of operation 

Saskatchewan Government industries have attained a truly remarkable record. We now find that many 

of our employees have acquired the necessary industrial technique. Our managers and superintendents 

are proving themselves capable. Supplies of materials and equipment are improving and we have every 

reason to hope that these industries will continue to operate with equal success in the 

  



February 5, 1947 

85 

 

future. 

 

Now my hon. friend, the Member for Moosomin asked if these can be broken down. These are being 

broken down and are being collated and will be tabled in the House. As the Hon. Member knows the 

financial statement for each company and the annual report of each company, will be tabled. I imagine 

that, under the Act, the above will only have to deal with the period ending March 31, but we will be 

quite willing to have the statements brought forward to September 30. 

 

Mr. Procter: — Mr. Speaker, the annual report will not be tabled for some days, judging by the rate the 

others are coming in. Now, the Hon. Premier must have the figures for each company in that total that he 

has given and it should be an easy matter if he would let us have a copy of the individual profit or deficit 

on each company. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, as I say, these reports are being prepared and will be tabled just as 

quickly as possible. If they can be tabled within the next two or three days, I will see that they are 

tabled; but, as the Hon. Member knows, it is within — I think — ten days under the Act that they must 

be tabled. I shall see that they are tabled just as quickly as possible in order that my hon. friend may 

have them. 

 

Mr. Procter: — The only thing I am afraid of, Mr. Speaker, is that this debate will be over by that time. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — My hon. friend will have the whole Session to debate it. He can debate it on the Crown 

Corporations Act; he can debate it on the Budget; he can debate it on almost anything else that he wants. 

My hon. friend is certainly privileged to debate it; but he can’t debate away 13 per cent return on money 

invested in the first year of operation of these companies. That will take some debating away. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have said something about the Government in business. Let me say just a word, 

also, about co-operative development. We believe that there are fields which properly belong in the line 

of co-operative endeavor and there has been set up a co-ordinating committee of our own Economic 

Advisory and Planning Board and the co-operatives interested in industrial development. That standing 

committee works very closely with both groups. Yesterday, the Leader of the Opposition was asking us: 

where is the glucose, where is the glycol, where is the industrial alcohol? My friend is in a very difficult 

position. At one time he is saying, “Why are you going into so many enterprises”? and another time he 

is saying, “Why aren’t you in more enterprises?” He finds himself in a very anomalous position. 

Yesterday, he was wondering where these different enterprises are and may I say to him that research is 

proceeding in these various fields. Some of them are definitely a proper field for the co-operatives and 

the co-operatives, as most Members know, have been carrying on considerable research in the field of 

chemurgy — that is the field of turning agricultural products into industrial products — and we have 

worked very closely with the co-operatives in order that we may not duplicate each other’s work and in 

order that each may carry on its work in the field for which it is best suited. We have, of 

  



February 5, 1947 

86 

course, been able to assist the co-operatives in some of their work such as the horse processing plant at 

Swift Current and in the co-operative implements organization which has been set up. Then, too, as Hon. 

Members know there will be introduced at this Session, The Co-operative Guarantee Act, which is 

designed to assist co-operative societies by making advances to them for purposes of this sort. 

 

I want to say just a word about private enterprise. We have been told that we have been driving private 

enterprise out of the province. I do not suppose a speech is ever made by a Liberal speaker in the 

province anywhere, but that he assures the audience that private enterprise is being driven out. Well, that 

is not the information one gets from looking at the corporations who have come into Saskatchewan. We 

find that from July 1, 1944, to January 27, 1947 — that is just a few days ago — there had come into 

Saskatchewan 335 provincial companies, with a total capitalization of $34,409,000; that there had come 

into the province 65 extra provincial companies with a capitalization of over $70,000; that there has 

been formed in the province, since we took office, 1,307 partnerships. That does not look as though all 

the corporations have immediately taken wing under this administration. 

 

Now, as has already been mentioned, a salt plant is to be established in this province by the Prairie Salt 

Company. My hon. friend, yesterday, wanted to know why the Government did not go into that. Well, 

the Government did not go into it for a very good and simple reason. You know, Mr. Speaker, the night 

on which we took office, I got a telegram from a friend of mine and all it said on it was: “If ye canna see 

the bottom, dinna wade far oot!” Well, only my Scotch friends will probably know exactly what that 

means, but it is very good advice. In this particular case, we could not see the bottom: that the picture 

was such — that there were various deposits of salt in other parts of the Prairies, but we would have to 

have distributive wholesale and retail facilities to dispose of the salts. Here was a field in which private 

enterprise could properly operate. On the other hand, in the case of sodium sulphate, we have in 

Saskatchewan a virtual monopoly of the mineral. Ours are probably the only deposits on the North 

American continent, except for Georgia. The product does not have to be sold through retail and 

wholesale channels; it can be sold directly to the great industries such as those which refine nickel and 

those who use it for pulp and paper, so that here we had a virtual monopoly; here we had a ready market 

to which our product could be sold in quantity and it was, therefore, a very logical field for the 

Government to enter and develop one of its own natural resources. But wherever there has been a logical 

field for private enterprise, we have sought to encourage private enterprise and at this Session we will 

encourage it even further. We propose to introduce legislation to set up an Industrial Development Fund 

by which money may be advanced to individuals or corporations who want to bring a new kind of 

business or industry into Saskatchewan that will fit into our provincial economy. There isn’t any reason 

why, with a Fur Marketing Service in the province, we could not make fur coats, that we could not be 

making gloves and baggage out of our leather. A great many other industries could be added to the small 

beginning which we have already made and if, by any financial assistance, it is possible to encourage 

private industry to come in where private industry legitimately may operate, then we are prepared to 

give that assistance and will do so under this 

  



February 5, 1947 

87 

 

legislation. That is all I propose to say about industrial development. 

 

I want now to say just a word or two about the two insurance schemes that were set up at the last Session 

of this Legislature. The first was under The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. I remember, last year, 

when the legislation was going through the House, the tremendous howl that was induced in the Press 

and the many complaints that came from some of the insurance companies. I am very much pleased to 

see now that one of the newspapers — the one in the city of Regina — that did quite a bit of 

complaining about the Automobile Accident Insurance Plan, last spring, now says that it is a pretty fine 

piece of legislation if we just won’t go any further. It is all right, they say, just don’t go any further! But 

last spring it was no good at all. Well, I think that the people of this province are generally very satisfied 

with that plan. We can yet make no very accurate estimate of what will be left in that fund at the end of 

the year. It has been estimated at something around probably $700,000, maybe more, maybe less, 

nobody knows how many accidents there will be before the end of March. Yesterday, the Leader of the 

Opposition said that that money represents too much in taxes taken out of the people’s pockets. Mr. 

Speaker, it represents money which will continue to provide benefits for the people and had it been 

taken out of the people’s pockets by insurance companies, it would never come back at all in benefits or 

in any other way to the people of Saskatchewan. Now what this Legislature has to decide is whether or 

not we should use the surplus, or the balance left in the fund, either to reduce the rates or to enlarge the 

benefits. Personally, I have an open mind on the subject. Wherever I have gone, I have talked to farmers, 

to business men, to workers and to professional men and wherever I went I said: “What would you do? 

What is your opinion?” I found, almost invariably, I think with about one single exception, it was said to 

me, “By all means let us increase the benefits.” That is what we will be recommending to this 

Legislature. 

 

Then I want to say a word about the other insurance plan which was introduced at the last Session, that 

is, the Hospital Services Plan. This Hospital Services Plan has entailed a tremendous amount of work 

and has and will, of course, give us some administrative problems. 

 

I notice that two or three criticisms are being made about the Hospital Services Plan. One is that the 

hospitals are all crowded and that we are responsible for crowding the hospitals. Now the person who 

complains about crowding the hospitals is assuming one of two things. The first is there are a lot of 

people going to the hospital who don’t need to go. Well, I don’t believe that, because that is a serious 

reflection on the doctors of this province, as no person can go into a hospital before, who should have 

been getting to hospital, but who could not afford to pay the bill. Now, if we are going to screen people 

out of the hospitals, let us screen them on the basis of need rather than on the basis of financial resources 

and ability to pay. 

 

The other criticism we are getting is that we could do this a lot more cheaply. Mr. Tucker said, why, we 

could do this for $3 per head per year! Well, if Mr. Tucker were here I would like to ask him this 

question: is he suggesting that we are paying the hospitals too much? If we paid a collective $3 per 

person 

  



February 5, 1947 

88 

per year, we would be paying the hospitals, this year, half of what it cost them to run the hospitals in 

Saskatchewan last year. My friend had better settle that with the hospitals. If he thinks we are paying the 

hospitals twice too much. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — He’ll need one. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — There is no group of people who are more careful about their expenditures, who work 

harder to make their hospital budgets meet than the hospital boards; if my friend can get the hospitals to 

take care of all the people who need to be looked after in this province for half the money, well, he will 

have a great deal of persuading to do as far as the hospital administrators are concerned. 

 

There has been some criticism that the payment is a flat $5 per person, $30 maximum per family and 

that it ought to be graded according to ability to pay. Well I agree with that, of course, that is a 

legitimate criticism. I said, when I introduced the legislation at the last Session, that this is what the 

Government would prefer. We would prefer a graduated scheme; but at the Dominion-Provincial 

Conference, the Federal Government set down as its policy, that if they were ever going to come into a 

national health insurance scheme, any province that wanted to participate in that scheme would have to 

do two things, first, register every person 16 years of age and over, and secondly, collect a flat amount 

per person. It was because we wanted to fit our scheme into a possible national health insurance scheme 

that we passed the legislation that we did. If the Federal Government finally comes to the conclusion 

that it will never come into a health scheme, then, of course, I shall ask this Legislature for permission to 

change the basis of payment. Then the.. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Will the hospital grant of 50 cents a day be paid? 

 

Mr. Douglas: — The hospital grant of 50 cents per person per day will not be paid to the hospitals; the 

hospitals will get their full payment through the hospital scheme, but the 50 cents per patient per day, 

which amounts to something over half a million dollars, will be put in as a subsidy into the hospital fund 

by the Provincial Treasury. I am coming to that very point. 

 

Another criticism was the criticism of Mr. Paul Prince, Past President of the Liberal Association, who 

says, “Why, this hospital scheme is just a scheme for raising money!” Well, as a Scotsman, I certainly 

would not recommend it as a scheme for raising money. The total possible receipts, the maximum 

possible receipts would be $3,800,000 and we estimate the cost this year will be in the neighborhood of 

$6,000,000. So if any person wants to go into making money I would not suggest that they start a 

hospitalization scheme. I can imagine no better way to lose one or two million dollars per year. 

 

I would say this: my friends talk about crowding hospitals. As far as I know this is the only Government 

in Canada which has contributed any money at all to the construction of hospitals. This Legislature 

voted last year $200,000 and the year before $150,000, making a total of $350,000 which has been spent 

in the last two years in the construction of hospitals and we will be 

  



February 5, 1947 

89 

 

asking this Legislature for another grant this year. 

 

When we took office, the number of hospital beds in this province was 3.9 per thousand of the 

population. Today, there are 5 beds per thousand — an increase of 26 per cent. By the end of this year, 

on the basis of the grants we have already authorized, it will be 6.3 beds per thousand, which will be an 

increase since we took office of over 50 per cent in the number of hospital beds. So, if my hon. friends 

say that beds are scarce now, I would point out that beds are 25 per cent more plentiful than they were 

when they were in office. The only reason that the hospitals are crowded is because, for the first time, 

people who are sick no longer have the financial obstacles standing in their way to treatment and they 

are able to go to hospital and be cared for. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is just one other matter I want to deal with before I sit down. The Leader of the 

Opposition talked, yesterday, about political promises, not his political promises, not his political 

program, but about ours. Now, political programs are something that we don’t just pass at a convention 

and then forget about. Political programs are something which we keep very close to us — I have one 

here which I usually carry in my wallet or keep on my desk — because we regard our provincial 

program, passed by the thousands of people that we represent who in constituency and in provincial 

conventions, lay down the policies which we are here to carry out as a highly important matter. This is 

their platform. This is the program which we were elected to implement in 1944 and I make no apology 

to anyone for the extent to which we have been able to carry out the mandate which was given to us two 

and a half years ago. What does it say? There are nine planks and I shall deal with them very briefly. 

 

It says first: “That a CCF Government in Saskatchewan will give you security in your home.” I point 

here, first, to The Farm Security Act, passed by this administration guaranteeing the home-quarter, 

providing the crop failure clause, the amendments to The Exemptions Act, giving exemption to 

sufficient farm produce to enable a man to look after his family, and I refer to the work of the Provincial 

Mediation Board. I have the Board’s reports for both 1944-45 and 1945-46 and I am pleased to be able 

to say that in these two years there has not been a single resident farmer in the Province of 

Saskatchewan who has appealed to the Mediation Board for protection, who has lost either his home or 

his farm. In the year 1945 there were 101 orders permitted by the Board with the consent of the parties 

concerned in order to clear up estates or accounts but not a single foreclosure granted without the 

consent of the parties concerned. In 1946 there were three orders made without consent, but all of the 

debtors were outside of the province, all of them no longer were living on the land and none were 

making an attempt to meet his obligations; 48 were granted, but with consent in order to clear up estates 

or accounts and in those two years not a single debtor, who asked for protection and was living on a 

Saskatchewan farm, has been denied the protection of the Act by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to remind my friends in the official Opposition that this has been done in spite of the fact that 

they have voted against every piece of farm security legislation we have put on the statute book and that 

this protection has been given to the 

  



February 5, 1947 

90 

farmers in spite of the fact that the Federal Government has done everything possible to obstruct us. 

First of all, they talked about disallowing our legislation, but there was such a public outcry they had to 

drop that like a hot potato. Now they are taking the crop failure clause to the courts. Why? They came to 

us about a year ago and said: “Now, if you make that crop failure clause inapplicable to veterans 

acquiring land under The Veterans’ Land Act, we will forget about the whole thing.” Two men farming 

side by side, one a veteran and one a non-veteran; we say to the man who is a non-veteran; “Under The 

Farm Security Act you don’t pay an amount equal to the interest in a year when there is no crop.” We 

say to the other man: “By virtue of the fact that you have served your country overseas and risked your 

life and limb in defence of democracy, you will have the privilege of paying your full interest with no 

reduction this year.” For this farm security legislation on the statute books of Saskatchewan, there is no 

thanks due to the Liberal Party, either provincially or federally, because they have done everything 

possible to have it taken off. 

 

Next: “The CCF Government will give you real debt reduction.” The only figures I have been able to 

obtain are the figures from 30 of the leading lending companies through the Dominion Mortgage 

Association and I could not get the figures for 1946, but in 1945, these lending companies had reduced 

their mortgage indebtedness, in Manitoba by $2,400,000; in Alberta by $3,800,000, and in 

Saskatchewan by $10,900,000. In addition to that the Government itself — as most of the Members 

know — has cancelled $30,000,000 of seed grain indebtedness, as well as some million dollars of relief 

indebtedness. 

 

“Increased Old Age Pensions”: I am very quick to say, Mr. Speaker, that we are not satisfied with the 

Old Age Pension being paid in this province or anywhere else. We still have a long way to go before we 

are paying the old people of this province or of Canada what they need, or what they deserve; but we 

have made a substantial start. In 1943, the average Old Age Pension paid in this province was $17.53; 

last year the average Old Age Pension paid in this province was $27.55 — $10 per month more, and you 

can add to that about $3 per month for the health services which we are giving, to bring this up in the 

neighborhood of $30 per person per month. In addition . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You gave 1943. What was the figure for 1944? 

 

Mr. Douglas: — In 1944? We were in office six months of 1944. Do they want credit for what we do 

too? 

 

In addition to increasing the Old Age Pension, the exemption has been increased and also, Mr. Speaker, 

this Government has discontinued the practice of placing caveats against old age pensioners’ property up 

to $2,000. 

 

“Medical: The CCF Government in Saskatchewan will give medical and hospital services irrespective of 

the ability of the individual to pay.” That does not say ‘free’, as some of my friends have been trying to 

tell the public. We have, as a matter of fact, of course, given free services as my friends will find, for 

cancer. Of course, I know that they have been going around, saying to people, “Why we started the 

cancer program!” Let us look at the figures. The amount of money which has been 

  



February 5, 1947 

91 

 

actually spent by the Cancer Commission up to July 10, 1944 — that is the day we took office — for 

hospitalization of cancer patients: nothing; the amount spent for surgery performed on cancer patients 

and paid for by the Cancer Commission, nothing; the amount spent on hospitalization of cancer patients 

from July 10, 1944, to December 31, 1946 — $334,000; the amount spent on surgery performed on 

cancer patients and paid for by the Cancer Commission for the same period of time — $88,541. 

 

We are providing free care for cancer patients; free care for those who are mentally ill; free care for 

those who are treated for venereal disease at our clinics and free penicillin for treating them; we are 

providing two-thirds of the cost of public health services in four regions and will be in two other regions 

and we are making a very substantial contribution to the Hospital Services Plan which, as I pointed out, 

will not be entirely financed and cannot be entirely financed on the $5 which is being collected from the 

citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

Then No. 5 was: “The CCF Government of Saskatchewan will give equal educational opportunities to 

every child in the province.” Again, I point to the equalization grants which have been paid by this 

Government. I point to the authorized text books which were given to children in grades one to eight; I 

point to the scholarship grants which have been paid to enable students to go on to university. Again, I 

am the first to say that we have not, by any means, managed to do all that needs to be done, but we have 

made a very substantial beginning towards providing a greater measure of educational opportunities for 

the children of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

No. 6 says: “The CCF Government will give increased mother’s allowance, maternity grants and care 

for the disabled.” I want to point out that in 1943 the average weekly allowance per mother paid in this 

province was $7 and that in 1946 the average weekly amount paid per mother was $15.68. In order to be 

perfectly fair, I should point out that in that figure there is included payment to 539 incapacitated 

fathers. The fact is that it is being paid, that is the most important part. That $15.68 now represents the 

average amount we pay to these people and in addition we are providing free health services, not only 

for these mothers, but for their dependents which is at least worth another $5 per month. 

 

Item No. 7 on this platform says: “The CCF Government will give freedom of speech and freedom of 

religion.” Well, I hardly need to elaborate on that. After the Leader of the Opposition talking yesterday, 

for two hours and myself talking, I suppose for two hours, speech still seems to be pretty free in this 

province; and if any of the Members have been to church lately — if not, I suggest that they might go — 

they will find that the churches are still doing business at the same old stands. I don’t think the people of 

Saskatchewan have forgotten those political broadcasts that Mr. W. F. Kerr used to indulge in, in which 

he said that the churches were going to be burned, that freedom of speech would disappear, that 

newspapers would be licensed and, worst of all, if the CCF Government ever got into power, there 

wouldn’t be any more elections. All of you can see the falsity of these wild and irresponsible statements. 

We have had three by-elections since that time and I can assure my hon. friends that there will be a 

provincial election and it will not be six years from the last. 

  



February 5, 1947 

92 

No. 8 on this platform was: “The right of collective bargaining for labor.” There is no need for me to 

elaborate on that. The Trade Union Act has resulted in a 60 per cent increase in trade union membership. 

The Annual Holidays Act, has been in operation long enough to be able to say that the only people who 

have taken any exception to it were the CPR on the one hand and the Federal Government’s own 

railway, the CNR, on the other. But otherwise the Act is operating very well and at this Session 

legislation is to be introduced regarding shorter hours of work in certain lines of business. The whole 

principle of collective bargaining for labor has been introduced, not only with respect to labor generally, 

but even with respect to those employees who are working for the Government and for the various 

Government corporations which had never before been done. 

 

The last plank, plank No. 9, simply says: “The CCF Government in Saskatchewan will give 

encouragement to the Co-operative movement.” I am sure there is no need for me to elaborate on that. 

We have set up the first Department of Co-operatives in Canada. We have working committees with the 

Co-operatives. We have given financial assistance to them when such financial assistance was needed 

and we are setting up, at this Session, machinery whereby financial credit can be advanced to 

co-operative societies in order to assist them in their expansion and their development. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when my hon. friend talks about the CCF always running to Ottawa, the CCF always 

making the excuse that Ottawa has not done something or other, there is the platform of the CCF and not 

in one single line of those entire nine items is the Federal Government mentioned. These things we have 

done and we have done them by ourselves and we have done them without Ottawa and in some cases we 

have done them in spite of Ottawa. 

 

And now just to impress upon my friend, let me recapitulate: l. A CCF Government in Saskatchewan 

will give you security in your homes. 2. Real debt reduction. 3. Increased Old Age Pensions. 4. Medical, 

dental and hospital services, irrespective of the individual’s ability to pay. 5. Equal educational 

opportunity for every child in the province. 6. Increased mothers’ allowances, maternity grants and care 

for the disabled. 7. Freedom of speech and freedom of religion. 8. Collective bargaining, and, 9. 

Encouragement to the co-operative movement. 

 

That nine-point program, Mr. Speaker, in conjunction with our promise of industrial development, 

constituted the mandate on which this Government was elected two and a half years ago. In view of the 

progress which we have made in that time, I would feel perfectly free at any time to go to the people of 

Saskatchewan, either for a vote of confidence or to ask that they give us a mandate to carry even further 

our program of setting up a co-operative commonwealth in the Province of Saskatchewan. But we were 

elected for a five-year term. We have gone to the polls three times since we were in office, therefore, 

there is no reason why we cannot spend the balance of our time rounding out the programs which I have 

outlined. But, if at any time, the Liberal Party feels that we ought to have a mandate before going 

further, we are quite prepared to submit our program to the people of this province, strong in the 

assurance that they will not only approve of what they have done, but that will give us an overwhelming 

mandate to continue to work for the welfare of this province. 

  



February 5, 1947 

93 

 

Mr. F. A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate, I would first like to 

extend my congratulations to the Hon. Member for Morse. I not only have the pleasure of having him as 

a seatmate, but also as a roommate, so I have the opportunity to know him fairly well. 

 

I find, Mr. Speaker, it is a little difficult, after listening to the speech by the Hon. Premier, to speak at 

any length as he has covered the subject very well. So I shall attempt to cut mine shorter. 

 

I also had the pleasure of taking part in the Morse by-election and I would like first to spend a few 

moments talking on some of the happenings in the Morse by-election. At a meeting held by our 

Opposition out there, on the night of the 26th, which was the night prior to the by-election in Morse, I 

had the privilege of being at a meeting in Central Butte, which was addressed by the Hon. Member for 

Arm River. I took very careful notes of his speech and I would like to proceed with your indulgence, Mr. 

Speaker, to give this House a few of the statements which he made at that meeting and if the Hon. 

Member still believes the statements he made at that time were true, he has every opportunity to make 

these statements again in this House where they can be challenged by the Minister concerned. He can 

make his statements and back them up here. Now, one of the statements he made was that, under the 

Liberal administration, prior to the CCF coming into office, Old Age Pensions on estates of $2,000 or 

under were free, that there was no charge back to the Old Age Pension recipient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not going to elaborate extensively on these statements, because I think the facts very 

eloquently speak for themselves. 

 

Another statement was that the mental hospitals, under the former administration, were 75 per cent free 

to all people requiring mental care and now they were only 95 per cent; and also that prior to June, 1944, 

cancer treatment was free. The Premier has referred to these so I think that covers that point pretty well. 

 

Another statement was that all arrears of taxes, relief, etc., were cancelled in 1937 by the Liberal 

Government up to and including January lst, 1935. Why January lst, I do not know. I imagine it would 

be cut off at December 31; but it was up to and including January l, 1935, and the present Government 

have not cancelled any or helped out the farmers in any way, shape or form, from that day or prior to 

January lst, 1935. 

 

Also, he was quoting from the Budget Speech of the Provincial Treasurer, of last year, and it was just 

about this time at his meeting that he noticed that I was at the back taking notes and he held up the 

Budget Speech and for my information he quietly told me that that was the Budget Speech of the 

Provincial Treasurer and he had no doubt in his mind that if I would ask the Provincial Treasurer for a 

copy, I would get one. But it so happened, Mr. Speaker, that I had three copies and I took my three 

copies and compared them and I found that all three were the same. In no place could I find the 

statement which he referred to, which was that, according to the Budget Speech, taxes in Saskatchewan 

had been increased by $142 per quarter section since this Government came into power. 

  



February 5, 1947 

94 

Another statement, Mr. Speaker, was that in the House, in the Session of one year ago, the Premier had 

stated that the Government had no idea of what they were going to do with the money for Crown 

corporations; it was entirely up to the Planning Board. Well, I think the Premier has given some 

explanation of what the Government’s ideas and program was of the Crown corporations and I think that 

pretty well answers itself. 

 

Now, the last one was a gem. He was charging the Premier of this province with running around the 

Morse constituency, speaking from public platforms, radio and elsewhere and deliberately 

misrepresenting the facts and deceiving the people. He said that in his opinion he felt that any Member 

of a responsible Government, who would take his place on a public platform and deliberately try to 

mislead the people or deceive them, was not fit to represent the public and should resign his seat. I 

wonder, Mr. Speaker, when we are going to have the by-election in Arm River? He referred to the 

statement that the Premier has made here, today, regarding no evictions. Mr. Speaker, I will grant the 

Hon. Member the privilege to refer to anything he likes in the Speech, but I do know that he will have 

somebody here to check him up, who has a better chance of continuing than I had at that meeting when I 

was shut off at the end of the third question by God Save the King. Now, Mr. Speaker, he referred to the 

statement the Premier had made in regard to evictions and he said that he could prove that the Premier 

was deliberately lying, that they were all falsehoods and that any time he consulted the Premier and 

asked him about these statements, he just sat there and hung his head and would not even answer. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, that would not only be a treat to me, but I think, to all the hon. gentlemen of this House, to 

see the Premier in his place, having to sit there and hang his head and could not answer the Hon. 

Member’s question! I asked him why he did not, the afternoon before, accept the Premier’s challenge at 

Halvorgate, where the Premier had challenged Mr. Culliton, or any of the other Liberal speakers on 

behalf of the Liberal Party, to meet him in public debate. If he felt that he could make the Premier take 

back his statement, that was the thing he should have done and I, also, without the Premier’s consent at 

that time, challenged the Hon. Member for Arm River to meet the Premier in public debate and the Hon. 

Member could name the day, the time, the place and the subject to be debated. I will now, on this 

occasion, once again extend that invitation to him, this time with the Premier’s consent. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that is pretty well enough for some of the statements that were given at that time. 

 

However, on my way home from the by-election I journeyed through the constituency of the Hon. 

Member for Kerrobert-Kindersley. I visited for a few days with some friends I used to know when I 

worked in that part of the province and it was very interesting to me. I stayed overnight with one fellow 

who is a good friend of mine, but unfortunately for me and fortunately for the Liberals, he is a supporter 

of theirs not ours, he said, “Well, it used to be that I had to spend my time defending the Government, 

but now it is all changed and I can spend the time criticizing them.” He said, “It looks like I’ll be able to 

criticize them for a good long time to come.” Last fall, Mr. Speaker, I happened to be visiting a friend 

and he was joshing me about our platform, policy and so on. He had in his possession a nice shorthorn 

bull which was given out in that locality by the Federal Department of Agriculture and 

  



February 5, 1947 

95 

 

after kidding me for some time he said to me: “Do you think your CCF Government could hand out as 

good a bull as that?” “Well,” I said, “I admit that when it comes to handing out the bull we don’t try to 

compete with the Liberals.” 

 

Now, I would like to touch, for a few moments, on some of the topics and the issues which affect the 

constituency which I have the honor to represent. We have, there, a larger unit for schools which I will 

give a few figures on. This unit was organized only last March — 1946 — with 95 schools in the unit. It 

had a total assessment of $9,132,647 rural, and $397,869 in the village. It gets an equalization grant of 

900 or $34,319. Some of the schools in this unit had a mill rate before of over 25 mills. It is true that 

they were not all that high, but there were some schools in the districts where there were quite a few 

children going to school that had a 25 mill rate and there were other places where the mill rate was down 

low where there were more little children attending school, and consequently, those who had a larger 

school to teach and should have had to hire teachers with more experience, had the least ability to pay 

them. Consequently, the teacher who had the heaviest school, generally was the teacher who had the 

least training, because the teacher who had the most training could more or less decide where he wanted 

to go. This unit, with only eight months of experience, has definitely improved the school situation in 

the Wadena Unit area. There were a considerable number of schools repaired and redecorated and fixed 

up, with some schools — I don’t know the exact number yet — built and more plans underway. The 

Saint Front School, which is only about six miles from my own home, has approximately 60 pupils or a 

little more at school. It is a two-room school. Each room is roughly, approximately 22 feet by 24 feet. So 

you can see, Mr. Speaker, that in that school there were 30 or more pupils in each room, 22 x 24, which 

did not give them a fair chance at all to get a decent education. The plaster was falling from the ceiling 

and kept dropping on their heads while studying. Over two years ago they applied to the Wartime Prices 

and Trade Board for a permit to build a new school and they have not been able to get one. 

 

Last spring, after the unit came in, they started work on a school at Saint Front, a four-room school. 

Unfortunately, they were not able to get the cement to go on with construction, but the excavating work 

for the basement and the gravel and that sort of material that could be got ahead of time, is on the scene 

ready for construction this coming spring. Now they have a carload of cement stored ready to start work 

in the spring. So I think that all things speak fairly highly for the larger unit system. Wadena Unit is one 

of the heavier populated units for children attending school. It has roughly 3,000 children attending 

school in that unit, which I think, the Members will agree, is one of the heavier units and it has not got 

the heaviest land for the best type of production or pay, so that I think we can expect that in a year or 

two we will see some great improvements in the Wadena Unit. 

 

Also, I would like to mention, for a moment, the highway situation in my own constituency. In the 

constituency of Wadena there is one highway running full length on the east side, but it isn’t all up to 

highway standard yet and there are two highways both crossing beside a little bit of No. 6 in the 

southwest corner. We have a total of 167 miles of highway in the Wadena provincial constituency. Now 

I won’t say that these are the exact figures, but they are the approximate figures as close 

  



February 5, 1947 

96 

as I could get from the Department here. Since July, 1944, there has been a little less than a quarter of 

the total of 167 miles, built or rebuilt, and 26 miles have been gravelled and the people of my 

constituency tell me that that is the most highway construction they have seen for a number of years, 

because it hasn’t been just in one year, it has been a little each year. There were 10 miles of No. 35 

re-graded and gravelled in 1944, between July l and December 31. In 1945, there were 16.31 miles of 

highway graded in that constituency and this last year there was another, roughly, 11 miles of new 

highway built and 16 miles of gravelling done, so that nobody can say it was put on just prior to the 

by-election or anything like that. It was spread over each year. The municipal roads are being improved, 

too, at the same time as greater grants are being given and more assistance, wherever possible, to the 

municipal councils. 

 

I would like to see, as soon as possible, some means whereby from this Legislature, we can give 

additional help to the municipalities, who are in the greatest need, because some of our northern 

municipalities are in great need of financial help. 

 

Then also the agricultural services of this province are being improved. In the province at the present 

time there are four regional supervisors, 36 Ag. Reps and 325 committees working with them and the 

people are becoming more and more conscious of the services available to them. Before they had heard 

of agricultural representatives, or departmental representatives, on behalf of the Department of 

Agriculture, but they had never seen any of them. Now they are getting more familiar with them and 

while it takes time to get something like this really working, where the people can take full advantage of 

it, it will come in due course whereby they will know what information they can get and they will go to 

their agricultural representative for that information. 

 

Now, the Wadena constituency, this past few years, has not been a fur-bearing district. There used to be, 

at one time, a considerable amount of trapping done in that area, but these last few years, since the water 

has vanished to some extent, the muskrat and a lot of other fur-bearing animals have left the district. 

However, there are a few trappers still doing a little bit of trapping in that part of the country — 

something like the Member for Meadow Lake referred to – “gypsy” trapping. That is about the style of 

trapping we have there, a number of farmers’ boys going out and setting a few traps and catching a few 

weasels or whatever kind of furs they can. But they all tell me, with hardly any exception, that they 

receive at least 50 per cent better prices now when they ship their furs to the Fur Marketing Service than 

they ever got by shipping any place before. While in Wadena this is not one of their main sources of 

income, it is just a sideline for most of the boys that take it up, they themselves appreciate very much the 

services of the Fur Agency in Regina. 

 

Similarly with the health services passed by this Legislature, a year ago. With very little exception this is 

meeting a very favorable reception in my part of the province. A lot of people in that part of the 

province have never known good times. A lot of the settlers settled that country between 1909 and 

1914-15, along about that time. When they settled that part of the province it was all heavy bush and lots 

of water, consequently, the amount of acreage that could be broken was very small and even if they had 

a crop and the crop itself did not 

  



February 5, 1947 

97 

 

freeze out, they did not have many acres and, therefore, the return in bushels was small. Then year after 

year we had heavy frosts and it was not until the latter part of the 1920s, until the country started to dry 

up, that we were not hit so bad with the frost and then the depression came on with all it brought in its 

train. 

 

A lot of the people in that part of the province have never known prosperity unless it is in the last year or 

two and they lament on the fact it seems to be too bad that the only time they can get a fair price for their 

produce is when they have to have their brothers, relatives or sons, or whatever the case may be, risking 

their lives in war; that it takes a war to create a market for the foods which they can produce; but in 

peace time their brothers or relatives and friends were riding the boxcars, unemployed and out of work, 

when at the same time the abilities of those unemployed could have been producing at that time. Things 

such as telephones and roads and a number of other public services could have been of very great 

advantage to that part of the province during the past few years when labor has been so scarce and 

production needs so great. 

 

So the health services in that part of the province, as I have mentioned before, are meeting very 

favorable reception because there are a lot of people who needed medical attention and to go into the 

hospital but could not afford it. Mr. Speaker, in the last issue of Liberty the issue for February 8th, there 

is a very good article under the title: “Canada’s Shame, our Mental Hospitals.” The author goes on to 

compare the mental institutions in western Canada and of the four provinces he speaks with very high 

praise for Saskatchewan. He visited all four provinces and while in Alberta he said that he was unable to 

have a talk at all with Mr. Cross. He refused to even see him and finally got into conversation with him 

on the telephone and he said that they had no money and he said that he thought that strange for Social 

Credit. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Who is the author? 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — Don Le Bourdais. He had visited the institutions and made a survey of all mental 

hospitals throughout Canada, an authority on mental institutions. I would like to quote two paragraphs 

from his writings in dealing with Saskatchewan. In the first he says: 

 

Certainly the Saskatchewan Government does not seem to have any difficulty in finding money for 

mental hospitals. ‘In two years we have doubled the expenditures on mental hospitals and there is 

every indication that this will be increased even further this coming year.’ I was informed by the Hon. 

T. C. Douglas, Premier and Minister of Public Health. 

 

Further on again, he is talking then about lack of materials and so on for building adequate facilities. He 

says these last, of course, are not peculiar to Saskatchewan. Every other province is in the same boat. 

But the present Saskatchewan Government cannot be blamed for existing conditions. It has been in 

office only two years. Since 1945 mental hospitals have been free to all citizens of Saskatchewan of 12 

months standing, a step forward. Every other province in Canada still charges all patients who can pay, 

although these charges are not equal 

  



February 5, 1947 

98 

to actual cost, these provinces all get by because considerable proportions of what they spend. You will 

find it in the statement of the Liberty magazine of February 8th. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as far as the proposals on new legislation in the Throne Speech are concerned, I am 

here to support them. I believe that they are another step forward towards trying to give the people of 

Saskatchewan security in their homes and to lift from them unnecessary burdens. You know, every time 

I walk down Scarth Street or Eleventh Avenue, here in Regina, when I come to the intersection there, I 

always stop and look at the nice gold letters engraved right onto the building, “Canada Permanent 

Mortgage Corporation.” Evidently, Mr. Speaker, when they built that building they thought the 

Canadian people indefinitely wanted a permanent mortgage over their heads and naturally they resent it 

when the CCF Government tries to devise ways and means whereby mortgages can be lifted from the 

heads of the people of the province. 

 

I think the people of Saskatchewan, if given a fair and just chance and given the true facts, are on the 

whole as intelligent a bunch of people as we have any place and I think that the three by-elections the 

Premier referred to will support that. When the people have had a chance to come back and say whether 

they like or dislike the legislation or the administration of this Government, in each case they have 

endorsed it, and I think that statements like we have heard yesterday from the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition, that the average person would not understand, the reference to the public health services, 

well I think they understand a lot of things a little better, or maybe quite a bit better, than some other 

citizens of this province think they do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to support the motion. 

 

Mr. A. L. S. Brown (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate, I wish to take this 

opportunity to add my congratulations along with the others, to the mover and seconder of the motion. I 

was particularly impressed with the high level upon which the mover opened this debate and could not 

help but feel that if it could only have been maintained on that level, we would have been making 

history in the annals of this Legislature or of any Legislature. It was particularly lacking in personal 

criticism and contained many constructive suggestions, which I am sure the Government will take note 

of and act upon. 

 

The Hon. Member for Meadow Lake, in his seconding of the motion, gave to us a word picture of the 

conditions of the North, which was of particular interest to me being a Member from the southern 

portion of this province. He made us realize that the problems in the North were our problems and could 

only be solved by those Members of themselves working together with the Members of the North in an 

attempt to find a solution to all of our problems. It was in marked contrast with the remarks of the 

Leader of the Opposition whose speech was punctuated with destructive criticism and at times even, I 

believe, degenerated to personal criticism of individuals, both in and out of this Legislature. It was 

entirely lacking in any item of constructive suggestion into which the Government could get its teeth and 

act upon. I listened, or attempted to listen, very carefully to what he had to say and I failed to hear him 

enunciate one principle of free private enterprise — which they so fondly 

  



February 5, 1947 

99 

 

pretend to support — which could be applied to our economy here in Saskatchewan and as such improve 

our society. I scanned the Liberal platform or, at least, the press reports of the Liberal platform, as it 

came from their convention in Saskatoon and, once again, I failed to see in that platform one item of free 

private enterprise, one item of principle of free private enterprise, which they were going to apply to the 

economy of Saskatchewan and as such improve our conditions. They mentioned the question of 

irrigation, which can only be done under social development. They mentioned the question of marketing 

boards, which is certainly the basis for a socialized system of marketing that ends in a Dominion 

Co-operative Act, which is simply extending into the Dominion field the principle of social ownership 

along that field. They mention the question of extensive irrigation, which can only be done through 

social control and social development. They mention the question of increased aid for pensioners, which 

is simply another social security. They mention the question of a 40-hour week, which is certainly 

controlling, by a social measure, the conditions and hours of work of our laboring class. 

 

On the one hand they condemn the theory and ideologies of socialism and then on the other hand they 

appeal for support to the people on the grounds of increased social development and social control. They 

are travelling with one foot in the airplane and one foot in the ox cart, which, I presume, is a good trick 

if you can do it. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker — if a suggestion is in order — that either they get both 

feet into the ox cart and travel down the road to economic chaos or else they get both feet in the airplane 

and travel along with us, and, incidentally, a large part of the rest of the world, along the sky-road to 

democratic socialism with our destination economic and social security. 

 

If I may divert for just one moment, Mr. Speaker, to something which possibly was not directly 

contained in the Speech from the Throne, but it is something that I feel is sometimes overlooked and is 

particularly overlooked by the Members of the Opposition. They have failed to realize that we are living 

in a complex and interdependent society, a principle which has been recognized by practically every 

progressive government in the world and is climaxed in the attempt by the different governmental 

bodies of the world to work out a formula for a workable and successful United Nations Organization. 

 

This principle of interdependence of society has been recognized by the governments here in Canada 

and, to a large extent, by the people of Canada. If there is any exception to that it must be in one or two 

political parties. This principle of interdependence has been recognized in Canada by the calling of the 

Dominion-Provincial Conference and while the conference may have failed in its initial proposal, it does 

not alter the fact that there is that interdependent era in the society within Canada and in the societies 

within the world. The fact that from that conference a tax agreement arose — a tax agreement which we 

will be asked to ratify at this Session — gives us some hope that there may emerge a fuller solution to 

the problem that faces us at this present time. As to the interdependence of the nations of the world and 

of the societies of the world, an incident occurred in my constituency this spring which brought this 

principle very forcibly to my attention. 

 

In the spring my constituency was honored with a visit by 

  



February 5, 1947 

100 

a Mr. Quan, a renowned engineer from China, who was sent over here to the American continent to 

study the irrigation projects that have been undertaken in America and in Canada, with the idea in mind 

of taking back this information to his people so that they may undertake extensive schemes of irrigation 

to provide food for their hungry people. Mr. Quan, whose father is a proprietor of a restaurant in the 

town of Assiniboia, took the opportunity during his visit here in America to visit his father at Assiniboia 

and I had the privilege and the honor of meeting that brilliant young engineer and of hearing him discuss 

the problems of his people and the conditions under which his people were living at that particular time. 

 

His visit occurred at the commencement of seeding operations in that district. While we saw, in our 

seeding operations, the commencement of a year’s work from which we hoped to obtain a living wage, 

he saw something else in the kernel of wheat that was being placed in the ground at that particular time. 

He saw in that kernel of wheat a hope that there may be some food for his starving people in his country. 

But as he saw us put that seed into the ground, there must have been a doubt raised in his mind and in 

the minds of his people, that we might, once again, fail them as we have so often failed them in the past. 

It was just at that time, Mr. Speaker, that the machine companies of Canada had gone on strike for an 

increase of 12 ½ per cent, although they knew, the industrialists of today knew, that the increase in the 

price of farm machinery meant a reduction in the production that the mechanized agriculture of Western 

Canada could be expected to produce. And this incident, in itself, must have raised a doubt in his mind 

as to our sincerity in fulfilling the resolution that we passed here, at the last Session of this Legislature, 

that we would undertake to the limit of our ability to provide foodstuff for the world. 

 

I also recall an incident which occurred ten years previous and which had some similarity to this 

pleading with us for food for his hungry people. I recall that ten years previous I was attending the 

University of Saskatchewan and I heard there a young Chinese student plead with us for understanding 

of the struggle that China was going through at that particular time. China, at that time was standing 

alone against the rising forces of fascism and imperialism. He pleaded with us to take some action to 

eradicate the evil that was in our society at that particular time, but we heeded not his plea. 

 

Oh, it is true that over cups of coffee we lamented the plight of war-torn China and we gave pink teas 

and took up silver collections for the aid of the children of China, but we took no positive action to 

eradicate the cancerous roots of social evil that were already embedded in our world society. I recall 

that, at about the same time, Generalisimo Chiang Kai Chek pleaded with the leader of the British 

Empire to refrain from supplying Japan with materials of war and we replied, through the leader of the 

British Empire, that we could not refrain, that we were making 200 per cent profit upon the materials 

that we were sending to Japan. We glorified in the fact, at least by negative action, that from the blood 

of the innocent Chinese we were obtaining 200 per cent profit. As he saw here, this young Chinese 

engineer who visited Canada and America this spring, as he saw us through our Federal Government 

endorse the request of the machine companies for an increase of 12 ½ per cent, a request that was not 

substantiated either in fact or in substance, but yet was granted by our Federal 

  



February 5, 1947 

101 

 

Government, is it any wonder that in his mind entered the doubt whether we were sincere or whether, 

once again, we were going to glory in the fact that from hunger pains and malnutrited bodies of 20 to 30 

million children, our industrialists would have their 12 ½ per cent. 

 

I have referred to that instance, Mr. Speaker, because the Leader of the Opposition in his speech 

suggested that we, in our Private Members’ resolutions were asking the Federal Government for 

something that we could not, or were afraid to, do ourselves. And while he admitted that he had not read 

them very closely, I am satisfied that if he had read them closely, he would have realized that that was 

not the case but that what we were doing through these resolutions is simply contributing our part to the 

welfare of the economy of Canada and of much of the world. We, as legislators in this Chamber, have a 

duty to perform that reaches far outside of these walls. We are interested, not only in the legislative work 

that we may do here, but we are interested in the economy of Canada as a whole, for, irrespective of 

whether we have the power to legislate over the Dominion of Canada, nevertheless we, as citizens of 

Canada, must accept the responsibility for the action of Canada. No, Mr. Speaker, we, representing the 

people here, have a responsibility to fulfil. We, as legislators, have a job to do, a job to do in which we 

must not fail, a job to do in which we dare not fail, a job to do in which we will not fail if we adopt as 

our motive the slogan of the Merchant Marines, as they kept the food-line to Britain open: “Damn the 

torpedoes and full speed ahead.” 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is what I suggest that this Government is doing. It is going full speed ahead along the 

road to democratic socialism. In a resume given in the Speech from the Throne and in the resume just 

given by the Premier of the work that has been done and what is forecast in this Legislature, while it 

may not be as spectacular as some maybe would have hoped and certainly not as erratic as was 

suggested would be by the Opposition, nevertheless I feel that this resume of social progress that has 

been made within the limited powers of the province, is one which will go down in history in the 

Dominion of Canada for the progress made in such a short period by any government. 

 

Our standard of living here depends primarily upon three things. First, our ability to produce; second, 

our ability to retain the wealth from that production for the benefits of our people, and, thirdly, in our 

ability to distribute the wealth as equitably as possible — wealth in the form not only of goods, but 

wealth in the form of goods and services as well. In the outline given by the Premier we have seen the 

great potential possibility of our productive capacity in a planned economy, and through the extension of 

the social services, we are extending and distributing those services which are being made available to 

the people, not on the basis of ability to pay but rather on the basis of need. 

 

One charge that has often been levied against the present Government is the fact that they are increasing 

taxation. I doubt that this claim can be substantiated, in fact, it certainly cannot in figures. But as a 

taxpayer and as a resident of Saskatchewan, I am not so much interested in the amount of taxes that I 

may pay or may not pay, what I am interested in primarily is the amount of return that I can get for those 

taxes. I am interested in dollar value return in the form of services based 

  



February 5, 1947 

102 

on need. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have at least some time before us in this Legislature in which to deal with 

specific details that have been brought down, so I will not weary the House with any detailed analysis of 

particular projects, which I think are of particular importance as outlined in the Speech from the Throne, 

but I do wish to take this opportunity of showing to the House that I will fully support the motion. 

 

Hon. W. S. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I would at this time like to take a few 

moments to concur with what has already been said in the extending of congratulations to the mover and 

the seconder of the Address-in-Reply and to concur also in the extending of congratulations to the 

Member from Morse on his easy and decisive win in the by-election of recent months. Having said that, 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask the privilege of adjourning the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 

 


