



















































Hansard: March 14, 1947


856 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session --Tenth Legislature 

32
nd

 Day 

 

March 14, 1947 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

STATEMENT 

 

RE ARTICLE IN LEADER-POST 

 

Mr. D.S. Valleau (ASVR):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to the attention of the House, an 

article in the Leader-Post, referring to a Legion meeting which took place in this city on Wednesday 

night. 

 

The article refers to all three of the Service Members and I think the impression left by the article is 

misleading to say the least. I would just like to make one or two comments, it refers to an incident which 

took place Wednesday night at the monthly meeting of the Regina Branch of the Canadian Legion. 

 

All the veterans had been invited to the meeting whether members of the Regina Branch or not. The 

headline in the Leader-Post states: “Embury is Criticized” and the article beings: 

 

Criticism of Allen W. Embury, active service representative in the Provincial Legislature was … by a 

member of the Canadian Legion Wednesday. While the other two active service Members of the 

Legislature rose to defend Mr. Embury for failure to attend the three meetings of the Legislature, the 

Veterans’ Affairs Committee also … this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am afraid that this article gives the impression that charges were made and accusations 

followed and the heat of debate arose and the Member for the Canadian Area and myself were forced to 

take the defensive and defend our comrade and I feel that that is a misleading confession to get abroad. 

The members of the Legion, who referred to the Veterans’ Affairs debate was quite mild and gentle in 

tone of our affairs. I distinctly recall hearing the Legion member, who introduced the matter, make the 

following statement. He said this: 

 

I was glad to see Mr. Embury elected because he possesses ability, vigor and leadership. 

 

He went on to state further as I recall the rest of it: 

 

I regret very much that Brother Embury’s ability, experience and insight have not been put into use in 

the Committee activities. 

 

That is, there was no suggestion of criticism or of accusations but rather merely that expression of 

regret, at the same time they did appreciate our comrade’s high abilities and when I rose to speak, 

following the Hon. Member for the Canadian Area, I did not consider that there had been criticism, I did 

not 



March 14, 1947 

 857 

consider I was rising to defend because defence is only necessary where there has been an attack and 

certainly as I recall there was no attack. What I was trying to do was to give an answer to what were 

expressions of opinions which were being held. I, therefore, stated that our committee of this House, that 

is, do not try to tell Members that they should be pressed in any particular area, that is entirely up to the 

Members themselves and I did not feel that we should discuss the matter at the particular meeting 

because the Hon. Member of the Mediterranean Area was not present and not able to answer any 

suggestions that were made. I was glad, on the other hand, to taking an active and healthy interest in our 

work here and in the work of our Committee and I felt that all three of us would probably work a little 

harder as a result of that particular discretion. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial 

Treasurer) that this Assembly do now resolve itself into a Committee of Supply. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour):  Mr. Speaker, in speaking to the Budget, I intend to give as 

detailed a report as possible, in the limited time at my disposal, of the workings of the two Departments 

I have the honor to head – the Labour Department and the Department of Telephones. I cannot promise 

definitely that I may not digress from time to time; however, I will stock to departmental affairs as much 

as possible. This, I believe, in line with the suggestion made by the Hon. Member for Last Mountain and 

the Hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

 

When the latter was speaking, several days ago, he made a remark to the effect that farmers cannot have 

the 40-hour week, a one day of rest in seven, time-and-a-half overtime and so forth. The farming 

population, of course, does not now, due to modern methods and machinery, put in the long hours they 

did many years ago. I think the farmers on this side of the House will agree that the hours are not so 

long. Thousands of our young men and women from the farms, now working in urban centres, are 

enjoying the benefits of these particular Acts and I doubt very much if they would wish to enter 

employment in the urban centres without the benefits contained therein. 

 

A suggestion was thrown out that, due to the advanced labour legislation brought in by this Government, 

we would not elect another member in a rural seat at the next election. That is possibly more wishful 

thinking than anything else. 

 

I am going to touch on the Civil Service for just a moment. It has been shown that there has been a 

considerable increase, as mentioned in this House from time to time during the debate on the Budget. 

Certainly there has been an increase in the number of employees and I believe I might use my own 

Departments as an example to show why we think that increase is logical. 

 

When we assumed office on July 10, 1944, we found the Bureau of Labour, which came under the 

Minister of Municipal 



March 14, 1947 

 

 858 

Affairs, had eleven employees; at the present time we have 33 employees, the increase being due, of 

course, to the beneficial legislation brought in for the wage-earners and the people in urban centres. Just 

for an example, I might say that we have brought all towns of over 500 population under The Minimum 

Wage Act and, of course, we have The Holidays with Pay Act. The administration has been greatly 

increased and in order to do that we must have a larger staff. The Apprenticeship Act is something else 

again which has come into effect since we assumed office and greatly increased the work of the 

Department. There is nobody loafing over there; I doubt if there is in any of the Departments. So it will 

be readily seen that large Departments, such as the Department of Public Health, Social Welfare, Public 

Works and so forth, which give the people of Saskatchewan the greater services, have had a 

corresponding increase and have had to provide many more employees in order to keep up with the extra 

work. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Government owns and operates the Telephone Department in 

the towns and cities of this province and the interprovincial communications. Alberta and Manitoba also 

own their systems, while in the other six provinces they are privately owned. Just before I proceed with 

my talk on the Telephone Department, I would like to extend to the Leader of the Opposition my regrets 

in knowing that he is going to leave the leadership of the Opposition. He was an employee of the 

Telephone Department before the First World War, I believe, being the first rural Superintendent the 

Department ever had. There was an inspector before him, I believe, but he was the first one with the 

title, ‘Rural Superintendent.’ He left in the latter part of 1914 or the early part of 1915, went into the 

Army and when he came back, I believe, got into politics not long afterwards. Son of a railway 

employee as I am myself, he might have gone far in the labour field had he followed along different 

lines; however, he chose to go into business and did not do too badly either. He became the Leader of 

the Government in this province for a good many years. I know that everyone on this side of the House 

joins me in wishing him the very best for the future; and, in fact, he has gained a wealth of experience 

and knowledge during his 25 years of public service. 

 

So that I might not appear to have created a wrong impression, Mr. Speaker, I would say that the 

Government does not own the rural telephone systems. I find that that fact is not so very well known in 

many parts of the province and people are continually writing in, who think we have control of the rural 

systems. We have 1,120 in operation at the present time and these rural companies have a total of 

approximately 52,000 subscribers. The Department itself has a total of 55,000 subscribers in the towns, 

villages and cities of this province. At the present time there is an acute shortage of material and it is 

going to be months, or perhaps two or three years, before we are back to normal and everyone in this 

province who wants one has a telephone. In Regina alone we have over 2,200 applicants; in Saskatoon, 

1,640; in Moose Jaw 864; in Prince Albert 423 and so on. For the whole of Saskatchewan there are over 

6,000 people waiting for telephones; in the whole of Canada, 125,000 and in the United States well over 

2,000,00. For the city of Regina there are orders placed with the manufacturers for a total of 2,200 

exchange lines and we expect 1,200 this summer and the other 1,000 to be installed in 1948, which 

should pretty well clear up the situation here. 



March 14, 1947 

 859 

From time to time, Mr. Speaker, I receive requests from people who know me quite well, or people who 

don’t know me very well, perhaps asking on behalf of a friend to see what can be done towards getting 

them a telephone. If there is any reason such as sickness in the family or anything like that and priority 

can be shown, I am glad to do it. But, if I may illustrate, Mr. Speaker: You have been in the line-up, 

perhaps, in front of a theatre – or you know of the lines, we hear about, that they have had in Britain, 

during the War, for food and one thing and another – somebody else comes along and slips into the 

line-up ahead of you – you don’t like it very well. So, when people ask for telephones out of turn, in 

effect that is exactly what they are doing. As far as Regina is concerned, they are slipping in ahead of 

2,200 people who have had these applications in some as long as 1942. At the present time we are 

concentrating on trying to get these people who have had applications in since `1942 and 1943 fixed up 

and we are giving them the preference. 

 

The Rural Branch of the Telephone Department is under the supervision of Mr. Cavanagh, recently 

appointed from Province of Saskatchewan and one of his main duties, I would say, is to encourage the 

amalgamation of the rural telephone companies. We find that they seem to function a great deal better 

when they are amalgamated, rather than having four or five in one town all with separate offices. We 

find quite a number are willing to amalgamate and the services of his department are available at any 

time for any assistance he or his staff can provide. There are, however, some obstacles and it is usually 

in connection with differences of opinion between the directors of the companies. It is a fact that lower 

administration costs and better service can be provided when the people have these amalgamated rural 

companies. 

 

As to the capital of the Telephone Department – it was capitalized at, I think, approximately 

$15,000,000. That amount was received from the Treasury, of course, many years ago, not all at the 

same time. A little over $5,000,000 has been paid back and there is still an amount of $10,000,000 

which has been received from the Treasury and never repaid. That is the capital of the Telephone 

Department. I think a statement was made here, the other evening, that amounts of this kind have been 

repaid, although no particular Dominion was mentioned; but it is a fact that that $10,000,000 is still to 

the credit of the Treasury as far as the Department of Telephones is concerned. 

 

I am going to mention, just for a moment, the increase in wages paid to the employees. I am mentioning 

that for the reason that I want to show this House that this is a fair wage Government. When we assumed 

office in July 1944, we found that quote a number of the employees, mostly the young women who 

worked on the switchboards, were receiving a very small rate of pay. In October, we put in an increase 

and in February another increase and brought their wages up considerably. It was also found that there 

were certain inconsistencies as far as holidays were concerned. for some reason or other, the head office 

staff was securing three weeks holidays and had for years while the plant and the operators and so on 

were receiving just the two weeks. We made that three weeks as soon as it was brought to our attention. 

I want to point out that this was before any union was formed. Since the union was formed, there has 

been another increase and we are anxious and wiling at all times to pay fair wages to our employees. At 

the present time the increase in wages plus the increase in the number of persons we 



March 14, 1947 

 

 860 

have had to take on since July, 1944, is costing the Department $335,000 a year. That is all to the good 

as far as I can see. That $335,000 is taken out of the must archives – if I might use that term – of the 

Telephone Department, paid to the employees through their wage envelopes, out into the stores and into 

the stream of commerce. I think it is an excellent thing to get that amount of money into circulation and 

the Civil Service is doing something along the same lines. 

 

These raises are justified. The cost of living has gone up terrifically in the past two or three years, even 

in the past year. As far as labour unrest is concerned – I’ll just digress for a moment – the reasons for 

labour unrest can be found in the price tags in the stores. Just go down town to any of the large 

departmental stores here in Regina; go through the furniture department, or the drygoods and so forth 

and you will see exactly what I mean. 

 

Now, last October we did, in signing a union agreement with the telephone employees, bring in the 

40-hour week and the five day week. The modern trend is in that direction and we are only too anxious 

to keep up, in fact keep ahead a little, if we can. Other companies in the provinces east and west of us 

have that in. They either had it then, or have put it in since and we are right in line with them. I am glad 

to see the Civil Service following the lead. There is some doubt as to whether or not they are going to 

like the five-day week, but as far as we are concerned – and we have between 1,100 and 1,200 

employees in the Department – the only complaint I have had is that one or two of the married 

employees have found that their wives have set washday from Monday ahead to Saturday. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank:  There should be a law against that. 

 

Mr. Williams:  Someone says there should be a law against that. There has been a terrific increase in 

long distance service in the past few years. I have a list here, somewhere – I won’t look for it just now; 

but it goes back for a good many years. During the 12-month period previous to that date, there were 

completed a total of 4,439,000 calls – an increase of 1,100,000 calls, or approximately 33 per cent. That 

is, of course, a tremendous increase and shows us what the Department has been up against in the War 

years and during those years it was practically impossible to get very much equipment, certainly not all 

that they wanted to have. 

 

I might say, just before I go on to say something of our suggested program for next year, something 

about what we have done and the places we have put in full line facilities in the past two and one-half 

years. The following points are now being served that previously had no communication at all: Barnes’ 

Crossing, Beaubier, Compass, Dorintosh, Four Corners, Gladmar, Onion Lake, Compeer, Lake Alma, 

Rapid View, Reserve, Radcliffe and Archerwill. In addition to that, the following points, which have 

been operated as toll offices, were provided with Department-owned local exchange service: Arborfield, 

Bethune, Carrot River, Wood Mountain, Highland Park – there are 10 or 12 of them; I shall not red them 

all. Toll line facilities were extended to the village of Kayville. 



March 14, 1947 

 861 

For the coming year, we have six projects in mind and we hope we will be able to go through with all of 

them. There is one from Loon Lake to Pierceland and it may be extended into Cherry Grove on the 

Alberta side. That particular locality, Mr. Speaker, is away up in the northwestern part of the province, 

or I should say, of the habituated par of the province. Another is a line from Minton to Gladmar; a line 

from Carrot River 12 or 14 miles northeast; one from Cabri to Verlo taking in the hamlets of Roseray 

and Hazlet; the fifth from Rockglen to Kildeer, which will take in three smaller places in between: 

Strathallen, Canopus and Quantock; and another from Consul to Govenlock. We have in mind putting in 

automatic service in the town of Melville just as quickly as we can; in fact the equipment is on order 

now. If we can do it, this year we will; if we can’t do it this year, it will be done the early part of 1948. 

We have property at Assiniboia, Watrous and Biggar; the property has been bought and the equipment 

will be ordered. We want to put automatic exchanges in those three places. It is going to be 1948, or 

perhaps 1949, before we get around to that, however. 

 

I have given a very brief outline as to the Department of Telephones. I will now go on into the 

Department of Labour which interests, of course, a good many people in this province. Whether or not, 

Mr. Speaker, residents in the various villages, hamlets and that, come under any of our Act, they do 

indirectly receive the benefit from them. It stands to reason that if in the towns of over 500 and the cities 

certain rates of wages are being paid, people are going to go into those places if they find they can get 

better wages. That has a tendency to increase wages in all the other towns and villages surrounding 

which, of course, we think is only sufficient. 

 

I am first going to mention The Workmen’s Compensation Act. In industry, it is unfortunate that, no 

matter how careful we are, employees suffer injury from time to time and for this reason we have The 

Workmen’s Compensation (Accident Fund) Act administered by the Workmen’s Compensation Board, 

which has its headquarters in Regina. Some comparative figures will be interesting to the House – I’ll 

just go back two years: In 1945 the total number of accidents reported to the Board was 8,415, 19 of 

which were fatal; in 1946 the number was 10,787, 26 of which were fatal. both the Board and this 

Department are concerned over the increase, which amounts to approximately 28 per cent. The 

explanation is, of course, that a large number of men are entering industry for the first time and we have 

a greater coverage than ever before. Last year, there were 8,900 employers reporting to the Board 

compared with 4,900 in 1945, an increase of approximately 80 per cent. The amount of payrolls reported 

by these employers amounted to $72,388,000 in 1946, compared with $58,000,000 in 1945, an increase 

of approximately 24 per cent. 

 

As indicated, these increases were caused by an increased coverage and an additional industrial activity. 

The House will recall that, last year, we brought under the Act a great many more wage-earners, such as 

employees in stores, shops of various kinds, janitors and so forth. That accounts for the increase, 

generally speaking. 

 

To reduce the number of accidents, the Department has appointed a full-time factory inspector, whose 

duty it is to go around to the various factories of this province periodically, 



March 14, 1947 

 

 862 

check on any existing hazards and recommend the installation of necessary safety devices. This is bound 

to have a beneficial effect and in the long run will reduce the number of accidents. Previously, this was 

done by the boiler inspectors, who did the best they could, having no particular training along these 

lines. We find that having a man with specialized qualifications is much more satisfactory. 

 

The Compensation Board also realized the importance of preventive work and has set up a Prevention 

Department of preventive work and has set up a Prevention Department which investigates accidents, 

checks files, gets out circulars and posters and so on. I might say, Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of this 

House or anyone who may be listening, that suggestions to either the Department of Labour or the 

Workmen’s Compensation Board are invited. 

 

This Board was set up under the Act that was passed by the Anderson Government back in 1930 and it is 

an excellent piece of legislation. This Government, however, has made improvements for the benefit of 

the injured workman and I will just enumerate two or three of them. 

 

Up until July 1, 1945, all persons coming under the Act were forced to lose the first three days of their 

pay, regardless of how long they were away. We have changed that and now a person who is away more 

than three days gets paid right back to and including the first day. I think the closest province to that is 

British Columbia, which says if a man is off six days then he will get paid right back to the first day. 

 

Another great improvement has been the raising of the workmen’s compensation from 66 2/3 of his 

salary to 75 per cent, which is the highest rate paid anywhere on this Continent or in the British Empire. 

the closest we know of, Mr. Speaker, is the State of Wisconsin, which pays up to 70 per cent. Most 

provinces and states pay the 66 2/3. Labour has asked from time to time to have this increased to 100 per 

cent and this ideally would be quite in order; we are sympathetic toward it. However, it would create a 

tremendous increase in the amount of money necessary to be raised from or assessed against industry 

and for the time being, at least, we have not proceeded beyond the 75 per cent. 

 

I should say, also, that up to July 1, 1945, compensation could only be paid on a salary amount up to 

$2,000; we have increased that to $2,500, so those whose earnings are greater than approximately $36 

per week. 

 

Back in the ‘thirties, when wages were extremely low, injured persons were paid on the basis of what 

they earned the year round, or for the 12 months previous to injury. Many of them, of course, earned 

little or nothing and as a result quite a number of pensions based on that small amount are very small. 

We have changed the principle and now an injured workman receives a compensation on the basis of 

what he was earning at the time of the accident. “We think that is a great improvement. 

 

Occasionally the question of compensation for farmers and farm workers comes up. I have had some 

correspondence with the UFC in this regard. As far as we know, the State of Arizona is the only one to 

the south of us which has any plan which covers agricultural workers. They are divided into two classes: 

first, 



March 14, 1947 

 863 

any agriculturalist or farmer who employs three or more workmen engaged in the use of machinery must 

insure such employees against a penalty of a misdemeanour; the rate of this classification is $3.60 per 

$100 of payroll premium; second, where the employer elects to exclude agricultural workers not 

employed in the use of machinery, he pays the rate of $6.55 per $100 of payroll. As far as we know, as I 

just said, the State of Arizona is the only state that has such a plan and the figures show it is a fairly 

expensive plan in comparison with the industrial rate in this province, which averages $1.65 per $100 of 

payroll. 

 

The railway employees come under another Act altogether, I’ll but mention them. There are six quite 

large groups: Conductors, trainmen, maintenance men, telegraphers, engineers, firemen and enginemen. 

They chose to stay under the old Saskatchewan Workmen’s Compensation Act, which was brought in 

here about 1911, although there is a provision in the new Act whereby they can elect to leave the old Act 

and come under the new any time they care to. 

 

I am going to mention, briefly, The Apprenticeship Act, which became effective in April, 1945. 

Fourteen designated trades are now being handled by this Branch as follows: motor vehicle repairs; 

carpentry; bricklaying; masonry; painting and decorating; plastering; plumbing; steam-fitting; sheet and 

metal work; printing; barbering, beauty culture and electrical. 

 

Up to the present time, the number of indentured apprentices totals 337, of whom 249 are veterans. 

Schools for these apprentices have been operated both last winter and this winter for a three-month 

period and last year we found that only 55 took advantage of the training. This year, there are 215 

attending the various schools at Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw and Regina. The principle under 

which these men take their training is that they receive a living allowance of $12 a week for a single 

person living at home; $15 a week, if they are away from home and $18 per week for heads of families. 

That is not a wage, by the way; just a living allowance paid while they are learning and the cost is 

divided equally between the Provincial and Federal Governments. 

 

It might be of interest to this House to know that this province has the highest apprenticeship wages of 

any in the Dominion and also pays the highest amounts to apprentices attending this school training. 

Using carpentry as an example, the apprentice starts in at 50 per cent of the journeyman’s wage, goes up 

5 per cent each six months, so that in five years he is up to the full journeyman’s rate. all trades do not 

handle it exactly the same way; but this is just an example. 

 

We have had requests for information regarding our apprenticeship scheme from distant points such as 

Australia, Great Britain and a number of the States to the south. I might just mention that the gentleman 

in charge of this is Mr. J.S. Dornan, and he has as his assistant a Mr. William Rogers. Any Member of 

the House who may have been interested in hard-ball around this part of the province, 15 or 20 years 

ago, may remember ‘Wild Bill’ Rogers – quite a pitcher; he is doing an excellent job for us in the 

Apprenticeship Branch. 

 

Rev. Mr. Vaughan, Administrator and Censor is in charge of theatres. We have 516 licensed theatres in 

the province together with 544 halls which come under his jurisdiction. From 1913 



March 14, 1947 

 

 864 

until 1945, the different censors were located at Winnipeg, but we thought it was more satisfactory to 

bring him up here and he has been here since the fall of 1945, has his office and censor room over in the 

Normal School building and the pictures are reviewed throughout the week. This work is most difficult. 

It is impossible to satisfy everyone – we all know that; but I feel he is doing as good a job as is possible. 

He eliminates a large number of suggestive scenes and dialogues from various pictures. In the United 

States, they have what is known as the ‘League of Decency’ – I believe it is a Catholic organization – 

and they review all pictures before they are sent out. They haven’t any power, of course, to order any 

cuts or anything like that; but the pictures that are sent out, they have seen them and sometimes they 

write their various Branches suggesting that such and such a picture not be seen and so forth; but we do 

find that from time to time our Censor will eliminate scenes or dialogues that have been passed by this 

League of Decency. Of course, the League considers that they won’t harm an adult mind; that’s why 

they pass them. 

 

I might say, at this point – and I wish the House would pay particular attention to this – that there are 

two classifications to these pictures: adult and general. We run into criticism from time to time about the 

class of pictures that go around through the province, but it is against the law to advertise these pictures 

without stating that they are Adult or General; that must appear in the advertisement. I have noticed that, 

in the Leader-Post that word appears in pretty small type most of the time. I intend to take that up with 

them, to make it a little clearer. But the reason that is done is to act as a guide to parents to determine 

whether or not they should permit their children to see the pictures. Obviously, the classification Adult 

means that there are certain parts in the picture considered not suitable for children to see and we feel 

that parents should accept some responsibility in keeping their children away from pictures marked 

Adult. Pictures marked General, of course, are considered suitable for either adults or children. 

 

Now pictures are not the only offender; we have these Detective Stories; sex magazines, True 

Confessions and so forth. We see them in the bookstores in various parts of the cities and towns and they 

are anything but what children should get a hold of. I can recall that, in my day, it was The Chicago 

Blade and Ledger, I think. That is still in existence, I believe, though I wouldn’t be sure; perhaps 

someone in this House can say for certain. But that is what it was then. They have become more 

streamlined now and, I think, not anything to be desired; and if there is anything that can be done to 

keep those out of the province, I think it should be done. I shall have to hurry along, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Steam Boilers Branch was set up in 1944 and when the Act was set up, it was largely based on the 

requirements for tractor boilers, threshing machines, of which they had approximately 3,000 in the 

province at that time. With more modern methods of farming – combines – of course it has gone down 

and there were only 12, I think, in operation last year. However, there are now many new types of 

boilers and pressure vessels in existence, such as those used in factories, for the heating of buildings, oil 

stills, air tanks and garages, packing plants, creosoting plants and so forth. Mr. Mayhew, who had been 

Chief Boiler Inspector for many years, retired last year and his place has been taken by Mr. Joseph 

Taylor, who has had extensive 



March 14, 1947 

 865 

experience with various types of boilers, large and small. We have inspectors located in Prince Albert, 

Regina, Moose Jaw and Saskatoon and last year they made, I think it was up to 600 inspections. 

 

The Trade Union Act, which has been in effect a little over two years now, gives employees the right to 

bargain collectively with their employers through the union of their choice and we now have in this 

province 283 unions with a membership of approximately 24,000. It is obviously greatly to the 

advantage of the employees to be able to bargain through their representatives, rather than going hat in 

hand to the boss and making the best bargain they could with him, as has been the case for many years 

in this province in many businesses. 

 

I might say there has been, in this province, comparatively a period of industrial peace and during the 

past year, only four strikes involving 108 persons took place, which resulted in the loss of slightly more 

than 909 days. That is all we had, last year, which is very small in comparison with a total of over 

4,500,000 man-days lost in the whole of Canada. 

 

I shall pass on now to The Holidays with Pay Act, which became effective July 1
st
 last year and which is 

fairly well known over the entire province. It entitles all wage earners to two weeks’ vacation with pay. I 

might add that the railways have challenged the validity of our Act, claiming that they come under 

Federal jurisdiction. The matter is now before the Courts. It has had certain delays and it is going to be 

some time in May before it is finally settled. In the meantime, of course, these employees, mostly those 

of the running trades and the maintenance of way men, are not receiving the benefit of the Act. We 

understand that Ontario and British Columbia have Acts giving one week’s holiday and Manitoba is 

bringing in an Act, we believe, to provide one week. Saskatchewan is the only province that has the two 

weeks. 

 

I have mentioned The Minimum Wage Act from time to time in this House and I don’t intend to go into 

it very much now except to say that we have the excellent rate of $18.50 established for both men and 

women in this province. 

 

I might, just for a moment, Mr. Speaker, give you some figures on the amounts that have been collected 

for and paid to the employees. You will recall that, a year ago, we brought in an amendment and the 

money now is sent into the Deputy Minister, who in turn sends it direct to the individual concerned. 

Now the arrears collected by the Department, in 1945, amounted to $8,634; in 1946, it was a little less 

than $7,800, which shows that the employees were getting more used to the Act; and plus the amount of 

$6,500 collected in the towns and villages. The total amount collected under this Act, The One Day’s 

Rest in Seven Act and The Annual Holidays Act, for 1946, amounted to $14,393.99. I can assure you 

that our inspectors – and we only have four of them – are right on the job and they will see that the 

employee gets anything that is coming to him. 

 

Then we have The Factories Act. I will not mention that, except to say that we raised the limit for young 

men and women to sixteen; it used to be fourteen, I believe. Now they must be sixteen before they can 

enter factories and we feel that that is quite proper; they should be in school up to sixteen. 

 

The One Day’s Rest in Seven Act gives the employees a day 



March 14, 1947 

 

 866 

per week off; we have very few complaints about that. 

 

We have done quite a bit for the student nurses, as far as legislation is concerned. We have done away 

with the tuition fees; they can’t be charged for breakages; the hospital has to supply their uniforms; they 

have to be paid in cash and so forth. 

 

I have here – I hope I have time to read one or two items – the newspaper called “Labor”: the 

railwaymen in this House and any who happen to be listening in, probably take it. I think there are 

several thousand copies come into this pr. It is printed in Washington, D.C. and it is an entirely 

independent newspaper; I think perhaps one of the very few I know of in the United States or Canada. 

There is not one word or line of paid advertising in here and it devotes one of its four pages entirely to 

Canadian news. There is something here in connection with my own union, right on the front page. I 

can’t take time to read it all. It says: 

 

“Telegraphers crush CIO in Election on Lackawanna” 

 

By a landslide majority of almost three to one, the agents, telegraphers and towermen of the Delaware, 

Lackawanna and Western, this week snowed under an attempted raid by the so-called United Railroad 

Workers of the CIO. 

 

Now I am not going to read it all. In fact, I do not want to create any indirect dissension between the 

CIO and the AF of L. or their counterparts in this country. But the Canadian page has quite a number of 

interesting items on it. They have their staff correspondent in Ottawa and the first thing that strikes the 

eye is a picture here entitled: “The Little Flower is Cold.” It is a picture of General A.G.L. McNaughton 

and Fiorello H. LaGuardia, former Mayor of New York. The picture was taken up at Churchill and they 

are here with their parkas, long coats and so forth. They actually were at Churchill and General 

McNaughton says: “We certainly have nothing to hide at Churchill.” The only comment the ‘Little 

Flower’, New York’s fiery ex-mayor had to make was that he found it extremely cold at Churchill. He 

could have said the same thing if he had been in Regina, last month. There is another item: “Chubby 

Powers is called for Biggest Headache of Parliament,” and that is quite a long article and it refers to any 

headache they had down in Ottawa. Now there is something here about our own city. Yes, here is a short 

article headed: “From Regina: 

 

Is training for future war more important than the veterans of past wars? Over 500 ex-servicemen are 

asking. They are attending the University of Saskatchewan and are living at the former RCAF School 

at Saskatoon. Now they hear that they must move out and try to find other dwellings, because the 

Saskatoon buildings will be used to house new RCAF squadrons. 

 

Before I take my seat, Mr. Speaker, I am just going to mention one article here – a paragraph or two 

attributed to Arthur MacNamara, Federal Deputy Minister of Labour. He says: 

 

Too old at 40 was the popular slogan with many employers in the depressed 1930s when the supply of 

workers greatly exceeded the demand and the prejudice it aroused has not been entirely removed. 



March 14, 1947 

 867 

He goes on and makes quite a pleas for the worker who is up in his 50s perhaps or even in his 60s and it 

is something that, I think, this House might advantageously think something about. However, I haven’t 

the time to go into that now; but it does show that industry has proven, during the War, that piece 

workers reached their peak at the age group from 50 to 55 years and that the highest incidence of 

accidents came in the age group from 20 to 24. However, as I said, I won’t go into that. 

 

In closing, I would like to say that I have been pleased to have shared this time with the Hon. Minister of 

Agriculture. We might consider it as a sort of hands-across-the-wheatfields, as it were, with a 

background of factory chimneys. We – and I include the wage earners of this province – expect the 

farmers to get a fair price for their products and in return we find that most farmers expect labour to 

receive a fair wage. The Members of this House predominately represent rural constituencies and it is of 

considerable credit to them that they have come along and passed what is considered to be some of the 

most progressive labour legislation in this continent. Labour members in return are 100 per cent behind 

the farmers in their request for better and stabilized prices for what they produce. 

 

Sometimes I think, Mr. Speaker, we work with the ‘golden calf’ in this province, too much. We talk 

about money, money; there’s been more publicity about money in the last three or four years in this 

province than I have ever heard before. That was understandable back in the ‘30s; we had so little of it. 

But now that the revenues are buoyant, we do quite a bit of talking about it. It has even got to the extent 

where the cartoonish of the Leader-Post, depicting someone to represent the Province of Saskatchewan, 

draws quite a likeness of the Provincial Treasurer. 

 

I would just like to make one more observation before I take my seat. Quite a bit has been said against 

the large increase in the Budget – not 40 per cent by any means. But I think everything has gone up in 

the past year or two or three years. In fact the Leader-Post itself, when you buy it at your door, has gone 

up 40 per cent. It used to be 15 cents a week, now it is 25 cents. The Budget of $45,000,000 possibly a 

few years ago would not have been any more than $37,000,000 or $38,000,000. 

 

In closing, I am just going to say that the Department of Labour primarily exists to improve the lot of the 

wage earner in this province, consistent with general conditions. Mr. Speaker, I intend to support the 

Budget. 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture):  Mr. Speaker, I am very glad to share the radio time with 

the Hon. Minister of Labour, if for no other reason than to prove that the farmer and laborer have 

everything in common, although I know that labor did gain ten minutes on my radio time. We shall have 

to endeavor to make that up some other day. 

 

In giving my presentations and contributions to the Budget, Mr. Speaker, I have noticed that the 

criticism levelled at the -administration and at the Budget falls primarily into two categories; one is 

criticism of the increased burden of taxation and the other one generally criticism of the expanding 

social services that we are providing for the people of Saskatchewan. 



March 14, 1947 

 

 868 

In the first case, I do not think that the criticism is altogether legitimate. With the exception of a few 

added taxes on gasoline, generally speaking, considering the reduction that has been made, too, in the 

Education Tax, the increase in revenue are largely due to the buoyant conditions of revenues at the 

present time. Perhaps that give the Members of the Opposition occasion to be envious and perhaps the 

increased social services that we are providing also cause them to have a degree of jealousy in that 

regard. We know that we are living in good times at the moment, although we are also very conscious of 

the fact that these good times will probably not be with us too long. However, when one views the 

tremendous backlog of disrepair in our province, not only to municipal roads, but to provincial roads and 

to services generally, I think that the increases in the Budget are not only called for, but I do believe that 

they are very necessary. We must remember that we are trying in this province to catch up on the 

backlog of disrepair which extended over the depression years, the years of the hungry ‘30s and then the 

War years, of course, when expansion of public services was not possible. 

 

I think, too, that all the advances and the trail-blazing that we have done in the fields of additional social 

services, aid to incapacitated persons, increases to the old age pensioners with medical aid for them, the 

medical assistance to the blind pensioners and the recipients of mothers’ allowances – all of that is 

wider. The hospital scheme, too, I think is about 20 years overdue. It seems to me that the people have a 

right to these services. They not only have a right to demand them, but they have a right to have them; 

and it appears to me that our agricultural economy must be such that it will sustain the services that are 

required in this modern age of ours – and that is all within the realm of possibility provided that the 

fiscal policy affecting agriculture, which is largely a Federal matter, is such that we will have an income 

in these agricultural provinces that will sustain these services on a proper basis. 

 

It appears to me that in the depression years when, relatively-speaking, revenue and taxation, so to speak 

were somewhat lower than now, we were harder set to pay taxes by far in those days than we are at the 

present time. Why, Mr. Speaker, today paying my taxes I can do so with a smile, without any difficulty 

at all, as compared to all those years, even previous to 1930, when it was very difficult to pay taxes and 

even pay ordinary farm expenses. Conditions are favourable and I think that the criticism levelled 

particularly by the Hon. Member for Arm River is entirely out of place, that these ‘poor’ farmers cannot 

bear the terrific burden of taxation that this terrible Provincial Government has placed on their 

shoulders. 

 

He refers to the Dominion Government as the good benevolent ‘Santa Claus’ that is providing family 

allowances to the province, that is providing PFA payments to the province; and he infers that if it were 

not for this Federal help we would be very seriously handicapped in getting the taxation we are at the 

present time. Let us take a look at this ‘benevolent Santa Claus’ that we have at Ottawa in the form of 

the present Liberal administration there! What do they take out of Saskatchewan? Oh, it is pretty easy to 

give – if you take plenty away! Let us take a look at the figures. 

 

There has been a whole lot said particularly by the Hon. new Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Tucker) 

who is presently at 



March 14, 1947 

 869 

Ottawa – and I hope he will carry on his fight there to remove the burden of taxation off the 

Saskatchewan farmers. After all, as the Hon. Member for Arm River has stated, most of tax falls on the 

land. Truly it does in Saskatchewan where 82 per cent of our production is derived from the soil. Let’s 

take a look at it. 

 

Federal Income Tax: in 1944 there was collected in Saskatchewan $22,500,000 of income tax alone; 

$3,800,000 corporation tax and excess profits tax; $226,000 succession duties; $582,000 amusement tax; 

$2,150,000 gasoline tax; $3,600,000 liquor tax; $8,257,000 tobacco tax – the Attorney General together 

with the rest of the smokers pays a good part of this tax – and then $16,500,000 sales tax – that painless 

indirect taxation that the man on the street doesn’t know much about. Compare that with your Education 

Tax! Compare that with some of these gas taxes that we are levied to provide services for this province! 

 

And this money that leaves the province, what do we get for it? True enough, the Hon. Member says that 

we get some PFA payments. Look what the farmer contributes into that fund! We get, to be sure, some 

assistance with the old age pensions. But then there is another tax, a $6,125,000 luxury tax, making a 

total of $64,000,000 that the Federal Government takes out of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We can add to that another vicious form of taxation under which the farmers of Western Canada have 

suffered for many, many years – tariff duties. It was estimated, on top of this, that in 1931 the Federal 

Government collected $29,000,000 of tariff duties from Saskatchewan. I would imagine – for lack of the 

figures – that the tariff duties might range up to $40,000,000 today; we’ll say $30,000,000. That would 

mean that there is $94,000,000 going out of Saskatchewan to the Federal Treasury. I think it is high time 

that the Federal Government realizes its commitments and responsibilities for social services, for health 

services, for taking over the burden of old age pensions and all of the other services that were provided 

for originally in the Dominion-Provincial proposals. With that done, no doubt we will be in pretty good 

shape in this province to discharge the responsibilities which are our jurisdiction and also to assist to a 

large extent the poor rural municipalities over whose welfare the Hon. Member seems to be so greatly 

concerned. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I noticed that in the course of the debate, the Hon. Members of the Opposition have 

been posing first as the champion and friend of the farmers, then as the champion and friend of the poor 

struggling municipalities and then they are greatly concerned, as I mentioned, about the ‘poor’ taxpayer 

years when they were in power here – that as far as the farmer is concerned and the municipalities, they 

are fair-weather friends, political friends. I have experienced it for years. They come to us at election 

time and give us glowing promises. Just as soon as they got back into power, they reverted right back 

into their old selves again. They feel a great concern for the municipalities at the present time. I am 

going to refer them back to their debt – protective legislation of 1938. 

 

That was the year, as we all can recall, when the tremendous burden of seed debt was placed on the 

farmers of this province. In the fall of that year, when economic conditions were very bad, 



March 14, 1947 

 

 870 

when the price of wheat had slipped from the high to an extreme low again, here was the statement they 

put out in connection with the collection of indebtedness. They put it out in priorities. They said, here is 

the way the farmer should pay his bills; first, he should pay his harvesting and threshing expenses; 

second, he should retain sufficient to maintain the farm and his family until the fall of 1939; third, he 

should keep enough feed for his livestock and for 1939 seeding operations; then he was to pay one 

year’s taxes and after that, 1938 seed grain indebtedness – and so on down the line. 

 

But there was a nigger in the woodpile. This brief statement of priorities looked pretty good on the 

surface; but when they sent out the letters of instructions to the various representatives scattered 

throughout the province, the instructions were something different entirely. Before one cent of taxes 

were paid, before any provision was ever made to sustain and maintain the farm family for the year, they 

permitted the implement companies to come in and collect not only on binders, threshing machines and 

engines, but in addition to that on other farm machinery necessary for harvesting the crop. 

 

My friends are beginning to take notes. Take note of this! I have it right here, Mr. Speaker, their very 

statement. 

 

I made the statement that the implement companies got theirs before the municipalities did. Here is a 

letter to an individual from an implement company, dated February 3, 1939. It says: 

 

I can really find no grounds upon which you are entitled to protection from the Debt Adjustment 

Board. I feel that you should have deducted $50 from the payment which you made on account of 

taxes to apply on this binder account. 

 

I have several of them here – they make nice reading; they sound very good to our farmer friends in the 

country. It will remind them of your record when you were the Government of this province – a record 

that we will not forget very quickly. 

 

Here is another one from a different company: 

 

Replying to your letter of the 28
th

, re the above (in this case it was an engine) I have to advise that 

settlement will have to be made on the date set out in my letter of November 23
rd

. I wish, therefore, 

that you would make application to the municipality for a rebate of the money which you paid to them 

and as soon as possible thereafter make settlement with us. 

 

Friends of the municipalities! Friends of the farmers! Crocodile tears at election time! Promises 

unfulfilled! It is pretty plain, Mr. Speaker, these people cannot serve two masters. They can’t serve the 

interests of the common people and at the same time uphold that wonderful free enterprise system of 

theirs. In this case they would let taxes go by the boards so that the free enterpriser would get his pound 

of flesh. 

 

Mr. Procter:  May I ask the hon. gentleman a question? 

 

Mr. Nollet:  When I am off the air, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member can 



March 14, 1947 

 871 

ask all the questions he wants; but the Minister of Labour has already taken some of my radio time and 

he is not going to get the rest of it. 

 

Now that is pretty well their record provincially and I could go on, Mr. Speaker. I want to assure the 

House that I lived under the circumstances prevailing in those days and under those Liberal policies and 

believe me, I can say to this House that I worked mighty hard to rout this Government out of power, and 

I can say to them they don’t need to sit there and say to us that we are losing support in the country. 

They are out! The people have turned their backs on them and they will stay out. 

 

Let us take a scrutiny of the Liberal record, Federally. First of all, it is to be recalled that, for three years, 

the farmers produced farm commodities far below the cost of production. The argument then was, “We 

daren’t let prices rise; we’ve got to keep on controls.” They did a pretty good job of controlling until 

finally a Wheat Pool delegation had to go to Ottawa and lay their case with the Federal authorities there. 

I could say to my farmer friends, “Just as quick as you get a Liberal or Tory Government in power, you 

no sooner do that than you have to start sending delegations to get redress for your freedom”. 

 

The result of that was that reluctantly, the price of wheat was raised to $1.25 per bushel – but after two 

by-elections; it took two by-elections to do it. We discover this. Now that farm incomes are a little 

better, we find that the restraints, the regulations of the income tax applying to farmers, are such that if 

they want any individual enterprise there they very successfully curb it. I don’t believe there is any 

nation either on this continent or even including Great Britain that is as stringent in its income tax 

regulations affecting the farmers as they are right here in the Dominion of Canada. The biggest deterrent 

that we have to encouraging our farmers to go into mixed farming and to increase production is this 

vicious income tax that makes no recognition whatever of basic herds, that makes no recognition of the 

fact that our farmers in the West here have a terrific backlog of disrepair to their buildings, which they 

have every right to rebuild while revenues and incomes are good as they are at the present time. In 

addition to that, I think that many of the obligations the farmers are discharging to our free enterprise 

concerns should be given some consideration in being exempted from income tax. 

 

Now we move along, Mr. Speaker. When the War was over, what happened? When the War is over 

decontrol sets in. “We’ve got to get back to normal,” they say. So the first thing that the benevolent 

Federal Government does is remove the subsidy on crude oil, which had the effect, last spring of raising 

the price of gasoline by two cents. I want to say to my hon. friend from Arm River that the Federal 

Government did not take off the gasoline tax when they did that neither. They kept it on. But now the 

suggestion is that the subsidy on crude oil will be removed entirely and the sky is the ceiling for gasoline 

prices … and my hon. friend, the Member for Arm River, said that, because of that, we should not have 

put on the gasoline tax at all. He would rather again see it paid to the oil companies rather than to the 

Provincial Treasury here to go for the building and the rebuilding of highways that fell into disrepair 

under this administration. 



March 14, 1947 

 

 872 

Then the farm machinery prices – a 12½ per cent increase last year. It is needless for me to comment on 

that; a good many farmer organizations have already done that. I would like to move on to last spring, 

when we all recall the packing house people, the packing interests above all else, went on stroke. They 

said they were not going to pay these ungodly prices for cattle and the farmers retaliated. They refused 

to deliver cattle and the result was that the packer was compelled to pay the price; but then the 

benevolent free enterprise Federal Government rushed to their rescue in July by permitting a raise in the 

wholesale prices and the retail prices of beef. 

 

Now we move on to January of this year. Cattle prices, due to the scarcity, the hard winter and the rest 

of it, have gone up again; but the Federal Government doesn’t wait for a protest or a strike from the 

packers or anyone else. They have raised the prices of beef to the consumer again by another three cents, 

which will not be reflected in the income received by the farmer, because as everyone knows, 

particularly my farmer friends, these cattle are paid for at so much a hundredweight on the hoof and they 

have no relationship whatever to the price that the consumer must pay. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, if anything else this should indicate to everyone the necessity and the 

affinity of the farmer and the worker. Here we have an example of these tremendous giant processing 

organizations standing between the worker and the farmer and the consumer, preventing them from 

making a price arrangement that would be fair to both of them. I notice that our packer friends in one 

instance blamed the packing plant worker for the raise in their prices and last fall, when the farmers 

went on strike, then it was a horse of a different color, with a different story to go with it. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, in the face of rising costs generally and where incomes generally had 

every inclination to go down, the milk subsidy was removed – a subsidy that, I believe, should have 

been retained. And then, my hon. friends opposite, when the Federal Government removed this subsidy, 

had the audacity to suggest that a Provincial Government should put such a subsidy on. Absolutely 

ridiculous! It seems to me that the Members of the Opposition are absolutely hysterical in trying to 

devise and concoct schemes to deter this Government from achieving the objective and purpose towards 

which it is directing its efforts. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this spring it has been intimated that the wool bonus will be removed, according to a 

letter received from the Federal Minister of Agriculture. We have not yet had any indication that the 

wool bonus would be continued, but we, as a provincial government, intend to pay our share of that 

wool bonus whether the Federal Government comes into the scheme or not and the Hon. Member for 

Arm River can put that down as one direct benefit, so to speak, for agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say something about the hog situation as it has prevailed over the years and 

as it exits at the present time. As we all know, it makes pretty sorry reading to the farmer. First we were 

told to produce more hogs and help win the War. The next thing we knew we were liquidated 

completely out of hogs, but we should not have been liquidated out of hogs. It might come as a surprise 

to the farmers of Saskatchewan to know that with the prices prevailing, last summer, we 



March 14, 1947 

 873 

could have made lots of money raising hogs, according to the Hon. J.G. Gardiner. You see, the Hon. 

Minister of Agriculture at Ottawa claims to be a farmer. He stated out as a school teacher, wound up to 

be a professional politician and thought it would be a pretty good idea to have a farm too. I think Mr. 

tucker will be looking around for some land. If he is, I’ve got a place that I can sell him pretty 

reasonably. 

 

Mr. Danielson: Of course, you haven’t got eleven sections! 

 

Mr. Nollet:  Here is the advice that Hon. J.G. Gardiner was giving, last year when we were making, 

and justifiably so, for increases in hog prices. He said, “Well, I can raise hogs on my farm much cheaper 

and more profitably in Saskatchewan than I can on my farm at Guelph, Ontario.” Apparently he has a 

farm in Ontario, too, now; maybe he is a little big afraid that we might confiscate this farm on him here 

in Saskatchewan … 

 

Mr. Procter:  I wouldn’t put it past you. 

 

Mr. Nollet:  … so he decided to play safe and have one in Ontario, too, so that he could say to the 

farmers: “I am just like you. I was raised between two rows of corn.” 

 

But that was a ridiculous statement to make when every farmer in Saskatchewan knows that it was more 

profitable to raise hogs in Ontario than it was in Saskatchewan. The proof of that lies in the fact that, 

when we wound up this year, we were not only short of hogs, but we were short of feed as well in the 

Dominion of Canada. It must have been a pretty big pill for the Hon. J.G. to swallow to increase those 

hogs. And I might say, Mr. Speaker, that I suggested to the Hon. J.G. Gardiner that, since the British 

Food Ministry was very willing to pay increased prices for our hogs, knowing that they would not get 

them otherwise – and they were interested in getting our bacon – an increase might be allowed. As a 

matter of fact, I suggested to Sir Andrew Jones, in Ottawa, that now that we were paying a subsidy on 

barley to get the barley, the only way we were going to get the hogs was to pay a little more for the 

hogs, and Sir Andrew absolutely agreed with that. I mentioned it to the Federal Minister and I am very 

glad that he has taken my advice in that regard. Perhaps if he kept on doing so, who knows, we might 

make a pretty good Minister of Agriculture out of him yet. At least he would not be getting it from a 

university expert, he would be getting it right from the horse’s mouth. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Or from the other end. 

 

Mr. Procter:  You picked the wrong animal! 

 

Mr. Nollet:  There are a few things more that I would to speak about in connection with the Federal 

handling of the agricultural situation and this doesn’t come out of the other end, I would like to say to 

the Hon. Member for Moosomin. I am going to talk about the fertilizer plants that the Federal 

Government very obligingly gave back to private enterprise – one in the East and one in the West; 

enterprises which, publicly owned, would have 



March 14, 1947 

 

 874 

meant a whole lot not only to western agriculture but to eastern agriculture as well. 

 

I should like to read some excerpts from “The Western Farm Leader”, in which the Canadian Federation 

of Agriculture stress the stabilization of agriculture generally and particularly has severe criticism of the 

sale of the nitrate plant. Here is what they say: they charge that it was a breach of faith when the Federal 

Government sold the Welland plant. The item goes on: 

 

The Canadian Federation of Agriculture delegation makes protest to the Government on the basis of 

their convention resolution. 

 

And they say this: 

 

The sale of the Welland Nitrate Plant to private interests was vigorously protested by the delegation 

representing the Canadian Federation of Agriculture when its general submission on behalf of the 

organized farmers of the Dominion was made to the Cabinet, charging positive breach of faith on the 

part of some Government officials at Ottawa, in that the nitrate plant at Welland Ontario was sold to 

private interests after the Canadian Federation of Agriculture had been given to understand that this 

plant was to be kept in operation by the Government. The annual convention of the Federation had 

directed that such protest be made to the Government … 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the CCF is not the only organization that believes in the socialization of certain 

industries. Here is the Federation of Agriculture, speaking for the farmers of Canada, demanding exactly 

that – and these are types of industries that should be taken over. Mr. Speaker, I will welcome the day 

when the Federal Government at Ottawa takes over completely these huge processing plants that process 

farm commodities. It is probably not generally known that prices are not set by the farmer; they are not 

set by the Government either. These huge monopolies set the price to the farmer and they also set the 

price to the consumer. And I think that that is a power too great for any disinterested, unsocial-minded, 

exploiting enterprise to possess. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I must be moving along. It is to be noted, too, that generally speaking there has been 

a general raise in price levels throughout, on necessary commodities including food and other items, 

particularly those items which the farmer will buy, all of which means an added burden and rising cost 

of production on the farm. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I might say something with regard to my own estimates, the estimates for the 

Department of Agriculture. It was intimated by the Leader of the Opposition that these increased 

estimates for Agriculture were not real after all, because most of the increase was accounted for – half of 

it, I think the Hon. Member said – by the fact that the Lands Branch was transferred to the Department 

of Agriculture. I wish the Hon. Leader of the Opposition would scrutinize the figures a little bit more 

closely before he makes these charges. The truth of the matter is that, last year the Lands Branch, when 

it was attached to the Department of Natural Resources, had an appropriation of $135,000; that has been 

raised this year to $418,000, a difference of $283,000. This, added to the amount 



March 14, 1947 

 875 

that will be available in the Feed and Fodder Branch, will give us a sum of $464,000, which will largely 

be used, or entirely used, for the development and conservation of feed and fodder supplies. 

 

I should like to mention some other items of expenditures that are to be made and which, I should say, 

will be made on behalf of agriculture and will directly benefit agriculture. For instance, we are planning 

a new building at the University of Saskatchewan to provide dormitory rooms for students attending 

these schools of Agriculture, at a cost of some $500,000, half of which, I understand, the Provincial 

Government will bear. That most assuredly is some assistance to agriculture, in spite of the fact that 

apparently, according to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, we should not have any more of these 

experts running around. I shall refer to that a little more later on. 

 

In addition to that, in the Department of Rehabilitation and Reconstruction, in connection with land 

clearing in the north, the Carrot River Valley, it is expected that $250,000 will be spent there to clear 

land and make it available to veterans. In addition to that again, the Department of Municipal Affairs 

estimates an expenditure of $200,000 in land clearance in connection with and in continuance of, the 

northern settlement rehabilitation scheme. This makes a grand total, outside the Department of 

Agriculture, of $700,000 that will absolutely benefit agriculture just as much as though the estimate 

were right in the Department of Agriculture itself. As a matter of fact, I would far rather see that 

expenditure made in that way, under the Municipal Department and under the Department of 

Reconstruction, because they are very closely related to the specific problems involved – one in 

connection with the re-establishment of veterans, the other with the re-establishment of the northern 

settlers in the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to devote some time to explaining briefly the emergency feed situation 

that has developed, this year. I want to assure the House at once that it is the policy of the Department to 

move away, definitely move away, from the old system of handling feed and fodder. To be sure we had 

to have recourse to it again, this year, as an emergency, but the $460,000 which I just mentioned will be 

spent to get away from the necessity of shipping feed and fodder constantly into those dried-out areas. 

We have been doing that for years and the one thing that impressed me was this: here the old Liberal 

administration had been doing this for years and years; as a matter of fact some $183,000,000 was spent 

in pumping relief, feed and fodder into those dried-out areas, but they never learned the lesson. We 

learned that lesson that you provided for and we intend to move away from your system. The Hon. 

Member is smiling. Well, I came in here last year, but I can assure the Hon. Member for Arm River that 

we will be moving away from it very rapidly, another year. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  It is taking you a long time. 

 

Mr. Nollet:  We’ll get there. But speaking of the emergency feed situation, this year, we partially put 

into practice the policy which we decided. Before we ever have a satisfactory arrangement whereby we 

can adequately, under emergent conditions, supply farmers in dried-out areas, we as a province are 

going to have to control that feed and fodder. The old system of making 



March 14, 1947 

 

 876 

contracts is pretty much a thing of the past and has proved a headache both to the Government, to the 

shippers and also to the recipients of the feed itself. Why, up in our country, in spite of the fact that the 

problem was larger, we are still waiting for hay up there. Of course, we don’t ever expect to get it. Those 

were the conditions and those will always be the conditions where you begin to scout around, late in the 

winter, to make contracts with private individuals for feed: the weather is bad and there is some that 

don’t want to pay particularly now when incomes are up and the people are reluctant to go out and bale 

hay. The feed supply that we had available, under the provincial control, at Kisbey, moved very rapidly 

into needy areas and I might say that our surveys up to then indicated that that supply would be quite 

sufficient. 

 

One remarkable thing about this whole feed situation, this year, is simply that the actual requests for 

feed have not been extensive when you consider the hard winter we have gone through and that is 

largely due to the fact that our program and campaign for the conservation and utilization of every bit of 

feed that the Department could find available had good results. I am informed by the agricultural 

representative from the southwest that never before had there been so much feed put up in that country. 

Now those were good precautionary measures; the feed was there, for a winter that was the worst winter 

we had experienced, and I don’t think the Hon. Member for Arm River, in his long yeas of residence in 

this province, has ever seen a winter to equal this one, when railways were tied up for three and four 

weeks and not even street cars in the city of Regina could move. 

 

I am not using that at all as any reason why supplies should not have arrived. Here is what I say: the 

responsibility for indicating to us the amount of supplies required is on the LIDs and the rural 

municipalities and as I say, up to the end of November, the number of orders received was not great. But 

right along, as I saw this winter develop and snow come – being a stockman, I am most assuredly aware 

and was every time these early snows come, of what might happen – we immediately, before ever any 

additional orders came to us, began to make a survey of the entire province to see if there were feed 

supplies available in Saskatchewan. I want to remind the Hon. Members that, in this province today, we 

have nearly 2,000,000 head of cattle, 125 per cent more than there were in this province in 1939. 

Therefore, with this early start, we found that much of the feed in the north and northeast was required 

for livestock there, although we had indications earlier on that some would be available. We discovered 

that out of 69 people that shipped hay to us, last year, only three could supply us with hay, this year; 

then we went to Manitoba to get hay, established contacts there and I might say by January 10
th

 we had 

far more hay contracted for than we had orders for and we tried our best to make deliveries just as 

rapidly as we could. We encountered a shortage of balers for many weeks; baling was help up, entirely 

due to the shortage of baler parts. We contacted every commercial firm that we knew of and finally we 

were able to locate 500 bales of hay. 

 

There is another great detriment to that old system of supplying feed. It is the fact that once the 

Government makes a contract with a shipper, private individuals go around the Government and order 

individual shipments at a higher price. We found that to be the case repeatedly and that is why, generally 



March 14, 1947 

 877 

speaking, an individual could get hay quicker than the Government can, but he pays the price. Generally 

speaking, we have to boost our prices accordingly and, of course, the recipient of the hay pays the price. 

 

I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that I want to make any reference at all to the particular herd of cattle 

referred to by Hon. Members opposite. I think that everyone pretty well understands the condition there 

and I can say to them that they took the wrong case if they want to make political capital – and I think it 

was pretty cheap politics, in view of the situation – and they must know what it is where a group of 

people ordered a measly three carloads of hay to sustain 600 head of cattle; it isn’t a drop in the bucket. 

Any livestock man knows that and he knows this too: this isn’t like the days of 1936 when we didn’t 

have sufficient income from cattle, when prices of cattle were so low that you couldn’t ship cattle any 

place economically. Today, prices of livestock are good. If I had a herd of 600 cattle any place in this 

province and get feed put up where there was feed and move the cattle to it and I could do so 

economically, today, without any great loss. 

 

Mr. Procter:  You sure can’t move the feed to the cattle. 

 

Mr. Nollet:  All I have to say to the Hon. Member is, if that is all I’ve got to move to cattle to keep 

them alive it wouldn’t be worthwhile moving it or moving the hay to them at all. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to turn to the Agricultural Representative Service. I have noticed that the 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, while he said that this service might serve a useful purpose, nevertheless 

it was another case of experts telling people what to do. Well, we have had these experts around in this 

province for quite a number of years. The only trouble was that under the previous administration there 

were not enough of them scattered throughout the province. The few that we had were concentrated 

mostly in the large cities and they would take a sojourn out occasionally and see the best farmers in the 

country all the way from Saskatoon to the Alberta border and then they would come back home and call 

it a day. That was the kind of service agriculture was getting under the setup at that time. 

 

Now, I don’t see why the Leader of the Opposition should take exception to these experts, these 

so-called experts. Do I derive from that that we should stop educating these agriculturists at the 

university, that we should discontinue the building of a medical college at the university because experts 

are going to be telling us what to do? Sometimes, I think the Hon. Leader of the Opposition should take 

some expert advice from his doctor: I think he has got a very bad case of political neurosia. 

 

We have expanded our Agricultural Representative Service from a vote of $64,000 for 1944-45 to 

$524,000 today. But the Hon. Member for Arm River says that that is not going to be any direct benefit 

to agriculture anyway. Well, I just cannot understand these two gentlemen’s reasons. One of them said 

to me, some time ago, to get busy and get my share of this Budget. Well, not because he encouraged me 

at all, we did get a very good budget for agriculture. Now he says, “It’s no good anyway; it 



March 14, 1947 

 

 878 

isn’t going to help agriculture very much.” Let us take a look at that and see if it is going to do 

agriculture any good. 

 

I would like to take a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, to try to outline briefly to you the Agricultural 

Representative Service and also outline to you the purpose for which it has come into existence. We 

want the Agricultural Representative Service in the Province of Saskatchewan to pay dividends and I 

know it will pay dividends. I know that when these young men – who are not going to be experts telling 

people what to do, but young men and some older men who, when working through local committees 

and advising local committees, 325 of which are set up in municipalities and LIDs of the province; when 

you get the technical and research knowledge that is available funnelled out to the people in the country, 

where you have a group of people studying a problem together, you are definitely going to better 

agricultural conditions. Instead of going and seeing the best farmers in a district, we have got to go and 

see the poorest farmers in the district. My friends know, they have seen many cases where one farmer 

will consistently raise, on the average, a 20-bushel crop of wheat and the farmer right next to him will 

probably get a 10 or a five-bushel crop; improper farm practice. Now, if we can bring the poor farmer up 

to a level and on a par with our better farmers believe me, the Agricultural Representative Service will 

far more than pay for itself. 

 

We have got to remember, too, that in Saskatchewan we have a tremendous productive potential. It 

might be astonishing for many to know that we have some 35,000,000 acres, under cultivation in 

Saskatchewan and that that represents 40 per cent, of the Dominion’s total cultivated acreage. As has 

been proved in the War years, we doubled and trebled and, in some cases, upped our production in some 

lines five times, when manpower was at a minimum, when just the old people were left on the farms. I 

am convinced that we can increase the volume of our agricultural production tremendously and thereby 

bring greater wealth into the Province of Saskatchewan. And, provided the Federal Government sees fit 

to adopt a fiscal policy that will pay production coasts plus an income that will equal what is termed 

‘parity’, we need have no fear of even a $70,000,000 Budget in the =co-op. 

 

Those things are all within the realm of possibility and it is just towards that end that we are going to 

direct the major efforts of the Agricultural Representative Service. We intend to start right with the 

source which is basic. There are a lot of areas in our province where, through proper land utilization, we 

cannot only stabilize farm conditions but we can infinitely increase farm production. The great problem, 

however, is to give a stability in that southwestern corner of the province where, in the dry years, as 

Hon. Members know, it extends outwards and grows larger. I am very conscious of the fact. The lesson 

has been amply driven home to me in those bad years that we experienced and that I experienced as a 

municipal reeve. That has been a lesson and, believe me, we should learn that lesson. 

 

Therefore our first effort will be directed towards bringing stability in the southwest part of the province 

by building up reserves of feed there closest to the point of need; by encouragement of the individual to 

do that; by direct assistance to him; by assistance to the municipality, acquiring blocks of land and 

where, under dry farm conditions, we can set that land 



March 14, 1947 

 879 

aside to provide reserves of feed which the municipalities will put into their banks. We are prepared as a 

provincial government, too, to develop irrigation projects for the municipality and acquire land for them, 

get it blocked up and use it as a feed reserve. In addition to that, too, there are areas such as Rush Lake 

where, under two arrangements with the Dominion Government, we are preparing to build up provincial 

feed reserves. I think that on that basis we can lick this whole problem of drought. We must do it. Then, 

of course, there is the matter of increasing the quantity and quality of our farm products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that this working through the local committee is somewhat of a departure in the 

technique of bringing science and research to the farmer. It makes people realize that they have a 

common interest with the scientists who are bringing the scientific knowledge to them; at the same time 

it provides for group action. It encourages people to think in terms of the community and not as an 

individual. 

 

Perhaps some extracts taken from a recent district board meeting will be very interesting to the Hon. 

Members and I hope convince them that we are not wasting this money that we are spending in the 

expansion of our Agricultural Representative Service. You hear a lot of talk about agriculture being big; 

it is big and we are going to make it more big and give it a more solid foundation and, I hope, a more 

lasting one. 

 

Here is the observation of one representative from one municipal committee, who was in attendance at 

the first district board meeting of District No. 27. Here is what the says, making his observation: 

 

First, you will agree with me that the men in research laboratories of our universities and the 

experimental farms have been and are doing wonderful work, but where we have failed is in getting 

the results of their research incorporated into the everyday lives of the farmers of this province. Every 

little while you see couples, who are getting up in years, selling out and moving to town because their 

children do not care to carry on with the farm and who in the majority of cases can blame them, when 

you go out and see what the living conditions are in most of these places as compared to what they 

could be with modernization? 

 

One man’s observation. I am going to go on and give you an indication of the various projects that these 

committees are suggesting. We are asking them: 

 

You take a look at your municipality; see what you can do. If you are in the southwest, if there’s an 

irrigation project, what can you do about it? Or are there other lands available that could be used, put 

into a community pasture and various projects of that kind? 

 

Here is a good example coming from the local committee. He said: 

 

When we get to forage crops our whole committee seem to agree exactly the policy that we are trying 

to carry on, of the provision for feed, the proper rotation of crops and mixed farming generally. 



March 14, 1947 

 

 880 

I want to say this, too, before I go on: one thing that has accentuated the feed situation, in addition to the 

2,000,000 head of cattle that we are using, is the combines; people are not saving straw any more. 

Therefore we have to get them conscious of the rotation of crops and going into forage crop production. 

Well he goes on: 

 

When we get to forage crops, our whole committee seem to agree, everyone present felt that more 

forage crops should be seeded, especially for feed. Most agreed that the present rotation of 

summerfallow the first year, wheat, the second, barley or oats the third, would work out fine. Around 

Lake Lenore, some claimed that the cereal crops are much shorter than a few years ago and the soil 

seems to have broken down to a fine dust. Erosion is a definite menace both by water and by wind. 

The people seem to be very little aware of the dangers of erosion as in the fall almost all combine 

stubbles are burned. 

 

Now you can notice, right through that whole observation, as this committee is studying this problem, it 

is fitting right into the policy that the Agricultural Department would have liked to have seen put into 

practice for years. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that all the legislation in the world that you could pass 

with authority will never bring the same results as this type of work will bring. 

 

Here is another: 

 

Farm accounting was discussed at length and very few farmers follow the habit of daily recording of 

their transactions. 

 

Now that would be very welcome news to Mr. Abbott, I am sure. I do think that there is such variety of 

subjects and so many projects that committees of this kind can get into. 

 

Another one: 

 

There has also been considerable discussion at our meeting over a matter of the full drainage of the 

district known as the Ranch Slough. It was found that 2,100 acres would be more or less affected. The 

council of the municipality was asked to again present this project to the proper authorities, asking 

them for an investigation by the engineers of Highways and the department of Natural Resources’ 

engineers. 

 

Here they have found a spot whereby, with some drainage, they could build up feed reserves. I think this 

is a grand idea and I think, when we get these people working right into a general over-all plan, that in 

the final analysis we are not only going to lick this problem of drought, but we are going definitely to 

increase our agricultural production in Saskatchewan as a whole. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wish to sum up as briefly as I can though I would have liked to have gone more 

into detail of my Departmental work. Perhaps I should make some reference to the veterinary situation 

in the province. 

 

As all members know, we are very short on veterinarians in Saskatchewan. The Dominion Services 

alone, I understand, are 



March 14, 1947 

 881 

short – the shortage is not confined to Saskatchewan, but affects the Dominion as a whole – some 95 

veterinarians. As Hon. Members also know we have been paying scholarships to Saskatchewan boys and 

girls who attend the Veterinary College in Guelph, Ontario. We have some 31 students in attendance 

there, but it will be some time before we have sufficient graduates coming back to Saskatchewan to 

adequately assist us in the establishment of Veterinary Service Districts. We expect a few graduates 

within the next year and a few more the following year. Some 12 will probably be graduating in 1949. 

That’s far away before we begin to replenish the loss sustained in veterinary personnel in Saskatchewan. 

But after that date, we should be able to expand very rapidly with the development of Veterinary Service 

Districts. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in closing my remarks: it has always impressed me, in the past, as when we were 

struggling as an infant movement to acquire political power not only in this province but in the 

Dominion, that the old parties had no definite solution to our economic ills. History has definitely 

proven – the Hon. Member for Arm River smiles, but I have tried to cast back over the years to give 

some indication as to what happened under their administration and the upholding of their so-called free 

enterprise system. What were the results? They brought the nation to the abyss of ruin; they have created 

a load of indebtedness on our farm population that they have not yet discharged and I might say that, 

when we hear this talk about farm prosperity, I wonder sometimes whose prosperity it really was. It 

seems to me that the creditors got the biggest chunk and now Ilsley or Abbott is bound to get the rest. 

That being so, I think that our farm people, who have selected this particular group to represent them in 

the Legislature realize that they cannot go back again to the old parties and the fact that they had no 

solution in the past is every guide and indication that they still have no solution for the future and when 

one takes note of the trend that is already developing and setting in, we appear to be heading, very 

rapidly, back to the same condition that prevailed at the close of the last War. There are, to be sure, some 

brighter spots. We welcome and give credit for, the contracts that have been made with Britain, although 

we reserve the right to criticize prices when they have no relationship to actual farm costs. We also 

welcome the fact that the Wheat Board is going to continue to function, though we regret that the Wheat 

Board’s activities will not be extended to coarse grain. All of those things we welcome; however, there 

is the gradual rise in farm production costs that cannot be ignored and if I know my economics, I know 

that this present economy is made to do one thing: It is made to draw back all the purchasing power that 

was created during the War years. 

 

It is about the best blotter that I know to gather up the people’s savings and once again concentrate them 

in the hands of a few people and then, when purchasing power runs out, again, loan it to people who 

wish to purchase goods or what not. So I can see again that even though the obligations have been 

discharged, this old debt creating system of ours has been stepped up to accelerated speed and will 

create debts again more rapidly than it ever did before. The people who sent it here know that and rather 

than losing support in the country, this particular group on this side of the House is gaining support; I 

think the people appreciate what this administration has done not only for the farmers of Saskatchewan, 

but for the people of 



March 14, 1947 

 

 882 

Saskatchewan generally. I think on the other hand that many of the people of this province wish, on 

more than one occasion, that this administration was in power at Ottawa. I note, with regret, that now in 

the postwar years, after all the glowing promises of the Prime Minister of Canada during the course of 

the War, when he had great visions of a new earth and a new heaven, he has apparently gone blind and 

lost all his vision since. 

 

Today, it is retrench; today, it is cut prices, cut your wool bonus, cut your milk subsidy; cuts all the way 

down the line, every one of which affects the little man and all of which the farmer and the consumer 

and the working man is compelled to carry the burden of, in the final analysis. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it appears to me that this group, rather than losing strength, must be gaining 

strength in the country and I do know this: it was the workers, the farming people and the businessmen 

of this province who realized that, due to changed economic conditions due to the tremendous advances 

of the machine Age and the technical skill of the people, being able to produce tremendous quantities of 

goods, a different type of economy was necessary. We were elected by a group of people who realized 

that this was a changing world and that our economy must change with it. Nothing has happened that 

might change these people’s minds and I am quite sure that nothing is going to happen, when one 

recognizes the tendencies that are already developing, that will ever change their minds until we have 

reached the goal toward which we have directed our sights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to make one more reference before sitting down. I don’t like to raise this 

matter again, but in my previous address in this House, I levelled a criticism at certain tendencies that I 

felt would, if continued, involve us in another titanic struggle. Everyone, I think, pretty well understands 

– I am sure that my good American friends understand that my criticism was not directed at the 

American people, was not calculated to be unfriendly to anyone. It was rather given in the spirit of 

wanting to live in a friendly, neighbourly world. It has always been one of the tenets of this political 

group here that we should have absolute free exchange of goods between all nations, and it has been our 

belief that that could never be accomplished as long as nations and national economies were on a 

competitive basis. We realize that it is vital that the internal economies of a nation be co-operative 

before you can have a free exchange of goods between nations. We want to see that and we don’t want 

just American dollars; we would like their goods; we would like British goods. We should like to see 

goods flow from one country to another undisturbed, to the end that all the people in the world would 

share in the good things of the world. 

 

I am going to say, Mr. Speaker, that I do believe there are occasions when a man must say the things that 

be conscientiously believes to be true. I want to say that I have seen – so have other Members – the 

result of the policies adopted, not by the people of any particular country, but by the privileged groups in 

particular countries, who, after all, pretty well decide and direct foreign policy. I should very much like 

to see a change back to the foreign policy as laid down by the late Franklin Delano Roosevelt, to the end 

that we can effectively have a United Nations in this world, regardless of differences in ideologies or 

thought. I cannot think, for the life of me, 



March 14, 1947 

 883 

that there is any good justification for bringing up the terrible holocaust in this world that we are bound 

to have if another war should come. It seems to me that it is quite apparent to every thinking man and 

woman that, should it occur again, we could easily blot out civilization. That must not happen. That is 

my great concern and I would feel, Mr. Speaker, that I would not be true to my own conscience if I did 

not raise these objections. I must do so. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that after all we are only on this earth a very short while, you and I. We have a 

very important part to play. When I think of the little short time that we are here and the entire 

insignificance of ourselves as human beings. I think that we should do what we can conscientiously and 

contribute to the general betterment, not only of living conditions, but of conditions generally 

throughout the world. I am very conscious of the affinity between common people, not only in Canada 

but in all parts of the world. I cannot help but think and must believe, due to my deep religious 

convictions, that these people have all been created in the image and likeness of one Creator, who has 

the sole prerogative to not only give life but to take life; that that life and that prerogative rest alone with 

that one Creator. To deny that would be tantamount to giving up our entire Christian philosophy. 

 

That being so, Mr. Speaker, the whole purpose of my remarks, as certain people of the press know and 

certain politicians know, was directed to that end and not to create any antagonisms between any 

peoples anywhere. I think that the people who are creating the antagonisms in the world, today, are those 

kind that enjoy special privileges and special power. They are the ones that would have us flung into 

another War from which humanity probably would never recover. I do hope that, by being a little bit 

more fair and pen about these things and a little bit more outspoken, speaking out for the things that we 

believe in and our convictions, probably another War could be prevented, and the advances made by a 

civilized world retained. I do hope, Mr. Speaker, that more people, not only in this Dominion, not only 

in the United States, Great Britain and elsewhere, will take that same attitude in regard to international 

relations. We must have a United Nations that will work. We must have world government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. P.J. Hooge (Rosthern):  Mr. Speaker, hearing these millions of words, many of them futile that 

have been uttered, I am inexpressibly weary and I don’t intend to take up as much time as some of the 

Members have, but I would like to get on with the job and wish that many others would feel the same as 

I do, that there is some possibility of getting through with this before Easter. 

 

Now in regard to the Budget Speech; I have read this booklet, I have heard the Provincial Treasurer and 

I have read this booklet several times and in my words, I don’t claim to be any master, but in my 

opinion, if I were asked to mark this document on a rhetorical basis, I think I would be liable to give the 

Provincial Treasurer full marks. Now there are some real beautiful voluptuous passages in here. I would 

just like to think they are worthwhile bringing them to the attention of the House again. One of them is 

this: 



March 14, 1947 

 

 884 

I gain a sense of Saskatchewan searching toward a new day, wider horizons, greater opportunities for 

the energies and initiative of its people. 

 

Now, I read that sentence several times and I thought at first it must be some typographical error, but I 

prepared several copies and they all seemed to be the same. Now this seems a peculiar statement to 

make by somebody that is a socialist, when it says horizons and great opportunities for the energies of 

the people. I think that sentence should really be corrected to read this way: “I gain a sense of 

Saskatchewan marching toward a new day, wider horizons, greater opportunities for the energies and 

initiative of its government.” Certainly the ideology of the government is to have control of the means of 

production and distribution and consequently I can see no reason for suggesting that there is, as long as 

this Government remains in office, any opportunity for the initiative of its people. 

 

Another of these passages occurs at the end of the address: 

 

New occasions teach new duties. 

 

I am glad to learn that the Provincial Treasurer is learning that it is not so easy to carry out the duties of 

government as possibly he thought at first. Another passage: “Time makes the ancient work uncouth.” 

That is another true statement. This philosophy that the Government is correlating, of course, is nothing 

new. It is quite ancient and has been discarded many times and I think he should take this to heart 

himself that time makes the ancient work uncouth and not follow this ideology any longer. They must 

upward still and onward who would keep abreast of truth. I was also glad to note that the Provincial 

Treasurer has learned that it’s quite a struggle to keep abreast of truth. During the election prior to 1944 

a great number of promises were made. Certainly at the time this party was not abreast of truth and he is 

apparently now realizing that in order to keep abreast of truth they are having quite a struggled. 

 

After reading this, one is involuntarily reminded of the words of Shakespeare when he says: “On what 

meat does this our Caesar feed that he has grown so great.” If I were called upon to prepare a Budget 

which is not at all likely, I would consider several matters. 

 

First of all I would consider the source from which the finances were to be obtained. Now, in this 

province, I think, about 90 per cent of the revenue is probably derived from agriculture. For that matter I 

would consider the hazards of the experience in this province. The income fluctuates from about 

$70,000,000 in some of the ‘30s to about $400,000,000 now and that the employment in this province 

and the income revenue is seasonal. We have a long winter during which we haven’t the revenue we 

have in summer and fall. Then I think I would take account of the fact that our population is not 

decreasing but diminishing. I think I would take notice of the rising cost of living. Also whether we have 

markets for our products. Another matter that I would take into consideration is the need and first of all, 

I would consider the need of the people, secondly, the need of the Government, but certainly I think the 

population of this province, particularly that of the farmer should come first. They should be entitled to 

life, 



March 14, 1947 

 885 

liberty and the pursuit of happiness. 

 

Now a third point to consider would be the amount. It has been pointed out by the Leader of the 

Opposition, when added together with the hospitalization expenses and automobile insurance, the 

approximate amount required to pay to the Government is around $65,000,000. That would be about 

twice the Budget in 1944. In the same province we have less people now to pay it. I added the gross 

income of this province, not only pertaining to agriculture as my figures are and I have interpreted this 

Budget correctly, I think the gross income from all sources, agriculture, mining, forestry and game and 

so on is approximately $429,000,000. Now this Budget then would represent approximately 15 per cent 

of this amount, that is the gross amount, but we must remember that this income of $429,000,000 or 

nearly $430,000,000 is not the net amount of the income. That amount must be very, very much smaller 

so that this Budget actually is, I don’t know what the percentage would be, but it would be a very much 

larger percentage of the net income of the people. And, I think it must be generally admitted that the 

income I am speaking about is very high indeed and that it does not represent by any means the average 

income in this province. As I pointed out a little while ago, the income has varied from about 

$70,000,000 to around $400,000,000, so the average income is very much lower than that. And then as 

to the allocation of the amount. 

 

If I were preparing the Budget I would never, never fix it at $65,000,000, taking those facts into 

consideration. In allocating it I think I would first consider that the farmers of this country, who produce 

the largest revenue, should have first consideration and secondly the Government. I should also 

endeavor to make some provision for a surplus. Now it seems to me that in the preparation of this 

Budget practically all these factors have been disregarded. It seems to me that the first consideration in 

the preparation of this Budget was that the Government should be considered first and foremost above 

everything. The Government of this province we all know, has increased its Cabinet very materially, it 

has increased its staff, it has a number of planning boards for various purposes. Now I don’t say that 

these planning boards are not required, I think it is, but the Cabinet should be able to get along without 

these planning boards and without incurring this expense. 

 

Now then, the Government has certainly made every provision to take care of itself but what has it done 

for the people? In spite of what the Minister of Agriculture said the gain for agriculture is not impressive 

when it is considered that the largest amount of the income of this province is derived from agriculture 

and the amount which agriculture obtained from this Government is quite insignificant, but not only 

does the farm industry get very little relief from this Government, but actually it is being taxed more 

heavily than ever, in spite of the fact that we have the largest Budget that was ever presented to any 

Government in this province, in spite of the fact that an additional $9 million or so will be obtained from 

the Dominion Government. We farmers naturally expected that we should be entitled to some share of it 

representing as we do the largest portion of the population and representing as we do the largest 

producers of revenue, but there seems to be no release in sight at all. 

 

When the -Dominion Government announced that they were cancelling the two-cent gasoline tax, at 

least the people in my 



March 14, 1947 

 

 886 

constituency certainly hoped and fully expected and thought they were entitled to the dropping of this 

tax entirely and I am sure that they will be very much concerned and very much disappointed that this 

tax is being re-enacted and not only that, but it was actually the intention of the Government to add 

another two cents tax. Of course, they didn’t feel very sure that was very effectively turned down. Then, 

again, we have the Education Tax. 

 

This tax, of course, was first of all introduced by the Liberal party as an emergency measure and one of 

the things that this – at least in the Rosthern constituency, I can’t say what was said in the other 

constituencies, but certainly in the Rosthern constituency – every speaker that was there, at least those 

that I heard, they definitely promised that this tax would definitely be eliminated just as soon as the CCF 

Party was elected. It was absolutely an unconditional statement, it wasn’t equalified in any way by 

saying as soon as we can find some other means of taxation in fact, these promises were so definite, that 

a number of people coming to the stores the day following the election were very much surprised and 

chagrined to find that this Education Tax was still being collected. 

 

Well now this is over two years since that and the Education Tax, at least a portion of it is still being 

collected. In view of the fact that the revenue of the Government has materially increased and in view of 

the fact that it has been explained by the Cabinet, that they never said it would be abolished but they 

only did promise that it would be abolished if other taxes were found in its place and other taxes having 

been found to replace it, certainly that promise should now be redeemed. Since the Education Tax has 

been removed from food, it seems to me that the Education Tax now hits the farming community 

probably harder than the rest of us. They have to buy a great many things at the stores on which the 

Education Tax is still payable. The Education Tax did not hit them quite so heavily while the Education 

Tax was also being collected on food because a great many farmers produced their own food on the 

farm, but now that that has been eliminated, I think it really bears more heavily on the farming portion 

of the community than on anybody else. For instance, many of these farmers will buy very expensive 

machinery on which Education Tax was to be paid and I think they therefore have a very just reason to 

demand that this promise of the Government should now be implemented by the entire removal of this 

tax. Now the Government states and Mr. Nollet, the Minister of Agriculture dwelt at some length on the 

fact that agriculture was being helped by the agricultural representatives. Well, now I have been in 

Rosthern for nearly 14 years now and although I am closely identified with the farming community 

there, I have yet to see one of these agricultural representatives in Rosthern. It is possible that they may 

come there, but certainly I have never seen any of them. It may be that Rosthern like many other 

activities of the Government, is that Rosthern in this respect is overlooked like it is in a matter of 

highways and various other things, but on one occasion in any event when I wrote to the Government in 

connection with a certain matter pertaining to livestock, I was definitely told that a certain agricultural 

representative would call on me, but at least a year has elapsed and he has never called at my office yet. 

I have no doubt that these men have a knowledge of agricultural problems and they may be of some 

assistance, but I think that the majority of our farmers are not asking for 



March 14, 1947 

 887 

assistance. I think they can handle their problems very well. 

 

My father came to this country in 1875, he simply settled on the bald prairie, there was no railroad there, 

there was no school, there was no houses, nothing of any kind and he helped himself and many 

thousands of people have done the same thing. 

 

You are all very well acquainted with the expositions of the Hon. Member for Arm River, I think apart 

from any political views he may entertain. I think you must certainly be impressed with his knowledge 

regarding agricultural problems. Now, he may be exceptional, but I am sure there are very many farmers 

in this country that also have a very intimate knowledge of agricultural problems and I think that as long 

as we have men of that type these agricultural representatives are not absolutely essential. Of course, it 

may be that they do some help, but to say that just because a number of agricultural representatives have 

been appointed, I don’t think that it means that agriculture has been assisted to a great extent. I am just 

wondering to what extent the Hon. Member for Arm River, for instance, has been assisted by these 

representatives. I think that possibly if they came around, he could tell them a thing or two about the 

matter in question. 

 

And then we are told, of course, that apart from agriculture that there has been other help extended. We 

are, for instance, told that there is a wide scope for private enterprise. Now that seems very singular, 

indeed, in view of the ideologies of this Government and particularly in view of the fact that certain 

enterprise, at least in the constituency of Rosthern, has not had any wide scope. 

 

The Hon. Members will remember that when the Insurance Bill was being discussed, I pointed out that 

in the constituency of Rosthern, that the company, carrying on insurance in a small way, at extremely 

low rates and on a mutual co-operative basis, and I tried very hard to have the company accepted under 

the provisions of the Act, but it was absolutely of no avail. Now, we are told by the Provincial Treasurer 

that there is wide scope for private enterprise, as long as it apparently doesn’t interfere with them then 

there is no scope at all. He also tells us in this Budget that they are going to aid industries. Now that is 

surely a complete reversal of the policies which they have been following so far. They have been 

starting their own enterprises and doing everything possible to discourage other enterprises and now 

they are actually going to aid industries. 

 

One of the things that is going to help this province is the Crown corporations. I think the statement 

which the Member for Last Mountain made concerning this is very much in point. These Crown 

corporations, I can’t see that they are serving any useful purpose, at least the majority of them. We have 

13 of them and I think the most of them serve no useful purpose. The field of endeavor in which they are 

engaged is fully covered by others who are not exploiting the people of this province. Quite a few of 

them only give seasonal employment. 

 

The Clay Factory, for instance, I believe is shut now and there is one man on guard simply watching the 

plant and I think the same must hold true of others as well. There seems to be no great increase in 

employment as less than 1,000 people have employment in all these Crown corporations and that has no 

appreciable effect on the employment situation in this province. 



March 14, 1947 

 

 888 

then, again, there seems to be no tenure of office. Every once in a while we read in the paper that this 

manager and that manager has been fired and somebody else appointed and, of course, it is an unfair 

competition for those businesses that have been established here for a number of years. Established 

businesses contribute business taxes, municipal taxes, income taxes and so on, all of which are not 

contributed by these private corporations. I think the Government, if it wants to be fair, should compete 

on an even basis with these others. 

 

I was rather interested to note in the Budget Speech that the advances to these Crown corporations had 

been fully approved by the Legislature. Well, I don’t know, I knew, of course, that some advances were 

being made, but whenever we tried to find out what they were being made for, we were never told so 

that I can’t agree with that statement that we were fully apprised of what these advances were for. 

 

We are also told in the public speech that the people are shareholders in these Crown corporations. Well, 

I found one of these wool patches the other day on my desk and I suppose this is one of the dividends 

that we are paying now by the Woollen Mills at Moose Jaw. I expect that likely that is the only dividend 

that that Mill will ever pay. I am rather inclined to doubt the statement about being shareholders because 

when the matter was raised here just recently about giving back the public revenue back to the farmers, 

that it belonged to the farmers, well there was a great howl from the Government offices and we were 

made to withdraw this. Apparently now this is a tax that is definitely paid by the farmers, it should be 

their property, but still when we were certain it belonged to the farmers, well then we were made to 

withdraw that statement, the farmers apparently have no share in it at all, it is the Government who owns 

it. So when you talk about shareholders in Crown corporations, I can put very little faith in that. 

 

We are also told how the Civil Servants have been treated so very well. Well, it is true they have 

received some increase in wages but I understand their time of service, their length of service per week, 

is also extended and that the extra hours that they have to work practically takes up the amount of 

increase in wages. 

 

Now, in regard to the education grants, the Government seems to take a great deal of credit for the 

educational grants. I don’t think there is any credit due to the Government at all, in connection with the 

education grants, in fact, I don’t consider it to be a credit at all. According to the public accounts the 

total amount collected, total amount of Education Tax collected, was $5,900,000 and some dollars, close 

to $6 million and apparently according to the Budget there is an increase, so it must be over $6 million. 

Now the total amount not taking on the grants, but the total amount spent on education in this province 

in the fiscal year that will be ending shortly, is less paid by all of us, is more than enough to pay the 

entire outlay that is spent by this Government Branch. When we are paying it directly for a specific 

purpose we should, certainly the Government should not say they are making a grant … and we are not 

getting all of it by any means, we are getting just that portion of it which is paid out in these so-called 

grants. Now, just in this connection, nothing in the way of criticism at all, but I, in talking about the 

Education Tax, I say this as a suggestion to the Provincial Treasurer, in talking to a local 



March 14, 1947 

 889 

druggist in Rosthern not long ago, he mentioned that he thought that the collection of the Education Tax 

could be considerably simplified, the Provincial Treasurer has admitted that the tax is somewhat of a 

nuisance, but he stated that though some of the nuisance could be taken out of it by following this 

method, that the Government could compare stamps in the various denominations counting, say, with 

one cent and then going up and then they could supply the dealer with the stamps and he could keep 

record of the amount of which he had been supplied. He would not be immediately paid for, but a record 

would be there. Then when articles were sold … education tax, the dealer would, of course, from time to 

time ask the Government to replace these stamps and these replacements that were attained after the … 

would be paid periodically as it is now, but in this way the dealer would not have to keep any record of 

stamps at all. He would merely be paying for these replacements and then in case he sold his business or 

there was a sale of bulk or anything of that kind, where he discontinued business, the matter could be 

checked up very readily. The Government would have a record of the amount that was originally sent to 

the dealer, they would have a record of the amount which he had paid and the difference would 

represent the amount for which the dealer was liable. In this way the dealer wouldn’t have to keep any 

books in connection with it. His stamps would at all times show how much he owed the Government 

and it would, I think, simplify the matter very greatly, also the collector. 

 

I think that is a matter that could very well be taken into consideration by the Provincial Treasurer and to 

try and make the collection of this tax as easy as possible for the dealer’s concern. With regard to the 

Social Welfare, although the Budget is about down where it used to be in 1944, there is not nearly a 

corresponding increase in the social Welfare. If I remember the Budget correctly we cannot expect any 

further increase in this regard unless further revenues of taxation can be found and I think it is very 

doubtful that they will be found because the Government seems to have explored every possibility of 

changing revenue. 

 

The Minister of Municipal Affairs, in speaking to this Motion the other day, ridiculed the Leader of the 

Opposition in connection with a point that we had made about giving some aid to crippled people for 

which no provision is made at the present time. He said that, when he was in power nothing had been 

done about it and he couldn’t give them anything but love, he ridiculed, rather said that he also believed 

in a Santa Claus. While I am very glad that not only the Leader of the Opposition, but the Liberal Party 

believes in a Santa Claus, a Santa Claus in my opinion is a person who is supposed to be generous, the 

Liberal Party has always been that, and to ridicule the matter of love, I think, is certainly something that 

is very strange for a person who advocates socialism and co-operation and all that sort of thing. The 

frame of mind of the Minister of Agriculture, however, I think shows the general frame of mind of most 

of the Members of this Cabinet. They have, in my opinion, very little sympathy for anybody outside of 

the Cabinet. 

 

I am very glad to hear that you have at least some of them, those of you who were … I was thinking 

from the remarks that he made particularly when he referred to Mr. McNab and said that he had had 

some labor trouble and when he had eventually died he thought that all laborers would be very glad to 

hear it, or something to that effect. Now, I think that statement was 



March 14, 1947 

 

 890 

rather careless and that he had absolutely no kindness whatsoever in his system and that should a 

mosquito light on him, it is altogether likely that that mosquito would probably die from pneumonia. 

 

Now, in talking about this matter of, I was just referring to, the Hon. Premier during the election in 1944 

– I don’t know whether he made the statement but, however, it was made with his permission and 

authority and knowledge, that there should be no blackout on health and that health services would be 

furnished free, but now we find that health services have to be paid in advance. Sometimes, at least, all 

we do get is possibly reservation and if we want it, it is sometimes not available. 

 

Then again, we have another Member of the Cabinet, the Attorney General. He talks about a Bill of 

rights here in the House, but I understand over the radio when he talks, he mentions that people who 

believe in a different ideology other than the CCF, why, he said, that they should be tried by our courts 

and punished. Then we have the Minister of Highways. He, according to answers given in this House, 

spends a great deal of money in his constituency of Rosetown. He spends very little in the constituency 

of Rosthern. Now, if there is any cons where money should be spent, it is certainly there. 

 

We have, I think it is hardly unique in this respect, we have about nine ferries in that constituency and 

we haven’t a single bridge there. We should have two bridges, but we haven’t one. 

 

Then we have the Minister of Education, another Member of the Cabinet. Without consulting the people 

and against their will, he established a number of larger school units and he is permitting and certainly 

hasn’t got his attention, permitting the use of a text book in the school which glorifies Russia and 

indoctrinates the pr with the ideology that is being practiced in Russia. 

 

Now then, we have another Member of the Cabinet, the Minister of Labour. He spoke this afternoon. 

He, apparently, is very proud of the -legislation he has enacted regarding labour, but the fact is that 

practically all, a good many of the decisions of the Labour Board have been challenged by the reports 

and not upheld. The result has been that there has been some dissension between employers and 

employees and altogether, I think, that he has rendered a disservice to labour in this province. One of his 

Bills was instrumental in having the box factory at Prince Albert seized. 

 

Then we have the Minister of Co-operative. We have been told different times that there is no 

government that interferes in connection with his co-operatives. I don’t know if he knows anything 

about this incident, but I was told on fairly good authority, that recently Mr. Cadbury at the last 

director’s meeting, was appointed a member of, appointed director of that company and that Mr. 

Schumiatcher was quite active in the director’s meeting. Now, since Mr. Cadbury himself is one of the 

members of the Planning Board here, there seems to be pretty close connection between the Government 

and the co-operatives in that case. 

 

We have the Minister of Agriculture, who spoke this 



March 14, 1947 

 891 

afternoon at some length. Now, he really wound himself up and got so excited that I thought he might 

burst a blood vessel and that would have been a great loss. Of course, Mr. Gardiner would undoubtedly 

have regretted that very much because he no doubt has been getting his advice right along from the 

Minister of Agriculture in this province. I don’t know how that loss could have been rectified had he 

actually, had that actually happened. So I would suggest that in the future he should be more moderate in 

his speech and not endanger his health, because we could not spare his valuable advice. His advice, not 

only covers the immediate field of agriculture, he seems to have knowledge of provincial affairs, 

Dominion affairs, international affairs. Not so long ago, he himself admitted it, he advised President 

Truman how to run the United States. He apparently is advising Mr. Gardiner how to run Federal affairs 

and he is advising us here how we should run our affairs. He certainly has a very nimble mind, indeed. 

He talks about this Government – that people would like to see this Government in Ottawa and 

apparently he entertains some hope of being the next Minister of Agriculture. The Minister spoke quite 

compassionately and tried to explain just why he had to refer to the United States of America here some 

time ago. But, I don’t know why it was necessary that he should compare that gallant, famous gentleman 

MacArthur with Hiro Hito. Certainly that doesn’t at all coincide with what he said here today. The 

Minister has attacked the Dominion Government very severely about, apparently gets such large 

amounts of money out of this province and pays back very little. He didn’t mention anything about the 

very large relief payments which the Dominion Government made and which has been cancelled. He 

didn’t mention anything about the generous family allowances that we get here. He also forgets that 

there was a War here not so long ago and that this War has to be paid for. Of course, he belongs to a 

party that until not so long ago wasn’t at all in favor of sending any soldiers out of the country and he 

apparently now refuses to, he doesn’t want to pay for the War. 

 

In the constituency of Rosthern people don’t object to paying reasonable taxes to pay for this War, 

which won us, or preserved our democracy, but apparently the -Minister of Agriculture thinks that’s just 

simply stealing from this province when these taxes are being collected. He mentioned about the 

increase in implements, 12½ per cent, but possibly he has overlooked the fact that the J.R. Chase 

Company here a few days ago voluntarily and without compulsion from anybody agreed to reduce, 

announced that they had reduced the price of its implements by 20 per cent. 

 

You are talking about this advice coming from the horse’s mouth, well now, I think that it would have 

been more appropriate if he had referred to an animal that resembles a horse, but has longer ears. I think 

the most effective reply to the Minister of Agriculture’s criticism of the Dominion Government is the 

fact that we had a better election in 1945 than the majority of people at that time have ever had. It didn’t 

agree with his views and endorsed the work of the Dominion Government and returned it to power. and 

that was particularly so in the constituency of Rosthern, where Mr. tucker was elected with a very 

substantial majority. 

 

Now, we also have the Minister, another Member of the Cabinet, the Minister of Natural Resources. He, 

by enactments which he puts through, the minerals are being lost by those who 



March 14, 1947 

 

 892 

do not pay the taxes he imposes. The fish now have to be sold to the Minister and he apparently has 

dominion over everything in sight. 

 

We have, also, the Minister of Social Welfare. Now, he was talking about exploitation when he was 

putting through the Insurance Bill and still when it comes to the constituency of Rosthern, confiscates 

the business of provincial company. He talks about social welfare and you would really think that he 

was very much enthused with this subject, but when some time ago, I brought to his attention that there 

was a ferry man that had been working on one of those ferries in the constituency of Rosthern for a 

matter of 15 years and that was in the course of his duty he had been hurt and that he was now partially 

disabled – I brought that to his attention personally, through letters and then had also the Leader of the 

Opposition bring this to his attention. but any assistance in that connection was absolutely denied 

although it has, I think, been the policy in previous years to pay a gratuity in matters of this kind. So you 

see from this that we have a Cabinet here, just like the Minister of Agriculture, that doesn’t seem to have 

an abundance of sympathy with anything. I claim it has no heat at all. It has, however, a soul, a boot sole 

and it effectively uses this sole to crush, to oppress. It wouldn’t matter so much if it had a head, but it 

doesn’t have a head either. 

 

We heard some other Members, we heard the Member for Wilkie and he also saw fit to emulate one of 

the Members of the Cabinet in criticizing the President of the United States in regard to his 

administration of that country. I am sure that any remarks made by the Member for Wilkie will not be 

taken seriously by the United States of America. It is just like a mosquito bite on an elephant, it doesn’t 

make an impression, but it is a nuisance just the same. 

 

 

We have heard the Member for Humboldt. He deplored, he mentioned the fact that a great deal of 

money was being spent for liquor and tobacco. Well, that is true and particularly so since this 

Government took office. The fact is that most of us are so disillusioned, we have been so frustrated, that 

we have such a sense of futility that unless we can have recourse to some of these pacifying agencies 

that we simply could not exist under this administration. In other words, this Government has a great 

responsibility in regards to drink and smoking. 

 

We heard the Member for Elrose tell us a story about a washing machine. He said that some woman had 

given birth to a couple of children, but her desire was for a washing machine. Well, now I am quite sure 

that if this woman had waited to have an electric washing machine, that with the electricity supplied by 

this Government, she would have waited a long time until her wish was fulfilled and she could give birth 

to a number of children before that washing machine ever arrived. He also told us about the veterans in 

the Eston district, not being afraid to take up leases instead of buying it from the Government. Well, I 

think that is quite natural, Mr. Speaker. I think these veterans, they are astute men, they have seen a 

good deal of the world and they know that this Government just hasn’t a long existence, that they will 

only be here for a few years and in the meantime these leases are quite attractive. I think they pay about 

a fifth or sixth share. Well, that is a very attractive rental with the expectation that as soon as the Liberal 

Government is elected they will buy this land. There is one 



March 14, 1947 

 893 

thing that struck me about the Member for Elrose. He spoke very moderately, but at the same time there 

is one thing that struck me as rather singular, I think, he congratulated every Cabinet Minister in the 

Government for something or other. Now this absolute supine subservience seems to be most 

remarkable. I can’t understand how a man and particularly the Member for Elrose, he was a high school 

teacher and has a mind of his own, how he could possibly agree, if he had an analytical mind, how he 

could possibly agree with all the policies that are being hoisted on us by this administration. 

 

The Member for Last Mountain displayed a good deal of courage and he was a notable exception in 

being able to state at least some of his views and not being dictated to by or overwhelmed by this 

Government and I was very glad that he disassociated himself from the remarks of the Minister of 

Agriculture and from the remarks of the Member for Wilkie in connection with this criticism of the 

United States. 

 

Now then, Mr. Speaker, this Government has amply demonstrated that although it is making every 

provision for its own perpetuation by increasing its … by increasing its staff, by exploring every 

possibility for everything, in that way it is perpetuating its own existence. It has also shown that it cares 

nothing for anybody else and it has no sympathy for the people of this province. It loves nobody but 

itself and it does not co-operate with the entities in this province, it even competes with them and if 

necessary will confiscate the business. This Cabinet here, is entirely self-centered and selfish and I am 

quite sure that we can expect no relief from them whatsoever. If any relief could have been expected 

from this administration it would have been this year; our finances are buoyant; our revenue has been 

very high. It is not at all likely that it will ever be higher; it is not at all likely that our finances will be 

more buoyant than before. We know that we can’t get anything more now from the Dominion 

Government than we have this year. There have been no other debt reduction by the Dominion. 

Apparently this has all been fixed. So that under these circumstances no relief can be granted by the 

Government this year, I am sure that we can’t expect any at any time. 

 

Under these circumstances, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the motion. 

 

Mr. Procter:  Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:00 o’clock p.m. 


