



















































Hansard: February 06, 1947


103 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Fourth Session — Tenth Legislature 

6th Day 

 

Thursday, February 6, 1947. 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. J. Gibson (Morse) for an 

Address-in-Reply. 

 

Hon. W. S. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, before commenting on the Speech from 

the Throne directly or the remarks that were made pertaining to it, I would like to take a few moments to 

draw to the attention of the Assembly the rather premature death of two citizens who have been well 

known in various spheres. I have reference first of all to the death of Mr. G. N. Griffin, who gave long 

and valuable service to education in this province. Mr. Griffin was one of the men who came west in the 

earlier days of the province and who served in the province as a teacher. Improving steadily his 

educational qualifications and growing in ability, he became a superintendent of schools and more 

latterly occupied the position of principal of the Regina Normal School. He retired from the Normal 

School staff because of ill-health some two years ago. He has been very well-known as the writer of 

several textbooks and particularly well-known in Regina and throughout the province as an inspirational 

speaker. Those who have had the privilege of hearing Mr. Griffin speak will agree with me that there are 

few people at any time or any place who could speak and leave with one greater inspiration than Mr. 

Griffin. He died earlier this week as a result of that dreaded disease, cancer. 

 

 The other death to which I have reference is the death yesterday or this morning of Miss Ellen 

Wilkinson, M. A., M. P., Minister of Education in His Majesty’s Government in Great Britain. Miss 

Wilkinson made a notable contribution throughout the 55 years of her life: National organizer of the 

National Union of Distributive and Allied Workers, a member of the Manchester City Council, four 

times Parliamentary Secretary in various capacities in the Government and more recently Minister of 

Education in the Labour Government. I think it is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that she was the 

second woman to achieve Cabinet rank in Britain and to note that both women achieving this rank were 

Members of the Labour Party. This is particularly significant. She was one of that group of people of 

whom it is sometimes said “they came up the hard way”. Her father was a cotton mill hand. Her 

education was gained by scholarships. She graduated with her Master’s Degree from the University of 

Manchester and she was active in the early years in the women’s movement to obtain women’s suffrage. 

She was the type of person who, when there was trouble anywhere involving the welfare of people, there 

she wanted to go to find out for herself. So she travelled to Ireland, to India, to Russia, to Germany, to 

Spain. She returned from her trip to Spain after a perilous voyage due to the fact that the ship on which 

she was travelling was 

  



February 6, 1947 

104 

attacked by rebel bombers. She returned to pilot through the House one of the first measures to protect 

buyers from unscrupulous salesmen. It was said of her that everything was small except her mind. 

Recently she represented the Constituency of Jarrow, one of the more distressed areas in Great Britain. I 

think the story of one incident will serve to indicate the kind of person she was. In 1935 a new hope was 

lit in the hearts of the people of Jarrow due to the fact that a Committee had suggested that here was the 

ideal site at which to develop the new Bessemer steel process. The people there had visions of getting 

out of debt and being able to buy new shoes; but the old established firm at the point objected; the 

international cartel which controlled the market threatened to close the market and the deal was 

prevented because of that opposition. At that time a delegation of some 200 strong from Jarrow decided 

to march the 300 miles to London to protest to the Government. At the head of that delegation marched 

Ellen Wilkinson, woman MP. They reached London, 300 miles away; the Prime Minister refused to see 

them; the petition was presented to the House of Commons and was refused. Ellen Wilkinson continued 

the fight but to no avail at that time. Of such stuff, the spirit, the heart of Ellen Wilkinson was made. She 

died yesterday, at the age of 55. Society and the cause of justice can ill afford to lose at this critical time 

such people as Ellen Wilkinson. I suggest it fitting that we pay her this tribute, thinking about her 

contribution, in this House. I say then, Mr. Speaker, turn to the matter of the Debate. 

 

 I find myself in considering the remarks of the Leader of the Opposition feeling somewhat akin to a 

man who went home for supper and found hash. He refused to ask the blessing and in explanation said, 

well, I blessed everything here before, why do it again. This is pretty much the situation with regard to 

the remarks of the Leader of the Opposition. It was like hash for several other reasons. We had had it all 

before and evidently he had had to search hard for material. When he did get it, it was bits and pieces, 

the origin of which even the cook would not disclose. There were, however, some evidences of it being 

possibly meat pie because there was considerable evidence of crust. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And baloney. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Regardless of that when it was all mixed together he presented it to us supposedly as 

meat. Mr. Speaker, I am inclined to be suspicious of hash unless I have a lot of confidence in the cook. 

May I suggest that after hash of that kind, anybody would try the patent medicine to which he had 

reference. 

 

 I note (and it is interesting) that at least one person agrees with the Leader of the Opposition and that 

person is the Editor of the Leader-Post. It is always surprising to me the unanimity which there seems to 

be between the Leader of the Opposition and the Editor of the Leader-Post. I would suggest that they get 

together and think over the slogan that the Leader-Post supplies which says: “Where all think alike no 

one thinks very much.” 

 

 In his general criticism of the Speech from the Throne he had reference to the fact that there was little 

reference to education which he termed the most important department (and I thank him) or to 

agriculture. So I took the trouble to look up 

  



February 6, 1947 

105 

 

copies of the Journals of this House of the Speech from the Throne for 1941, 1942 and 1943. In 1941 I 

find that education is not mentioned. With regard to agriculture they did have some reference to there 

having been a substantial crop and to the quota system established by the Wheat Board. There was a 

sentence near the end of the Speech which said: “Until the Dominion Budget has been presented, it is 

impossible to determine what provincial action may be advisable.” 

 

 In 1942 I find again that there is no reference to education and I find that the reference to agriculture 

was almost completely, if not completely that which referred to the work of the Federal Government. In 

1943 I find again there is no reference to education and under agriculture they mentioned the campaign 

to increase production; they mentioned the farm labor supplies and they mentioned, “we have had a 

large crop.” 

 

 In the light of that, Mr. Speaker, I think we must be a bit chary about accepting the sincerity of the 

criticism of the Leader of the Opposition on those points. 

 

 It is interesting too, to note that he reserved for himself the right to attempt to make a case against 

planned economy, by reference to something that was happening in Great Britain, his authority for 

which was a quotation from the newspaper published I believe by the Searle Grain Company but that the 

rest of us were not to have reference not only to Great Britain but not even to any other province in 

Canada. He labored hard in an attempt to establish a theory that there was some conflict, some necessary 

conflict between a planned economy and individual freedom. He stressed the “rugged individualism”, 

forgetting, I suggest that this retreat to individualism has been the retreat of those who defended 

feudalism and of those who defended slavery. He tries to convince us this laissez-faire economy which 

he would accentuate would somehow make individual self-interest add up to social good. History shows 

that such has not been the case. The net result of this unrestrained self-interest has been the turning of 

individuals and groups of individuals who have attained power because of their wealth against the 

welfare of society. This age-old retreat has always led to crass selfishness and a disregard for the general 

welfare. It is freedom, true; but it is freedom of a negative type; freedom to exploit natural resources; 

freedom to exploit slavery; freedom to escape paying back to society its just due; a freedom which spells 

wealth and position for some and poverty and exploitation for others. On this type of economic 

individualism some men have been able to build a temporary security, a temporary security which was 

periodically upset by ever-deepening depression and when shaken from this security history shows that 

these people have turned to the sham security of Fascism. That is the history of Germany and that is the 

history of Italy. When the cards were down it was the freest of the free enterprises who supplied the 

finances that made it possible for the Fascist to gain control of the people of those countries. That is the 

type of “rugged individualism”, the thing that this “rugged individualism” has conferred on us in the 

past. 

 

 He had some reference to financing the program under a CCF Government and I think that he said that 

only with regard to social welfare was any reference made to federal aid. I mention this, Mr. Speaker, 

merely to point out that in the Hon. Member’s own words, he strayed pretty close to fiction; because in 

the copy of the program that I have I find on page 15 under 

  



February 6, 1947 

106 

“financing the CCF program” it has reference to questions of increased federal aid for Old Age 

Pensioners, education and health services and goes on to say that it is generally recognized now that if 

Confederation is to continue, Canadian unity to be realized, then there will have to be a redistribution of 

income between the federal and provincial governments to enable the provinces to maintain and expand 

essential services. 

 

 As I mentioned before, he had reference to education as the most important department in the 

Government. I must admit, Mr. Speaker, that is one thing with which I am inclined to agree; but I find it 

rather difficult to reconcile that statement with the record of his Government. I do not want particularly 

to mention the period of the 1930s when times were difficult, when our average rural teacher’s salary 

was something like $400 per year and when there was one time when accrued arrears of salaries 

amounted to almost $2 million and when the Government of the day loaned money to school districts to 

enable them to pay up these arrears — loaned it to them. A truer index might be the period of the 1940s 

when they maintained a minimum salary of $700 and even at that arrears were accumulating at the rate 

of thousands per year; or when they maintained a system in which there were many school districts 

operating with a mill rate of from 20 to 45; or a system of superannuation which was somewhat $300 

less per teacher than it is today. 

 

 In spite of that record the Leader of the Opposition can stand up and offer these pious platitudes about 

the importance of education. He disliked any reference to federal aid; he made accusations for each 

statement that might be misinterpreted. He made reference for example to the statement in the Speech 

from the Throne to the schools operated jointly by the two units of Oxbow and Estevan, I know not yet 

what objection he was taking to that. He simply said it might be misinterpreted. 

 

 I would like to point out in connection with this school that it is one of the things which indicates the 

fact that under the larger units local control is increased; that here is a school which it would have been 

impossible to have under the system of administration which they insisted on continuing. Here is a 

school in which the curriculum is not the standard curriculum but one which was worked out by the 

members of the Board, the teaching staff and the superintendents there with advice from the Department 

and from the University. 

 

 To return to the matter of the dislike for federal aid, I have here two exhibits, Mr. Speaker. One of 

them is a copy of the “Saskatchewan Liberal” printed on Thursday, January 27, 1944. This contains an 

account of the address given by the Minister of Education at that time, Mr. Staines, to the meeting of the 

Liberal Council held in Saskatoon just prior to that date. I have reference to it because the things which 

Mr. Staines talked about in this pre-election priming are almost identical with the things which the 

Liberal Party promised us in this other exhibit, which is a copy of the Liberal program for education 

arrived at at their recent convention and reprinted in the School Trustee a few months ago. I should like 

to look over some of the items which were talked about having particularly in mind the accusation of the 

Leader of the Opposition that we were asking Ottawa to do things. 

 

 Take this statement in the “Saskatchewan Liberal”: 

  



February 6, 1947 

107 

 

In order to improve the health administration, standards of teacher training, pay of teachers, the 

curricula, courses for bright and backward children, junior high schools and adult education, current 

expenditures of the Federal Government on education are proposed to be doubled. 

 

Here was the line given to the council before the election: 

 

In order to do all these things current expenditures of the Federal Government are proposed to be 

doubled! 

 

 Mr. Speaker, the Federal Government had made no mention at that time of doubling or increasing 

expenditures. Reference was being made to a document drawn up by the Canada Newfoundland 

Educational Association which said that in order to do these things expenditures ought to be doubled but 

did not say that the Federal Government ought to or might do the doubling. 

 

 The Leader of the Opposition had some interesting comments, he thought, in reference to the lack or 

the failure of this Government to carry out its promise to re-organize the financial and administrative 

arrangements with regard to school districts. But in this same paper there is this statement by Mr. 

Staines: 

 

This has already been done in Saskatchewan by 1939. 

 

Not 1944 but five years before. He said the CCF proposed to bring about changes which had already 

been brought into effect as long ago as 1939. Mr. Speaker, that is the Minister of his Government saying 

that these things had been done then. In spite of the fact that last year our additional equalization grants 

were some $600,000, in spite of the fact that over a two-year period we have given assistance to districts 

for building and repairing to the extent of almost $800,000, we — he says — have failed. We have done 

that much more and we still have not done the job which they said was done in 1939. To go on, 

reference is made to public health nurses of whom they say that at the time there were 21. I might say 

for the information of the House that there are today 54 of these nurses doing field work. Then again he 

quoted from Section 5 of Item 222 of the Federal Health Insurance Draft Bill to provide medical 

inspection of school children in all sections of the province for the detection and control of 

communicable diseases and for the prevention and correction of physical defects. Not the Provincial 

Government but the Federal Government. He said this was the Liberal policy — I think he was correct 

— it was the Liberal policy — a draft bill which never made a real appearance and which has not yet to 

this day materialized, Liberal policy, friends. Then the matter of a medical college at the University was 

being considered; it is now, Mr. Speaker, being built. Their scholarship fund is compared with the CCF 

proposals. We have increased that fund to the extent of $20,000 annually. I had the pleasure of hearing 

the President of our University in two different Convocations say that during this two-year period there 

has been no need for any student in Saskatchewan who was academically qualified to be denied 

University training because of inability to finance. Now, Mr. Speaker, as it has been said, I made 

reference to that document merely because of its similarity to the promises today — this document said 

they were going to do these things when the Federal Government doubled their expenditures or did 

certain things they had already promised. I think we can realize from that just what his Government 

would 

  



February 6, 1947 

108 

be doing if it were sitting in office today. 

 

 Reference was made also to the shortage of teachers and it was inferred that nothing was being done 

about it and that by 1950 there would still be nothing done about it. Well, Mr. Speaker, the statement 

regarding the shortage of teachers was a statement of fact which I think needs to be drawn to the 

attention of the people of this province over and over again. The Throne Speech I suggested should 

reflect conditions in the province and that is what the statement did. Reference was made too that this 

shortage exists in other places. Again, Mr. Speaker, I have no excuse that such a statement appeared. 

There is a shortage of teachers; there is a shortage of doctors; there is a shortage of plumbers; there is a 

shortage of nurses; there is a shortage of woollen underwear. We are still suffering from the War and 

will continue to suffer for some time. But the statement of the Leader of the Opposition that the situation 

is worse than at any time previously I think cannot be substantiated. It is one of those wild shots in the 

dark of his, one of those broad generalizations which some friend of his may have whispered to him. In 

1943, 1,800 students with a few weeks of training were released to take over schools in this province. In 

1944 there were 629. In 1945 there were 528 and in 1946 a reduced figure from that again. Of this group 

some 1,300 qualified for interim first class certificates last summer. There were at the beginning of the 

fall term some 800 students enrolled at the Normal Schools. Some of them have gone out to take 

positions until January at which time they will return to the Normal School and will be replaced by 

another group. Enrolled at the College of Education this year, we have some 300 students; that is in 

contrast to a maximum previously of somewhere between 40 and 50 students. 

 

 There are many reasons for this shortage of teachers. We lost, of course, great numbers during the war 

— into the armed forces and into industries. I think I am right in saying this, Mr. Speaker, that even if 

there had not been a war but merely a return to normal economic conditions many teachers would have 

left the profession and gone into more remunerative occupations. One reason why there is a shortage is 

because of the memory of the insecurity — a memory of unpaid salaries under a Liberal Government 

and the instability of an outmoded system of administration. Another reason was the lack of sufficient 

recognition of the importance of education and consequently the status of teaching and I suggest that 

when reflections are cast on teachers (as they were cast the other day in the House here) that in itself is a 

detriment to recruitment of teachers. 

 

 Now as to what has been done and is being done: The minimum salary has been increased as we all 

know to $1,200 and financial assistance has been made available so that districts can pay. Even under 

the $700 minimum under the previous Government arrears of salary were accumulated and if it were not 

for the assistance given by virtue of equalization grants there would be hundreds of districts in the 

province today unable to meet even the $1,200 minimum. In each of the units salary schedules are in 

operation. They are not perfect salary schedules but they represent an acceptance of the principle. There 

has been an overall increase during the last two years in the salary of the rural teacher of between $200 

and $300. 

 

 There is an improved superannuation plan that I suggest is a most important factor in recruiting 

teachers; a superannuation 

  



February 6, 1947 

109 

 

plan, which, if not the best in Canada, is certainly among the best for teachers which as I said before 

would provide for a teacher superannuated at age 60 roughly $300 a year more than the plan under the 

previous Government. 

 

 There are improved working conditions, buildings and supplies because of the larger unit activities 

and because of grants from this Department. Teachers have greater security because of the collective 

bargaining afforded through the larger units. There is improved teacher training which is a vital factor in 

the Normal School and in the College of Education where we have, rising out of suggestions from the 

Department of Education, a combined arts and education course. Too, there has been increased 

recognition of teachers as evidenced by the using of teaching personnel in the province in departmental 

work. They have representation on the Film Board and on our general co-ordinating committee, on the 

salary schedule committee and on the University Senate. The situation is bad but things are being done. 

 

 I have no apology, Mr. Speaker, no compunction in saying that much more must be done before we 

can be assured of an adequate teaching staff. I have no hesitation nor apology in adding that until 

Dominion-Provincial financial relations are properly arranged on a basis of need (that is not the basis of 

the proposed agreement) and until our natural resources are exploited on behalf of society and until our 

economic affairs are so arranged that society’s wealth is returned for society’s good, that condition will 

not be reached either here or in most of the other Canadian provinces. Nor have I any apology to offer 

for adding that the Opposition in their constant needling of people whose taxes may have gone up (many 

of whom could afford it in order to pay for this important service) and in their constant attitude of being 

against change and improvement are not contributing to the solution. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, 

they are contributing to the detriment of the solution in order to further their own selfish political ends at 

the cost of educational improvement. 

 

 Reference was made by the Leader of the Opposition to the “cumulative record cards” which have 

been distributed in the province. He showed again a rather considerable lack of knowledge in his 

remarks. In a question he had reference to a student’s report form. There has been no such form. 

Evidently, as he talked, one would gather that he had never heard of a cumulative record before. I can 

quite understand if he has not; however, it seems to me that if he had not he should at least have taken 

the trouble to talk to somebody who might be expected to know something about it before he rose in this 

House and made remarks of the kind he did. They are in fairly common use. I have here, for example, a 

copy of the form which is produced by the Vocational Guidance Centre in Ontario, which is in common 

use in the schools of Ontario. The main difference between it and ours is that ours is distributed free; 

there they had to pay for theirs. The British Columbia Department of Education is at the present time 

compiling one for their province, one very similar to the one which has been in use in the schools in 

Saskatoon. I regret very much, Mr. Speaker, the statements made here with regard to this being a 

“dossier” with regard to “gestapo” activities in connection with it. I regret the Leader of the Opposition 

singing the song of the demagogue and “Danny Boy” beside him singing the chorus. I regret it because 

it impels me to answer in like kind, to say that this type 

  



February 6, 1947 

110 

of remark which one would expect from a political charlatan of the “nth” degree and I challenge the 

Opposition to point to one thing in these reports that could be used by any state government, regardless 

of how unscrupulous it might be. 

 

 I should like to say something about the way in which this report card, this record was prepared and 

how it is to be used. It was discussed, for example, before it was finally distributed with the 

superintendents of schools in the city of Regina who are not employees of the Government. They were 

both in total agreement with it, both most anxious to have such a form at their disposal. In 1944, the 

United States Government established a national committee on cumulative records. They attached some 

importance to them, Mr. Speaker, or the Federal Government would not have established a national 

committee. This committee studying cumulative records set forth a number of items which should be 

included in a proper record form. Those are the items you will find in the record form which we are 

issuing. Pamphlets were distributed to teachers, a couple of general guidance pamphlets, one in 

particular before the record form was issued, which gave directions as to the use of it. Now to read just 

some of the things it establishes. It began with a quotation: 

 

Guiding without data is quackery. 

 

We don’t propose to indulge in quackery. It also said: 

 

A word of warning should be spoken with regard to gathering information about home conditions. 

Many parents and pupils, too, may resent an unheralded inquiry about intimate family matters. They 

may adopt the attitude that these things are personal, private and none of the teacher’s business. If, 

however, both parents and pupils have had the opportunity to discuss the guidance value of such 

information, if they are convinced that the purpose of the inquiry is to effect a better understanding of 

the pupil and his problems, the information is likely to be given freely and willingly. The wise teacher 

will not request such information before the parents are ready to give it. Only the unwise teacher will 

attempt to obtain this information by indirect methods for that way lies disaster. 

 

 This was followed up by another bulletin with regard to giving details of usage. The whole thing was 

discussed by our conference of superintendents months ago. Complete information and instructions were 

given at that time. Before they were distributed to teachers the superintendents discussed the matter with 

the teachers. Many of them have not distributed them yet because they have not had the opportunity of 

discussing them fully enough with their teachers. 

 

 I should like to go into some of the broader and more meaningful things about the record, Mr. 

Speaker. I think it is necessary because the question has been raised and the way it has been raised that 

we know why. First of all, there are differences among individuals; differences in intelligence and 

aptitudes. Those differences must be studied if the teacher is going to do an adequate job of teaching. 

Those variations affect the mental and emotional growth of pupils and must not be ignored. We have 

stated in our curriculum this: 

  



February 6, 1947 

111 

 

The extent to which a school discovers and provides for individual needs of a student determines the 

adequacy of his progress. 

 

 In order to achieve some of those objectives we have developed a guidance program to assist 

individuals to plan their education career, to make emotional, social and educational adjustments and to 

select a vocational field. Now those, I suggest, are very necessary objectives. The cumulative record is 

absolutely essential in order to carry out such a program, to encourage and enable the teacher to study 

the child as an individual. Somebody has said that “God does not make any sister ships” and it is 

essential that these people be treated and studied as individual human beings. 

 

 A word, too, about a mental hygiene program to which the school must make a considerable 

contribution. I have a quotation, Mr. Speaker, from a book written by Laycock, Griffin and Line on the 

results of some research for the National Committee for Mental Hygiene. I think it worthwhile to read a 

few paragraphs of the findings of these noted and well known psychologists and educators. They say 

this: 

 

Consider for example the outcome of 100 elementary school children selected at random without 

regard to age, sex or grade. The following predictions may be made if the trends of the last twenty 

years are maintained. Four or five will spend part of their lives in mental hospitals; four or five more 

will develop serious mental illnesses which will be cared for at home or institutions other than mental 

hospitals; one or two will commit some major crime or delinquency, will spend some part of their 

lives in jails or penitentiaries; three or four will be handicapped by retarded or stunted mental 

development that without special training or other provision, they will have difficulty in becoming 

useful and productive citizens; and of the remainder it is estimated that from thirty to fifty will fail to 

reach the maximum efficiency and happiness in life possible for them, because of unwholesome 

emotional habits and personality traits. 

 

 That I say, Mr. Speaker, is an indication of some of the fruits of the free enterprise system. Would the 

Opposition have us sit back and in the schools do nothing with regard to such a situation or do they think 

that the school can make no contribution? Is it still just a place for teaching reading, writing and 

arithmetic? It is so very true, Mr. Speaker, that a stitch in time saves nine and there is no agency which 

will contribute greater to alleviating the conditions in mental hospitals than can the school with an 

effective guidance and mental hygiene program. It is not just the matter of the teacher and the school 

using this report. In the larger centres, particularly, we have today specially trained teachers for this 

work. Our superintendents have some training in mental hygiene. The Public Health Department is at 

the present time giving its public health nurses training in mental hygiene and those people be at the call 

of the teachers. In order that they may be maximumly useful they must have some record and some 

information with regard to the student and with regard to the conditions under which he lives and works. 

 

 I should like to refer to a few appraisals of this 

  



February 6, 1947 

112 

cumulative record. The Commissioner of Mental Services in this province, looking at it the other day, 

said such a record will be invaluable. Dr. Bennett of the University of California who this year was 

brought in by the University to teach a class in guidance at summer school, said to her class one day 

when they were considering this: “This is the best record of this kind I have ever seen.” Or one might 

refer to the Star-Phoenix (and I would suggest that the Leader of the Opposition, although he does not 

believe in looking at things outside of Saskatchewan might at least read something else besides the 

Leader-Post; he should be able to go that far). In an editorial about it they said this: “Public 

understanding of this project will bring wide acceptance of it. It does no good to magnify the possibility 

of abuse while overlooking the opportunity of successful progress in the schools.” Again, “It serves no 

purpose to raise the cry of ‘socialism’ against the development of proper school records. More pupil 

guidance, not less, is the best way to develop the school service.” Or again, “A system of record in use 

in Saskatoon collegiates is well abreast of the times. This is sound educational practice. It has yielded 

rich dividends to the community. It would be a pity if school records became a political issue, or if the 

attempt made by the Leader-Post to label school records as a device of the ‘octopus state’ were 

successful. Of an editorial of the Leader-Post they say this: “This is scaremongering. The teaching 

profession in Saskatchewan contains many intelligent, alert and liberal educators on whom we are 

prepared to rely to see that the best progressive practice is developed in the interests of the children.” 

 

 It is high time, Mr. Speaker, that we realize that education is a science and I suggest that if the 

Opposition had taken a decent course — the opportunity of sitting down and talking for a couple of 

hours with any one of dozens of competent people they would not have spoken as they did. Such is not 

their policy. All ends for them are subjected to the ends of political expedience. 

 

 With regard to the larger unit, for the first time the Leader of the Opposition showed that he was 

clearly in opposition. He tried to crawl back in the ring at a later date but he clearly disqualified himself 

in the opening round. He is against — nobody could take anything else from his remarks in this House. 

He had one or two little criticisms based on what happened in one municipality or in one school district 

or two school districts and on something that a friend told him. On the basis of that he generalized for 

the whole thing. I said last year in this House, Mr. Speaker, that anybody who has been in the insurance 

business at least ought to know the folly of generalizing from one special instance. He had reference to 

what happened when a pane of glass was broken; he had reference to a school being moved in one 

district. When I wanted to ask him to give me the names of these places so that we might investigate he 

waved me back to my seat. In many instances it is highly desirable that schools be moved from one 

district to another. The larger unit board has the right under the Act. The Department does not approve 

that these things be done without proper local consultation. The responsibility in education is a 

collective one. It was not that way under their Act. Under the Act which they passed the responsibility of 

providing educational facilities was left with each local district. A local district had an assessment of 

$50,000 and was faced with the responsibility of providing school buildings and facilities in that district. 

We have said that it is a 

  



February 6, 1947 

113 

 

common or collective responsibility. 

 

 He had reference to some statistics again from one municipality. Note that he omitted any reference to 

any decrease in taxation so I want to make reference to some. Take Local Improvement District No. 527 

for example, before entering the unit every school district had a mill rate more than double that of the 

unit flat rate. I could generalize on that in the same way that the Leader of the Opposition generalized on 

the figures of one municipality but I do not propose to do so, Mr. Speaker. Or take the Broadview 

School Unit of which I think he was speaking. Here there are some districts in which there is a decrease 

in taxation. One of them, Forest Edge No. 4803, had a decrease in taxation from 22 to 14 — a decrease 

of 8 mills. That to him was not important. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it would have been better proof of 

his sincerity about education had he tried to give both sides of the case. It would be better proof as to 

where his interest really lies — whether it is interest in education or an interest merely in the dollars and 

cents. 

 

 I like very much a statement made by the Member for Assiniboia in speaking yesterday when he said 

that he was not so much concerned with the taxes paid as in the type of service which he received in 

return for those taxes. The Leader of the Opposition might have gone on to look at the condition in some 

of the schools not in units. I have some examples here from the Moosomin Superintendency which is not 

in the unit. They may be in the Hon. Leader of the Opposition’s constituency or they may be in that of 

his desk mate. The first one — Spring Creek — has in the last two years increased from 2 mills to 9 

mills, or an increase of 350 per cent if we want to play around with figures like that. So I could 

generalize on that, Mr. Speaker, but I do not intend to. On taking ten schools from that area I find that 

the average increase in taxation over the past two years is 90.0 per cent — these schools are not in a 

unit. I say one could generalize on that but it would be fallacious. 

 

 What are the factors which enter into increased costs in the units to which the Hon. Member had 

reference? Well, the first is the equalization effect. I wonder if they disagree with that? I wonder if they 

disagree with the principle of people helping their neighbors, if they disagree with the fact that education 

should be more of a collective responsibility. Another factor is the cost of administration. I have 

analysed the budget of five different units which we happen to have on hand and they show that the cost 

of administration was some four per cent higher than it was in the individual districts, but if one 

considers the administration costs which were there before the local secretary’s salary, individual district 

audits, advertising and so on, that increased administration cost is closer to two per cent. But the biggest 

factor of all, of course, is the factor of additional services. I have said before and I wish to repeat that 

one cannot judge a program of this kind on what happens in one district or in one municipality or even 

in one unit. One must expect to take an overall picture. In the two years in which these have been 

operating, with in many cases a backlog of years of work and disrepair because of depression and 

because of war and inadequacy of system with a tremendous burden of debt in many cases, debentures 

and DAD adjustments, with an impaired teaching staff and a period of scarcity of materials and rising 

costs, very gratifying progress generally has been made. Progress which, unless if one did not know 

what was in the schools before, one might not find. 

  



February 6, 1947 

114 

 Library services: The Speech from the Throne had reference to a 25 per cent improvement in the 

business of the Book Bureau and the Leader of the Opposition thought that it was not worthwhile 

mentioning. Well, if it was merely a matter of mentioning business of the Book Bureau, I would agree, 

but it was more than that. It indicates the growing willingness and readiness and desire to buy books, to 

improve libraries, one of the important teaching tools that we have. That I suggest is important. Helping 

teachers and audio-visual teachers who for the first time in many cases are bringing some of the 

greatness of audio-visual education to hundreds of our rural schools; new buildings and repair programs; 

high school assistance to students by virtue of helping to pay costs in lieu of transportation or boarding 

away from home, which amounts in some cases to $10,000 in a unit; dormitories in other cases and 

improved and additional facilities. At some 17 points in the province additions have been made by way 

of some technical education program, many others are planning and will be in operation during the 

coming year. Salary schedules, as analysed the other night a budget of two units would indicate a 30 per 

cent increase in salaries; improved sanitation in schools because of improvements in water supply, 

toilets and so on; more adequate supplies; the provision of noon lunches. Not all of this in every unit, 

Mr. Speaker, but some of them in every unit in two years under the greatest of difficulties and I am 

proud of many of the unit boards and superintendents who have made this improvement possible. 

 

 He labored long and steadily with regard to a charge of propaganda in the schools. He suggested that 

there had been no previous charge. Well, I do not know whether there has been or not, Mr. Speaker, but 

I do know this, that there has been a very frequent charge, perhaps not because of what was in the 

curriculum but because of what was left out and because of a lack of reality, a lack of practicalness and 

of purposefulness in the curriculum. I want to spend some little time on the matter of the Social Studies 

textbook to which he had reference, a textbook which, first of all, has been used in the Province of 

Alberta for eight years and which was revised this year in order to bring it up to date. The authors of the 

textbook, Professor McDougall of the University of Alberta and Mr. Paterson of the Ryerson Press, 

formerly of the University of Toronto and formerly of the Regina Collegiate staff. These two rather 

well-known educators to whom the Leader of the Opposition most disrespectfully refers to as fellow 

travellers. The book, as all textbooks and all school programs, was submitted to the Educational Council 

in this province and accepted by them as a proper textbook for use in the Saskatchewan high schools. So 

that you may know the proceedings and those present, may I just read the minutes of the Educational 

Council at that time: 

 

Present: Dr. J. S. Leddy of Saskatoon (who is head of the Classics Department in the University) 

Mr. S. N. McEachern of Saskatoon (who was the Commissioner of the Board of Trade at that time) 

Mr. R. L. Stutt (of the Wheat Pool) 

Mr. H. Janzen of Regina, Director of Curricula, as Chairman. 

 

Mr. Janzen as Director of Curricula was asked to present the proposed changes. He presented the new 

course; he carefully explained the new books which were to be adopted and a thorough discussion of 

the new books in each subject followed the presentation. It was moved by 

  



February 6, 1947 

115 

 

Mr. McEachern and seconded by Mr. Stutt that all the books suggested by Mr. Janzen for the Grade 

IX course, for the Grade X Social Studies and for the alternative course in biology be approved. 

 

 May I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that these charges against the Department of Education are also charges 

against the members of the Educational Council and I think that any Member ought to think rather 

carefully before making such charges. The textbook is one on social studies. I think we should consider 

carefully just what social studies are. Sometimes the term “social science” is used. In our program of 

studies we said this: “So it comes that today an effective school program of social studies, no matter 

what traditional values it may cherish, must take account of human relations in social groups, and 

provide a functional education for social living in this new uranic age.” We said this further, reporting 

on the findings of the Sub-committee on Education of the Canadian Youth Commission: “Young 

Canadians rate clear thinking on the problems of life, with understanding of the complex problems and 

citizenship responsibilities in modern society as the most important values the schools can give them. A 

significant majority of these young people express dissatisfaction with their schools’ offering in social 

science. They want the schools to get closer to the world of conflicting political, economic and social 

forces; to prepare them for graceful participation in social living and to help them discover and develop 

their vocational abilities. They rejected the traditional procedures of patriotic indoctrination and 

exercises as the most effective means of giving young people a compelling belief in the Canadian way 

of life and instead gave their endorsement to ‘improving economic and living conditions for all 

Canadians.’” And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that anybody making a curriculum today cannot omit 

consideration of such statements as that. Again we have set out as our main aim in this social studies 

course to provide material for the growth and development of intelligent, responsible, socially conscious 

citizens. We emphasized that it is not only what people learn but perhaps even more important yet, how 

they learn. In this course the students, working through this text which provides suggested references for 

discussion, will read, discuss, interview, collect data and form their own decisions. Above all, Mr. 

Speaker, they are challenged by the realities of a modern world, challenged by the realities of living 

problems. They must think their way through and I suggest that is what the Opposition are afraid of. 

 

 The forces of reaction all through history have been opposed to encouraging analytical thinking and 

they dislike the spirit of free inquiry, they would rather we look back than look at the present, the future. 

 

 I would like to make some considerable references to some of the portions of the text which, although 

they haven’t mentioned, I suggest they disagree with but with which I doubt they dare to stand here and 

disagree. 

 

Page 61 — Housing 

Are there any areas in your town or city where the housing is not up to a desirable standard? Make a 

map of your city or town and mark these particular areas. Then try to determine why they are in 

certain limited areas. What should and what might be done about improving conditions? What is being 

done in other countries? Are there any undesirable social effects which may result from living under 

such conditions? 

  



February 6, 1947 

116 

Perhaps people should not think about these things. I think they should. 

 

During the war there was a shortage of houses in many cities, especially for war workers in factories. 

To provide homes at prices which workers could pay the federal government organized a home 

building agency called Wartime Housing Limited. Find out how many homes were built in this way in 

your province and in your own community. What is being done in both to provide returned soldiers 

and their families with homes? 

 

I imagine that the Members of the Opposition might dislike this next one very much. Speaking of the 

problems of the farmers, it said: 

 

The farmers bought more land to grow more wheat. They borrowed money to pay for it with the land 

as security for repayment at eight per cent interest. By 1932 wheat was down to forty cents. Now what 

happened? Suppose a farmer had mortgaged his farm for $10,000 and agreed to pay $1,000 per year 

(principal and interest). In 1930 when the boom broke he could make his payment with 800 bushels of 

wheat. But in 1932 he must sell 2,500 bushels. 

 

I can understand it. They don’t like to have people reminded of those things. 

 

When prices fell and the farmers were unable to meet instalment payments some of the creditors began 

to seize their machinery and their farms. Thus the farmers lost thousands of dollars and their 

operations were crippled. Finally the provincial governments had to interfere to protect them. 

 

That includes credit for whatever provincial governments may have done. 

 

They may not like this specific problem on pages 76 and 77. 

 

In 1928 a prairie farmer who owned a section of land, bought a threshing outfit for $3,500 and some 

purebred cattle costing $1,200. To guarantee payments he signed promissory notes with a first 

mortgage on his farm as security. He agreed to repay the money in ten equal instalments with interest 

at eight per cent per annum. He also agreed to pay eight per cent on any unpaid interest. Question: (a) 

Find out what was the average price paid for wheat in your community for each year 1929-1945. (b) 

How many bushels of grain must be raised each year to meet the farmer’s payments of principal and 

interest. (c) Taking the various factors into consideration and remembering that the farmer must also 

raise enough grain to pay his taxes and living expenses would he be able to keep up his payments? If 

he were not able to do this, what would happen to his debt? What might happen to his farm? 

 

 I can understand, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Members of the Opposition might not like to have people 

remember. Better that we go further in history where things did not affect us. 

  



February 6, 1947 

117 

 

 A real condition which I had occasion to investigate not so very long ago indicated an original 

borrowing of $2,000 on which $2,500 had been paid and on which the mortgage company today wants 

$3,500 in order to complete payment. These are things which perhaps the Hon. Members of the 

Opposition would rather not have brought to mind. 

 

 Speaking of co-operatives: 

 

Now let us suppose that the housewives (and their husbands) join together to form a big retail 

organization of their own — a consumers’ co-operative — to which the fruit can be shipped direct by 

the producers’ co-operative. The profit to the owners can be still greater and the cost to the housewife 

still smaller. Question: Find out about the co-operatives in these countries and report your findings. If 

there is a co-operative organization in your community investigate its organization and estimate its 

value to the community. Have the manager of a local co-operative give your class a talk on the 

benefits to be derived from co-operative effort. Afterwards discuss his address, for there may be 

members of the class who will not agree with what he said and they should be allowed to express their 

opinions. Investigate the claim that living on co-operative farms is pleasanter and yet cheaper than on 

the individual farm. 

 

 Investigate the claim. I suggest nothing could be fairer than that, though I notice that this is one thing 

to which Mr. Tucker objected, saying that this was introducing children — preparing them for the 

socialization of land. It seems as if he is admitting at last, Mr. Speaker, that co-operative living is 

socialism. Or this section: 

 

The co-operatives, as exemplified in the Wheat Pools are instances of large-scale service systems. But 

even larger co-operatives are not sufficiently powerful to control markets and set prices because there 

is strong competition from great private corporations. 

 

 Mr. Tucker has object to that. If he takes exception to that, Mr. Speaker, may we also expect him to 

vote for the abolishing of the Wheat Board and reopening of the Grain Exchange? 

 

While American farmers were being paid to destroy hogs and cotton and while Brazilian farmers were 

dumping coffee into rivers, hunger and shivering nakedness were common. Why should there be 

hunger and too much food, under clothing people and too much clothing? 

 

Propaganda, people should not think about those things, they should close their eyes. And to go on: 

 

Farmers for example often have to sell their produce to processing companies at less than the cost of 

production. Fishermen are in a similar position. Yet the consumer may find that the price he pays for 

the finished product is only slightly lowered, if at all. Evidently our industrial system should be so 

controlled by the Government or otherwise, that the primary producer received a fair share of the price 

paid by the consumer. 

 

And to indicate again, there is the book: 

  



February 6, 1947 

118 

Occasionally a great corporation may have at its head some person who appreciates these 

responsibilities and tries to face them. Three examples which may be cited are the Procter-Gamble 

Soap Company in the United States, the Cowan Cocoa and Chocolate Company and the Lever Soap 

Company in Britain. These firms have done much to give their workers regular employment, fair 

wages and good living conditions. It may be noted that this humane policy while requiring large 

expenditures has been a success financially. 

 

 So, Mr. Speaker, these are the samples of so-called propaganda. I suggest that there is too great a 

tendency today to declare any truth that one does not happen to like as propaganda. If education is a 

process by which certain facts were embalmed in the memory of students with the hope that someday, 

sometime, somewhere they might be of use to someone, somehow, then the critics would have a case. 

Or if history were something which was studied simply for the sake of finding out what had happened in 

the past, instead of for the sake of guiding us in the future, then they might have a case. But history and 

education are not so narrowly conceived. We cannot, Mr. Speaker, walk backwards into the future. We 

must not over emphasize individualism to the detriment of communities. The survival of civilization 

depends on our capacity to sweep away many of our time honored ideas and on our ability to replace 

them with new patterns which will be adequate for the purpose of today and tomorrow. That, Mr. 

Speaker, is the challenge to education. That is the challenge which we in this province are trying to meet 

with a modern system of administration and teacher training and with a living curriculum. That, Mr. 

Speaker, is what the Members of the Opposition are afraid we will succeed in doing. 

 

Mr. L. W. Lee (Cumberland): — I would like first to congratulate the former speakers on their very 

able addresses. The new Member for Morse, Member for Meadow Lake, the Premier and Hon. Minister 

of Education. It makes me feel a bit small getting up after a man that’s as capable and able as the 

Minister of Education. 

 

 I acknowledge the right of criticism by the Opposition if that criticism is directed towards improving 

or bettering the conditions of the people but being a veteran of the last war, the First Great War, I mean.. 

pardon me, I resent the criticism directed against this Government in regard to the present veterans land 

policy. When we think of the way in which the veterans of the First Great War were treated I don’t think 

there can be any criticism of the policy of this Government. 

 

 In our district up North, the veterans of this War who have acquired land under this Government 

policy, are in all cases that I have interviewed there is.. I’d like to read a bit or some portions of a 

petition or memorandum that was sent to Ottawa in May of 1944 by the veterans of the First Great War. 

This petition was signed by thousands of veterans as well as other citizens. It was endorsed by the 

Alberta Legislature, the Alberta Farmer’s Union, the Wheat Pool, the United Farmers of Saskatchewan 

and other organizations. Now this is a portion of what the veterans say in regard to the Soldier’s 

Settlement Boards.. of the benefits of the veterans of the First War. I quote: 

 

Out of a large number of the veterans who returned from 

  



February 6, 1947 

119 

 

that war 25,017 chose agriculture. Some of them returning to the.. 

 

Those are the men who are now known all over the West as soldier settlers under the administration of 

the Soldiers’ Settlement Board. This Department’s chief function was to help the veterans accomplish 

the ultimate ownership within a reasonable period of time of his home in the country for which he 

fought during the Great War I. Have they succeeded in accomplishing this — we shall see. 

 

 As of recent date there were 6,163 of these veterans and their families remaining of the original 

25,017. These survivors are now much older and also much sadder and wiser and yet such is the 

deplorable situation today. And not a single person holding an administrative position has the common 

sense or courage to say that these settlers have faced an impossible test. To the contrary, they have for 

years endeavored by threats and persecution and seizures to force them to give the claims to their homes 

in the Canada they have fought for so gallantly. After revaluation these farms are sold; often to aliens at 

less than 50 per cent of their former Soldiers’ Settlement Board loan value. From the period of 

September l, 1939 to December 31, 1943, 2,418 settlers left their farm or were put off. This was an 

average of 606 per annum in two and one-half years. If this rate is maintained there will be no soldier 

settlers left in another five years. Their original loan placed at the disposal of the Soldiers’ Settlement 

Board was $109,034,331. Soldier settlers have repaid, up to December 31, 1942, in principal 

$43,264,734.84; in interest $24,056,711.45, a total of $67,321,446.29. Total indebtedness as of 

December 31, 1943 — $8,684,553. Accurate salaries paid to the Soldiers’ Settlement Board officials 

over the same period up to December 31, 1942 are as follows: Salaries $20,325,246.85; other than 

salaries $10,243,534.48, or an aggregate of $30,568,781.33. Surely these figures speak for themselves. 

This I think should prove that we this time are doing a better job for the returned man than they have 

ever previously received from any other government. 

 

 It is surprising that the Opposition have the nerve to say or get up and quote things or criticize a policy 

such as we have, when the figures of the past and veterans of the past of the First Great War have to put 

up with conditions such as I have just quoted. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, we have had some criticism from parties not favorable to this Government policy, 

criticism of our policy in northern Saskatchewan and I would like to therefore say a few words about it. 

We have several thousand living in the North who have their homes in the North and whose main 

occupation is fishing or trapping. The yearly income of these people is not very large and the past policy 

that is before this Government came into being when they were dependent almost entirely on local 

buyers coming into their area for the disposal or selling of these fish. These local buyers, some of whom 

were quite lenient, would give the fisherman a loan shortly before fishing season opened large enough to 

enable them to buy their nets and equipment required to carry on their fishing operations. Had they not 

done this, the buyers might not have had any fish to buy as in many cases their return received for this 

fish was insufficient to carry the people over the summer months and certainly not sufficient to buy new 

equipment for the next fishing season. It seems to me that I have a faint recollection 

  



February 6, 1947 

120 

of similar situations existing in the southern part of Saskatchewan or I should say all through 

Saskatchewan a few years ago. I am referring to the farmers and the mortgage company. I remember the 

time when the price of grain was not sufficient to carry the farmers through so they were compelled to 

go to a loan or mortgage company for assistance, usually in the fall to take off the crop. If they had not 

got this assistance some of the crops might not have been taken off and of course mortgage companies 

wouldn’t have got their payments. I think the situation between the two is quite similar. In 1944 the CCF 

Party promised the people of the North that if elected they would set up plants and form a fish marketing 

board to assist the people of the North in their fishing industry. We were asked to do that by hundreds of 

fishermen in the North and I for one promised them if we were elected today we would have plants in 

my constituency and a provincial fish marketing board. We have, I think, chosen an industry that is 

going to continue its stand and will be more appreciated as time goes on, an industry that will not only 

assist the people of the North but be an asset to the whole of Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Mr. Marion: — Could you tell me where.. ? 

 

Mr. Lee: — One is at Lac La Ronge and the other is at Beaver Lake. 

 

 As I was saying fishing is our third largest primary industry. But until recently it didn’t even pay its 

own way, it had to be subsidized. Today however the picture is different, it is a growing industry under 

the new efficient plan set up by the Department of Natural Resources. Our neighbors to the South have 

confidence in our fish produce and are showing that confidence by bidding for the product instead of 

condemning it and to ban it as was done some years ago. 

 

 Values that might be obtained from our fishing industry are and I would like now to give a summary 

of some of the products or by-products derived from fish. Of course the main product — the main use of 

our fish in the North today is for the food value. I might say that pound for pound it has as much protein 

as meat; it is rich in bone building, it contains calcium and phosphorous and iodine. It also has all the 

vitamins so it might be good advice for good health to eat more fish and also for their livestock, pigs, 

cattle and poultry. We here in Saskatchewan, or the farmers here in Saskatchewan, are using thousands 

of pounds, I think maybe I could say thousands of tons, of fish meal. People feed it to their livestock. 

 

 Besides fish meal and oil I would like to mention a few other products manufactured in the United 

States and some other countries. Besides the food value we have products manufactured out of the 

by-products. Some of these are: glue, fertilizer, soap; pigments from the scales as used in the 

manufacture of soap; we have various kinds of lubricants; there is the shortening made from the 

by-products; substances derived from the by-products are used in the manufacture of linoleum and oil 

cloth. There’s a substance used for metal plates; metal platen; medicine; artificial pearls are made from 

the scales, also beads; insulin; gelatin to make ice; glass which is used for very fine wines, beers and 

making jelly and cements. There’s a place for synthetic fibres, there’s material used in printers ink and a 

number of other uses for the by-product of fish. 

  



February 6, 1947 

121 

 

 So I think, Mr. Speaker, that this Government’s policy in building up our fishing industry in the North 

is well taken. I might say that plants built by the Hon. Minister of Natural Resources are plants. They are 

fully modern and efficient. They are plants that will stand for years without re-modelling or reforming. I 

might say that the machinery and equipment that is necessary is for instance, transportation equipment, 

so we have snowmobiles, tractors and various other transportation vehicles such as trucks. For water 

they have motor boats. The Ministers could be congratulated on the building of these plants which is the 

beginning and I might say a new industry in Saskatchewan. I believe that in northern Saskatchewan it is 

an industry that I think will be more appreciated as time goes on. It’s an industry that’s going to expand. 

Our neighbours to the South are, who were at one time almost on the verge of banning our case, are now 

getting confidence in our plants, and I look to see a steady and a good market for all our fish products in 

the years to come. 

 

 I would like to say a few words in regard to supplement in the North, the increase of population. I 

noticed in the paper an item about the Saskatchewan policy in the North, I think about a year ago. I 

forgot the name of the party that wrote the letter but he was condemning our policy. He said people were 

leaving the North, everything was getting quiet, you didn’t hear the put-put of the motor boats on the 

lakes anymore, you didn’t hear the roar of the motor of the planes flying overhead. Well I don’t agree 

with him. I didn’t at the time and I think, Mr. Speaker, that I can truthfully say that the population in the 

North is steadily increasing. The Department of Natural Resources surveyed a new settlement area in a 

certain district between Flin Flon and summer resorts of Beaver Lake. I know shortly after this area was 

surveyed most of the lots and plots of ground had already been spoken for and I am quite sure by now 

that all of them, or most all of them, are leased and next year they are planning on opening up and 

surveying further ground for settlement. 

 

 The same thing applies to Lac La Ronge where a town site has been surveyed out and as far as I know 

applications are still coming in for plots and ground. The highway into Lac La Ronge was finished last 

fall and some part of it gravelled. We now have highways, the first highway in my constituency which 

touches on the water routes leading to the different parts of the north land and the North West Territory. 

These highways are going to do big things in opening up and realizing or developing I should say 

resources of our north land. Formerly travellers going into the North were dependent almost entirely on 

water routes or by air. 

 

 I might say that there is considerable interest shown in the various districts of the North in the mineral 

areas. This large nickel deposit recently found in Manitoba, or at least only recently advertised to the 

public, I understand there is a possibility of it extending into Saskatchewan. I was talking with the driller 

who worked on that deposit and he said he considered it to be second to the one at Sudbury and maybe 

even larger than the nickel deposit at Sudbury. I don’t think that any criticism of our policy to drive 

away investors or stopping progress in our fishing industry or our fur farms are very well founded. I 

think today you will find there is considerable more activity in the North by people who are really 

anxious to develop and make a living than there has ever been before. 

  



February 6, 1947 

122 

 I would like to say a word about Cumberland House. My first trip into Cumberland House, a family 

settlement of people, very nice people but they were isolated and lived there alone. They apparently had 

very little connection with the Government. There was no Natural Resources man there to look after 

resources. No doubt, occasionally, a man was sent in. Since we took over we have had a man stationed 

there permanently and sometimes several men. Some of them engaged in surveying it in anticipation of 

dams and canals to expand and increase the rat population of the settlement itself. We have brought in a 

sawmill and last summer I think some over a hundred thousand feet of lumber has been sawn. They also 

have a caterpillar tractor and a bulldozer. People are building new houses, digging basements and I 

doubt if there was any house that had a basement under it there before. Very few of the houses were 

built with lumber, there was no place they could get the lumber unless they transported it about 90 miles 

by water from the town which was almost prohibitive. 

 

 Still I think looking at the North as a whole the last few years since this Government took office has 

seen a greater change than that country has ever seen before and I think the next few years is going to 

see a still greater change. There are I think minerals, undeveloped minerals. I would like to say that 

sometimes I am not particularly pleased or satisfied with the situation as it exists up there today in 

regard to minerals. We have several large mining companies who we might say almost have a monopoly 

owing to the fact that they have the money and can secure or buy any claim, new claim or new kinds of 

minerals that ever show up. It appears to me that eventually we will possess only the barren parts of the 

north country that does not contain minerals. It is a situation that I know is hard to overcome. I would 

like to see some of this area, some of the mineral bearing areas preserved for the Government of this 

province. Quite right, we do collect royalties from some of these mines but it is not compulsory for them 

to open up and develop every mineral. We might therefore have to wait many years to be able to derive 

any benefit from some of these mineral areas developed under private enterprise. 

 

 The same thing applies to oil throughout the province. Our oil resources are practically untouched and 

from information on the formation of the underground I am positive we have a number of very valuable 

oil fields in this province. I would like to see some of these — this oil resource researched to the top. 

The development of oil is a very costly and expensive procedure, but I also know that there are none of 

these large oil companies going bankrupt even though they are spending millions of dollars in the 

drilling of new wells and for prospects. 

 

 Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that I don’t want to take up any more of this House’s time, so I’ll take my 

seat. 

 

Mr. J. Wellbelove (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to support the motion, I would 

like first of all to extend congratulations to the Member for Morse on taking his seat in this House. The 

Morse by-election was of course of more than local or passing interest. It was not my pleasure to take 

part in the contest as a speaker or a visitor. While attending the CCF convention in Moose Jaw I 

happened to get into conversation with a man who is a strong supporter of the Liberal Party and after 

some general jollying 

  



February 6, 1947 

123 

 

around about the respective merits of our two parties, I said to him: “What do you think are the chances 

for your party in this province?” He said, “I don’t think they are very good.” I said, “What gives you that 

impression?” He said, “You take the Morse by-election. Our boys threw everything they had into that 

election and tried hard to get your fellows on the defensive.” (By the way, Mr. Speaker, we are on the 

offensive not on the defensive!) He said, “We tried hard to get you fellows on the defensive,” and he 

said, “You see the results of that.” 

 

 I was a little bit interested when the Leader of the Opposition extended congratulations to the Member 

from Morse and found it necessary to draw his attention to the fact that he was taking his seat with a 

reduced majority from that of his predecessor. If my memory serves me right, in the general election of 

this province, in the Cannington seat there was some discussion as to what constituted a majority. With a 

majority of approximately 600 I think the Member for Morse can feel fairly comfortably seated in this 

House, not having to maintain his balance on the sharp edge of a marginal majority. 

 

 I would like to draw attention to one clause in the speech of His Honour: 

 

My Government has concluded a Tax Agreement with the Dominion Government which will be 

submitted for your consideration. 

 

 At the time of the visit of the representatives of this province to Ottawa in August, 1945, some of us 

were a little bit disconcerted. All that we could hear or read about in the Liberal subsidized Press of this 

province was the ‘Garson’ report and I for one wondered what our fellows were doing down there. 

Impartial observers afterwards, Mr. Speaker, gave credit where credit was due. They commented on the 

remarkable compilation of the material which was submitted and the statesman like and conciliatory 

way in which the brief was presented. Then I wondered why was it there was not more mention made 

about the Saskatchewan presentation of August, 1945. There was some grudging comment — and then I 

recalled that just previous to that it was generally understood that the Prime Minister was possibly 

relinquishing the reins of office and that the Liberal Party was looking around for a Crown Prince to be 

in the line of succession. I think, possibly, Premier Garson was praised out of proportion (may I say) to 

the value of the presentation or material that he presented for one reason. There was another western 

aspirant for the line of succession and possibly that was why our province did not receive the 

commendation, the praise and the notice that it should have received for the statesmanlike presentation 

of the case. I can think of another matter for applause, Mr. Speaker, and that is that the Governments of 

different ideologies, different bases of thinking and approach to different subjects could meet on 

common ground when it meant something which might tend towards cementing this nation from coast to 

coast. I trust that our party always will look to the basis of agreements more than playing up the lines of 

divergence between people of different nationalities, of different religions and different schools of 

thought — such as our Liberal Government has always played up in the past — because it is only as we 

find the general common grounds and fundamental principles upon which we can agree that we can 

hope to build a nation. And that is a charge which is entrusted to us: to lay the foundations in this great 

land of ours for a 

  



February 6, 1947 

124 

nation that oncoming generations may build onto; and I think that our delegation to Ottawa, in its 

presentation of the brief, the subject matter of the material submitted and the general basis of 

presentation went far towards achieving that end as far as the open-minded people of the Province of 

Saskatchewan are concerned. 

 

 Then also there is the matter of the Tax Agreement. Not much attention has been shown to that in the 

House so far but I think that is worthy of comment. Lots of the hidebound Liberals out in the country 

(and there are two or three types of Liberals; there are some who are fair in their approach, and there are 

some that are pretty hidebound), said: “Well, it cannot be done as far as your CCF Government is 

concerned. What our people could not do, you cannot accomplish.” I think we have proved to all 

impartial people that the CCF Government of the Province of Saskatchewan has been able to present a 

case to the authorities at Ottawa to which they have given favorable consideration. We have always 

argued on the hustings, in convention and everywhere else, that the drouth was a national calamity so 

that the costs which were incurred by the governments of the day in tiding their people over that 

calamitous period should be shared by all of the Dominion, insofar as the kinship of people in this 

Dominion was concerned, not isolating one group to carry their own charges for a national calamity and 

favoring others — as was done in the Halifax explosion and other matters of primary importance in the 

Dominion of Canada. 

 

 There is one thing that I have been very proud of as far as our Government is concerned and that is our 

social legislation. Going out in the country, I have been very pleased to present a program of 

accomplishments of this Government with regard to the Old Age Pensions — a rise in the Old Age 

Pension though not as much as we would like to see. I think we are all agreed an Old Age Pensioner is 

worthy of greater consideration than he is receiving at the present time because he has put a stake into 

the country and it is not that we are giving him something; it is that he is drawing dividends on his 

investment. I do not look on the Old Age Pension as anything we are handing out to a man; we are just 

giving him dividends on the investment that he has made and the contribution he has made personally to 

the building up of this nation. We have removed him from the threat of having to file a caveat on things 

that he might own, up to $2,000. 

 

 In the cancer field, I think we have got great cause for congratulations. The diagnostic and surgical 

work and the whole of the treatment and survey in regard to cancer are free to the people of this 

province. In connection with mental cases, what I am most pleased about is the method of approach by 

the Government of the day. We have always (for some reason or other I could never understand) looked 

on mental ill-health as something which should be kept in the background because it cast something of a 

slight on the family that happened to be connected with a person so handicapped. Mental ill-health is 

nothing more than on an equality with other ailments of the human body — and I have tried in my 

constituency and I think a good many more have tried to bring out the new methods of approach: that it 

is nothing to be ashamed of. Whenever there is suspicion of mental unbalance in a child, instead of 

putting that child somewhere it does not contact the public very often, I think the case should be brought 

out in the forefront and treatment given while treatment may be effective and recognizing our 

responsibility as a 

  



February 6, 1947 

125 

 

province that we should assume responsibility for mental treatment placing it on that higher standard 

and as far as materials and facilities have been available to remove the congested condition which 

prevailed at the time this Government took office, I think there has been a tremendous contribution 

there. 

 

 With regard to the distribution of free penicillin, the treatment of socially-dangerous diseases under 

the oversight and care of a doctor is another step in the right direction. In the education which has been 

carried on in connection with those treatments, instead of the mock modesty which has kept it in the 

background, I think the attitude adopted by this Government to bring it out into the front and fight it and 

recognize that the thing has got to be stamped out before it stamps out civilization; I think that that 

attitude is the right attitude and right approach. 

 

 In connection with the Air Ambulance, there is no need to dwell on that. We had a case in the locality 

in which the Hon. Member for Elrose and I live, where it was very effective during a time when the 

highways were blocked and trains could not get in; a case of gangrene (which could not be just treated 

exactly as the doctors and patient wished it to be treated at the local hospital) and was flown here to 

Regina and from here on down into the States. To the people in that district, recognizing what the Air 

Ambulance service meant in the time of dire need like that has more than counterbalanced any adverse 

criticism of the Government with regard to the extension of our health services. 

 

 Then in connection with the Hospital Service Cards; I think we have all, after looking at the back of 

our Hospital Service Card, realized the advantages we get from being possessors of that Hospital Card 

and I was very much surprised to hear Mr. Tucker on the air criticizing the Hospital Plan of this 

Government. First of all, he betrayed his own ignorance about the wishes and desires of the Government 

of which he is a Member at Ottawa, in that the provincial plan was designed (and I hope destined) to fit 

into the federal plan. Then, speaking about the distribution of costs; as the Premier has pointed out: 

should we be left on the resources alone of the province, there may have to be a different distribution of 

costs in the future. But his idea about selling a man a card and then not providing a bed for him, I do not 

think I ever heard such an absurd challenge as that with regard to the need of the hospitalization services 

in this province. 

 

 It was my privilege to serve on the Hospital Board that erected the first hospital in the Province of 

Saskatchewan under the Municipal Hospital Scheme in 1916 and 1917. In 1934 we went into . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, not the first. 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — I said ‘built’ the first hospital, not purchased. The building of a hospital . . . In 

1934, we entered into the doctors’ scheme. We thought we had fair hospitalization and general treatment 

for the seventeen years we just had the hospital scheme and it was surprising after we had gone into the 

doctors’ scheme in 1934 the amount of silent suffering that there was in the districts tributary to our 

hospital that were served by the hospital plan. People that we had never thought of. Although they had 

free hospitalization yet they did not feel that they could incur the expense which was necessary for 

  



February 6, 1947 

126 

operational work and for some considerable time it meant that the doctors had to use their own judgment 

(as doctors have and will use judgment under this plan, unless they are opposed to the plan — and I 

don’t think a doctor on his professional dignity will be opposed to the plan) to regulate the cases which 

were in greatest need for first treatment. We found, Mr. Speaker, that although at the inception of the 

doctors’ scheme it did appear as if there might be congestion in our local hospital, with the application 

of common sense it would work itself out. We have, today, a splendid service and I have not heard any 

objections to the switching to this new plan, realizing that the future holds more in store for the people 

of this province than the past has done for the simple reason that we had regional advantages in the past 

and now we shall have more than regional advantages. 

 

 Then in connection with the Old Age Pensioners, the increase in pensions and all that intervenes in 

connection with that, as well as health and farm security, you know I feel proud of our social legislation; 

and I was rather surprised, not to say amused to see the Rt. Hon. J. G. Gardiner (who was just ‘Hon.’ 

then) speaking in Saskatoon at the Liberal convention, saying that the credit for this social legislation is 

due to the Liberal Government, that “these people are just carrying on some things that we started.” 

 

 Now, Mr. Speaker, through my lack of experience in the legislative halls, as we sat in the Government 

benches and fought through to get that legislation written into the Statutes of this province, I thought the 

credit was coming to the Government of the day but evidently it is not. But in my reading I found one 

other individual that has made a somewhat similar mistake, as to where credit should be placed. Joseph 

Stalin, in his capacity as Generalissimo of the Red Army, last September (I think it was), in addressing 

the Red Army, recounted their brave exploits on the Eastern Front in Europe and the Manchurian 

campaign and gave to them the sole credit for the winning of the war. That, of course, had repercussions 

in America where speakers and papers recounted their wonderful exploits and we all agree on the 

wonderful contribution that the American people made towards victory in the Second Great War. A 

London paper in commenting upon it said: 

 

It does not seem yet to be decided whether the United States of America or the USSR were responsible 

for the winning of the Second Great War. The British Commonwealth of Nations, of course, merely 

prevented them losing it. 

 

 As I read that I thought, well, when you consider all the unfulfilled promises of the Liberal Party, if 

there is no credit coming to this Government for placing that legislation on the Statutes of this province 

with the consent of the Rt. Hon. J. G. Gardiner and Mr. Tucker (who has also voiced those sentiments) 

in addressing our meetings, in the future, possibly we might be allowed to say that we prevented the 

people from losing the benefits of this legislation. I am going that far in any case. 

 

 We are, in point of time, about the halfway mark in the life of this Legislature. Of course the life of a 

legislature is a movable event. It does not necessarily have to end, as our Liberal friends revealed to us, 

at the end of the statutory period of time but we are nevertheless about half way in the statutory life of 

the Tenth Legislature. The other evening I 

  



February 6, 1947 

127 

 

was looking over a few of the dire forebodings that were going to happen if this Government ever came 

to office. I remember that one of the first ones was the risk this province was running if they placed a 

group of inexperienced men in charge of the affairs of this province. Then, just after they assumed 

office, we saw a press release where the retiring Provincial Treasurer had left $8 million in the Treasury, 

unguarded, to be handed over to this incoming Government. Well, we felt sorry for that financial foster 

child which had been reared so lovingly and then was to be handed over into such reckless hands. In 

taking over we were told (and it was not because the Liberals lacked anything in trying to make it an 

accomplished fact) that the financial standing of this province was going to be wrecked on this 

Continent. Yet I find in the Financial Post, December issue that the price of outstanding Saskatchewan 

bonds has moved up an average of 1.4 per cent since November 1946 in the quiet bond market. They are 

now selling 15.8 per cent higher than their average price of $92.42 for August 1, 1944, shortly after the 

CCF Government took office. And then quoting from this Provincial Treasurer’s Press release of 

November 28th, I find that the public debt has been reduced over $70 million, I find that on a basis of 

population of 1944 of some 850,000, the per capita debt of that time was $252 and an estimate for 1947 

of $169. And so we find all the way through that dire foreboding was not an accomplished fact. The 

province today is in a better financial position than it has ever been in the past two decades. 

 

 Another one we were face to face with, which has been dealt with very thoroughly and so it is not 

necessary for me to check on it, was that private enterprise would be scared out of the province. The 

Liberals or the Party Press left no stone unturned to make that an accomplished fact. They tried to foul 

their own nest. We have cleaned out the nest and new enterprise is prepared to come in and make a 

home in the Province of Saskatchewan. When you recall the mineral taxation and all the dire foreboding 

of what was going to follow it, we find that one of the companies that was hardest hit by the enactment 

of that legislation is one that is going to spend approximately $1 million as an initial step for the 

increasing of its plant here in the Province of Saskatchewan. So that is dire foreboding No. 2. 

 

 There is one thing I have always watched in connection with the Member for Arm River and I expect 

he will repeat it again; he has said it every session so far: that is, the head-on collision between the CCF 

and the co-operative movement. Well, now, if we were getting our running orders from the Hon. 

Member for Arm River, if he had hold of the throttle, he would miss nothing to see that head-on 

collision an accomplished fact, although he is a local worker in the co-operative movement — proving it 

is possible to be a worker in the co-operative movement and yet not to have absorbed the fundamental 

principles of the co-operative idea. They are just rising to the fact that they made a wonderful mistake 

when they outlined our policy. Of course, our people did not leave it to them to outline but they thought 

they had the authority to outline the CCF policy. 

 

 There are these two forebodings which I have mentioned and in this third to which our friend, I guess 

in all sincerity, has always referred, which is a failure to appreciate the ability of the people of 

Saskatchewan. We have been quoted here the other day from Mr. Henderson and we have been quoted 

from every authority on Socialism and Communism and every other -ism but the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have the ability to 

  



February 6, 1947 

128 

round out a type of Socialism which fits the requirements of the people of Saskatchewan and that is what 

we are doing. We find and we know that there is a place in this province for the investment of private 

capital so long as it does not conflict with the best interests of the people. We find that private capital 

can be invested in private enterprise. But one thing as back benchers we are going to insist on and that is 

that our Government always places sufficient safeguards when private capital comes into this province 

so that the interest of the people is safeguarded and not exploited as it has been in the past. We are going 

to ask for that. But we recognize that there is a very definite place for private capital for investment. 

 

 We recognize also that there is a place for a duty where public control has to be pre-eminent and take 

first place. We will decide in our conventions, in our caucus, in our talks with our Government 

Members, just what we consider is the place of primary importance where the public should hold and 

should have the absolute and full control of the development and the possible enlargement of a particular 

industry. Well, then, in spite of what my friends say there is going to be no head-on collision as far as 

the CCF and the co-operative movement is concerned. Our ideologies parallel — something our friends 

have not been able to understand. But as a member of co-operatives, I realize that a co-operative has a 

restricted responsibility. Its responsibility is primarily to its members. I realize that many of our 

co-operatives have had a very influential effect on the price structure and the salesmanship of 

commodities because of the fact that they were in the market — especially in connection with their 

Wheat Pool administration but primarily the co-operative has a restricted liability and that is to its 

membership. 

 

 I take it, Mr. Speaker, that we as a co-operative movement forming a Government have a wider 

responsibility than a co-operative or a group of co-operatives. We have a responsibility to the whole of 

the people of the Province of Saskatchewan, whatever their station or whatever their walk in life may be 

and that is wider than any scope held by a co-operative in this province. So there is plenty of room for 

development, plenty of room for enlargement, plenty of room for all to work in the development of this 

province and its wonderful resources, as long as the people of this province keep the Member for Arm 

River away from the place where running orders are issued because if ever it is entrusted to him I am 

afraid he would have a head-on collision because he always strikes me as hoping that such a thing might 

happen, not to advance the province but to advance the Liberal Party. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that we as 

back benchers will never arrive at the position where we would prefer to advance the interest of our 

party at the sacrifice of the interests of the people of this province. 

 

 In connection with the Liberal leadership several things have been said. I think personally that the 

newly-elected Provincial Leader should have backed up his charges with his presence in this House if it 

were possible for him to have done so. I have respect for the House Leader of the Liberal Party. I have 

also an admiration for the Member for Moosomin when he tries to build up a strong argument on a very 

wobbling foundation. I sat across here and I told him personally that I admire the skill with which he 

tries to get that fabric to hold together — pretty paltry, I admit that but it is commendable the 

  



February 6, 1947 

129 

 

way in which he does from a pin-point basis endeavor from time to time to build up a legal argument; 

not very convincing, I will admit, but still it is worthy of admiration. But absenteeism neither engenders 

respect nor incites admiration and I think the elected Leader, if it could have been arranged, should have 

sat in this House. It would have added to the general interest of the House to have said nothing more but 

then, on the other hand I notice in the Leader-Post (I wish I had brought that editorial) it was headed: 

“Mr. Tucker Points the Way”, and it was a wonderful build-up, an endeavor for a ‘party’ paper to build 

up the man. 

 

 One of the greatest curses in this Dominion of ours with a subsidized, controlled press, is that you can 

take hold of a straw man and build him up while it serves your purpose to build him up whether he has 

got any ability or any efficiency at all. You can build up a straw man and make him look like a giant — 

but they have got a big job on their hands right now. I think that in some ways it would be a loss, really, 

if we stopped Mr. Tucker going around the country because you would be surprised at the reaction from 

the average man that you meet, the average man and woman. They say: “Well, look here! If this fellow 

has not got the courage of his convictions and we square his statements with what we know is an 

absolute fact, well, it is not very convincing. “I would like to tell Mr. Tucker that he is not getting 

anywhere until he comes and backs up what he says right here in the House and endeavors to prove his 

statements. At the present time he is arousing about as much interest and carrying about as much 

conviction as a barker in the midway and that is saying quite a lot. 

 

Mr. Procter: — He seems to have stirred you up quite a lot. 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — I don’t think he is really going very much further than that. 

 

 There is one other point I would like to speak of because I think it is going to come into the forefront 

after a while. I notice there is a question on our Order Paper with regard to the details (which is a perfect 

proper question) but we have seen it in the papers stressed quite a lot with regard to Section 198 of The 

Rural Municipal Act and the contribution to the UFC cause. I recall to the credit of this House, Mr. 

Speaker, that it passed the House and was written into the Statutes of this province without a dissenting 

voice. We recognize what every inhabitant in the Province of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Mr. Procter: — On a Point of Privilege, Mr. Speaker, I opposed that amendment in Committee. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I did too. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — Was it recorded? 

 

Mr. Procter: — I don’t remember whether it was a recorded vote or not, but I spoke on it and I 

certainly opposed it. 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — I apologize for the oversight but be that as it may 

  



February 6, 1947 

130 

that statement may be useful. 

 

Mr. Procter: — I won’t back up on it. 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — There is hardly an individual in the Province of Saskatchewan but what has 

benefited immeasurably from the fact that we have had a farmers’ organization in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. From the time the old Territorial Grain Growers took up the fight against CRP right 

down to the present day, the farmers movement has never stopped from fighting the farmers’ battles. We 

may not all agree with the press releases or the different steps that they take but that is for the 

membership who elect their delegations to determine the policy of the UFC. As far as the contribution of 

$200 is concerned it is small indeed from the funds of any municipality to contribute towards a farmers’ 

educational organization. Nobody is suffering and everybody is benefiting from the practice we have 

had and have at the present time of having a farmers’ educational organization in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 We are advancing along the line with regard to hospitalization but let us give the credit to that great 

little band of farm-women headed by Mrs. Violet McNaughton, Mrs. Hollis and others who from 1913 

to 1916 carried on an unending fight to endeavor to get the Government of the day (and they acceded in 

1916 to the wishes) to institute the Union Municipal Hospital Scheme. It was those women who saw the 

light — the women that had been face to face with the hardships and privations of the pioneering life of 

the Province of Saskatchewan at that time. And I can recall some of the opposition that was made even 

when the hospitals were beginning to be built. People said: “It is one of the craziest ideas to think that 

away out there on the prairies the Government can grant permission for the erecting of a hospital and 

you expecting to give the treatment which is necessary, anywhere near equivalent to what you can get in 

the cities at the present day.” 

 

 The Liberal Government deserved credit (and we will give credit where credit is due), they deserved 

credit in 1916 for placing on the Statutes of this province, The Union Hospital Act which has been a 

great benefit to the people of our province. 

 

 Some years ago when the late Hon. Dr. W. R. Motherwell was Member in the Kindersley 

constituency, it was my pleasure and privilege to fight side by side with him because I always thought 

he was a man worth working with and working for but after I had gone over to the Progressive Party — 

in fact, succeeding Mr. Motherwell, we elected the first independent Member to sit in this House. After 

the progressive movement was started (I guess I was still on the mailing list of the Liberal Party because 

I have the handbook of 1929). The Opposition are always reminding us of what we said and what we 

have done. I wonder why we are paying this $3.6 million in connection with the acquisition of the power 

plant because it says here: 

 

A record of substantial achievement. A sound financial position, unprecedented growth and wise 

progressive administration of the Liberal Party. It has among other things secured to the people control 

of power at all times. It has promoted the development of our great coal deposits. It has created a 

provincial highways system and is now hard-surfacing the same with gravel. 

  



February 6, 1947 

131 

 

In the one about the Saskatchewan coal on page 60 of this book they say: 

 

The efforts of the Saskatchewan Government for many years have been directed towards meeting the 

entire home consumption with Saskatchewan coal. 

 

In 1929 that is what they were directing us with and then: 

 

The facts show that the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan has done everything to place the coal 

industry on sound substantial basis and that as a result of Government policy, the coal industry in 

Saskatchewan is being revolutionized. 

 

In connection with power: 

 

The alertness, vigour and progressiveness which characterize the Gardiner Government was well 

illustrated in its grappling with the power question . . . Saskatchewan’s lot a happy one . . . Contrasted 

with the power situation in other western provinces, Saskatchewan’s lot is a particularly happy one. 

Control of the power in Alberta is already definitely in the hands of private companies and not a few 

public men are disturbed at the prospects. In Manitoba where the Provincial Government has a limited 

hydro system, private interests are strongly entrenched and the Government system is operated at a 

loss. In Saskatchewan on the other hand the way is open to the creation of a great provincial system 

patterned after that of Ontario which has proved such an outstanding success. 

 

In the face of those unaccomplished promises, Mr. Speaker, I shall support the motion. 

 

Mr. B. Putnam (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my congratulations to the Hon. 

Members who have preceded me in this debate especially the Hon. Member for Norse who had the 

honor of moving the motion. Judging from my own experiences it could not have been an easy part for 

him and I think it is a remarkable job. 

 

 I take it, Mr. Speaker, that this Debate is the time and the place for the Members of this Legislature to 

express their views concerning matters that they consider to be for the welfare of their constituencies 

and the province as a whole. At previous sessions of this legislature I have refrained from saying very 

much about the constituency which I have the honor to represent in this House. I would like to take just 

a few minutes this afternoon to tell the Hon. Members a little about the Humboldt constituency. Many of 

you have been there, many of you know considerable about it but perhaps some of you have not had that 

pleasure. The Humboldt constituency is fundamentally an agricultural area along the southern boundary 

is some marginal and some sub-marginal land. However, I think that I am safe in saying that the 

northern part of my constituency so far as an agricultural area is concerned will compare favorably with 

any part of the province. It is on the edge of what is known as the farm belt. There are many well built 

productive farms with good improvements and nice homes. 

 

 A large part of this area comprises what is known as 

  



February 6, 1947 

132 

St. Peter’s Colony. The original settlers were mostly Roman Catholic. The headquarters of their church 

was at Muenster about eight or nine miles east of Humboldt. There is also a boys’ college at Muenster 

which accommodates some 80 or 90 students. In connection with St. Peter’s College is a farm of several 

quarter sections. I wasn’t able to get the figures of just how many acres and I would like to say a word or 

two about the work that is being carried on there. They have a splendid herd of Hereford cattle, also a 

fine herd of Holstein cows, some shorthorns, Yorkshire hogs and are doing considerable work along the 

lines of nursery and shrubbery work and the community derives the benefit of the work that is being 

carried on there in being able to obtain their foundation stock for their herds and flocks. I would like to 

suggest to the Hon. Minister of Agriculture that when he has occasion to be in that part of the province 

that he go to this College and see for himself some of the splendid work that is being carried on there. 

 

 The town of Humboldt which is the largest in that constituency, about 1,800 people, has a court house, 

a land titles office and a splendid line of shops and splendid business enterprises. It is the divisional 

point for the CNR and is quite a railroad centre. The CPR running north also crosses at that point. We 

are not so bad off for highways. Perhaps we shouldn’t kick too much. No. 6 goes north and south across 

the Humboldt constituency and No. 5 crosses going east and west. No. 20 comes into the town of 

Humboldt from the south and we expect next year to see it extended on towards Prince Albert and 

another branch towards Melfort. We didn’t get much done last year but we are expecting great things in 

the year to come. The No. 14 borders along the southern part of the Humboldt constituency. 

 

 I would like to say a word about the political situation in Humboldt. There isn’t much left of the old 

Liberal organization. They are rather hard put. In fact, they made a transfusion a few months ago. A 

certain man, a certain gentleman from Maple Creek moved in to Humboldt, which he had a right to do. 

I’m not kicking about that. It happens that he was the defeated Liberal candidate in Maple Creek in the 

1944 election. He’s being given a build-up and there is a murmur abroad in the land that he’s likely to 

become the Liberal candidate when the time comes for the Liberal nomination. Now back in ’38, I 

believe it was, a vacancy was created in the Humboldt constituency. A by-election was called and a 

certain defeated Cabinet Minister was brought in to contest the seat of Humboldt. Well, he went away, 

he wasn’t elected and so far as I know no one has ever heard of him since. I’m a little surprised that they 

are following the same tactics again but I am confident that the people of Humboldt constituency have 

no intention of turning back the hands of the clock and sending the legislature a member of reactionary 

forces and the so-called free enterprise, especially would that be so were this defeated candidate from 

Maple Creek successful in getting the Liberal nomination. 

 

 I would like to come back to agriculture, Mr. Speaker, the . . . yes, I did want to say a little bit more 

about the Humboldt constituency. If there were — if I were inclined to boast, Mr. Speaker, I think it 

would be about our young people in the Humboldt constituency. I would like to refer to the splendid 

record that was made in the schools of Humboldt at the year of ’45 and ’46. Three high school students 

of the school of Humboldt received university scholarships. The Star-Phoenix saw fit to devote an 

editorial to the wonderful accomplishments made from the schools of Humboldt. 

  



February 6, 1947 

133 

 

 I think that the Hon. Minister of Education must have taken these things into consideration when he 

decided to set up the first rural area of adult education in the Province of Saskatchewan. He set it up in 

that area and the man in charge of it had his office at my home town, in the town of Watson. He arrived 

there late this fall. The weather and the roads were bad and he hasn’t been able to accomplish a great 

deal but he is laying the ground work and getting acquainted with the people and I am sure that a great 

deal will be accomplished in this work in the future. 

 

 I’ll not take time to say much about the larger units in the school unit of Humboldt except to say that 

our enrollment is especially large with an enrollment of 2,700 which I believe is about a thousand more 

than the average unit in the province. I referred yesterday, I believe, that Wadena has about 3,000, I 

think those are two of the very largest. Our larger school unit board is faced with the problem of 

rebuilding 50 per cent of the schools in the next seven or eight years, it’s quite an undertaking but they 

are surveying the field and grappling with the matter and I am sure that we are going to accomplish 

results. 

 

 We have a housing problem in the town of Humboldt similar to the housing problem that the people 

are facing all over the province and all over the Dominion perhaps. The Hon. Minister of Reconstruction 

undertook to deal with this matter during the last year. As I think you all know the Provincial 

Government acquired quite a number of buildings in the airports which were being dismantled and at the 

Dafoe Airport which is in the south-western part of the Humboldt constituency the Government took 

over a number of those buildings. There were many returned men in Humboldt that needed homes. With 

the shortage of houses the Hon. Minister of Reconstruction, after looking the thing over, decided to 

move a two-storey structure from the airport into the town of Humboldt to put this building into suites 

where it would accommodate about 30 families. I’m very disappointed with the progress so far. It was 

undertaken early last summer but the inability to get contractors and suitable equipment, help and 

everything else curtailed the work to a great extent. A few weeks ago part of this building was on the 

foundation in the town of Humboldt. It is necessary to move it in eight sections. Well, a heavily 

constructed building to be moved over forty miles, of course, is quite an undertaking to get on the 

location when you have eight sections to move. With the bad weather I’m afraid it will be further 

delayed because the chances are this spring there will be high water and perhaps it will be late in the 

summer before this undertaking will be completed. 

 

 As I said a moment before, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a word about agriculture. I see the hour is 

crowding on. A few years ago Saskatchewan looked like it might be a pork producing province of 

considerable importance, however, it is no longer in that field. Two years ago in this House I predicted 

what was very likely to occur. In 1946 we produced only 38 per cent of the hogs that we have produced 

in 1944. Is that correct? Yes, 38 per cent. Now there is a very serious decline especially at a time when 

the world is very much in need of these very products. The same situation applies to our dairy products. 

A report, month by month and year by year, shows that they are declining. I am told that quite a number 

of dairymen in the Regina area have gone out of business in the last few months. Large quantities of 

powdered milk right today are being shipped into this province to supplement local supply and meet the 

needs of the people. This seems especially regrettable in a province where we can grow grass and hay 

and cut the very best of feed. 

  



February 6, 1947 

134 

I said here a year ago that it was because of the shortsighted federal policies that these things were 

occurring. Now, Mr. Speaker, we find that Ottawa is a little bit more inclined to lend an ear. They are a 

little more open to suggestion than they have been in years gone by. I am willing to give credit where 

credit is due but, Mr. Speaker, it is something like locking the barn after the horse has been stolen. It is 

too late. A man that goes out of the hog business today or sells all of his dairy herd just because things 

are correcting a bit is not going to turn around tomorrow and restock his barn. This is a problem that 

isn’t going to be easy or quickly solved. I think that it is especially regrettable that it has been permitted 

to occur. 

 

 A year ago in this House I deplored the fact that our agricultural lands were coming into large 

holdings. The daily press of this province took me to task for making the statement at that time. So far as 

I can see they didn’t give any reason that what I said was not correct but I still think that it is regrettable 

when we have so many returned men. I believe that the Minister said here yesterday that there were 

several applications for every farm that the Provincial Government was able to offer and the boys that 

are growing up on the farm, who want to branch out for themselves are unable to get suitable 

agricultural land. So, Mr. Speaker, I repeat today that I think it’s a mistake that our farm land should be 

gobbled up into large holdings in the face of the conditions as they are. The federal officials have been 

going across Canada saying that we could accommodate ten or twelve million immigrants. Perhaps that 

is so, Mr. Speaker. I would be the last one to deny a place for the people from the over crowded 

countries providing it would not upset our economy entirely here in Canada. But how are you going to 

bring this about and still increase the holdings of the people who are already operating their farms on a 

large scale. 

 

 Now, Mr. Speaker, I have some other things that I would like to talk about — our social aid plan, our 

highways, our health scheme and all that sort of thing. However, I pride myself on not making my 

speeches too long. There will be a resolution coming before the House. There will be certain bills 

introduced bearing on these things and I shall reserve my right to exercise my privilege at that time to 

speak on these matters as I see fit. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:55 o’clock p.m. 

 


