



















































Hansard: February 21, 1947


381 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session – Tenth Legislature 

17th Day 

 

Friday, February 21, 1947. 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

RESOLUTION – OPPOSITION TO INCREASED FREIGHT RATES 

 

Mr. D.M. Lazorko (Redberry) moved, seconded by Mr. A.P. Swallow (Yorkton): 

 

That this Legislative Assembly go on record as being opposed to any increase in freight rates and 

certain rates for the carriage of Express Traffic within Canada, as requested by the Transportation 

Companies. 

 

He said: When we look back into the early days and the development of our Western country, we see 

following the different explorers and fur-traders the development of the vast prairie and park land in the 

western parts of Canada spearheaded by the different railways that were built during that time. We all 

can see that the railways contributed more than anything else to the development of the Western 

Prairies, which today are one of the larger exporters of food products in the world. We can also see, 

when we look the situation over at the present time, that the railways are the real life-line of western 

Canada. We can see all the consumer goods coming in from the different ports and factories that we 

have within this country over the railways into western Canada and being spread out among the people 

and scattered all over these prairies. We can also see the products that we have here for export being 

collected at the different points and brought into centralized points and also taken out on our railways to 

our export market. This winter it has been proven to us by the tieup we had in this country only a few 

weeks ago that the railways are the lifeblood of the Canadian economy, and that the railways are life 

themselves to the people in western Canada. 

 

On October 10th last, the Railway Association of Canada asked for a 30 per cent increase in freight 

rates. We maintain that the railways must prove the necessity of this increase. We maintain they must 

prove it by producing figures of cost and revenues asked for by the seven different provinces on behalf 

of the Canadian people because these people in Canada will be the ones who will pay the $80 million 

estimated increase in rates if the 30 per cent is given to the railway company. These are the people that 

should have some say as to whether the increase is to be given or not. The railway companies should not 

accept their own statements as sufficient in the fact that Mr. D.G. Coleman, Chairman and President of 

the CPR made a statement in St. John, New Brunswick, November 26th last, part of which I quote: 

 

That the railway rates should be based on what the traffic can afford to bear. 

 

Here rises the question – can the traffic afford to bear 



February 21, 1947 

382 

a 30 per cent increase? And also who shall be the judge of what the traffic can afford to bear? I maintain 

that certainly not the people who admit, according to the reports from Ottawa on most important 

particulars on the 30 per cent increase in freight rates dated January 3rd and 4th, that $21.3 million out 

of the estimated increase in revenue will be solely for the purpose of paying the dividends. The attitude 

of the railway companies from October 10th last up to the present time has been one of opposition to the 

request of the different provinces for breakdowns in their operating costs and revenues. They have 

admitted at the same time that the 30 per cent increase will mean some $300,000 to the Company per 

day or in the neighborhood of $7.5 million per month. The different provinces have asked for cost 

breakdowns with regard to revenue and expenditures as between East and West and also of the different 

services that the railways are giving. Mr. Carson, our counsel on behalf of the railways has said these 

request are unnecessary, irrelevant and many other different things. 

 

Is there any way a company can maintain that an increase is necessary because they have to pay an 

increase in wages for their employees and that materials cost them a lot more than they have in the past 

and that new replacements also cost them considerably more than they have in the past? According to 

the Press, the railway companies claim that materials and wages are costing them over 40 per cent more 

than what they used to cost before. I have endeavored or tried to find out what the actual increase has 

been as far as railway employees are concerned out here in the West, and I find that they did get an 

increase rating from 27 up to 30 per cent and sometimes a little over that. 

 

There is another item that enters into this statement. In the 30 years of development here in the West, 

which were at the same time the nearly stages of development of the railway companies here in the 

West, I believe that a lot of supervision was necessary before all the details were worked out so they 

could be efficient and give proper service to the people. But what we have seen happen is that the 

amount of supervision that was necessary then is still kept today, which, I maintain, is not necessary. 

Here we find a lot of people who are receiving much higher salaries than the average employee in any of 

the railway companies. I maintain that these railway companies are over-officered, if we may use that 

term, and if they do say that they are paying 40 per cent more for wages they may be correct. Further, if 

we take the ratio of the payroll to the operating expenses or operating revenue of the railway companies 

we find that in the case of the Canadian National from 1924 to 1943 the ratio has decreased by 3 per 

cent. In the case of the Canadian Pacific from 1926 to 1943 the decrease has been 7 per cent and in both 

cases they are employing less people today than they have been before. 

 

When we look at the average haul we also see a big difference from what it used to be and what it is 

today. In years gone by, five men on a freight train hauled between 1,500 and 2,000 tons; the same five 

men today can haul between 6,000 and 7,000 tons. Another thing we see is that where diesel service has 

been instituted, they have done away with the firemen and the brakemen. 

 

So let us take a look at their shops and divisional points across the prairie. They used to have wheel 

mounting trains in 



February 21, 1947 

383 

Edmonton, in Saskatoon, in Portage and Winnipeg. Today they have them only in Edmonton and 

Winnipeg. There has also been some talk of having only one in the future some place in Canada. When 

we look at the passenger service we see a similar picture. I believe lots of us have travelled between 

Saskatoon and Calgary and we may remember, in years gone by, we had division points in Saskatoon, 

Kindersley, Hannah and Calgary, where engines, and in many cases cars were changed. Today the same 

engine and the same cars go through without stopping from Saskatoon to Edmonton; there the picture is 

the same. Starting from Winnipeg we have divisional points at Rivers, Manitoba, Melville, Watrous, 

Biggar, Wainwright, Alberta and the last one in Edmonton. Today the same train and the same cars go 

through from Winnipeg to Edmonton without changing. 

 

Further when we scan the pages of our daily press, or weeklies, it seems rather significant that all we can 

find in the press are arguments put up by the railway companies and their counsel with regard to their 

claim; their figures are submitted and so on. Someone is building up in the minds of the people a case 

for the Railway Association. Well let’s take a look at the other picture, the other side of the picture here 

in the West. Let’s look at the freight rates back up to 1920. Following the First World War, freight rates 

were increased considerably in the early ’20s at the time when inflation was about at its highest in 

Canada, when our grain stock, consumer goods and wages were at about the same level or in some cases 

a little higher than they are today. We also remember the ’30s, the calamity of the ’30s when everything 

crashed all around us. The only thing that stood out like a sore thumb were the freight rates which didn’t 

go down with the others. If we are to have a recession, or if we will be faced with a recession in the next 

few years to come, looking over the past record, I am afraid that we cannot expect any consideration as 

far as railway rates are concerned, especially in the western parts of this country. 

 

So let’s look into the future and see what the 30 per cent increase, if granted, will do to the economy and 

to the people in Canada and in particular in the West. The cost of living, the cost of production, will 

increase on all consumer goods, whether they will be coming in or going out from the Western Prairies. 

Agriculture in particular will have to, or will be able to for a very short time following such an increase, 

pass this increase on to the consumers whether they are in Canada or outside. But if you look a little 

farther ahead to the time when agriculture in Europe and other countries will be re-built, Canada and 

especially in western Canada, will have to absorb this increase itself. What will be the results? When we 

will be faced with the fact of having to absorb this cost ourselves, there are two things that are going to 

happen. If we absorb this cost, we will still be able to hold some of our markets for a time outside of this 

country. But when agriculture is faced with too heavy an overhead the tendency will be to go out of life 

and then whether we want to or not, whether we like it or not, we will lose our outside markets because 

we wouldn’t have the goods to supply to the people outside of Canada, and one way or the other we will 

lose, sooner or later, lose our foreign markets and our foreign trade. 

 

Then when we look at our natural resources, I maintain that 



February 21, 1947 

384 

mine operators in Estevan, or in any other field that may be developed in this province, will not be able 

to hold all their markets that they have outside of this province. Those that may be opened up in the 

years to come will not be in a position to obtain markets outside this province. When we look at our 

lumber industry we can see very well where our lumber, used for pulp and paper, will definitely lose the 

market that we have now outside of this province. When we look at our fish production which has been 

going on steadily for quite a number of years we can see the same picture; we will be losing our market 

for fish because of the high price that we will be forced to charge for this product. The same thing 

applies to many other things, possibly to a lesser degree, that we have in the province for export to other 

provinces or outside of the Dominion. 

 

On the whole, I maintain that industry and business will suffer. They will be faced with a curtailment 

because the turnover, not in the price or the aggregate price of these goods but the turnover in the goods 

themselves, will be small all across the prairies, because the people will not have the extra money to put 

in to these goods and services which they require. From this standpoint industry and business will also 

suffer along with the rest of the people in western Canada. 

 

I want to point out something that did happen along the same lines in years gone by. The fuel oil 

companies doing a large retail trade in Saskatchewan, Alberta, Manitoba and many of the other 

provinces in years gone by have had to pay as much as $500 and $600 for hauling a carload of fuel from 

the Wainwright district into Borden, my own home town. Because of a similar condition in every other 

town all across this province and other provinces the companies turned to distributing their products to 

the people of the West by bus and not by rail. There the railway did kill the goose that had been laying 

for them a sizeable golden egg. 

 

An alarming thing, Mr. Speaker, is that the increasing freight rates will effect western production as a 

whole. I want to quote the late Sir Edward Beatty who was a president of the CPR for a long time, from 

a statement which he made to May of 1934. I quote in part: 

 

The prosperity of this Company depends upon the prosperity of agriculture and therefore western 

Canada, from which territory about 60 per cent of this prosperity is normally derived. 

 

I believe Sir Edward Beatty was right when he said that and I believe that that same statement is still 

good today. 

 

I want also to quote another statement of Sir Edward Beatty made on the 5th of March 1935, when he 

was speaking to the Board of Trade here in Regina. And I quote: 

 

There are some who suggest that the solution for the railway problem is to be found in an increase in 

freight rates. It is true that our wages are among the lowest in the world as I have already said and in 

some cases they may be unnecessarily low. The freight rate structure is, however, a complex affair and 

radical changes in it may produce unfortunate effects. A considerable increase in the rates, and I say 30 

per cent is a considerable increase, from any major type of 



February 21, 1947 

385 

traffic, I suggest the grains are a major type of traffic in western Canada, could scarcely fail to be 

damaging to the national interest. For my part, I should regret to see this tried until everything possible 

has been done to eliminate waste in our transportation system. 

 

I want to add a little more along similar lines. I want to add this – in western Canada we have no water 

routes, we have no direct transportation that amounts to much as we have in other parts of Canada. We 

are a long way from water routes on the one side or the other. We are just about in the middle. Our roads 

are not such that truck transportation is advisable or is beneficial enough, or profitable enough for the 

people to go into this type of transportation. The railways have been and still are the main transportation 

system in this part of the country. While an increase in the freight rates here in the West will hold, I 

maintain that in the East where they are close to water routes, where their road system is short and 

compact, where truck competition is very, very keen, an increase in freight rates will not hold. It will be 

whittled away as has happened in the past. I maintain that instead of being a help all across the 

Dominion, if freight rates are increased the western part of this country will be discriminated against 

much more in the freight rate structure that we have in the Dominion. 

 

While speaking of competition, it seems very significant, Mr. Speaker, that the railways have not asked 

for an increase in passenger traffic rates. That to me is very significant because there they do have 

competition and I believe in some cases very serious competition from cars, from buses and from travel 

by air. It is in only the thing in which there is no competition that they can make the rate stick if a grant 

is increased. 

 

Now, looking at the daily life of the people in the West as a whole, we can see whether we require 

services of the school, of the hospital, of modern conveniences, such as power. Whether we require 

services from hamlets, villages, towns or cities, whether we are farmer, teacher, doctor, business man or 

manufacturer, we are daily paying because of the disadvantages that we are up against, the vast distances 

in the western part of our country. We have been paying for it from the early days of settlement and 

development and we are still paying for it today. I maintain that the 30 per cent increase in freight rates 

will affect every man, woman and child, no matter what walk of life they are in. If there is anything we 

want to do to put the Canadian economy and especially western economy, on a toboggan downhill slide 

the best thing to do is to grant a horizontal 30 per cent increase in freight rates. 

 

In conclusion, I want to make this remark – the service which the railways have been able to do in this 

part of the country and the rest of the Dominion, this service which has built up the West and Canada as 

a whole, which of late years has come to be an important factor in world affairs and has come to be a 

bread basket for the unfortunate peoples of the world, this same service can and will, if allowed, break 

what it has built up in the past. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move this Resolution. 

 

Mr. A.P. Swallow (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to second this Resolution, so ably introduced 

by the Hon. Member for Redberry, protesting against the 30 per cent increase in freight rates, I wish to 



February 21, 1947 

386 

give some facts to show just how it would effect the pocket-books of the people of Saskatchewan. We 

ought to remember that this increase will effect the prices of practically everything we consume and it 

will naturally affect the standard of living of citizens. It is estimated that at least 90 per cent of the goods 

that we use come from eastern Canada. We must realize the very unfair rates we are paying the West 

today as compared to the rates in other parts of Canada. This has been very much stressed by the Hon. 

Member for Redberry. 

 

I am going to give just a few items. Figures are not very interesting so I will not give any more than I 

can help. These items are things we all use practically all the time. Take window glass for example, 

shipped from Montreal to Vancouver, the rate is $1; window glass from Montreal to Calgary which is 

approximately 600 miles shorter in haul is just double, $1.98. Now that one item alone will give us an 

idea of the unfairness and discrimination that we suffer. We will pay twice as much on that article, in 

Saskatchewan, than is paid by other provinces. Take paint – the rate is $1.25, compared to $1.98; boots 

and shoes shipped from Montreal to Vancouver – the rate is $2 and to Calgary is $3.03; hardware – 

$1.25 compared with $1.98 and canned goods – $1.50 compared with $1.98. Now the cost of shipping, it 

costs 30 per cent more to ship a bag of cement from Regina to Rosthern than it would to ship that same 

bag of cement the same distance in Ontario. It would cost 70 per cent more to ship lumber the same 

distance. You can imagine what this will mean in building a home: What this discrimination will mean 

to our returned men, the returned men of Saskatchewan in re-establishing themselves compared with the 

men of Ontario or other parts of Canada. Those few figures show the definite discrimination between the 

rates of the East and the West. Even if it was considered that the companies are entitled to this increase, 

which has not been admitted, the 30 per cent right across the board would still be very unfair, on top of 

these rates that I have quoted. 

 

It is hard to get an estimate of what this 30 per cent will cost to the various industries in the province and 

just what it will cost the farmers in their purchases of machinery per year. There has not been any 

definite estimate made but I have been assured that it will cost the western farmers up into the hundreds 

of thousands of dollars, possibly into the millions on shipment of their machinery. Giving two items, it 

will cost $17 advance on an eight foot tiller; it will cost $12 on a double disc drill; the average increase 

on a car will be $36. It will probably, as estimated, cost the purchasers of cars in Saskatchewan in this 

next year a half a million dollars. 

 

Now some industries have recommended an equalization of rates. For instance, cars made and shipped 

from Windsor range from $127 up to $183 through Canada. It is stated that an equalized rate would be 

$65. Now I am not recommending an equalized rate for goods shipped the same amount of miles in any 

part of Canada. 

 

We have the figures available in one industry that we are all interested in and that is the dairy industry. 

They will be very seriously affected and especially in Saskatchewan. The eastern province and British 

Columbia can consume practically all the dairy products that they produce. We in Saskatchewan export 

from 60 to 70 per cent of our butter. We export approximately 14,000 tons of butter each year. I could 

imagine when I 



February 21, 1947 

387 

go into the restaurants down in the city that we export more than that, Mr. Speaker, but that is a lot of 

butter. Now it is not only the freight on the butter we export but also on the supplies used in the 

manufacture of butter. At the present time it is costing the dairy industry approximately 4 1/2 cents per 

pound. If this 30 per cent increase goes into effect, it will cost them another 1 1/3 cent which will mean 

that a total cost, a total transportation cost will be approximately 5 2/3 cents per pound. That amounts to 

$320,000 per year to the dairy industry of Saskatchewan. Now this increase if it goes into effect may 

have the result of cutting down the production of butter in Saskatchewan. If it does, it means that 

Ontario will have to divert a lot of their products to the manufacture of butter, from cheese to butter 

because they purchase butter from us today. That will mean then a greater reduction in the manufacture 

of cheese which is so important to us all over Canada. 

 

It has been estimated that this 30 per cent increase will increase the general cost of living 5 per cent. I 

say these are only estimates, Mr. Speaker. Now it will give the housewives some idea of the increase 

when one firm alone in Regina had estimated that it will cost them $20,000 for canned goods that are 

shipped into this city. 

 

This province, as we all know, is hoping to complete an agreement with the Dominion Government 

whereby the province will receive a subsidy of approximately $15.25 million in consideration of the 

three fields of taxation. As I say it cannot be estimated what this will cost the Province of Saskatchewan 

but, it has been estimated that we will pay out, from the pockets of the people of Saskatchewan, a similar 

amount to that which we will receive in the subsidy. Now this we all agree will be a very great blow to 

the economy of the west. 

 

The argument that the companies need this increase on account of increased costs of labor and other 

costs does not wash. The Hon. Member for Redberry has mentioned that and I think we can all 

remember not many years ago when great engines were drawing or hauling from 20 to 30 cars. Today it 

is nothing, not a new sight to see them hauling 100 cars, and this takes no greater crew. The maximum 

load of butter some time ago was 20,000 pounds per car. In 1942 an order was issued by the transport 

controller that no car less than 40,000 pounds would be loaded. Now this meant a greater saving or a 

greater gain to the companies at no greater cost; the same crew drew those cars. The same thing does 

apply in the workshop. With more efficient machines, they are doing much more work with less men. Of 

course, this does apply to all industry in Canada. 

 

We are realizing more, I think, than ever, Mr. Speaker, that there are definite fields for private 

ownership and there are also definite fields for public ownership but there are services so important to 

the welfare of human beings that should not be privately owned. I wonder what we would think if our 

education system was in the hands of private ownership or health services or hospitalization, our 

highways or our postal system. 

 

Now we are told that we could not exist without our railway system. We are told that we are absolutely 

dependent upon it for existence, for the transport of our great wealth from one part of Canada to another. 

Yet one of the greatest monopolies we have today in Canada is the CPR and it is controlled by a 

comparative small group . . . The Hon. Minister says the 



February 21, 1947 

388 

CNR is not much better. We do know, and I think he knows, that the rates are controlled by a Board of 

Transport Commissioners. They are appointed by a government I believe and without discrimination 

also. They are controlled by a group whose principles are pretty well expressed in the words of D.G. 

Coleman and this was quoted by the Hon. Member for Redberry but it is worth repeating: 

 

That railway rates should be based on what the traffic can afford to bear. 

 

That is typically the principles of free enterprise. If competition is too keen in the East, then the East can 

soak the West to make up for it; that is what is being done today. 

 

Now in a conference with the Board of Transport Commissioners, Mr. Ralston representing one of the 

eastern provinces called the attention of the Board to one item in the statement of the CPR – $21 million 

for dividends to shareholders. That means that about one-quarter of the amount that will be collected in 

this 30 per cent increase will be paid in dividends to shareholders and I think in many cases, wealthy 

shareholders. Now if the corner grocery store, Mr. Speaker, is holding us up in prices, we can build 

another store on the other corner and the competition will compel him to ask reasonable prices, but if a 

railway is holding us up, there doesn’t seem to be anything we can do about it. The old saying that 

competition is the life of trade doesn’t seem to work today in our railways. Now I hope that the time will 

come in the not too distant future when we will realize that the Canadian Pacific Railway has too great a 

monopoly to leave in the hands of private enterprise and it will become a publicly owned service to 

serve the people of Canada as our Coastal Service does today. Mr. Speaker, I have great pleasure in 

seconding the Resolution. 

 

Hon. L.F. McIntosh (Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative Development): — I feel that the 

mover and the seconder, the Hon. Members for Redberry and Yorkton have dealt very effectively with 

the economic repercussions that a 30 per cent increase in freight rates would have on the economy of 

western Canada, so I don’t propose to attempt to elaborate on the statements that have been made by the 

Messrs. mentioned. I think it is just as well to point out to this House, for the information of the 

Members, the actions taken by the Government of Saskatchewan to protect the economy of the people of 

this province insofar as the overall question of transportation rates is concerned. 

 

Under date of October 9th last year, the Railway Associations of Canada, on behalf of their members, 

submitted an application to the Board of Transport Commissioners for a 30 per cent horizontal increase 

in freight rates. Shortly thereafter, the lake freight shippers submitted an application to the same body 

for a 30 per cent increase in lake freight rates. Some adjustments also were asked for in connection with 

express tolls. The Province of Saskatchewan immediately made application or filed application with the 

Transport Board on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan opposing this increase and on October 28th 

the Government called a conference of the business interests of this province representing producer, 

consumer, distributor and manufacturer. 



February 21, 1947 

389 

At that all-day conference, it was suggested by these people that they approve of the setting up of a 

technical committee to take care of the case on behalf of the people of the province and also 

recommended that an Advisory Committee be named. The technical committee, as we know is headed 

by Dr. George Britnell, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon. Mr. W. Cronkite and Professor Probot 

from that institution also are serving on this committee. Because it was generally felt that this was a 

matter in which an accountant could play a very important part, the Government of the Province of 

Saskatchewan in co-operation with the Government of Manitoba secured the services of Mr. Walter 

MacDonald of Mellow-MacDonald, Chartered Accountants, Winnipeg, as their accountant. 

 

Those named to the Advisory Committee consisted of the President of the Associated Boards of Trade 

for Saskatchewan and of the Canadian Manufacturers Association, Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Producers, United Farmers of Canada. The President of the Saskatchewan Co-operative Creamery 

Association was also represented on that Committee. The Retail Merchants’ Association and the 

chairman of the Saskatchewan Executive of Trades and Labour Council and also the President of the 

Local Council of Women were on the Advisory Committee. On the 13th of November, under the 

Government of the Province of Alberta, an all-day conference of the four western provinces for the 

purpose of co-ordinating our opposition in connection with the freight rate question was held. I think the 

Hon. Members of the House will appreciate that the problems affecting the Province of British 

Columbia in the field of transportation are to some extent different from those affecting the prairie 

provinces. However, as a result of the conference, we decided on the course of co-ordination. A little 

later on, that co-ordination was extended to embrace the Maritime Provinces and we found seven of the 

nine provinces in Canada co-ordinated in opposition to a 30 per cent increase in freight rates. 

 

As we got further into this question and gained a broader appreciation of the many complications 

involved, we felt the need for a transportation economist. We were successful in Saskatchewan in 

securing the services of Dr. W.A. Currie, University of Toronto, who is a Transportation Economist. He 

spent several days in our province, assisted the Province of Manitoba, and Alberta as well. I might say 

also, Mr. Speaker, that we were successful in securing the services of Major M.A. MacPherson, K.C. to 

plead the case on behalf of the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It is rather significant to note that two of the provinces of Canada do not appear to be represented before 

the Board of Transport Commission. It is rather significant to note that seven of the nine provinces feel 

very definitely that this is of economic importance and significance to the people of the provinces which 

they represent. I wonder if it is not because of truck and water competition in the Provinces of Quebec 

and Ontario that they do not see fit to be represented before the Transport Board on this all-important 

question. It is largely because of that competition that we feel that any increase that may be granted will 

fall heavily on the people of these three western provinces. 

 

The Board of Transport Commissioners initially decided to hear the case of the railway companies on 

January 8th and the case of the lake freight shippers on January 20th. Applications 



February 21, 1947 

390 

made before the Commissioners got a postponement until February 11th, and on February 11th the 

hearings got underway in the city of Ottawa. The seven provinces are very interested in regional 

hearings and have so informed the Board of Transport Commission. Up to the moment, there has been 

no attention given by that Board in connection with regional hearings. In order that the seven provinces 

may be in a very sound position to present arguments on behalf of the people that they represent, they 

asked the Railway Companies through the Board of Transport Commissioners to have certain 

comparative rates found. Up to the present we are still waiting for this very essential information from 

the Railway Companies. Judging from the information that one can believe coming from the Press and 

also from the competence of the evidence submitted before the Board of Transport Commissioners, I 

think that our people in the Province of Saskatchewan, can rest assured that their case is in very 

excellent hands. Everything possible that can be done will be done by the Technical Committee 

representing the Provinces of Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Alberta, British Columbia and the Maritimes, to 

protect the economic interest of their people in relationship to the problems of transportation. It gives me 

a great deal of pleasure to support this Resolution, Mr. Speaker. While I would like to have seen the 

Resolution make mention of the desirability of regional hearings, nevertheless, I believe, judging from 

what the mover and seconder said, that that thought was in their minds. I take great pleasure, Mr. 

Speaker, in supporting the Resolution. 

 

Mr. A.T. Procter (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, it is not my intention to take up a great amount of the 

time of the House. I can assure the mover and the seconder that as far as the opinions of this group are 

concerned, they are on very sound ground and they always will be on sound ground with what they’ve 

done in connection with this Resolution; that is, they’ve taken the plank out of the platform of the 

Liberal Party of the Province of Saskatchewan and when they do that, of course, we all recognize that 

they’re on the right track and should be supported. However, Sir, . . . Oh yes, the pride of the Liberal 

Party of Saskatchewan, as far as it can, will implement it and has implemented it. However, I prefer to 

support this Resolution on different grounds from many of those that have been urged. 

 

I think that there are two or three things that everybody will concede. First, that we can’t have a 30 per 

cent increase in freight rates without this very seriously affecting the economic standards of the people, 

particularly of the West. I think, too, that everybody will agree that the railway companies are a 

necessity and should have fair treatment. As to the necessity of a freight rate increase of 30 per cent, that 

is a thing where we do not agree with the applications. It seems to me, Sir, that this whole problem since 

the inception of our troubles with railway rates has been a lot to do with getting on to a wrong basis. An 

examination of the history of the difficulties the West has had with freight rates and I do not exclude the 

government-owned railway any more than the CPR, I do not agree with the Member for Yorkton when 

he suggests that the Canadian Pacific Railway is the main party desiring the increase. I think both 

railroads desire this increase and I think that both of them, both the government-owned and the CPR, are 

equally in cahoots in applying for the increase. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — Who do you think would be responsible for the action 



February 21, 1947 

391 

taken by the Government? 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Well, the management of the railway. My hon. friend the Premier who has just asked 

me that question, seeks to show as part of his political belief that governments get into these positions 

and then treat the people differently to anybody else. Well, I think that the clearest instance is right now 

before us, Sir. If my hon. friend, the Premier, had everything in the hands of the Government of the 

province or of the Dominion and had his party as the Government of the Dominion, we the common 

people of Saskatchewan would be getting just exactly the same treatment from those government 

corporations that they would set up as we are now getting from our own railroad, the CNR. However, I 

don’t want to introduce . . . 

 

Mr. Douglas: — Does he imply then that the CNR can make this application for an increase without the 

consent of the Government to whom it is responsible? 

 

Mr. Proctor: — I think that the CNR is in exactly the same position as any Crown corporation or 

anything else that you set up in this province. If you set up a management to run a corporation and that 

corporation finds it is going into the hole and knows that the directors of that corporation are going to be 

blamed for it, then they will very soon go to you, Sir, as Premier and say here are a whole lot of very 

good reasons on the face of them why our prices should be increased and that’s just what will happen 

with your Government’s corporations and with your socialistic Government if you ever get it, God 

forbid. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — Well, it’ll have to show better reasons than the CNR have shown to date for any reason 

for any increase. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Well, there I agree with you. But I say that you have a typical instance of what happens 

with your socialistic and your government corporations. Now the corporations set up by a socialist 

government are no different to the corporations set up by the old line parties, the CNR to run the 

railroad, and you will come to exactly the same results with them too. However, that is taking me away 

from the line that I was trying to develop, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — But I’m glad it’s on record. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — I’m very glad to have it on record, Mr. Premier, I’m very glad. I hope that the people of 

this province will take note of what we’ve both said because it is the clearest evidence that they can 

hope for nothing from the period when the state gets control of all or railroads and all our other 

enterprises. All they will be doing is being soaked a little more for what they get. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — They are being soaked plenty now. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Yes, they are being soaked now and they will be soaked 



February 21, 1947 

392 

worse then, because there will be more inefficiency and less competition. Now, Mr. Speaker, if I may go 

back to the line I was trying to develop. In the early days of the history of Canada, the railroad 

development was in the East and there were two at that time, great methods by which transportation 

could take place for any distance. One was the water transportation and the other the railroad 

transportation to the extent that it had been developed. Now, what happened with the increasing railway 

development was that water transportation being cheaper than railroad transportation, railway freight 

rates in the East were lowered to meet the water cost of transportation. When the railways were extended 

out to the West where we had no water competition, the same principle was carried forward out into the 

West. Now, it seems to me that there, basically, was the error in the whole freight rate structure. I cannot 

see why it should be that because a certain portion of this country has been favored by water 

transportation as a competition to railway transportation, another portion of the country where there is 

no competition between the two forms of transportation, should pay a higher freight rate. It seems to my, 

shall I say, limited understanding that a freight rate should be set on a schedule that has some regard to 

the cost of giving the service and should not be based on the fact that because there is competition in that 

service it should be lower and because there is no competition in that service it should be higher. Now 

that principle was not only carried on to the disadvantage of the West in regard to freight rates, but when 

we came to the Prairies we find, and it is now I think conceded by the railway freight experts 

themselves, that the cheapest movement of freight exists over the broad plains of western Canada. In 

other words, for a given 500 miles from Regina east, it is cheaper to move freight than it is from a point 

east of Port William. In other words, Mr. Speaker, the West again got, to use the sign expression, 

“soaked” in the freight rate structure. 

 

Now, I admit that there is some basis, perhaps for the argument that the railway freightmen use, that 

different types of freight should bear different grades. I think the usual example that they use is that if 

the carload of cement had to bear the same freight rate structure as the carload of silk stockings it would 

not be possible to ship cement at all because of the cost of transportation. That would seem to me to be 

one of the proper basic things that should be considered, namely, the bulk, the weight and the value of 

the commodity shipped. But, while I admit that that is perhaps the proper principle on which to set up a 

freight rate structure, I do not admit that because there is competition between water and competition 

between the railroads that that should be a basis of a properly drawn up freight rate structure. Neither do 

I admit, Sir, as you know, the practice that has grown into the freight rate system that there is a lower 

freight rate even here in the West to a point served by two competitive railroads. The basic rate, I 

suggest, should be the one on which I have already based my thesis – that the service rendered, the bulk 

value and so on are proper things to take into consideration. The mere fact that the small town of 

Moosomin, from which I come from, is served by one railroad, and that 20 miles south of us the town is 

served by two railroads, and that the town 20 miles south, therefore, should have a lower freight rate 

than the one in which I am fortunate enough to live, does not seem to me a sound proper basis at all. 

 

Now coupled with that and I don’t profess to be a freight 



February 21, 1947 

393 

rate expert or anything of that kind, Mr. Speaker, but the little study that I have given to this matter in 

both periods when I have had something to do with the transportation system of this province, convinced 

me of two things, first, that there is no sound basis in logic or reason for the discriminatory freight rate 

charged to the West. I think, if my recollection, and I am quoting from memory, serves me right, the 

average freight rate, if there is such a thing, is about 26 per cent higher in the western provinces than it is 

in the eastern provinces and that, in spite of the fact that the actual cost of the service delivered per mile 

is cheaper in the West than in the East. Now if there must be (I think that we all concede that we must 

have railroads) but if there must be an increase in freight rates then I suggest that the whole question 

should be gone into. 

 

The Board of Transport Commissioners and again my hon. friend, the Premier, raised the question here 

about these government boards, the Board of Railway Commissioners is an independent Board. True, 

they are appointed by the Government, but they are appointed in exactly the same way as any of his 

boards under his socialist state would be appointed. They have admitted and admit today that the freight 

rates are discriminatory: they don’t seek to deny it. They say that the principle of the discriminatory 

freight rates has been accepted and must be accepted if the railroads are to be permitted to carry on 

business at all. Now, for myself, I am not prepared to accept that proposition. These inequalities and 

inequities crept into our freight rates, but now the time has come with his request for such an enormous 

increase as 30 per cent with all that it means to the people of western Canada particularly for the whole 

question to be examined and a sound and economic freight rate structure imposed on the whole country. 

I can see no reason why it should be that we, out here in the West, should bear that 26 per cent 

differential; why we out here in the West should bear this increased rate because we have no water 

competition. There is no reason why certain localities in the West should bear a different rate, although 

equally distant from the point of shipment, merely because there are two competitive railroads. 

 

Now, Sir, there is another question in connection with that that has been touched on rather lightly be 

some of the speakers and that is the question of the truck transportation in the province, in all the 

western provinces. May I say this to you, that I do not think that the competition of the trucks can be so 

lightly dismissed. In the first place, I suggest that had the railway companies exercised foresight, a great 

deal of the necessity for the now asked for freight increase could have been avoided by the railways 

themselves handling certain of the short-haul freight and express by their truck system, subsidiary to the 

railway system. It could have been similar with the express, but the railway companies, shall I say, slept 

at the switch until that business got into other hands. 

 

There is another danger that I now want to point out in this House. From time to time, there has been an 

attempt to bring transportation by truck under a national board of transport commissioners. In effect, the 

idea would be to have exactly the same sort of control, particularly on interprovincial freight by truck as 

is now imposed on the railway freight statutes, by the Board of Railway Commissioners. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, we in this province have seen that by virtue of the fact that we provincially retained control of 

our truck system, we have received certain benefits in the breaking of that 



February 21, 1947 

394 

discriminatory freight rate. I remember that when I was Minister of Highways we had to haul some 

gravel from north of Regina down on this Soo Line and we were able to get the special rate for that 

freight from the railway. True, they based it on just a very slight variation to what it would have cost to 

haul it by truck, but the reason for that was that because there was competition by a truck, they were 

allowed to quote a special rate that otherwise would not have applied. If there is to be a differential 

allowed in the East because of truck and water competition to the railroad, I think that the time has now 

come when we in the West should be prepared to ask for and to receive the removal of that differential. 

 

I think too, that insofar as we in the West are concerned, there has not yet been established any ground 

for the necessity of the railroad to have this increase. There are today many economies which can be put 

in by the railroads. When the railroads themselves have gone over their structure and have made every 

possible economy along the lines that I have suggested, when they can satisfy the people of Canada and 

the different provinces of the things that they have done, then there might be some ground for their 

application. But so long as the railroads take the attitude that they have taken, that they will not attempt 

first to make all those savings that could be made, that they will not explore these other means of 

carrying our goods at a cheaper rate, that they will not come freely and frankly and lay down before the 

people of Canada and our representatives a schedule which will show the necessity for an increase and 

will enable us to determine where these excessive costs are coming from; until that day I say that we are 

justified in refusing to accept their application, in refusing to support their application and in taking the 

attitude that their application is untimely, unnecessary and not in the best interest of the people. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I shall support the Resolution, but may I just say one word in closing which I 

almost overlooked, mentioned by my hon. friend over here from Yorkton again, and that is that this 

application has shown one of the evils of private ownership. I’ve dealt with that in speaking to the 

Premier across the floor of this House to a certain extent but let me point out to you, Sir, that here we 

have a utility owned and operated by the people of Canada. We have a utility owned and operated by 

private enterprise. We find that both are joining in this application, both pressing for this increase, both 

of one mind that the poor old consumer should be soaked for their benefit, in the one case for the 

making of profits, and in the other case, I presume that it is because of the fact that being government 

owned and operated and owned by the state they consider that we the consumers should not object to 

pay to them the money. But for me, 30 per cent to the CNR is not a bit different from 30 per cent paid to 

the CPR and you have the example of exactly what is going to happen if my hon. friends ever do 

succeed in socializing this country as they talk about. 

 

Mr. Valleau: — Mr. Speaker, before the Hon. Member sits down . . . 

 

Mr. Proctor: — It does surely. 

 

Mr. Valleau: — Isn’t that statement in reverse . . . CNR and CPR. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — What do you men, I don’t 



February 21, 1947 

395 

understand? 

 

Mr. Valleau: — The Hon. Member said that money paid to the CNR is no different than money paid to 

the CPR. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — No, I mean that it comes out of my pocket and interferes with my personal aims and 

personal necessities to the same extent whether it went to the CNR or whether it went to the CPR. In 

other words, every dollar of that increase in freight rates that I give to either railroad leaves $1 less for 

me to support my private enterprises and that when you have got this country socialized as you would 

like to have, but which you never will have, then I say to you that the people will be in the same 

position, then all their money will be gone, funnelled into your socialistic enterprises, none left for them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Arthurs: — He said that the CNR wasn’t as efficient as a privately owned company. I would like 

him to clear that point up. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — I didn’t say that; I said that both of them joined in the application. They joined and 

either one is just exactly the same as the other. 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — Would there have been any difference in the choice? 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Well, actually, Mr. Speaker, I think that the CNR . . . 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — I have a question to do with the latter part of the Hon. Member for 

Moosomin’s remarks. I was interested in the fact that the Hon. Member for Moosomin said that this 

Resolution was exactly along the policy of the Liberal Party. I think that’s extremely interesting. Is the 

Liberal Party in Saskatchewan telling us what they will do about freight rates where they have no power 

to do anything about freight rates but in Ottawa they are in power and they are not doing anything about 

freight rates? 

 

Mr. Proctor: — That’s all right. I have no objection to that as long as I can answer it. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I am discussing the Resolution. I am discussing the Resolution and the 

statement made by the Hon. Member about it, that it is a plank of the platform of the Liberal Party in 

this province. I am pointing out the inconsistency of a provincial party which can do nothing about 

freight rates, having a plank, saying that they are in favor of reducing freight rates when they are in 

power Federally where they can do something about freight rates and are actually at the present time, not 

only allowing hearings, asking for an increase in freight rates but are themselves a party to asking for 

these freight rates. Now my hon. friend . . . 



February 21, 1947 

396 

Mr. Proctor: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether my hon. friend, the Premier, is asking me to reply 

to something he is saying or whether he is speaking on the Resolution. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — I am speaking on the Resolution. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Oh! Well that is alright then. I wish you had spoken before I did. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — Now, Mr. Speaker, neither my hon. friend nor his Party can wash their hands like Pilot 

with reference to this matter of freight rates. The Federal Government which my hon. friend supports 

has two distinct responsibilities with reference to this matter of freight rates. The first is that the 

Canadian National Railways is a government-owned railway. Now my hon. friend says that this 

government-owned railway in cahoots, is the term he uses I believe, with the privately-owned railway 

are now asking to get some more money out of the consumer’s pocket. He says that if you have a lot of 

government ownership (what he calls socialistic enterprises, although most of you will be interested to 

know that CNR is a socialistic enterprise which makes Mr. King a socialist) these socialistic enterprises 

would be doing just the same – coming along and trying to get something out of people’s pockets. May I 

point out to my hon. friend what the difference is. The difference lies here, the Government at Ottawa 

does own a national railway but that nationally owned railway apparently is not controlled and directed 

by the elected representatives of the people of Canada. My friend keeps referring to them as they . . . 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. gentleman a question? Does my hon. friend suggest 

that the government interfere with the Board of Transport Commissioners in control of either railroad or 

is he trying to suggest that in the socialistic enterprise there will be no Board independent of the 

government but everything will be in the hands of the government? 

 

Mr. Douglas: — I am making it very clear, Mr. Speaker, that we believe in economic democracy. If a 

railway or any other public enterprise is going to be paid for by the people and maintained and operated 

by the people then the policy of that railroad or whatever that enterprise is should be laid down by the 

elected representatives of the people. The Canadian National Railway, a creature of the Government of 

Canada, financed and paid for by the people of Canada ought not to be allowed to embark on a policy 

which is contrary to the best interests of the people of Canada. If the Canadian Government agreed to 

the Canadian National Railway making application for this 30 per cent, then it stands condemned for so 

doing. If the Canadian National Railway makes this application without any consultation with the 

Government of Canada, then the people of Canada might as well recognize now that their elected 

representatives and the Executive Council of Canada haven’t any control over the railway which the 

people of Canada think they own. 

 

The second thing is, and here again the responsibility lies 



February 21, 1947 

397 

right at the door of my hon. friend’s friends, that you have a Board of Transport Commissioners. They 

have a definite function as he has said himself. There are two things in Canada which control, to some 

extent, freight rates in order to prevent discrimination and in order to prevent unfair freight rates. The 

one, as my friend has said, is competition. Competition is particularly effective in the East where you 

have water routes and where you have bus and truck traffic. The water routes are effective as a 

competitive factor in British Columbia but here on the Prairies, especially in long hauls, there is no 

competitive factor to keep rates down to a reasonable level and therefore on the Prairies we are 

completely at the mercy of the other factor which is supposed to keep freight rates down to a reasonable 

level and that is the Board of Transport Commissioners. 

 

A study of the rates over the last 25 years will show anyone that the Board of Transport Commissioners 

has not had that effect. While in eastern Canada rates have come down steadily to meet competition, 

rates in western Canada have not come down proportionately with the result that even without a 30 per 

cent increase which is being asked for at the present moment, we are paying far too large a share of the 

revenues which are collected by both the railways. Therefore, any government which sets up a Board of 

Transport Commissioners who take as their basic premise what my hon. friend has said, namely that 

discriminatory rates are inevitable, it is very well time that a Board was set up that had some other basic 

premise, namely, that wherever competition is not operating to keep rates down to a reasonable level, 

then the Board of Transport Commissioners must step in and see that rates are kept up and that they are 

reduced in those areas where there is no competition on a comparable level with the areas where there is 

competition. And when my hon. friend tries to throw the blame on the fact that one of the railways is a 

government-owned railway and that the more you have government-ownership, the more you are going 

to have this sort of thing, he is not talking about the kind of government-ownership we have n mind at 

all. He is talking about the kind of government-ownership in which the government has lost control of 

what it is supposed to own. I will assure him that any type of society in which the people themselves 

own and control some of the principal means of production and distribution, the people themselves will 

see that they are controlled in the interests of the people, not doing as is being done by the CNR at the 

present time, something which is contrary to the best interests of the people who are supposed to own 

the railroad. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — It is a very interesting thing to watch and listen to some of the 

explanations that are made in regard to certain interpretations that my hon. friend has placed in them, but 

actual facts become apparent. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that there are two national 

enterprises in the railway system of Canada, the greatest in the world. They have been built up through 

the years by the people of Canada to some extent by public grants and public assistance, which was 

inevitable during the early days perhaps. I don’t want to discuss the merits or demerits of that particular 

past at all. Back in 1918 or 1919 the Canadian National Railway was taken over by the Government of 

Canada. Why were they taken over? They were taken over because they went bankrupt, and that they 

were necessary to the welfare of the people of Canada. There had to be somebody to take hold and 

control of this enterprise, this great transportation system. As a matter of fact there were 



February 21, 1947 

398 

several systems, Mr. Speaker, welded into one, and that was done very, very successfully. 

 

Mr. Williams: — Would the Member agree that the Canadian National Railway that he has just spoken 

of back in 1918-1919, would he agree that they went bankrupt at that time, or before that time, due to 

private enterprise? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t see very much distinction. The only difference is this, Mr. 

Speaker, if the woollen factory or shoe factory or some other socialistic enterprise in this province goes 

bankrupt, so long as they have competition they can’t very well put up their prices for goods that they 

produce but if the day ever comes, of course, when they do control the market, well, all they have to do 

is jack up the price. 

 

Now the Canadian National Railway with their Canadian Northern, the Grand Truck and different 

branch lines that were in existence previous to 1919, all were bankrupt more or less. Then they went 

time after time – and that is no news to my hon. friend; he’s a railroad man; he knows that; he knows 

they pay good wages to their employees to carry on, which they had to do to give us service – they went 

time after time to the Dominion of Canada, to the taxpayers of Canada, the Dominion Government. 

They asked for certain grants to meet that expense and everything else in order to carry on. Sure, and 

there were guaranteed bonds issued, guaranteed by the Dominion of Canada as trustee of the people of 

Canada which, they had, Mr. Speaker, to implement the obligations which these bonds entailed and the 

interest on these bonds. Now we all know that one year, I think, they got $96 million, but that was 

shortly after they had taken over the system. By reorganization and proper business methods brought 

into effect by the President of the Canadian National Railroad after the last war, the system was built up 

to one of the most profitable and most efficient and extensive systems in the world, and it is a credit to 

Canada today. But the Board that operates that system is not a government board in that sense of the 

word. It is not headed by any Cabinet Minister or by any Deputy Minister or anybody else. It is an 

independent board set up by the Parliament of Canada to operate that particular enterprise, and as I said, 

I think merit is being the guide in advancing the man in that, on that particular board, that means that the 

fellow that has proven himself to be efficient and a good manager and a good executive has finally 

attained the merit of heading that Board. 

 

Now then it is not so very long ago, Mr. Speaker, since the railway men in Canada – I’m not going to 

criticize them, I’m not going to enter into that phase of it at all, whether their demand for substantial 

wage increase was justified or not, I’m going to my hon. friend’s statement yesterday on another part of 

the discussion, when he said here, that labor doesn’t strike, or threaten to strike or demand increases n 

wages without being absolutely necessary. Well, I’m going to take that as being matter of fact. I’m not 

going to question it at all, but the fact does remain, Mr. Speaker, that a few months ago, well it is quite a 

few months ago now, they didn’t have to strike; they were rewarded with a very substantial increase in 

wages, not only CNR lines where they are a government-owned system but on the CPR or the private 

owned systems as well, running into millions and millions of dollars a year. Well that was a situation. 



February 21, 1947 

399 

Mr. Willis: - Would you say that the 30 per cent increase therefore was to cover the mens’ wages? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t say anything like that and he’s not going to put any words 

in my mouth. The fact is that I think even he himself is fair minded enough to admit that when an 

expense of millions and millions of dollars, hundreds of millions of dollars is being loaded on to the 

railway system of Canada by an increase of wages which was made retroactive for a five or six months 

period, if not more, will have some bearing on the financial position of any enterprise, whether it is a 

railway or anything else. I think he will admit the reasonableness of that statement. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You begrudge the employees the wages? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well that’s not a question, I’m not discussing the merits of this at all, but the fact is 

this, and my hon. friend knows that there were years when 97 per cent of every dollar taken in by the 

CNR went to pay wages on that railroad. That was the labor bill on that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’d just like to say that I think that is the most exaggerated statement that has ever 

been made in this House. 97 per cent is ridiculous. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well he can go back and see the statement that was filed in the House of Commons, 

if he wishes to do that. I am not going to retract that statement, Mr. Speaker. The situation is simply this 

– there are two great organizations of national importance and they are both in the same position, at least 

they claim they are, they claim they are in that position. I don’t know, I’m not going to say whether this 

application for increases in freight rates is justified or not justified. That isn’t the question at all. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s the Resolution. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, just a moment I’ll get to that – you are not going to squeal out of it as easy as 

this – the fact remains that we have one private owned railroad and one owned by the Government of 

Canada, with certain obligations insofar as salaries of the employees are concerned, so far as keeping up 

the interest on the investment. In this regard, Mr. Speaker, they are a little bit different from the 

Saskatchewan Government Crown Corporations which haven’t had to pay any interest on the invested 

capital, at least not so far, but the railways have to do that. You take it out of the public treasury, that’s 

what you do. At least you have done it so far. You are not paying interest on the $2 million that the 

people of Saskatchewan gave you two years ago either. So far your Crown corporation was investment. 

You took it out of the public treasury, out of the taxpayers money to pay that, if you paid any, and you 

must have paid something because it is two years ago now and there’s $2 million and there is $120,000 

at three per cent for two years. He invites these things, Mr. Speaker, and he’s going to get them as quick 

as I can give them to him. Now let me get back to what I 



February 21, 1947 

400 

was going to say. These two organizations are binding themselves due to certain circumstances 

according to what they say – I’m not guaranteeing what they say is correct. Now there is being set up by 

the people of Canada, by the Parliament of Canada, a certain body, to which all transportation systems in 

Canada, not the railroads alone but the lake shippers, all the boats and freight organizations, even 

truckers in certain parts of Canada, can appeal and submit certain facts and figures in evidence. They 

will be scrutinized, they will be challenged by the people of Canada or the provincial governments, or 

certain organizations, Boards of Trade or anyone else, to prove before that body that they must have this 

increase in railroad freight rates or lake freight rates or truck rates or anything else. They must have that 

in order to function and render service. Now that’s the situation. 

 

Now there is absolutely no difference, Mr. Speaker, between the CPR and the CNR in that respect. 

There is just this difference: if they cannot get any increase in freight rates, if their healthy state of life 

depends on the increase in freight rates (now I’m not saying that they do) then so far as the CNR is 

concerned, the Government of the Dominion of Canada, no matter who that government is whether it’s a 

Liberal or Conservative or a CCF or a socialistic or communistic government, will have to pay the 

deficit on that railroad. The CPR, on the other hand will probably have to get along for a little while 

until they have dissipated or paid out all their assets, then the people of Canada, by demanding 

transportation and service will have to come to the rescue of that company and take them over like they 

did the CNR. That is the ultimate effect of the refusal of granting anything if it’s needed. Now again, 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not saying that this increase is needed. I’m just as much opposed to it as my friend 

from Moosomin and I’m just as much opposed to the increase in freight rates as the mover of the 

Resolution, every bit of it. But it is no use. This is a business proposition; it is a question of utmost 

importance to western Canada and to all of Canada, but it will hit us, I think, Mr. Speaker, worse than 

anyone else and we think it is going to effect our economy here more than probably anything that has 

happened to it for a long, long time. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I am opposed to any increase in 

freight rates and I’m going to support this motion. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:05 o’clock p.m. 


