



















































Hansard: April 01, 1947


1143 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session – Tenth Legislature 

45
th

 Day 

 

Tuesday, April 1, 1947 

 

The Assembly met at 11:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

RESOLUTION RE – DEVELOPMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN RIVERS’ 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution of Mr. D.H. Heming (Moose 

Jaw City): 

 

That this Assembly, through the Provincial Government request the Federal Government to give 

immediate consideration to and take earliest possible action on development of the Saskatchewan 

Rivers to provide: 

 

1. Waters for irrigation of: 
 

(a) land served by these river systems; 
(b) Land in the Qu’Appelle Valley, and adjacent thereto, and any land lying adjacent to dams 

on the South Saskatchewan River if developed for power purposes. 

 

2. A much needed source of water supply for the cities of Moose Jaw and Regina, and for urban 
communities within the serviceable area; 

 

and urge the said Government to expedite all engineering, agricultural and economic surveys 

necessary to determine the location of dams on such river systems suitable for power development 

similar to have suggested in the “Acres” Report for Fort a la Corne.” 

 

Hon. W. Patterson (Cannington):  Mr. Speaker, with specific reference to the possible development 

of the South Saskatchewan River to provide a certain services and improvements, the question really 

involves a much wider field and the debate which has taken place to date would indicate that. With 

reference to the matter of water supply, water conservation and irrigation, all of these things are of very 

great interest and of very great importance to many parts of the province as well as those immediately 

adjacent to the river system referred to. A discussion of this matter, Sir, is one that involves a great many 

factors. Many of these factors are beyond the understanding or information of the average layman and it 

might have been advisable before this House went on record in reference to a matter so important, but 

which involves so many technical engineering and other problems, it might have been advisable, Sir, 

had we made some effort to secure authoritive advice and information. Personally, I think it is a mistake 

for this House to just go on record and say we favor something without knowing something about which 

we are registering approval of and when I say that, I don’t wish to be understood as minimizing in any 

way my appreciation of, or my support of, any measure of water conservation, water development, 

irrigation, power development or any of these other things that 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1144 

are possible, but as I say, I think it is rather a mistake for a representative and a responsible body such as 

this to just plump its vote, so to speak, without knowing altogether what it is talking about and I would 

suggest that perhaps in another year if this matter is to be considered that before going on record and 

registering our opinion, if we are to attain any status or maintain our position in the eyes of the public, 

that opinion must be based on sound information, on the very best technical advice that we can get. Now 

I have all due deference to the Hon. Member for Lumsden, but he told us in the House that he had an 

engineer that was prepared to build a dam at Outlook for $5 million. Well, I rather doubt whether the 

House should accept … 

 

Mr. Thair:  On a Point of Privilege. I made no such statement. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  It was in regard to Elbow. 

 

Mr. Thair:  I made no such statement. I could show you the scripts. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Well, in any event that sort of statement, Sir, is not sufficient for this House to place 

its deliberate and decided approval on and … 

 

Mr. Thair:  I would like him to quote what I am supposed to have said. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Well, I can’t propose and I don’t propose at the moment, because I can’t remember 

the exact words, but that is the impression. He said, that he had an engineer who reported or who had 

stated that a dam could be built at Outlook or at Elbow, I forget which, for $5 million. When I asked him 

to name his authority, he refused to do so and certainly the hon. Member will remember that incident. 

 

However, Sir, that is only a suggestion and I think the House would strengthen its position when dealing 

with these kind of matters if, before coming to a final conclusion or placing itself on record, it should 

delve very much more into the facts of the case and ascertain what the conditions actually are before 

proceeding to register its decision. 

 

The Hon. Member who introduced the Resolution provided us with a new slogan, “Ask and ye shall 

receive.” Well, that slogan served its political purposes in past days, but more and more people in this 

province are beginning to realize that those services and other governmental activities provided by 

governments have, in the long run, to be paid for by the people and I think it is becoming more and more 

evident to the people of this province that if they are going to ‘ask and receive’ that subsequently there 

will be a pay day and for that reason I think they are more and more looking to us to approach these 

matters on a sound and practical and business-like basis. 

 

Now, fortunately for us, in Saskatchewan to a partial extent at least, and to a considerable extent, we 

have an authority which has proved it by its record, that it has been prepared to make a very substantial 

contribution to the needs and 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1145 

requirements of the Province of Saskatchewan with respect to the conservation of water, the 

development of water supply, or irrigation and related matters. There is definite and concrete evidence 

by reason of the fact that up-to-date the Government of Canada has expended approximately $25 million 

for these purposes and there is very indication that they propose to continue that policy and every 

indicating that they propose to increase the scale of those expenditures. I think, perhaps in this respect 

the situation is rather interesting. 

 

The expenditure for these three or four specific purposes have up to the present time been confined to 

the Province of Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta, but it has been necessary for the people or the 

representatives of the people, in all the rest of Canada for these expenditures made in this prairie region 

and I must say that at this time we are under a debt of gratitude in this province to men like Mr. J.R. 

McNicoll of Toronto, who has no personal interest in western Canada, who is not of the same political 

faith as the major political parties operating in these provinces and who, notwithstanding that fact, has 

devoted many years of energetic and untiring service to promoting, not only in this part of Canada, but 

to promoting and the support of this work and this type of activity in other parts of Canada that are not 

so directly interested. 

 

Fortunately for us all, Sir, this matter has never been one of political controversy and so far as I am 

aware, all of the political parties realize and appreciate the importance, yes, the necessity of us doing 

everything that is reasonably and practically possible to conserve our water supply and to make the best 

use of it. Now so far as the Liberal Party is concerned, there is no question about its position. From the 

outset it has supported and as I will shortly indicate, in a practical way, demonstrate where it stands in 

regard to this matter and in view of that fact, I think it is rather unfortunate that in this House bits of 

statements, clauses, or sentences from speeches made by men who have, by their whole record, 

indicated their genuine interest in and support of these matters, should be – I won’t say distorted – but 

should be used to try and create the impression that several men in the public life of this country, who 

have given sincere and worthwhile support to these matters, that their position should be misunderstood 

and misrepresented. 

 

I say, the matter is too big and too important and it has been in the main a non-political issue and I 

regret, personally, that opportunity has been taken, as I say to take a sentence out of some statement that 

Mr. Gardiner made on some occasion to take a sentence out of a speech that somebody else made 

somewhere else, to prove a case which is contrary to the concrete and definite evidence that is available 

or should be available to any who are interested in this matter. 

 

The water conservation policy will include these activities which I have referred to, Sir, under one title. 

The water conservation policy is administered by the Federal Government, is administered in western 

Canada, in the three Prairie Provinces by what is commonly and popularly known as the PFRA. The 

PFRA Act was passed in the Federal parliament in April 1935 and it was under the Government headed 

by the Hon. Mr. Bennett. Very soon after that there was a change in government. I think the PFRA had 

begun some limited operations prior to the change of government, but all due credit to Mr. Bennett and 

his Government for the initial steps which he took and for the very substantial foundation which he laid. 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1146 

Later on in 1935, Mr. Gardiner became the Minister of Agriculture and this activity came under his 

direction and administration. Having a very intimate knowledge of the problems and difficulties and the 

possibilities of this part of Canada, Mr. Gardiner immediately began a very energetic program in 

promoting and extending the activities of the PFRA. I am not in a position to say, Sir, what was in the 

minds of those who drafted the first Act, but I think at that time, in view of the conditions which existed, 

that the primary purpose was to provide and preserve a water supply mainly for individuals or for 

communities. True, the Act covered a wider scope than that, as you will remember very well, Sir, the 

situation in 1935 and at that time the problem of water supply was an individual problem with thousands 

of farmers on these western Prairies. They had a considerable vision no doubt, as the drafting of the 

original Act will indicate, but as I say, I think perhaps in the first instance they were more and primarily 

concerned with the matter of providing a water supply for individual farmers or where that was not 

possible, for communities and connected with that, of course, was the problem of soil drifting which was 

so severe at that time. But in any event, very shortly after Mr. Gardiner took charge of this activity and 

by an amendment to the original Act, he considerably enlarged its scope and its application to include 

land utilization, the establishment of community pastures and a more or less what you might call an 

educational or cultural program. In other words his vision and his ideals in connection with this activity 

extended far beyond providing an individual farmer with a dug-out or building a little dam to serve a 

community and I can remember at the time, as Premier of this province, certain negotiations which took 

place with the Federal Government, with Mr. Gardiner or with his representatives of his Department 

which resulted, for instance, in the development finally of the Val Marie irrigation project and more later 

in the development of the Cypress hills. 

 

The PFRA also, Sir, has been fortunate in having the service of qualified men who have managed its 

affairs. Its first director, if that is the proper term, was Mr. L.B. Thompson, Superintendent of the 

Experimental Farm at Swift Current and for a number of years Mr. Thompson carried on, but naturally 

the activities and work of this organization grew where it was beyond, not the ability of Mr. Thompson, 

but the capacity to carry on this along with his ordinary and his regular duties in connection with the 

Experimental Farm, so that in 1938, Mr. George Spence, the present director of the PFRA was appointed 

to his present position. 

 

Now, I think all of those who know Mr. Spence and irrespective of their political leanings of political 

affiliations, will give him credit for a number of qualities. First, for an intense interest in this class of 

work, in this particular type of activity brought home to him by a long residence in the area where 

drought and crop failure had been most prevalent. Second, they will give him credit, I am sure, for an 

intense activity a tireless man and many instances of that in his previous activities could be quoted to 

prove that statement and thirdly, I think Mr. Spence would be credited by all men who know him, with 

an intense integrity and an outright and ultimate honesty. I think all of us could give Mr. Spence credit 

for those qualifications and many others, but in any event and when I say that I am not belittling in any 

way the work done by Mr. Thompson, now I have an equally high regard for Mr. Thompson, who laid 

certain very solid and practical foundations, but who was connected with the PFRA activities for, I 

think, about two years 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1147 

in its formatted stages. Now, secondly, I think that all of those who know Mr. Spence or know anything 

about his work will give him credit for having given during the period that he had been director of that 

operation, the very best that was in him, that he has never spared himself and that he has been interested 

in that and nothing else and that he has a picture, that he has a vision of the possibilities of what might 

be accomplished and that he will never cease in his strivings to reach that objective or to attain that end. 

 

In connection with the activities of the PFRA over the period of now 12 years, or nearly 12 years, a great 

deal has been accomplished, again maybe I should apologize, Mr. Speaker, for departing somewhat from 

the actual text of the Resolution, but you have allowed on this debate previously a good deal of latitude. 

I wanted to try to impress this House with the fact that the whole operation of this phase of Federal 

Government activities has from the outset been characterized with an energy, with an activity and with a 

success, but does not always associate itself with governmental activities in general. Up-to-date, for 

instance, over 33,000 small water projects have been provided either for individual farmers on their own 

farms or in the form of community watering places and small dams. For that purpose, $3.5 million has 

been expended. Larger water projects and the Government of Saskatchewan will enjoy the benefits or 

partial benefits of one I have in mind, the dam at Weyburn. 

 

There are similar rather large scale dams to the number of 50 that I think every Member of the House 

knows something about, the community pastures that have been established. They also know something 

about the experiments that have been undertaken to control soil drifting, to undertake re-grassing to 

build shelters and that sort of thing and associate with those, of course, the work that has been involved 

in transporting or transferring, moving settlers from one area to another, where their chances of success 

will be considerably better. Then a great deal has been done in connection with soil research and soil 

surveys to determine the best use which can be made, the best forms of cultivation to encourage and the 

best types of products, grain and fodder and that sort of thing. 

 

Now in addition to that, a great deal of individual assistance has been given to farmers in the way of 

engineering advice in developing their water projects. We were told by the representatives of the 

Matador Co-operative Farm that the PFRA had assisted, in fact I think if I remember correctly, the 

PFRA built the dam from which veterans on that particular farm expect to obtain or are obtaining their 

water supply and from which they expect to irrigate, I forget, but a limited number of acres, but enough 

to insure them of a fairly substantial fodder supply, so that I say, I don’t think in this House we should 

pass any resolution which even, by inference, reflects on the sincerity of the PFRA. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I quite realize that the PFRA is not referred to in the Resolution, but it is known by 

practically every man, woman and child in Saskatchewan at least, that the PFRA is the Federal 

Government’s water conservation organization. Now there is another phase of water supply and that has 

to do with water supplies for our urban communities and this insofar particularly as the cities of Regina 

and Moose Jaw are concerned is a very old and long standing question. 

 

In 1914 or 1915, certainly at the outbreak of the First 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1148 

Great War, a project had been engineered and specifications or what you might call it, had been 

prepared which for the purpose of providing a water supply from the South Saskatchewan River to the 

cities of Regina and Moose Jaw and the municipalities along the route and a vote was taken; the cost 

was to have been borne by the municipalities concerned, a portion among them I presume in relation or 

proportion to the value and a vote was taken. The Federal Government at that time wasn’t in the picture 

at all; this was to be entirely a municipal undertaking and the result of that vote is that while the two 

cities concerned voted in favor of the project, the urban municipalities along the route opposed it and as 

a result it was defeated, so that for the time being it was dormant. 

 

Another phase and one that s receiving increasing consideration and attention by the people of this 

province, is the matter of irrigation, the possibilities of irrigation. As I said at the outset, I question very 

much whether those who framed or drafted the original PFRA Act had in mind that that activity would 

ever embark upon any very large or very substantial irrigation project. As I have already pointed out, the 

first major irrigation project in this province and in relation to some of those in Alberta, it is 

comparatively small, but I say major irrigation project because we must bear in mind that for many years 

many ranchers, particularly in southwestern Saskatchewan, had developed comparatively small 

irrigation projects on their own. They used it to flood their hay meadows and to insure a supply of 

fodder. Now the first irrigation project, the major irrigation project, or one with any consequence in 

Saskatchewan, was undertaken in, I forget the years, Sir, but I think it would be 1937. I may not be 

correct in that exactly, but about that time, by the PFRA in the Val Marie District and on that occasion 

the Provincial Government came into the picture because a considerable portion of the lands which 

would come into the irrigated area were the property of the province. I remember a number of 

conferences negotiating with the PFRA representatives and with the Federal Government representatives 

before an agreement was finally reached, but in any event finally as a result of co-operation between the 

province and the Federal Government the Val Marie project, the Val Marie dam was constructed. A 

certain area below the dam was prepared for irrigation. Subsequently similar projects were carried on at 

Maple Creek and at Cypress Lake. The Province of Alberta had, of course, a very much longer, a much 

more comprehensive experience in connection with irrigation than has the Province of Saskatchewan 

because as I have just said, these three fairly large and yet in relation to some of the projects in Alberta, 

comparatively small projects, are all that we have had experience with in this province and those only 

over a comparatively short period of time. 

 

In Alberta – and those Members of the House who were attendant at the Board of Trade Banquet in the 

hotel some weeks ago will remember the story that was told to them by the speaker who came from 

Lethbridge and who had very substantial first-hand information. 

 

But I think to sum it up briefly, we might say this, Sir, the experience in Alberta has proved this: first of 

all that if the individual who is to benefit from the results of irrigation has to pay the capital cost or even 

any substantial portion of it, it makes it impractical. In other words, the capital cost has to be borne by 

some governmental authority and that’s been proven in Alberta, both with respect to irrigation projects 

that were undertaken by the Irrigation Districts which were 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1149 

municipal or what you might call a community affair, it evidently was the experience of the private 

companies because the CPR expended a very substantial amount of money running into, I think, some 

$20 million on the development of a irrigation district and in the end turned it over to the settlers 

practically free of cost. In fact I think they gave them a donation to take it over, so that it is very evident, 

I think and again I speak only as a layman and without a sufficient examination of these things to speak 

with authority, but I think it is very evident that the capital cost of irrigation projects in Alberta and 

Saskatchewan cannot be borne or cannot be paid by the individual who lives on the irrigated land, but on 

the other hand it does appear from what the gentleman from Lethbridge told us and from what other 

information we can obtain. Once the capital costs have been provided for, the individual operator can 

pay and should pay probably the operation and maintenance cost of the scheme, which supplies him 

with this water. 

 

As I have said, of course, that involves efficient local administration, efficient local operation and 

management of these concerns. Sometimes I feel that those who advocate irrigation so strongly are 

inclined to forget that there are certain difficulties and certain objections in connection with irrigated 

farming or irrigation farming and it is not all sunshine anymore than any other occupation that any of us 

happen to engage in in this life. It has been, I think, the experience in Alberta that it is rather difficult to 

convert the dry land farmer to the task of going around with rubber boots and shovels keeping the 

ditches open and keeping the mud out and all that sort of thing. Again, when I say that I am not decrying 

or reducing in any way the merits of the advantages of irrigation but as I say it is not all sunshine and we 

mustn’t accept irrigation as the complete answer for all of our problems even in those areas where 

irrigation is possible if the time should come when it is provided to them. You see we suffer one 

disadvantage in this province particularly in relation to other places south of us where irrigation has been 

such a pronounced success. After all in Saskatchewan even with irrigation, our growing season is a 

comparatively short one, all possibly with certain projects such as alfalfa, you may grow two and 

possibly three crops in a season, but down in California where we hear so much about the success of 

irrigation, I am told that down there in some of those projects they grow three, four or five different 

crops on the same plot of ground during the course of the year. Well, now, of course, we don’t enjoy that 

advantage. However, when I say that, I am not minimizing, in any way, the value or the importance of 

irrigation. 

 

Shortly after the First War a gentleman called William Pierce made an elaborate, I don’t know how an 

intensive study it was, Sir, I think because of the extensiveness of the area which he covered in the size 

of the project, it must have been more or less of a reconnaissance survey, but in any way Mr. William 

Pierce studied and made a report on what is usually referred to as the Pierce Project. Now that was a 

very large and a very elaborate irrigation project which started somewhat somewhere up in central, 

perhaps north central, Alberta and came down between the North and South Saskatchewan Rivers into 

the Kindersley-Kerrobert country over through Rosetown and all through there. Now he had in mind in 

that project two ideas, one to bring a tremendous area under irrigation and secondly, to provide work or 

employment. I think it would be fair to say that that scheme has never been sufficiently investigated or 

studied in detail to determine whether it is sound or practical. 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1150 

I have heard many arguments in favor of it and many arguments against it. I am afraid many of those 

arguments are, like my own, not sufficiently well based on accurate information to enable a person to 

make an honest and a satisfactory decision, but in any event we heard a great deal about the William 

Pierce project and I think when our friend from Elrose was talking about hearing the South 

Saskatchewan River project talked about for the last 18 or 20 years, he had that in mind. Well that, Sir, 

is an entirely different matter and it is not the use of the South Saskatchewan, if any water is used in that 

project from either the Saskatchewan Rivers, it was from the North Saskatchewan River, but more 

recently the project which is the immediate topic of the Resolution has begun to receive consideration. 

Now just when that first began to be considered I cannot say. I am quite sure that when the men who 

drafted and made law the original PFRA passed that Act, they did not have in their mind any such 

ambitious or comprehensive, expensive scheme as the South Saskatchewan River project and that we 

have progressed from 1935 until now, to regard this as a sort of everyday to go and build a $100 million 

dam on the South Saskatchewan River indicates two or three things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It indicates, first of all, the extent to which the public mind and to which public opinion has begun to 

realize, first of all, the importance of water development and water conservation. Secondly, it indicates 

the extent to which the governing bodies of the country are prepared to expend money for these 

purposes and, further, it indicates to me, Sir, the forward movement, the vision and the energy and the 

foresight of the men who direct and administer PFRA activity. What does this involve? Many great 

dams have been built in various places on the face of this globe, Mr. Speaker, but the great majority of 

these really large dams, such as Boulder Dam and dams of that kind have been built on rivers which 

flow in rock valleys or their foundations, their valley is of rock and, of course, the dam in that case is 

constructed of concrete, but only in comparatively few cases have major dams such as well have to be 

built on the south Saskatchewan River, if the project that we envisage is to be a success, will have to be 

built of clay or earth. Two or three of those kind, of that type of dam have been built up to the present 

time. I think the largest in the world is at Fort Peck and it wasn’t built in a year or in two years or in 

three years. I presume that from the time it was started until it was completed, probably some 10 or 12 

years elapsed. The American Government at the present time is developing plans to build, what is called 

the Garrison Dam, somewhat further South; I don’t know just the exact location and they have already 

spent five years in preparing the plans and making certain of where the dam should be built, how it 

should be built and all the rest of it, before actually embarking on the project. 

 

If the South Saskatchewan River dam at Elbow or Outlook or wherever it is to be built, is built, Sir, on 

the scale as presently contemplated, it will be the third largest of all clay or earth dams in the entire 

world and I think, Sir, that any reasonable man or any reasonable woman would agree that before 

embarking on a project of this size, of this cost, of this importance, that no authority should be rushed 

unduly or hastily into action without taking every possible precaution to insure that when it is finally 

done it is done property. Before going on with that, may I point out this, Sir, we hear a great deal about 

what can be done by damming the South Saskatchewan River and this same story was used in the United 

States in connection 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1151 

with the Missouri Valley with control or whatever they call it. You must remember first of all that you 

can’t use the same water to provide power and to provide irrigation and to provide for civilian 

consumption. If you drain the water off into irrigation districts it evaporates. If you run it over the dam 

to provide power it is gone, it goes down the river and if you pipe it off in drains or pipes to serve the 

cities or the urban communities it is consumed in that way, so don’t get any misapprehension about 

using the same water over and over again for this purpose and that purpose and the other purpose. 

 

Now fortunately for us there would appear to be possibilities on the South Saskatchewan River where 

there is an ample water supply to do all these things, to provide a considerable amount of power, to 

supply the cities of Moose Jaw and Regina and to irrigate a very large area of land, but this must also be 

remembered, Sir. In Alberta the rivers there which up to the present have been used for irrigation 

purposes, are practically level with the prairie beside them. By putting in a dam, the water is raised 

approximately to the level of the land to be irrigated, whereas on the Saskatchewan River, as every 

Member of this House knows, the Saskatchewan River runs in a bed, in a valley 100 or 200 – I don’t 

know how many – feet deep, but that no matter how high a dam you build, a certain amount of pumping 

is required to bring the water up for irrigation purposes and that pumping in turn takes away or uses a 

certain amount of the power that can be developed by allowing a certain amount of water to run over the 

dam. So as I say, there is a good deal of confusion both as to the possibilities of irrigation and what can 

be done with water conservation, but in spite of all of those things, Mr. Speaker, and I only speak of 

them as actual practical facts that must be applied in a sober sensible consideration of the whole 

situation. 

 

In spite of that mere fortune, it would appear that at an expense maybe of $100 million, a water supply 

can be provided on the South Saskatchewan River that will provide water for irrigation, that will provide 

water for power and it will provide a water supply for our urban communities, particularly in these two 

cities. Now, I think in a question of this kind we might with more justice to ourselves, approach it from 

what it primarily is, the point of view of an engineering project, rather than a political one, rather than 

whether it is going to effect the bridge at that Saskatchewan Landing or the bridge of the ferry 

somewhere else, but the first consideration is that economically and from an engineering point of view is 

it feasible. 

 

Those who are concerned about the Qu’Appelle Valley, if a 100 foot dam is put in at Elbow, it will back 

the water up so they will actually have to build a dam at Edgetower, somewhere there to prevent the 

overflow rushing down the Qu’Appelle Valley and not irrigation it, but squashing it out, but I have no 

doubt that part of the scheme will be an overflow or an outflow at that particular dam which will provide 

a water supply for the Qu’Appelle Valley. Nobody knows at the present time what this project will cost. 

A great deal of preliminary engineering and expense was involved and not only expense, that has not 

been the controlling factor, but the time that was required to do the work necessary to establish the 

feasibility and to estimate the cost of this project. Not taking them in their order necessarily, but first of 

all the PFRA has surveyed approximately a million acres which it is considered may be available for 

irrigation if this project, if this dam is built. Now I am not 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1152 

suggesting for a moment, Sir, that the dam will irrigate a million acres, but over a million acres have had 

to be surveyed and the topography or whatever you call it, taken and the levels and all that sort of thing 

to determine whether some or any part of those sections which could be supplied with water from this 

dam. 

 

Then, the location of the dam. As I have already said, Boulder Dam, and I forget the names of the 

others, a great many of them will be in the minds of Hon. Member, were all built in rock formations 

where the engineering was comparatively simple. When I say that, it doesn’t mean that it wasn’t very 

intensive at that, but as compared with building an earth dam on a clay foundation, the engineering of 

these other dams that I speak of was comparatively simple and it was necessary if the proposed dam on 

the South Saskatchewan River was to be built and to say where it was built, that there should be 

absolutely no doubt left, or absolutely no uncertainty that it was placed at a position on the river where it 

would stay. I wonder if any person has visualized what would happen to the city of Saskatoon if a dam 

at outlook or Elbow, 100 feet high, were to give way. Why what we’ve read in the papers the last day or 

two with regard to the floods at Loon lake, it is infinitesimal as compared to what would happen, not 

only in Saskatoon, but all down that valley if a 100 foot clay dam, built at outlook or Elbow should 

happen to give way. 

 

The first thing was to make absolutely certain as far as human ingenuity and human engineering could 

determine that the dam when built was built in a place where, as I say, to the utmost extremity of 

certainty its permanency could be assured and to do that, Sir, it wasn’t just a matter of going down an 

putting a test hole down here and going a 100 yards or 100 miles down the river and putting another one 

there. There has to be the most intensive and well correlating boring in various points on the river to 

determine where a possible foundation might be found. It is quite possible, Sir, and again I am not an 

engineer, I don’t know, there may be only one or two sites in that whole river within the Province of 

Saskatchewan where it would be practicable, where it would be sound and where it would be safe to 

build an earth dam of the kind or character that is contemplated. 

 

Those works are not done in a day either, not done in a week, they are not done in a year; but that work 

has been actively prosecuted by this PFRA over a considerable period and then to be more certain still if 

that is possible, when they had taken these sums and made these, they called in the man who is generally 

accepted on this continent as the highest authority on the matter of the construction of earth dams. 

General Ferguson of the United States Army Engineers, a man who has perhaps had more experience, 

more knowledge of this type of construction than anybody else, certainly on this continent, or possibly 

even in the whole world. 

 

Now, surely, Mr. Speaker, that he has only an … these activities and these actions have only been a 

matter of sound common practical sense. After all, if we are going to spend a million, a hundred million 

dollars, not a million dollars, not five million dollars, but a hundred million dollars, because that is what 

it will probably entail. You know, Sir, that it will cost $5 million to divert the Saskatchewan River while 

this dam is being built. You can’t build a clay dam and let the water continue running over it while you 

are building it, that makes 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1153 

common sense and a new river will have to be built to divert the waters of the South Saskatchewan 

River while the Elbow dam that is to be at outlook, Elbow, if it is to be at Elbow, is being built. Now 

that in itself will probably cost $5 million. 

 

I say, surely we might be reasonable and fair to the authority that have taken this necessary, these sound, 

these practical and safe steps instead of rushing in and say we want you to build this dam without further 

study or without further consideration or without further action. I think, Sir, again I say, I think it is 

rather regrettable that a sentence that was contained in a speech made by Mr. Gardiner at some particular 

place, should be withdrawn from their contacts and put together to prove that the PFRA or the Federal 

Government, which carried on the activity through that particular organization haven’t done anything, 

didn’t intend to do anything and weren’t going to do anything. I say, I think, it is unfair and it is unjust 

and it does not represent a true picture of the situation. Had we done any less, sir, they would have been 

unfair to the people of Canada who are putting up the money for this project. If they had neglected any 

one single safeguard for the protection of the investment by the Dominion of Canada as well as the 

protection of the people who would be effected, if in the event of this dam being built and in washing 

out or giving way would be threatened with loss of life and property. I say they would have been true 

not to their duties or their responsibilities had they neglected to do all the things that they have done 

up-to-date and there is nothing in the whole record of this organization. 

 

I have outlined some of their other activities merely to indicate that it has not been a dormant 

organization; on the contrary, it has been one of the most active, one of the most energetic and one of the 

most successful. I think we might in fairness say to men like Mr. Spence and to men like Mr. Gardiner, 

“First of all we appreciate what you have done up-to-date and we confirm the steps that you have taken 

to insure that this project when it is built, is safe, is practical, is sound and is thoroughly worthwhile,” 

but then we may go on and say to them having gone that far, we would like you to press the word 

forward and bring it to a conclusion as soon as is reasonably and properly possible. 

 

I propose to introduce an amendment to that effect in a very few minutes, Mr. Speaker, but let me go 

one from that to the further phase of this picture. After all the Provincial Government has some 

responsibility in these matters and our municipalities have some responsibilities in these matters. The 

Government of Canada has announced its policy; Mr. Gardiner has stated it. I heard him in an address 

down here. I think also before a Board of Trade of some similar luncheon, that the Dominion 

Government was prepared to provide the water storage to build the dams and to dig the main ditches and 

from there on they expected the Province and municipality or the local water user to provide the 

facilities that were necessary to utilize the water storage that had been provided under federal auspices. I 

am sorry to say, Sir, that if in this province we have a fairly substantial irrigation project, where the 

water supply has been made available, has been provided or made available by the Federal Government 

and where up-to-date comparatively little or nothing has been done to utilize and I must say that I think 

in fairness, that examples of that kind do not encourage or would not encourage the Parliament of 

Canada to vote $100 million for another 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1154 

project in Saskatchewan unless there was some certainty that it was going to be made more use of than 

the use that is now being made of projects already developed. 

 

So I say we must have co-operation between the Federal Government and the Provincial Government if 

the ultimate use, the maximum use of projects of this kind is to be obtained. The Provincial Government 

comes into this in a number of respects. First of all there is a question of water rights. I don’t know what 

the policy of the Government today is, I think it is the same as during the previous administration in 

connection with these small water projects, when they involved putting a dam across a small stream or 

anything of that kind, the consent of the Provincial Government to the use of that water, or to that water 

development had to be obtained. I think it was granted practically automatically and I presume that is 

still the practice. The question of water rights, that is a comparatively small and minor question. I think 

the question of water rights involves a great deal more than that. Well then, secondly, there is the 

question of the share that the province is compared to pay in connection with the construction of this 

project at Elbow or Outlook in relation to the power development that will be developed. Naturally, I 

don’t think the people of the Province of Saskatchewan can expect the Federal Government to build 

projects which develop power if that power development involves additional cost. I think they can 

reasonably and properly expect the province to meet those costs because the province is going to benefit 

entirely from that power development. Then there is the question of the organization of local irrigation 

or water users district. If this water is to be dammed up to this height, made available, pumped out unto 

the prairies in these main ditches, and some organization has to be effected to construct the lateral or 

side ditches, I forget the technical term, and to control and collect the revenues that will be necessary to 

keep those in operation. The construction of distribution, that’s it, distribution and lateral districts. That 

goes along with the organization of irrigation districts and Water Users’ Association and then there is 

the very, very important question of the operation and maintenance of these various irrigation plans and 

Water users’ Association, because I do not think, Sir, no doubt it will be wasted; many people may ask 

for it. I think you will find that after the Federal Government has constructed the water supply or the 

equipment or the construction that makes the water supply available, that all we can expect them to do is 

to maintain that. We will have to, as a province, or as municipalities or as Local Irrigation Districts, have 

to assume the responsibility for the maintenance and operation of these local lateral and distribution 

ditches. 

 

I understand that in the Province of Alberta, of course, as I have already stated, Sir, they have 

considerably more experience than we have had and I may say that on the whole, it has been rather a 

costly experience. A good many millions of dollars have been sunk there, which have to be assumed or 

will have to be assumed by the Government of the province, in the case of the CPR, by the CPR 

Company. I surely, we could learn and anticipate in this -province from the experience that they have 

had there. True, conditions probably are somewhat different, they have as I already stated, many of the 

streams that they use of irrigation purposes, they are practically on the level with the Prairies and there is 

no pumping or no expensive construction involved in damming the water up. It is less costly and there is 

no pumping, as I say. I am sure that we can learn something from the experience of Alberta. I 

understand, Sir, 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1155 

I haven’t this authoritatively, but I understand, Sir, that in the Provincial of Alberta, possibly because of 

their provincial experience in the past, the costly one as I have said, the Provincial Government and the 

Federal Government have now pretty well come to a working agreement as to these various matters that 

I have referred to. How far the federal responsibility comes where the provincial responsibility steps in, 

as I say, I understand in connection with water rights and all that sort of thing, they have come to a 

practical, if not a complete and final agreement. Certainly an agreement that is working reasonably 

satisfactorily to both parties. 

 

I suggest that in this province something of that kind will have to be developed before we can expect the 

Government of Canada to spend $100 million on a dam anywhere on the South Saskatchewan River or 

anywhere else in the Province of Saskatchewan, so far as that is concerned. 

 

Now, in view of what I have said and I hadn’t intended to talk so long, Sir, I am going to move an 

amendment involving the three points that I have outlined. First of all to remove from this Resolution 

the implication or the inference that the Federal Government has been doing nothing, has been negligent 

and dilatory in regard to this matter. Secondly, I want to say that we commend them for what they have 

done up-to-date. I am going to add to that, the second point, that we asked them to proceed with all, as 

quickly as possible with due regard to safety and proper administration and all that sort of thing, to 

complete the work and certainly I am going to ask the Provincial Government to determine its policy on, 

in regard to the various matters which appear to me to come entirely under the heading of provincial 

jurisdiction and provincial responsibility. 

 

Consequently, I am going to move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by Mr. Danielson: 

 

That all the words after “Assembly” in the first line down to and including “provide” in the fourth line 

be struck out and the following substituted therefore: 

 

“commends the Federal Government for the steps it has already taken, through the PFRA to 

determine the possibilities for the development of the South Saskatchewan River to provide”: 

 

and that the following be added at the end of the motion: 

 

“so that it may proceed with the development and construction of such works as may be considered 

advisable.” 

 

And, further, that this Assembly is of the opinion that the Provincial Government should at an early date, 

and with full and complete co-operation with the Federal Government, determine and announce its 

policy with respect to the development and construction of water storage and conservation, irrigation 

and power development in regard to: 

 

(a) Water rights and their being made available where required in such development; 
 

(b) division of the costs of power development and distribution; 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1156 

(c) organization of irrigation districts and Water Users’ Association; 

 

(d) construction of distribution and lateral ditches and canals from the main ditches constructed by the 

PFRA; and 

 

(e) operation and maintenance of irrigation projects. 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): Mr. Speaker, I don’t propose to take very much time, only to just say a 

few words about the motion and the amendment to it. 

 

First of all, the Leader of the Opposition has repeatedly said this morning that the motion contained 

some reflection on the PFRA in some inference, that they hadn’t been as aggressive as they might have 

been and that there is some reflection on either the personnel or the policy pursued by this PFRA. I have 

read the motion over several times and I fail to see any reflection at all on the PFRA or in the work 

which they have done. 

 

However, I do see here is a request that the Government of Canada should proceed to do some 

additional work which it is recognized as very essential to the economic stability of Saskatchewan. Now 

the Leader of the Opposition has, in a quite lengthy speech, come back again and again to the fact that a 

great deal is being asked of the Federal Government and he says and ye shall receive.” He says that the 

people of Saskatchewan are now becoming aware of the fact that if you ask and receive that some day 

there is coming a payday, but as far as irrigation in this province is concerned, we have learned, not only 

to ask and, but we don’t expect a payday. We don’t even expect to receive unfortunately. 

 

If there has been any misapprehension about and if there has been any clamor on the part of the people 

of Saskatchewan for large irrigation projects, my hon. friend needn’t blame any resolution moved in this 

House. He can blame the people who, for the last 10 or 12 years have tried to win every election on 

promises of large irrigation projects that have never materialized. 

 

Now there is no use in talking about taking isolated sentences out of the statements of Mr. Gardiner or 

anyone else. Those of us who participated in the by-election in the Assiniboia constituency when Mr. 

Gardiner, on January 6, 1936, became a Federal Member, will remember that the big issue in the 

Assiniboia by-election was that they were going to build a million dollar dam at Estevan; to turn the 

Estevan park into a paradise and to change the entire topography of that country. Of course, the dam 

didn’t materialize, but the election was won and the next election Mr. Gardiner moved to another 

constituency and the next constituency, they were going to irrigate the Qu’Appelle Valley and in the 

last, 1945 election, the ante went up from a 20 million dollar project to a 100 million dollar project and 

the people of Saskatchewan were made irrigation conscious, not by the Members in this group, but by 

the very lavish promises made in each constituency in which Mr. Gardiner became a candidate. When 

the election was all over and the smoke had died away and Mr. Gardiner had been elected by a slim and 

questionable majority, we looked at the estimates and found that less than $100,000 had been authorized 

for the purpose of looking for a 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1157 

site for a dam, which, Mr. Gardiner said had already been chosen. 

 

Now, if there is any misunderstanding in the public mind about dams and irrigation projects, they have 

been made by virtue of the fact that the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan has been winning such elections 

as it has won, and such seats as it has won by these extravagant irrigation promises and the people of 

Saskatchewan have certainly been well trained in asking, but in this case not in receiving, and neither 

the reception nor the payday have yet come around. 

 

It seems to me that there could be no more appropriate day for my hon. friend to have been discussing 

Mr. Gardiner’s irrigation projects on an April Fool’s Day. I think that there is probably the most 

appropriate day on which this whole subject could be discussed, because I know nothing on which we 

have been April fooled more for the past 10 or 12 years here in the southern part of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The amendment, Mr. Speaker, may I say about the latter part of the amendment, if I may start at the 

back end, the latter part of the amendment, I quite concur in. I think that the Provincial Government 

would be prepared at any time to state its position with reference to water rights being made available to 

the question of the division of costs of power development and distribution, the organization of 

irrigation districts and Water Users’ Association, the construction and distribution of lateral ditches and 

canals, and the operation and maintenance of irrigation projects. Those are things on which the 

Provincial Government would be very glad to make its policy known. We have already entered into 

agreement with the PFRA regarding a number of matters and these could be extended the moment the 

PFRA indicate their willingness to even consider seriously projects such as was suggested in this 

Resolution. 

 

The first part of the amendment, I would draw to the attention of the Assembly, which if the amendment 

were accepted, the Resolution would read: “This Assembly commends the Federal Government for the 

step that has already taken through the PFRA to determine the possibilities for the development of the 

Saskatchewan River, to provide (1) water for the irrigation of the, (a) land served by those river systems 

(b) land in the Qu’Appelle Valley, etc. etc. and (2) a much needed source of water supply for the cities 

of Moose Jaw and Regina and for urban communities within the serviceable area. I said that this has 

already been done; that they have already determined the possibilities for the development of these 

things. And then the Motion goes on: “and urge the said Government to expedite all engineering and 

agricultural and economic surveys necessary to determine the location of dams on such river systems.” 

 

Now personally, Mr. Speaker, I can’t vote to commend the PFRA for the steps they have already taken 

to determine the possibilities for the development of the Saskatchewan River with reference to all these 

items, because I don’t know what steps they have taken. All I have been able to see in the Federal 

Estimates were picayune amounts of money to permit certain surveys. $67,000 was the amount to make 

a survey, but what steps they have already taken to determine the possibility, certainly this House and I 

don’t know that even the Federal House have had any information to that effect. I would be prepared to 

support that the suggestion that we should urge the Government to expedite all engineering, agricultural 

and economic 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1158 

survey, but I certainly would hesitate to commend the Federal Government for determining possibilities 

when I don’t know what steps they have taken to determine those possibilities and so far of the more 

recent statements Mr. Gardiner, no indication was given that they have yet agreed or arrived at any 

conclusion that there are certain steps which should be taken and which they propose to take. 

 

For that reason I will personally oppose the amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SECOND REPORT OF THE SELECT STANDING COMMITTEE ON CROWN 

CORPORATIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. W. Patterson (Leader of the Opposition) moved, seconded by Mr. Danielson (Arm River) that 

the Second Report of the Select Standing Committee on Crown Corporations be referred back to the said 

Committee for consideration. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the Report of the Select Standing Committee on Crown Corporations was tabled 

in the House here, last Saturday, March 29
th

 and in view of the fact that a minority of the Members of 

the Committee were not in agreement with the report as tabled, I had to take this method of presenting 

the views and opinions of that minority. 

 

May I say, for the benefit of those Members of the House who were not Members of the Committee, that 

this minority report, which might be divided into two sections, setting forth two general ideas, resulted 

from these facts: 

 

When the Committee met and we came to the examination of certain of the corporations, the evidence 

was that the corporation, or the Government on behalf of the corporation, had employed certain 

valuators and appraisers to inspect and valuate certain properties and certain machinery or certain 

equipment, and that the amounts paid for these properties or machinery so valuated was, of course, 

represented in the capital structure of the Crown Corporations in question. One of the Members of the 

Committee for the opposition group moved for the production of these reports. This was refused on the 

grounds that some of these valuations had been made by employees of the Government, such as the 

Deputy Minister of Public Works – I won’t say that he was the particular official referred to, but I think 

he was one of them – and consequently, as communications between departments, or between an official 

of the Government and the Government, are confidential, the motion was ruled out of order by the 

chairman. 

 

In a subsequent examination of a subsequent Crown Corporation, recognizing this fact, we moved for 

the -production of the valuation and appraisal reports of those specialists who had been hired 

specifically by the Government to make an appraisal or a valuation of the property purchased, but 

eliminating those reports made by employees of the Government, because we accepted the fact that we 

would have to do sounder the Rules, and indeed we would have made the same exception in the first 

case had we realized that some of these valuations had been made by employees of the Government. 

That motion also ruled out of order, the Minister taking the ground that it was not in public interest to 

make these documents available, or to make them public. 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1159 

Now I wish you to appreciate, Sir, that there was a distinct difference, that, at least, the application of 

this ruling was different. Insofar as any Member of the House requiring the production of a document or 

communication from a Deputy Minister to his Minister, that rule, of course, is sufficiently 

well-established that there is no question. But when we asked for the tabling of a document, or a report 

say, which has been made by some person outside of the Government service to the Government, then 

whether it is in the public interest or not to produce that document or report is a matter within the 

discretion and at the decision of the Minister. If the Minister says it is not in the public interest, that, of 

course, decides the matter; but a document of that nature, or a report of that nature, is in an entirely 

different position from a report made by a Deputy Minister to his Minister, or a report made from the 

Minister to another, or from one Deputy Minister to another. We realize that, in one case, there is no 

question, but that in the other, it is the matter of the Minister’s discretion. 

 

Frankly, Sir, I do not know why reports, valuations or appraisals made by an expert who has been called 

in by the Government on the purchase, say of shoe machinery or a second-hand woollen mill down in 

Massachusetts, should be regarded as confidential documents. The Government took the attitude that 

they were and, of course, having taken that attitude, that is not in question. But I do say that, not having 

that information, the members of the Committee were not in a position to know whether, for instance, 

for the $300,000 that is invested in the woollen mill in Moose Jaw, the value is there; whether the 

province received value for that investment and whether the machinery and that sort of thing that was 

put there at a certain cost, was actually worth the money that was paid for it. 

 

For that reason we contend, as outlined in the first two paragraphs of the Motion which I have 

submitted, that it was not possible for the Committee to carry out its duties, to determine these matters 

with any degree of accuracy and to be able to tell this House and to tell the public that the investment in 

these Crown Corporations is actually as represented. 

 

When I say that, I don’t wish to be misunderstood. I am not suggesting for a moment that there has been 

$1 illegally spent, or anything of that nature. The question is whether, for the $300,000 in the woollen 

mill at Moose Jaw, there is value there for that expenditure; similarly with the shoe factory and the 

brickyard. 

 

The third paragraph in the Motion, which I am submitting, is supported by these facts: 

 

When the Minister of Natural Resources announced that he was going to embark on a woollen industry, 

he told us that the cost would be in the neighborhood of $90,000. That was subsequently corrected to 

$125,000 – and I think perhaps the difference was accounted for by the fact that, in the first case, he was 

talking of the machinery, and perhaps, in the second case, he was talking of the plant – the building and 

the machinery. In any event, we find by the records presented to the Committee that the final cost of this 

particular corporation, for example, was approximately $300,000. 

 

The explanation given to us in Committee was that, in buying machinery and buildings these days, you 

could never get a fixed price. Well, in this particular case, the Minister bought a 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1160 

building already built and all of the expense that he was at in connection with it was what alternations 

were necessary. Certainly, having purchased the property for a certain fixed sum, the cost could not be 

raised up; then the major part of the machinery in it – as we understood the information given to us – 

was purchased second-hand from two mills in the United States, and there again these rising costs could 

not affect his original purchase price. 

 

The fourth paragraph – about establishing a fiscal period – the Government already has accepted our 

ideas there to a certain extent, as evidenced in The Crown Corporations Act. I give them credit for a 

sincere desire to bring the fiscal years of these corporations up to a day which will give the Committee 

an opportunity of examining a much more recent period of business operations than was possible, this 

year. 

 

Mr. Fines:  Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. gentleman a question in this connection? In this 

morning’s Leader-Post, the editor states: “Mr. Patterson would like to see the Crown companies 

operation on a calendar year basis.” I would like to ask, does he agree that it should be on a calendar 

year basis? 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Well, when I spoke on this matter before, in the Budget Debate, I suggested that as 

the Power Commission could close their books at the end of the year and have a report before the 

Legislature by the 1
st
 of February it was quite possible, for we have the complete 1946 Power 

Commission figures tabled in this House at this Session. I think – if I remember correctly – that for that 

reason I did suggest December 31
st
 in my Budget speech. Now I am willing to make the concession – if 

you care to call it such, Sir – that, in view of the explanations that were made in the Crown Corporations 

Committee, I can see that perhaps, for certain industries, that is not a convenient date – and I am quite 

willing to accept that. But certainly the Insurance Office could, just as well, have given its report up to 

December 31, 1946, as up to March 31, 1946; and I think the same applies to many other corporations, 

where there is no factor connected with the operation of the corporation that makes it inconvenient – 

these also might very well close their books on December 31
st
. 

 

Another point, covered by paragraph five, is the question of whether these corporations should pay 

interest to the Provincial Treasury for capital and working account advances advanced to them. There is 

argument as to whether or not that should be the case. I am going to point out, Sir, that the two major 

operations in this province, that are going to be made Crown Corporations, have been doing that ever 

since they were established – the Power Commission and the Telephone Department. They may have, 

on odd occasions, found it somewhat difficult, but there was never any complaint and the public never 

expected anything else. I think the Government would have been well-advised to have continued that 

practice in connection with these two new Crown Corporations. 

 

The sixth paragraph: your committee recommends that Crown Corporations engaged in commercial 

activities should pay to the municipalities in which their operations are carried on, the taxes which such 

activities would pay if the enterprise was conducted by a private owner. The argument may be 

advanced: “Well, but your Government did not pay municipal taxes on the Telephone 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1161 

Department or on the Power Commission.” That is true, Sir, and possibly we are to be criticized for that. 

However, the position with respect to those two activities was considerably different in this respect: they 

are, first of all, what might be called natural monopolies – ordinarily, they cannot have any competitors, 

and the basis upon which they do business has no relation to, or effect on, any possible competitor; 

secondly, both of those activities were established for a specific purpose – not to make profits, but to 

give the users telephone service or power service, as the case might be, at cost. Whether or not we are 

going to experience a departure from that policy, I don’t know; but the Telephone Department was 

founded 40 years ago for the specific purpose of giving the telephone users of Saskatchewan telephone 

service at cost. Similarly, the Power Commission was established in 1929 on the same basis. 

 

The final paragraph is, of course, again a matter of opinion. Those of us who support the minority report 

are of the opinion that from the information supplied to us and the records that were available to us – 

that is, for the period up to March 30
th

 completely, with the exceptions I mentioned at the outset and 

some information up to September 30 – we cannot see that there is any advantage, public or otherwise, 

in the Government operating these activities, such as the production of bricks, boots, boxes, blankets, 

lumber, etc. When you take into account the capital investment on which the province is paying the 

interest, the taxes which are lost to the municipalities and to the Federal Government, we suggest there 

is no advantage in the Government engaging in activities of this kind. So I move, Mr. Speaker, seconded 

by the hon. Member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson): 

 

That the report of the Select Standing Committee on Crown Corporations be referred back to the said 

Committee for consideration of the following matters: 

 

Your Committee finds itself unable to make a full and comprehensive report on the matters referred to 

it by reason of the fact that the Committee has been refused, on grounds of public policy, information 

essential to the production of such report. 

 

It has not, therefore, been possible to determine with any degree of accuracy whether the purchase of 

property and equipment by certain Crown Corporations was conducted on sound and economical lines, 

whether value was received for the money expended or whether assets of certain Corporations are 

actually worth the amount at which they are carried on the books of the Corporation. 

 

The information submitted to the Committee indicates that capital costs of some of the Crown 

Corporations established to date have greatly exceeded the original estimate of cost but the 

information and evidence obtainable by the Committee does not enable the Committee to report on the 

reason therefore. 

 

It is recommended that the Government should establish a fiscal year period appropriate to the 

industry engaged in so that reports appropriate to the industry engaged in so that reports presented to 

the Legislature would show the financial position of each Corporation to the latest possible date before 

presentation. 

 

Your Committee is of the opinion that interest on Capital 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1162 

and Working Account advances made by the Government to Crown Corporations should be included 

in the actual cost of the Corporations to whom such advances have been made. 

 

The Committee further recommends that Crown Corporations engaged in commercial activities, such 

as the production of bricks, boots, boxes, blankets, lumber, fish products, and other materials, should 

pay to the municipalities in which their operations are carried on the taxes which such activities would 

pay if the enterprise was conducted by private owners. 

 

The Committee is of the opinion that the results of operations of Crown Corporations to September 

30
th

, 1946, the latest date for which figures were made available, do not indicate that Government 

ownership and operation of ordinary or competitive enterprises provides and advantage when taxes, 

municipal, provincial and federal, and interest on investment are taken into account. 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier):  Mr. Speaker, it is hardly worth starting to discuss the questions raised 

by my hon. friend before the lunch recess. Before asking Your Honor to call it one o’clock, I would like 

to just ask you to consider the whole question of the proper procedure here. The other day, in the 

Committee, the Hon. Leader of the Opposition moved, as a possible report from the Committee, just 

exactly what he has presented here and, of course, the Committee turned it down. Then the Leader of the 

Opposition asked how it was possible for his group to bring this matter to the attention of the House and 

of the country. 

 

No committee of the Legislature has a right to make a minority report. My hon. friend knows that, 

although he has constantly referred to this as a minority report. The Committee cannot make a minority 

report, as my hon. friend knows, and it is very doubtful if he can even move to refer a report back, under 

Beauchesne, page 196, Citation 671, which says: 

 

When the report does not contain any resolution, recommendations or other propositions for 

consideration of the House, it does not appear that any further proceedings in reference to it as a report 

are necessary. Every session, Select Committees make reports of this description, containing a 

statement of facts or of the evidence on the subject of enquiry; but as they do not contain any 

proposition which can be agreed to by the House, they are simply printed for the information of the 

Members. 

 

That is one count. I think the report of this Committee is in a very similar position to the report of the 

Public Accounts Committee. 

 

However, when my hon. friend raised the matter the other day, I agreed, representing the Government, 

that we would not hold up any statement which the hon. gentleman wanted to make on the basis of the 

48-hour rule which is normally required in moving concurrence, because we wanted my hon. friends to 

have the opportunity to state their case; but I am most anxious that we shall not take steps now which 

will set precedents for Committees all along the way, and I do think that, first of all, the matter of the 

propriety of a motion like this, within the rules of the House, ought to be decided upon. 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1163 

I also draw your attention to Citation 673, which says: 

 

As the rules of the House govern the procedure of Committees generally, a Committee cannot strictly 

speaking, renew a question on which its judgment has been already expressed. 

 

Now this matter was all before the Committee; the Committee rejected this as a Motion moved by my 

hon. friend and his colleagues. I again raise the question as to whether or not the Committee can be 

asked to reconsider something which in its own judgment it has rejected. 

 

It seems to me that, on those two counts, the Motion and the procedure generally is out of order. 

Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, since the matter has been debated. I would like the opportunity to say 

something about the Motion which is proposed, before Your Honour decides whether or not a Motion of 

this sort is in order. I shall ask you to call it 1:00 o’clock. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Just before you do that, Sir, I quite agree that the Speaker should take this under 

advisement during the lunch hour. May I say first, Sir, that I quite agree that the Committee may not 

submit a minority report, but there are methods provided for a minority of a committee, where it is not in 

agreement with the report submitted, to present its views. When the Committee’s report contains 

recommendations, then, of course, the opportunity is present on the Motion for the report of the 

Committee to be adopted. Anyone who is not in agreement with the report can move an amendment at 

that stage, without any notice. But in a committee such as this, or for instance, the Public Accounts 

Committee, which merely report that they have done a certain job when it is over, the only way that a 

minority on the Committee can express their disapproval of, or their objection to, a report made, or to 

the conduct of the Committee, is to give notice by way of Motion. 

 

Now, Sir, when this matter was up in the Crown Corporations Committee on Saturday morning – I think 

-- it was quite evident that we cold not give two day’s notice of Motion with any hope of having our 

Motion considered by the House and the Premier was good enough to agree that, as far as he was 

concerned – he could not commit the House, of course – he would waive notice of Motion, and this 

comes on the Order Paper as it would have come in the ordinary course of business had the Crown 

Corporations Committee reported, let’s say, a week ago. There would simply have been a notice of the 

same nature and probably containing exactly the same thing as we are now discussing. 

 

On the question of whether a committee shall reconsider a matter that has already been decided by it, 

this House is at any time at liberty to send back to any committee any report that that committee has 

made and say: “We are not satisfied with it; we want you to go back and go into this matter again.” 

 

What that rule means, Mr. Speaker – and it applies to the House itself – is: if we once debate a question 

in this House we are precluded from debate that question again at this Session; and the Committee of its 

own volition could not, having once made a decision or reached a conclusion, open the matter again and 

reconsider it. But on instructions from this House, it must do so. Whether it changes its mind or not is an 

entirely different matter. So, if you will keep those points in mind, Sir, 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1164 

I would be glad to have your decision after the lunch hour. 

 

Mr. J. Benson (Last Mountain):  On a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker. I want to point out to you that 

during the Session back in 1931 or 1932 – along there some time – a report of the Law Amendments 

Committee was submitted to the House and an amendment was moved in the House sending that report 

back to the Committee. The Legislature refused to accept the report of the Committee and it was sent 

back to the Law Amendments Committee on two occasions during that one Session. I think that, if you 

just refer to the records you would see what took place at that particular time. 

 

Mr. D.S. Valleau (A.S.V.R.):  Mr. Speaker, speaking to the Point of Order, there is another aspect of 

the case I would draw to your attention. In the Committee, at the time, the Premier said that he would 

not insist on Notice of Motion being given and the customary waiting period observed before the Motion 

could be debated, in view of the time being short. As a Private Member, I feel also that we should not 

insist, in order to expedite the business of the House. However, I noticed that the Leader of the 

Opposition did not altogether claim that he could present his motion as a minority report, but that he 

could do so as a substantive Motion of which due notice had been given. But even on these grounds, I 

believe the Motion is out of order, Mr. Speaker, because of the last paragraph which in part reads: 

 

The Committee is of the opinion that the results of the operations of Crown Corporations … do not 

indicate that Government ownership and operation of ordinary or competitive enterprises provides any 

advantages. 

 

Then there are some qualifying phrases; but that is the substance. I contend, Mr. Speaker, that if the 

House were confronted with a Motion such as that and asked to debate it and arrive at a decision, it 

would be reviewing a debate and a decision we have already had under the Crown Corporations Bill. To 

reach a decision, we would be debating a general principle all over again, and if we agreed to this we 

would be turning down a general principle that we have already debated and approved. So I believe it is 

out of order. For my own part, I have no objection to allowing the Motion to stand without the required 

notice, but I think this particular part of the Motion would be out of order. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Before Your Honor gives you decision on this, I would like to make some reference to 

the statements made by the Leader of the Opposition, in view of the fact that he has been allowed to put 

this Motion on record. Whether it is in order or not, statements have been made with reference to it and 

with reference to the whole procedure under which the Committee conducted its business and I would 

like, before Your Honor gives your decision, to be allowed to make some statement and some refutation 

of the remarks that have been made. I think that is in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  I shall reserve my decision until after the lunch recess. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  I have considered the proposed Motion of the Hon. Leader of 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1165 

Premier, not on one occasion, but on different occasions, has said that the report of this Committee is not 

debatable, just as the report of the Public Accounts Committee. Surely, if that is the case, this report is 

not debatable. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  that is quite all right. So long as a report is given on Routine Proceedings, it is not 

debatable at that stage. But this is on Orders of the Day. It is in the Orders, therefore it is debatable at 

this stage. Apparently my hon. friend does not want to have anybody give the facts of the case. That’s 

the way it appears. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  You would not give the facts. That is the trouble. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  On the Point of Order, I take it that the position of the Premier is correct. 

Consideration of the report stands on the Orders of the Day. Under the ruling I gave, the subject matter 

of the Motion of the Hon. Leader of the Opposition is out of order. I rule that it is perfectly allowable to 

make some remarks on consideration of the Second Report. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Some reference was made to not giving the facts; I doubt if there are Crown 

Corporations conducted by any democratic government anywhere in the world in which information 

concerning the financial operations and financial structure has been made as readily available to the 

Members of the House and the general public as we have in the Crown Corporations operated in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. An attempt has been made to throw a smoke-screen, in my opinion, by way 

of asking for documents which, in the normal course of parliamentary Government, would not be 

brought down and to ask for information that would never be produced by any government dealing with 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Now the whole technique of Crown Corporations is, of course, something that has come up in the last 10 

or 15 years and, as I said the other day, whether we like it or not, increasingly governments are going 

into business, other Provincial Governments, the Federal Government, governments of other Dominions 

and the British Government, and to facilitate the carrying on of commercial, enterprises by a 

government, new technique has had to be worked out. It has been found that the old departmental 

system has not worked very well, as I illustrated the other day, in the case of the Post Office; and in our 

own case, the Department of Telephones, which was called a department and whose employees were 

outside the Civil Service, but come under the Civil Service Commissioner, was half a department and 

half not a department. The Commission technique has been tried out; but increasingly democratic 

governments in all of the English speaking countries and in some of the other democratic countries, have 

been turning to the Crown Corporation method as being the more flexible and the more businesslike. 

 

In working out such a technique, we will have to work out, at the same time, our own code of ethics and 

our own code of conduct as to how these ought to be operated and it is rather significant that, if one sits 

down to read over Hansard any time in the last 10 years, one will find that exactly the same kind of 

charges which my hon. friends opposite have been making with reference to this Government and the 

charges which their newspapers have been making with regard to this Government, are almost 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1166 

the Opposition during the recess and I am of the opinion that the first paragraph and the matter raised by 

the Hon. Member fro the European Area (Mr. Valleau) in connection with the last paragraph, are in 

effect asking the Assembly to reverse decisions it has already made at this Session and further they raise 

matters of broad general policy in this connection which certainly would not be within the purview of a 

committee of this House. On those grounds I rule the Motion out of order. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to make some reference … 

 

Mr. Danielson:  You have given your ruling, Mr. Speaker. You have ruled the Motion out of order. 

What is the Premier speaking to? 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, I submit that that’s a pretty arbitrary procedure. The Leader of the 

Opposition has been allowed to present or outline what is in effect a minority report from the Committee 

on Crown Corporations. While I agree that the Motion is out of order, statements have been made and 

the effect is that no member of the Committee or of the House has been given an opportunity to refute 

any of those statements before the House and in the country. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  What is before the House at the present time? What are you speaking to? 

 

Mr. Douglas:  I am speaking to the Order: “Consideration of the Second Report of the Select 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations.” 

 

Mr. Danielson:  There is no Motion before the House. The Motion has been ruled out of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  What I have ruled out of order is the Motion that was in the nature of an amendment to 

the report of the Committee. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  In discussing the report of the Crown Corporations Committee, I would like to say just 

a few words, as I don’t want to take up the time of the Assembly, because there is a lot of business yet to 

get though. There has been, before this Session began and throughout the proceedings of the Assembly 

… 

 

Mr. Danielson:  What are you speaking to? There is nothing before the House. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  I am speaking to the Order – “Consideration of the second report of the Select 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations.” I understand the report is debatable at this time. The 

reason my friend could not deal with it was because of the required 48 hours notice. That was waived. I 

consider that the report can still be debated by this House. All I want to say is: there has been a concrete 

attempt … 

 

Mr. Douglas:  On a Point of Order. The 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1167 

identical word for word with the charges which the Opposition in Ottawa have been making with 

reference to the Federal Government, which is of the same political complexion as my hon. friends 

opposite. The charges which the Conservative press in the East have been making with reference to the 

Federal Government are almost the same as our friends across the way have been making with reference 

to us. In other words, there is not yet a full appreciation of the fact that Crown Corporations are operated 

differently from ordinary departments of government. 

 

I have here, for instance, some of the things that have been said in the House of Commons by Ministers 

of the Crown who have under their jurisdiction Crown companies. For instance, Hon. C.D. Howe, 

speaking in the House of Commons on January 4, 1946 said: 

 

It seems to me that Parliament has all the control over the activities of a Crown company that it has 

over the activities of a government department. The main control over the activities of a department is 

through the voting of estimates. If funds are required for a Crown company, they must be voted by 

Parliament. Parliament can then exercise the same controls as it would exercise over any department 

of the government. 

 

The Prime Minister, speaking in the House of Commons on February 23
rd

, 1943, discussing the same 

matter said: 

 

All these statements that the Government is hiding this and hiding that, that there are transactions 

concerning which the Members cannot get information – all this comes to naught so long as we have a 

Public Accounts Committee and so long as the Members are free to call that Committee together and 

to have referred to it a question of wrongful expenditure which they wish to have investigated before 

that Committee. 

 

And Mr. Ilsely, speaking in the House of Commons on November 12, 1945 said this: 

 

The House has not an inalienable right to the disclosure of all the actins of the executive. Ministers 

may refuse to disclose matters if refusal to disclose is in the public interest and is so stated by the 

Minister. 

 

May I point out that the Government Companies Act passed by the Federal Government gives even less 

control over the expenditure of public money than does The Crown Corporation Act under which these 

Crown Corporations are operated. Their Act permits companies to use operating revenues, to pay 

operating costs and to make advances and loans, without having to resort to the appropriation of the 

House. 

 

Last year, when Mr. Murphy, one of the federal Members, asked for certain information regarding the 

Polymer Corporation, a Crown company, Hon. Mr. Howe said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, this question refers to the manufacturing data and the current operations of the Polymer 

Corporation. The Public Accounts recently published, contain the balance sheet of the operations of 

the Polymer up to the end of March, 1945 … (The same year as we are using) … The difficulty of 

giving the present-day cost is 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1168 

that rubber is competitive in foreign markets with that of other manufacturers, and it is prejudicial to 

the work of the directors or policy-makers to have the day-to-day operations made public in such a 

forum as the House of Commons. If the Government intends to be in a competitive business, I think 

the same latitude which is permitted to competitive business should be permitted to Crown 

Companies, and, therefore, in the public interest. I must ask that this question be dropped. 

 

And even taking something which is not as new as the Crown Corporation setup – the Canadian 

National Railways, which is operated on a slightly different basis, in answer to a question by Mr. 

Coldwell, Hon. Mr. Howe said this on June 14, 1940: 

 

The reason we do not give information about matters of internal management of the Canadian 

National Railways is that the railway is in a highway competitive position and to present information 

on matters of internal management, just as it is asked in the House, might be harmful to the 

competitive position and, therefore, against the public interest. 

 

That is the position which has been taken in Ottawa regularly over a period of years, the position which 

has been taken in the British House, the position which has been taken in the American House – where 

they have some Crown companies a well – and I submit, that in this House and in the Crown 

Corporations Committee we have gone much farther than any other democratic government in placing 

all the available data in the possession of the Members of the House and of the Committee. 

 

Now the main complaint has been not that they have been denied any information about the operation of 

these plants nor their day-to-day business operations, nor their present financial position, nor their 

financial structure; the main complaint was that these companies had a certain value placed on the 

books, a value at which they were acquired – equipment, buildings, sites. A Motion was brought into the 

committee first of all asking for all the evaluator’s reports. It was pointed out that a good many of these 

reports were made by the officials of the department, and that the report of an official to a Minister was 

a confidential document and that this House has not the power to ask for such a document, therefore a 

committee of the House has not the power to ask for such a privileged document. Then it was suggested 

that instead of that they should have the commercial evaluator’s reports and again the same thing is true. 

First of all these reports were given by commercial firms handing in confidential reports on the basis of 

their investigation. No commercial firm is going to appreciate having their report which they give on a 

certain company or on a certain corporation or a certain business undertaking, made public property. 

They hand that report to the Minister concerned, or to the Executive Council, for their information. 

Furthermore, the evaluator’s reports were not the sole thing upon which these purchases were based. In 

every case, the evaluator’s report was only one of the bases. In every case some members of the Civil 

Service, some officials of the department, also submitted reports, in order that we might have the 

approach from every angle and in order that we might get as fair and as proper an evaluation as was 

possible. 

 

My hon. friends asked for something which, in my opinion, 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1169 

they knew before they asked for it that they could not get, under the rules of this House and on the basis 

of asking for something which they knew they could not get, they not seek to create the impression that 

something is being held back from them. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, may I submit to you that, first of all, the evaluation placed on these various 

companies and their assets have been accepted by the auditor, who has the power to call for these 

evaluator’s reports. The Member for Arm River smiles – but he was the man who was Provincial 

Auditor when my hon. friends sat on this side of the House; they must have had some confidence in him. 

Before he places his seal upon the audited statement, he has the full power to go over these evaluator’s 

reports and to estimate whether or not the value placed on the books is higher than it ought to be. As a 

matter of fact I can tell this House, Mr. Speaker, and the people of this province, that in every case the 

estimated value by evaluators in some cases were commercial people. My Hon. friend mentioned the 

brickyard. For instance, we sought the services of Professor Worcester of the university, who made a 

trip. He was not the only one; there were members of other departments – the Public Works Department, 

the Natural Resources Department – who also investigated the plant. And on the basis of the various 

estimates, we made a purchase considerably below what the estimated value was. But my friends are 

surely not going to suggest that Professor Worcester and the various departmental officials should have 

their confidential reports brought into the Committee? It never has been suggested anywhere, never been 

done anywhere – and when my friends ask for something that they know that no government could do 

and continue to do business and they use that as a political pretext then to go out and say they were 

denied necessary information. 

 

The fact is the Committee on Crown Corporations had two things submitted to it: the financial structure 

and the financial statement and the financial statement was passed by the auditor who had access to all 

documents and to all the reports and this Legislature, if it has confidence in the auditor, ought to be 

prepared to accept his report in view of the fact that he had all the facts in his possession. If it has not 

confidence in him, this Legislature has the power to remove the auditor. 

 

The London Times, which has been running a series on Crown Corporations – and it could certainly not 

be accused of being sympathetic to public ownership – makes this summary after three or four articles. I 

think it is worth drawing to the attention of the House: 

 

Finally, publicity itself can be a major protection both for the public corporation and the public. Few 

existing corporations publish adequate accounts of their annual reports. They should be required to do 

so. There should also be occasions for debate in Parliament of the corporation’s policies and programs. 

The corporation should conduct its affairs with the knowledge that they will, from time to time – 

though not like government departments – at all times be required to explain and justify them to 

administrative departments and through Parliament to the nation. But Parliament too has a 

responsibility to fulfil, if publicity and discussion are to be fruitful and conducive to the efficient 

management of corporations. Unless they are conducted under strict conditions self-imposed, these 

debates upon business matters might do 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1170 

more harm than good. The complement of the corporation’s responsibility to Parliament must be a 

self-denying ordinance on the part of Parliament in the exercise of its authority. 

 

It means to me that there is a statesmanlike statement; that while this Legislature, responsible as it is to 

the people of Saskatchewan, has the right to the fullest possible information with regard to the policies 

and programs of these Crown Corporations with reference to their financial statements and financial 

structure, at the same time we have responsibility to see to it that for mere political purposes we do not 

insist on the eliciting of information which in the long run would do harm to these corporations and to 

the public welfare. 

 

Some of the suggestions made by my hon. friends in the Committee on Crown Corporations and in the 

Motion which they moved in the Crown Corporations do not pay interest n the money advanced to them 

from the Provincial Treasury. That, Mr. Speaker, is a very picayune point. If the Crown Corporations 

pay money to the Provincial Treasury, it is simply a matter of the people of Saskatchewan taking money 

out of one pocket and putting it into another. There is no loss to the people of Saskatchewan by virtue of 

the fact that they are not drawing money taken from the Provincial Treasury and advanced to the Crown 

Corporations. An attempt to make a case out of that seems to me pretty small indeed. 

 

The whole matter of paying taxes by these Crown Corporations to municipalities has, of course, been 

discussed before, brought up again in the Crown Corporations Committee and brought up today by the 

Leader of the Opposition. In the first place, as he admitted himself, his Government did not pay taxes: 

the liquor stores all across the province did not pay taxes; the Power Commission did not pay taxes; the 

Telephones did not pay taxes, although these were forms of public enterprise and my friend is making a 

pretty weak case if he suggests, the moment another government comes in, that they ought to pay taxes. 

 

I go one further: my friends know, when they talk about taxes, that this Government already has 

announced that we are prepared to make payment in lieu of taxes. Therefore, they are simply beating a 

drum for something they know is going to be done, in order that they might claim some of the credit for 

it. 

 

The other criticism which was advanced was that, after sitting on the Crown Corporations Committee, 

these gentlemen are now convinced that there is no value in public ownership in the pertain of ordinary 

or competitive enterprises. Of course I don’t know what they mean by ordinary competitive enterprise. 

The Opposition says, in the House, that Power and Telephones are something into which the 

Government ought to go, but the Liberal Party does not say that in British Columbia and they don’t say 

that in Ontario, where the Bell Company holds sway; so that, in those provinces, telephones are 

competitive too. It will be an interesting thing for the people of this province to know that the Liberal 

Party has now definitely put itself on record as being opposed to public ownership. The people of the 

province will be interested to know that, if the Liberal Party is ever returned to power in this province, 

one of the first things they propose to do will be to dispose of the woollen 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1171 

mill and of the shoe factory; to dispose of the Fur Marketing Agency; to dispose of the Timber Board; to 

dispose of the brick plant; to dispose of the bus corporation and turn it back to the Greyhound or to some 

other private corporation. I think it is a good thing that the lines are now clearly drawn, that my hon. 

friends who for many years were looked on as the public ownership party – the people who supported 

the CNR; the people who supported public ownership of radio – have now taken a stand in this province 

as being opposed to public ownership. The people of this province can now know that the industrial 

enterprises which have been undertaken by this Government and which, as was shown, even after 

reserves have been set aside, have given back a return of 13 per cent on the money invested, these 

corporations will be scrapped – probably scrapped as the briquetting plant was – for $1 to some kind 

friend of the Government; that they will be scrapped and these enterprises now owned and operated by 

the people of Saskatchewan for the people of Saskatchewan will now see what the fate will be of these 

Crown Corporations, if these gentlemen had their way. 

 

I would, therefore, move, seconded by the Hon. Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. fines), that the Order for 

the Consideration of the Second Report of the Select Standing Committee on Crown Corporations be 

discharged. 

 

Mr. W. Burgess (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley):  Mr. Speaker, I want to say just a word or two from the 

standpoint of an ordinary Member of the Legislature who is not a member of the Crown Corporations 

Committee and who presumably has no knowledge of the conduct of the Crown Corporation except 

what is presented in this report. Now I would say, even at the risk of differing somewhat from my Hon. 

Leader, that there is a difference in the attitude that ought to be taken to businesses which might be 

termed monopolistic public utilities … 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! May I call the attention of the Hon. Member that the Motion before the House 

is that the Order for consideration of the report of the Committee be discharged from the Order Paper. 

The Motion is not debatable. 

 

Mr. Burgess:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say this: I asked you if debate was going to be permitted on this 

subject, if other Members would have a word and you said it was an open question, or so I understood it. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  While the matter before the House was the Order – Consideration of the Second 

Report of the Select Standing Committee on Crown Corporations, it was an open question and 

debatable. But the Motion before the House now is that that Order be discharged, which is not debatable. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to argue your ruling at all, but both the Leader of the 

Opposition and myself have been given a good bit of latitude and I would think that, with 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1172 

on consent of the House, some of the Members might be allowed to make any statements. I think that an 

undertaking to that effect was given to them really, a little while ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  The Motion before the House is that the order be discharged. So long as that Motion is 

before the House, there can be no debate on the report. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Well, if I have the consent of the House, I will withdraw the Motion temporarily, until 

the discussion of the report is completed. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  But you could not move the Motion a second time. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Well, reverse it and the Provincial Treasurer will move it. 

 

An Hon. Members:  No, no! We can’t bring it up again. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  No, then I’ll withdraw the Motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion withdrawn. 

 

Mr. Burgess:  As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, I am not a member of the Committee, but I have before 

me for my information this report and, Mr. Speaker, with respect, I submit that the report gives very 

little information. It tells me that we have 10 Crown Corporations. It tells me that the Committee asked a 

number of questions some of which they got answers to and that there was no let or hindrance on the 

interrogation of the responsible Ministers and officials. 

 

Now, I suppose that that ought to be fairly satisfactory. There is a large group of Members of this House 

on that Committee and I have a good deal of confidence in those Members; but, Mr. Speaker, there has 

been no opportunity, so far as I know, for this House to give any specific consideration to any of the 

companies individually and we have to face the fact that a government in business cannot entirely free 

itself from political questions. I agree absolutely with the remarks of the Premier that, if the Crown 

Corporations have a responsibility towards Parliament, Members of Parliament have a responsibility to 

the Crown Corporations and that, in their discussion of them, in their criticisms favourable or otherwise, 

they should practise a wholesome restraint, and that they should not be particularly looking for political 

capital. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, these companies cannot completely be divested of government policies, or they will 

not; because we have statements made, for instance, with reference to the lumber industry, with 

reference to the Timber Board, that the policy of the Government was to make the lumber available for 

Saskatchewan consumers. I am not quarrelling with that policy – I think it is a right policy; but it does 

definitely have a bearing on the success or otherwise of the Timber Board. We have had the statement 

made that the fish filleting plants were partly necessary in order that the people in the fish industry might 

not go on the 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1173 

unemployed relief lists. Now that is to say that it was a sort of a mixture between the idea of a filleting 

plant as a business proposition or the idea of a fish filleting plant as something to save the fishing 

industry and keep fishermen from being on relief – a mixture of Government in business and 

Government policy; and Government policy can never be divorced entirely from politics. We had some 

similar arguments advanced with reference to the fur business and we have had the statement made that, 

if there is a loss on the Box Factory, it was more than made up by the better wages that the people 

working in the Box Factory were receiving. 

 

Now, I submit, Mr. Speaker, that up to the present time, neither in Saskatchewan nor in Ottawa have we 

devised a satisfactory technique for handling business as a Parliament – and it is not a good enough 

argument to use that, because they have not a good method in Ottawa, we cannot be expected to get a 

better method in Saskatchewan. Our Parliamentary processes were not really devised to handle this sort 

of thing. That is not to say that they cannot be adjusted to do it, but I submit that it has not been done yet 

and that one of the most important tasks before this Legislature and this Government, if it is to be the 

policy to go into business, is to devise a better method than a report of this nature is. 

 

I submit that we, as Members of the Legislature, are the only meeting of shareholders of these 

companies that is, or can be held and that as shareholders of these companies, we have to get more 

information than we have had up to the present in order to be able to make an intelligent judgment as to 

whether these companies are individually or collectively good business propositions. I am not terribly 

concerned about that, at the moment, because I recognize – or think I recognize – that none of them have 

been long enough in operation for that information to be available. I do submit, however, that by next 

Session we will have to have some better means and some reports with more information in them, or 

else we won’t be doing our full duty to our constituents in the country, whose representatives we are, as 

shareholders in all these different companies. It would suggest itself to me that, perhaps, these different 

companies or this Crown Corporations Committee, maybe should strike off individual committees to go 

into the very heart, if you like, nothing barred from their information. 

 

I recognize that a business cannot have everything that it is doing and every item of its business, 

splashed over the public press and criticized for all kinds of reasons; but, at the same time, as a 

democratic Legislature, we must provide ourselves by some means with fairly complete information 

about these companies. 

 

Now I don’t know whether I am in order here – it is mentioned in this statement that was ruled out of 

order, but the Hon. Premier referred to it: the question of interest. As far as it appears to me, Mr. 

Speaker, -- and I am no upholder of interest – I don’t believe in interest; but insofar as capital is used by 

these companies, capital which has to be paid for by the province at a rate of interest, insofar as no 

interest is charged to that company for the use of that money, that company is being subsidized. I will 

agree with the Hon. Premier that it is a matter of taking money out of one pocket and putting it in 

another; but it is necessary for the purpose of the record, that we know which pocket it is being taken out 

of. I don’t think 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1174 

that we should charge the interest on capital used by a Crown Corporation to the consolidated revenues 

of the province without recognizing that that is, to that extent, a subsidy being given by the province to 

that particular company. It may be all right to do it, but it should be marked on the books and I submit, 

Mr. Speaker, that unless it is done, it is not good bookkeeping. 

 

The question of taxes is something else again and I, of course, did not know that this question was going 

to be debated today. I am not prepared to debate it; but I think that they haven’t got as much information 

in the report of that Committee as ought to come before this House. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  May I ask the Hon. Member a question? You are not suggesting that this report of the 

Committee is all the information we had? 

 

Mr. Burgess:  Oh, no, not for a moment! 

 

Mr. Douglas:  We had, of course, also the financial statements which all Members of this House had 

to vote upon. 

 

Mr. M.J. Feeley (Canora):  The Hon. Member for Qu’Appelle-Wolseley stated that he is not a 

member of the Crown Corporations Committee, and left the impression that, therefore, this information 

was not available. I think that, as a matter of fact, as he went on he pretty well divulged the fact that he 

did know quite a bit more than he suggested. 

 

Mr. Burgess:  I said, presumably, Sir. 

 

Mr. Feeley:  The fact is – and we all know – that with the exception of the very brief last Session, all 

meetings of the Committee were held open to the public, nothing was held in camera and any Member 

of this Legislature certainly had every chance in the world to sit in and if he wanted some questions 

asked, he could have done, as I have done on more than one occasion, slipped a little note to one of the 

boys and had his questions asked. Any question that he wanted could have been asked and answered 

there. I want to repeat what I stated the other day: the most complete information that I have ever had 

regarding any other the Departments of the Government, or the Commissions, was available for us there; 

more complete information, as a matter of fact, than we generally get from any Department of the 

Government. I am just a little surprised to hear the objection that is taken now in view of the fact that we 

have had several previous sessions – I am thinking now of the Power Commission, the Telephone 

Company and the Liquor Board. Just our Public Accounts. But we have never had any information that 

was worth two cents regarding those three departments of the Government – if you call them such, Sir. It 

is because of that, because of my dissatisfaction, because f the fact that I have tried on a number of 

occasions to get information regarding these and have never had that information made available to my 

satisfaction, that I am keenly interested in seeing that these corporations are accepted as a principle. I 

believe they are sound. I believe that they are a considerable improvement over the method that we have 

had in the past. 

 

Having said that, I want to say that I am not going to be 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1175 

content with this. When this is done, I am going to suggest, Sir, that we should exercise the opportunity 

that we have as Members of this Government to decide on the policy of these corporations. I am not 

satisfied to just come here and listen to reports. As a representative of a constituency in this province, I 

think I should have an opportunity and take advantage of the opportunity, to aid in the formulation of the 

policies. I want to be able to decide on the policies of the Liquor Board. I want to be able to help decide 

how much liquor is going to be available. I want to know what the general policy of the Telephone 

Company is going to be. I want to know what the general policy of the woollen mill is going to be and I 

want to be able to say to the Government and to the heads of these corporations, the Boards: I am not 

satisfied – if I am not satisfied. I want to be in the position where I can make my voice heard and felt 

and get results. That is why I am strongly for this particular change and I am strong for the Crown 

Corporations principle. 

 

Hon. O.W. Valleau (Minister of Social Welfare):  Mr. Speaker, I listened very carefully to the Hon. 

Member for Qu’Appelle-Wolseley without being able to arrive at a conclusion as to just what it was he 

wanted. He proceeded to discuss the procedure in relationship to general departmental business of the 

Government and also in relation to, or in comparison with, reports available to shareholders of an 

ordinary company. I think that, in all probability, the information that is available here today, or that has 

been made available to this Legislative Assembly, is far in excess of that which is usually received by 

the shareholders – shall we say – of the CPR about that and that is a business corporation running to a 

much greater extent. I would also like to draw to the attention of the House that the question of refusing 

information, or of the Minister denying information or documents being regarded as privileged 

documents – this has been said time and time again, but apparently it has not yet sunk in – is not 

exclusively a function of the Crown Corporations. 

 

In the Department of Social Welfare we are spending nine or ten million dollars a year – about nine 

million dollars a year – and many of the reports that are the basis upon which we spend that money are 

not available to this House. Take, for example, the question of employment. Yesterday, I dictated three 

letters asking recommendations in regard to a certain application that came to us. When those 

recommendations come in, they will not be available to the House; they will be a privileged document 

between myself and my correspondents. The reports upon which we pay out old age pensions are 

privileged documents and while in many cases I do make them, as a matter of courtesy, available to 

Members of the House for their information, because they are interested, if it came right down to a 

showdown, I would have to say that those documents are reports from my inspectors to the Minister in 

regard to whether that pension should, or should not, be payable. 

 

The information available – again let me repeat – the principle is exactly the same in carrying on of the 

departmental work as it is in the Crown Corporations. 

 

Then we come to the question of policy. We have discussed policy, in this House, on the departments, 

through the voting of funds. Policy in regard to any Crown Corporation can be 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1176 

brought before this House, at any time by any Member, on the basis of a substantive motion, a 

resolution. Those two things – the examination of what the Crown Corporation has done in the past, 

done during the preceding year, on the basis of policy laid down is one thing; the basis of policy, or the 

criticism of policy, is something else again which can, without any difficulty whatever, be brought 

before the House. I think probably that, in the years to come, we will work these techniques out much 

more satisfactorily; but I question very much if the action that has been taken up until the present time 

justifies the criticisms or the semi-criticisms which have been levelled at it so far. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour):  Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Canora has perhaps 

left unintentionally the impression that there was never any opportunity of knowing what his 

Department of Telephones has done from year to year. Now I have in my hand the Annual Report of the 

Department of Telephones for the financial year ending April 30, 1946. It is in reality a miniature Public 

Accounts. Here we have – I don’t know what else would be required – there is a report on Plant; 

following that, Commercial; next Department exchanges; going over next into Traffic; Balance Sheet as 

at April 30
th

; Revenue; Expenses; Disbursements; Freight, Express and Cartage and so forth. Now I am 

sorry if the Hon. Member has been eating his heart out, all these years, not knowing what has been going 

on; but these have been available and we must have 50 or 60 copies every year. I will send the page boy 

over to him with this copy. 

 

Mr. D.S. Valleau (A.S.V.R.):  Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to make a speech in this debate. I think it 

has lasted quite awhile; but I think there is some confusion between the Hon. Member for Canora and 

the Hon. Minister of Telephones. I don’t think that the Hon. Member for Canora meant that there was 

any criticism of the Minister for the way in which he prepares his reports, or any suggestion that the 

reports had not been prepared over all these years and made available to Members. I think the point that 

the Hon. Member for Canora was getting at is that the technique which we are evolving in Crown 

Corporations Committee of having the reports before us and going into them in detail and asking 

questions in detail, is a technique which had not been followed in the Department of Telephones, as an 

example. While that report is there and is similar to the Public Accounts, we have not had a committee 

set up to go into it as they go into the Public Accounts. That is the difference. It is not that there is any 

criticism of the Department of Telephones, but the suggestion which we have is that the technique we 

are studying in the Crown Corporations Committee is something that could well be used on Departments 

such as the Department of Telephones, in the future. I think that this is all that was involved in the Hon. 

Member’s suggestion. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer):  Mr. Speaker, if that is all the debate, I should like to move, 

that the Order for Consideration of the Second Report of the Select Standing Committee on Crown 

Corporations be now discharged. 

 

Motion agreed to. 



 

April 1, 1947 

 

1177 

ROYAL ASSENT AND PROROGATION 

 

At 11:20 o’clock p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor having entered the Chamber, took his seat 

upon the Throne and gave Royal Assent to the Bills presented to him. 

 

His Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor was pleased to deliver the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the legislative Assembly and in doing so I wish to 

thank you and congratulate you upon the work you have accomplished, and to express my confidence 

that the results of your labours will be of benefit to the people of the Province. 

 

Many important matters have come before you for discussion and decision. Included amongst these 

were: The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act, declaring our basic freedoms and assuring to the people of 

the province certain civil rights; the ratification of a Tax Agreement between the province and the 

Dominion of Canada adjusting the financial relationships between the Governments; the cancellation of 

seed grain indebtedness for the yeas 1935 to 1937; the reduction of hours of work in certain industries; 

the establishment of a Provincial Research Council; the encouragement of –co, municipal and industrial 

activity in Saskatchewan; the establishment of classification and merit systems in the public service, and 

the integration of publicly-owned and operated industrial enterprises. In these and other matters you 

have given favourable consideration to many proposals for the improved welfare of the rural and urban 

population of the Province. I have observed with satisfaction the earnest attention you have given to 

safeguarding and promoting the public interest. 

 

I thank you for the provision you have made to meet the further requirements of the Public Service and 

assure you that the sums of money voted will be used economically, prudently and in the public interest. 

 

In taking leave of you I desire to thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies to 

the activities of the Session and to wish you the full blessing of Providence as you return again to your 

respective homes. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Valleau, Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

It is the will and pleasure of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 

prorogued until it pleases his Honour to summon the same for dispatch of business and the Legislative 

Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 


