



















































Hansard: March 06, 1947


619 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session – Tenth Legislature 

26
th

 Day 
 

Thursday, March 6, 1947 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

STATEMENT 

 

PRESS STATEMENT IN THE LEADER-POST 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Municipal Affairs):  The Leader-Post made the statement that 

I stated last night at the convention that the Government was going to impose a two-cent tax on farm 

fuel. This statement was not made. It was a discussion of a proposal which was submitted to the 

convention and I would like to make a statement on this question. 

 

The headline in the Leader-Post this morning saying that the province is imposing a two-cent gas tax on 

April 1
st
 is a very serious misinterpretation of my statement to the delegates of the SARM Convention 

last night. I am sure that the delegates present understood perfectly well that this whole proposition to 

levy a provincial tax on certain gasoline and oils and the plans for distribution of this money to the 

municipality was additional on two things. 

 

First of all, the convention was asked to deal with this matter and to express their opinion on it. In the 

statement issued by the Hon. C.M. Fines it was made clear that if the municipalities approve of this plan 

the Government is willing to levy and collect the tax providing the Legislature approves. This statement 

was repeated in my speech last night. At the end of my speech many questions were asked as to the 

details of the tax at the present time as imposed by the Federal Government and a comparison and the 

tax imposed. I repeated several times last night that this was a proposal for the municipalities in 

convention to consider. Never once did I state that this Government intended to impose the tax if the 

municipalities opposed it. 

 

In fact one delegate asked if the Government would impose the tax providing the convention approved. 

My answer was that it would be up to the Legislature and I could not promise what they would do. 

 

It appears that the Editor of the Leader-Post or his reporters were the only people who misunderstood 

my remarks. I feel sure that few delegates, if any, went away from the convention last night with the 

impression which the news item in this morning’s paper creates. The editor of the Leader-Post is again 

to be found with a very small minority. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

RESOLUTION – ROYAL COMMISSION ON LITTLE MANITOU LAKE 

 

Mr. J.A. Darling (Watrous):  moved, seconded by Mr. Benson (Last Mountain): 



March 6, 1947 

 

620 

That this Assembly, recognizing the need of a clinic or health centre in Saskatchewan for the treatment 

of arthritic and rheumatic ailments, and, in view of the opinions submitted to the Royal Commission 

on Little Manitou lake as to the benefits to be derived from hydrotherapy at natural spas, recommends 

to the consideration of the Government: 

 

(1) Earliest application practicable of the recommendations of the Royal commission, particularly as 
to the restoration of the water level of the lake; 

 

(2) The establishment, in conjunction with the Federal Government, of such a clinic at Manitou 
Beach. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this motion has to do with a report which I understand was tabled today in the 

Legislature and it has reference very largely to the work of a commission which was set up by the 

Government two years ago to make an investigation into the medicinal values, if any, of the waters of 

Little Manitou Lake and other matters concerned with the facilities at Manitou Beach through which 

those benefits are passed onto the public. 

 

In drafting this Resolution I have put it in two paragraphs. First, recommends to the consideration of the 

Government the earliest application practicable of the recommendations of the Royal Commission, 

particularly as to the restoration of the water level of the lake. 

 

Secondly, the establishment, in conjunction with the Federal Government, of a clinic health centre at the 

lake for the treatment of arthritis. 

 

Now, perhaps by way of introduction, I might say that shortly after I became the Member for the 

constituency of Watrous the Council of the village of Manitou Beach sent to the Government a request 

through myself that something be done to assist in the development of Manitou Beach as a health resort 

and as a result of that request the Government did set up this Commission. This commission made a 

report last October, I believe, and the press was naturally enough given access to this report and in the 

various papers in the province they published the findings of the Commission. 

 

It would be wrong to state that the report, as published in the press, stated anything which is not 

contained in the report of the Commission. It would be wrong to say that, but very unfortunately they 

did give an emphasis to that report which I believe has done considerable damage to the Beach and to 

the town of Watrous, which is not justified by the report itself. In fact, my opinion on the matter can be 

well realized when the Resolution which I am speaking on at this moment is based on the opinions 

which this commission gathered, when proceeding with its work of investigation. 

 

I might say that there was a good deal of discontent and astonishment, I think, in the town of Watrous 

and vicinity of Manitou Beach when the report was published and the chairman of the Commission and 

myself were invited to meet the Board of Trade at Watrous. We went down there and the chairman, who 

is Mr. O. Wingrove of Zelma, had a copy of the report with him. I, at that time, did not have a copy and 

after mulling over the report, the members of the Board of Trade, who were present  



March 6, 1947 

 

621 

I think their opinion was shared by the opinion of the secretary who spoke for them – shared the opinion 

that it was the press report rather than the report of the Royal Commission with which they had a 

quarrel. Yet in spite of all that, I have a copy of the press report here and I cannot find any statement in 

it which is not contained in the report. It’s just simply a matter of emphasis. I am very glad that I have 

this opportunity of introducing this Resolution and dealing with the report so that any misapprehension, 

which may have resulted in the minds of the people of Saskatchewan, may be removed by subsequent 

press reports on the matter. 

 

I think that when the members of the Commission, as individuals agree to accept the responsibility at the 

request of the Government, a position which they did not seek, but which they accepted, I think we were 

right to assume that they did it with a sense of public responsibility. Both the Government and the 

people of Saskatchewan owe them thanks for their work. 

 

The Government has been criticized because this Commission was made up very largely of professional 

men, of doctors, in fact. There was a time when I personally believed that the commission might have 

been more equally balanced between the scientific point of view and the point of view of the average 

citizen. I believe I made a suggestion to the Hon. Premier that it might be well to enlarge the 

Commission to include a greater representation of the ordinary citizen, but I have come to believe that 

perhaps it is just as well that the Commission was set up as it has been. I have come to believe that this 

report, while it certainly does prove disappointing to people who had hoped for more wholehearted 

support for the accepted belief in the neighborhood of Manitou Beach and in many places throughout the 

province, that those waters had very definite value in a medicinal way. I say that in spite of the fact that 

it has been disappointing, I believe that the conservative kind of report that can be expected from a 

commission made up of men with scientific minds, who don’t go overboard in the matter of enthusiasm 

one way or another, but take a detached and impersonal view of all the evidence or all the opinions 

which are brought to their attention. I think perhaps that we can have more confidence in that kind of a 

report than in the report of a commission which this Government might very easily have set up, which 

would have been almost certain to return wholehearted endorsement of all the claims for wonderful 

benefits which can be allegedly received through treatments at Manitou Beach. 

 

I want to compliment the Government on the way in which they set up this Commission. There were 

four members of the Commission, the chairman and two others named by the Government and two were 

named by the Association of Physicians and Surgeons. Dr. B. Brachman and Dr. W.P. Johns were 

named by the Association of Physicians and Surgeons; Dr. J.G. Rempel and W.A. Riddell were named 

by the Government. At the invitation of the Premier I named a gentleman who was subsequently 

appointed chairman, Mr. Oscar Wingrove of Zelma. I named Mr. Wingrove because he is a man who is 

well known locally and there has never been any doubts cast upon his integrity and his common sense; 

he has the capacity to apprise physical things at least which comes to most men who spend a lifetime at 

his occupation as a farmer. 

 

First of all I would like to read the limits of investigation from the report. This is on page 1 of the report: 



March 6, 1947 

 

622 

Since, very early in the investigation it appeared that the limiting factor at the present time was 

whether or not the lake could be prevented from disappearing, the Commission felt that it was not 

justified in extending its investigation into a discussion of the need for arthritis clinics in the province. 

A thorough investigation into the latter point would require visits to various spas and clinics dealing 

with arthritis and rheumatism, and it would require considerable effort in contacting European 

authorities in this field for opinions. Some information might also have been gleaned by the difficult 

procedure of contacting refugee physicians from Europe who had had spa experience. All of this 

would have required a considerable amount of time and much additional expense to the Government. 

 

Since there was considerable doubt as to whether the lake could be saved for use even as a resort, the 

Commission felt it was not justified in causing additional expense and consuming additional time 

before making a report. Thus the information secured relates only to the physical aspects of the lake, 

the existing facilities and a general approach to the benefits that may have been, or may be secured 

from the use of Little Manitou Lake as a resort. 

 

From that it will be seen that the Commission, while it made a very thorough investigation of the lake 

and its vicinity, of the facilities which are already provided at Manitou Beach, it did not make an 

exhaustive study of the value of the waters in a medicinal way. 

 

I would like, first of all, to deal with this all-important question of the raising of the water level of 

Manitou Lake. The Commission report contains reports by PFRA engineers and officials of the Water 

Rights Branch of the Department of Natural Resources. Now I thought that I would do a little 

investigation on my own account and I called at the PFRA office here in Regina during the progress of 

that investigation. We have heard a good deal of mention, both in this Legislature and out of it, of the 

proposed dam on the Saskatchewan River near Elbow. We have heard the cost estimated as somewhere 

between $50 to $100 million and more. The Hon. Member for Moose Jaw spoke on that same subject a 

short time ago in the House and there appears to be some hope – although not too immediate – that 

something will be done in that connection. If that dam were built, there can be no doubt that the water 

level of Long Lake would be taken care of. I bring Long Lake into the discussion because, as everyone 

knows, -- or a great many people know – the Lanigan Creek drainage empties into Long Lake at the 

present time and that this Lanigan Creek drainage empties into long Lake at the present time and that 

this Lanigan Creek drainage is the only source, according to engineers’ reports, which might be diverted 

to restore the water level of Little Manitou Lake. It would apparently very obviously be unwise to divert 

that flow to Long Lake; and, therefore, the two projects are correlated. I would not like to think that the 

restoration of the water level in Long Lake and in Little Manitou Lake were dependent upon the 

immediate spending by the Federal Government of $100 million on the Saskatchewan River. 

 

It was in order to find out if there was any less expensive alternative which might be undertaken should 

we fail to persuade the Federal Government to take action within a very short time with respect to this 

larger project that I approached the PFRA 



March 6, 1947 

 

623 

authorities in Regina. The information which was given to me there was that the Qu'Appelle River flow 

has dropped very considerably; that the Qu'Appelle River flow was the main source from which the 

water level of Long Lake was maintained. The average flow of the Qu'Appelle River during the 20-year 

period from 1911 to 1931 was 120 cubic feet per second, from April to October; and this apparently was 

sufficient to maintain the water level of Long Lake. I am told that by a comparatively small project 

which is not beyond the means of the provincial Government, the water could be diverted to Long Lake 

from the Saskatchewan River, which would compensate for the decreased flow of the Qu'Appelle River. 

I am told that there is a height of land of 85 feet between the Saskatchewan River and the source of the 

Aitkow Creek, which empties into the Qu'Appelle River and into Long Lake. I am informed that it 

would be possible, without very much cost by means of a cut, to reduce that height of land to 50 feet; 

that a pump station could be set up there which would insure a sufficient flow of water to compensate 

for the reduced flow of the Qu'Appelle River; and that the whole project might be undertaken with an 

expense of $100,000 – at a capital cost of $100,000 and an annual cost of $10,000 per year for pumping. 

I am sure that it would be unfair on my part to represent those figures as being a final and considered a 

report on the part of the PFRA. In fact, the gentleman whom I consulted, Mr. Grey, said, “even if we 

double that figure it still gives some idea of what an be done – that the project is practical – at a cost not 

comparable at all to the cost of the larger project which is contemplated by the Federal Government.” 

 

I don’t propose to spend any more time of the House in dealing with this matter of raising the water 

level. The Commission is concerned in case Manitou Lake disappear entirely. Mr. Grey of the PFRA 

says that is absolutely unnecessary and that they are unduly alarmed. We said we can restore the water 

level of Manitou Lake and long lake and that they will not be allowed to disappear. So with that I will 

pass on from consideration of the lake water level. 

 

Now to get back to the report itself. One of the recommendations of the Commission had to do with the 

roads leading into the Beach. There is a highway from the town of Watrous – a gravelled highway – into 

Manitou Lake and I suppose like a great many of our highways, it occasionally needs something done to 

keep it in shape, but it has a volume traffic at certain times which keep that three miles in a perpetual 

cloud of dust. The people there have become alarmed at the possibility of the dangers of travelling on 

that highway when it is literally impossible to have sufficient vision to ensure safe driving. A delegation 

from the town of Watrous waited on the Minister of Highways last fall and the Minister approved the 

project of hard surfacing that stretch of highway from the town of Watrous to Manitou Lake. I hope that 

he will find it possible this summer to do that work. Again, I wouldn’t want to commit him to it. I am 

going to try my very best to see that it is done, but the Minister did not make a definite promise in that 

regard. However, I believe that he was, I am sure in knowing him that he was sincere, in saying that it 

would be done if it were found possible at all. The Commission speaks of the road leading down from 

the north into Manitou Beach and around the end of the lake that is in a deplorable condition and it 

certainly should have some work done in order to make it an attractive approach from Highway No. 14 

north to the lake. 



March 6, 1947 

 

624 

I suppose there are very few people listening to me who haven’t been to Manitou Lake – who haven’t 

seen Manitou Beach – but in case there should be I might say that there are 400 to 425 cottages there of 

which 25 or 30 are occupied for the year round. There are also seven hotels in the neighborhood and 20 

rooming houses. This is from the report of the Commission. It has been estimated that the resort can 

accommodate 600 or more families during the summer season. There are approximately 100 persons 

that make their permanent residence in the village. That will give some idea of the size of the 

establishment down there. 

 

I come to a paragraph in the report which I regret that the Commission found it necessary to include. All 

the rest of the report is impersonal and detached and deals with visible things. This paragraph deals with 

the human weaknesses of some of my constituents and I feel that as their representative I should say a 

word in reply. 

 

I would first of all like to say that insofar as the Commission is concerned they have, in my opinion, said 

either too little or too much and I am going to go on the basis that they have said too little and expand on 

it a little because there is some foundation, there is very definite foundation for the statements that are 

contained in the report. Now that paragraph reads as follows: 

 

There is an attitude among the permanent residents of the village that they must attend strictly to their 

own business because of the short season. Thus, there is a lack of real community planning, general 

untidiness about the properties and the tendency to blame others for the deficiencies. The main point 

stressed by most of these persons is the marvellous nature of the water, but in spite of having lived 

there for many years and making their living at the beach, practically none have made any genuine 

effort to get definite facts regarding the lake, the water or its effects. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is an attitude among the permanent residents of the village that they must 

attend strictly to their own business because of the short season. I am not surprised at that attitude. Here 

we have a community which depends very largely for its economic well-being upon a short season of 

two to three months time – again according to the report – as many as ten to fifteen thousand persons are 

stated to come to the beach over a weekend. One can well imagine just how busy those people are in 

trying to cater to the needs of ten to fifteen thousand people over a weekend and in addition those who 

drop in during the week and those who are permanent residents there. I think it is very natural that they 

should each feel that they are fully occupied in attending to their own business and I could understand, 

too, that it might interfere with real community planning. 

 

Now that phrase “and the tendency to blame others for the deficiencies,” I wouldn’t have any doubt that 

if I had the gift of searching men’s soul’s at sight that I could find a great many people away from 

Manitou Beach who might be guilty of a similar tendency. But there is a tendency at Manitou Beach, 

there is a state of mind at Manitou Beach, which has caused the Commission, I am sure, to make that 

observation. A great many of those who are working there giving treatments and working in 



March 6, 1947 

 

625 

auxiliary services have been there for a long time and they are convinced that they are the custodians of 

a natural resource which has very great value to the people of this province if it were fully developed. 

They have done a great deal within the limits of their capabilities, their financial capacity to do it, to 

advertise those benefits. I remember being in Saskatoon exhibition and seeing a very tastefully arranged 

display of the products of Manitou Beach and literature which had been prepared advertising the profits 

to be derived from treatments from the lake. I know one gentleman, I could name him but then I think 

there were probably others involved so I won’t name any names at all, but it was a very genuine effort to 

popularize the beach and those people are fairly convinced, as I said before, that there is an asset of very 

great value and they are obsessed and I think justifiably, that’s my own personal opinion, with the idea 

that it is not being sufficiently recognized. But their sphere of influence is too narrow. They feel their 

own incapability to extend that sphere of influence and they have been trying to interest others to come 

to their assistance and up to the present time they have been left entirely alone. Now I think that their 

tendency, if it is true at all, their tendency to blame others for deficiencies is that sense of frustration 

because they have something they feel of great value and they haven’t been able to put it across to the 

people. 

 

The paragraph here, “the main point stressed by most of these persons is the marvellous nature of the 

water, but in spite of having lived for many years and making their living at the beach, practically none 

made any genuine effort.” Mr. Speaker, those people are responsible for the setting up of this 

Commission which criticizes them for failing to set up a commission to explore the value of the water. 

Unquestionably no commission would have been set up had those people themselves not taken the 

initiative. This Commission was set up as a result of their own initiative and the Commission, probably 

because it had not been informed as to the reason for its existence, turns around and blames those who 

are responsible for its establishment for failing to do anything about the matter. So that I felt it necessary 

to bring this slight, if not criticism at least elucidation, of this paragraph contained in the report in the 

interests of those whom I represent in the House. 

 

Now garbage disposal – the article which appeared in the press is rather harsh on the garbage disposal 

system at the Village of Manitou Beach. I would like to quote from a letter received by me from the 

secretary of the village and also secretary of the Watrous Board of Trade in connection with garbage 

disposal. I don’t think that I have to trouble to find words of my own to describe their garbage disposal 

system. When I am speaking of this remember that I am speaking of a community of which there are 

100 permanent residents, the others come for the summer season and go, or they come for a day and go, 

and they are subject to invasions of from ten to fifteen thousand people according to the report, over a 

weekend. I would suggest before we come and talk about maintaining tidiness and cleanliness that if 

15,000 people each brought a packet of cigarettes or a packet of popcorn and threw away the carton that 

you would find that there was a good deal of tidying up left to be done by those few people who were 

left there to do it. but with respect to garbage disposal, in regard to the inadequate garbage disposal 

system, they mentioned, this is a letter received by myself from the secretary of the council: 



March 6, 1947 

 

626 

We also take exception to that, in that we feel we have a mighty fine system and consider it better than 

you will find in most places with the exception of the larger cities. We employ a man and team to do 

nothing else in the busy season but to collect garbage and to deposit it in the nuisance ground, which is 

located a considerable distance back on the hill. We even have a large underground disposal tank in 

the nuisance ground where all liquids are put and same seep away into gravel beds. I do not think you 

will find any better nuisance ground anywhere or garbage disposal system. 

 

When we consider the size of the community and the very short season in which they operate, it seems 

to me that if that statement is true and I have absolute confidence, Mr. Speaker, although I haven’t been 

to the nuisance ground, but I have absolute confidence that it is true, then it seems to me that that small 

community has done fairly well with respect to the removal of garbage. 

 

I don’t think that I will take the time of the House to deal any further except to get right down to the 

question of the treatment for arthritis. The Commission in their own report are quite guarded in their 

statements. They do not discount, I think I am being quite fair to them when I say, they do not discount 

the possibility that there is a definite benefit peculiar to the water. You will notice in the Resolution, 

however, that I do not mention the water at all, the medicinal qualities of the water. I do, however, 

mention the value of hydrotherapy at natural spas. Now, the Royal Commission seems to have made a 

very thorough job of sending out questionnaires. I believe they sent out something like 80 to different 

medical authorities and they received replies from about half of those. I would like to read to the House 

some of the replies received. I might say that if I should miss a little bit it is because I am unable to 

pronounce some of the medical expressions which are employed by those men of science. Now this one, 

the first one I am going to read is from W. Parkman, Dean of Temple University, School of Medicine, 

Philadelphia, and he is replying to a question with respect to the value of hydrotherapy. I will read the 

question that he was answering, that was posed to him by the Commission: 

 

As a result of your experience, what is your personal opinion of hydrotherapy either artificial or at 

natural spas in the treatment of rheumatism, arthritis and their allied conditions?” 

 

And W. Parkman, Dean of Temple University, School of Medicine, Philadelphia, replies in part: 

 

Hydrotherapy is beneficial. However, wholesale treatment aggravates as many as it helps. In other 

words, careful supervision of each patient is essential: treatment must be prescribed for each 

individual and changed according to the response of the patient to treatment. Natural spas have the 

marked advantage over office or home treatment of changed environment, rest, recreation and 

association with other persons similarly handicapped. 

 

S.G. Gamble, University Hospital, Columbus, Ohio: 

 

In my opinion, spatherapy is an excellent adjunct in their 



March 6, 1947 

 

627 

treatment, that is the treatment of arthritis and rheumatism. Of the conditions mentioned, mental and 

physical rest obtained away from home while at a spa is a very important factor in the results obtained, 

so that hydrotherapy is only a part of a well-planned program of treatment. My one private criticism of 

spatherapy is the cost involved to a patient of moderate means who spends all his financial reserve for 

two or three week’s treatment at a spa when it would be much wiser to spread the money out over a 

longer period of time. For those who can afford it, spatherapy is ideal. 

 

W. McFarland, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, has this to say: 

 

I feel it a most valuable adjunct to the treatment of rheumatic diseases. I consider hydrotherapy in 

some form a definite must. 

 

Now I don’t want to bore the House with a great many of those, but there are a few more in order to give 

a fair cross-section of the ones which come herein. From the School of Medicine, Atlanta: 

 

There is a definite indication of value in many chronic dermatitis---I have seen four cases of chronic 

psoriasis treated for months without benefit by numerous dermatologists at the Mayo Clinic. Three 

weeks of rest and spatherapy at Warm Springs at Kansas cleared all cases and one case of arthritis was 

cleared for the first time in years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are one or two more here that I could read but here is one which is very apt and to the 

point: J. Makins, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University: 

 

If the lake could be used for bathing purposes or the water piped into an enclosed swimming pool and 

has thermo qualities, it might be of considerable value in the treatment of poliomyelitis, certain forms 

of arthritis, neuritis and other nervous conditions in which it is desired that the patients use their limbs 

in natural movement. 

 

This is from W.H. Roberts, M.D., Rosehaven Sanatorium, Sydney, British Columbia: 

 

Kenny method of treatment is of definite value in treating poliomyelitis, particularly during the acute 

state. Patients, particularly those in Saskatchewan, would no doubt greatly appreciate having hotel and 

other accommodations available so that they could go away from their usual occupation and take 

advantage of spa treatments. 

 

John Hopkins, University School of Medicine, Baltimore says: 

 

Spa can be of great value in the treatment of chronic ailments but it is the sanitarium feature rather 

than the water that seems to be the more important. the patient is away from home, free from 

responsibilities and cares in an attractive setting with well-though out dietetic and hygienic regiment. 

There is doubtless at times some additional benefit from the nature of the water. 



March 6, 1947 

 

628 

Certainly in the case of Sulphur springs the water has a potency that other waters do not possess. there 

are very few well-organized and well-conducted spas in this country. More interest seems to be shown 

in them recently and Dr. Richard Kovacks of New York city has written several papers in the past year 

or two. 

 

W. Parkman, Dean of Temple University, School of Medicine, Philadelphia: 

 

The spa idea is good. It needs further development on this continent and we need further knowledge 

and experience in the therapeutic uses of the spa. The problem of chronic disease and disability is a 

major problem. It is a problem of increasing importance in our civilization. The physician is often too 

busy with the acutely and dangerously ill patient to manage the chronically ill patients as well as it is 

possible to do so. Going further the point of view of the preventive medicine is inadequately 

developed and used at present. In conclusion, your spa will be in great value if: 

 

1. You have well trained, conscientious physicians, nurses, technicians. 2. You have enough staff for 
them to take a personal interest in each patient. 3. You provide adequate income for this staff and 

an opportunity for them to increase their knowledge and ability in hydrotherapy. 4. You make their 

position dependent on their technical proficiency rather than their politics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps I have trespassed a little on the indulgence of the House in reading so many of 

those, but I wanted to justify my position in presenting this motion based on the opinions expressed to 

the Commission of Manitou Beach. The Commission more than once names the clinic which is operated 

there by Dr. Stipe. Dr. Stipe’s testimony does not appear in the report. Doubtless, because Dr. Stipe 

would be regarded as an interested party since he is one of the operators down there. But I have a letter 

which he wrote to me, dated February 9, 1945, before this Commission was set up. He has had, he had at 

that time, 15 years experience at Manitou Lake. 

 

It is my opinion that the medicinal virtues of these natural alkaline mineral waters are now sufficiently 

probed, that in the interests of the general public at large it would be an excellent gesture for the 

Provincial Government to develop same to a greater extent than has heretofore been done. 

 

There is no question about it that there is a very definite field open for the treatment of arthritis and 

rheumatism. On January 25, 1946, I received a letter from the Mother Superior of the Ursaline Convent 

at Bruno, Saskatchewan. This lady writes: 

 

As several of the Sisters of our community are suffering from arthritis, we have been advised to lay 

before the attention of our provincial representative a petition that chronic arthritis be mentioned in the 

new Health Act, and the same privileges be granted to arthritis patients as are given to TB and cancer 

patients. There are several people in the town of Bruno who are suffering from this painful disease in 

whose name I am also writing as well as in the names of the undersigned arthritis patients of 



March 6, 1947 

 

629 

our community. May I ask your kind attention to this request. 

 

I find that in the submission of the Saskatchewan Government to the Dominion-Provincial Conference, 

the late lamented Dominion-Provincial Conference, there was the following paragraph with respect to 

arthritis: 

 

We submit that a special grant should be made available for any arthritis program so that sufferers 

from this disabling and common disease may receive the benefits of a research and treatment program. 

In our opinion this is a problem comparable in importance to the problem of the blind and crippled 

children, etc. and a grant should therefore be made towards it. 

 

This was enclosed in the letter which I received from the lady in Bruno – a brief on arthritis. 

 

A Canadian Rheumatic Disease Association was formed on February 14, 1936; (apparently it stopped 

functioning when the War began) but it places a few facts in connection with rheumatism and arthritis 

on this brief. If you are interested, please write at once to your Dominion or Provincial representative 

urging that they bring before the government the following facts: 

 

1. There are an estimated 600,000 cases of chronic rheumatism in Canada and there are no beds 
available for them. 2. Rheumatism causes more crippling and loss to industry than any other 

disease. 3. That while rheumatism does not kill it does cripple and therefore creates a serious 

economic problem. 4. There are at present no funds available for research and no money set aside 

for treatment or diagnosis. 5. Arthritis or chronic rheumatism is not even mentioned in the draft of 

the proposed National Health Bill, nor in the new Dominion Health Magazine entitled, ‘Canada’s 

Health and Welfare.’ 

 

Mr. Speaker, since I came into the House today, there has been handed to me a schedule of this report. 

That schedule has the testimonials that were sent to the Commission in response to their advertisement. I 

haven’t had time to go over those, but I can well understand what some of them, at least, will contain 

because I have seen so many similar ones. There are many people – when I say, many, I mean 

considering the number of people who are there at all – who are at present living in the town of Watrous 

and in the village of Manitou Beach who came there in the first place because they were in need of 

treatment for some of those diseases and who are among the staunchest supporters of the idea of the 

development of that place as a health resort. 

 

I feel confident in commending the report to the Government, as presented by this Royal Commission, 

in spite of the very obvious criticism of certain conditions alleged to have been found existing at the 

beach, and that they will be moved to take action in the matter. 

 

The Resolution calls for the cooperation of the Federal Government. My reason for including that, Mr. 

Speaker, was that interest has been expressed in the House of Commons, by the Minister of Veterans’ 

Affairs, and I have an excerpt from a 



March 6, 1947 

 

630 

speech made by John G. Diefenbaker, K.C. M.P. for Lake Centre, on January 9
th

 over CHAB Moose 

Jaw. I am not going to read it all but just that part which refers to Manitou Lake. 

 

Next may I refer for a moment to Lake Manitou or Watrous Lake. I have no hesitation in saying that 

there is no lake in Canada or in the United States that possesses to such a degree the qualities of the 

spa of other European watering places. Thousands of people have been benefited by bathing in its 

curative waters; the benefits were known by the Indians for several hundred years as recorded by the 

writings of earlier explorers. Watrous Lake must be preserved and I have been doing everything in my 

power to secure help for this necessary work. I placed before Parliament the benefits it confers on 

urological patients and have endeavoured to secure the establishment of a hospital by the Department 

of Veterans’ Affairs. 

 

Everything seemed to be proceeding favourably when a Royal Commission set up by the Provincial 

Government came out with a report that has done harm, not only to the lake, But to the flourishing 

town of Watrous. 

 

Mr. Diefenbaker goes on: 

 

I have discussed the curative values of the waters of the lake with outstanding Canadian chemists and 

they have assured me that its chemical content does result in substantial improvement of various 

rheumatic ailments. I think the time has come for both the Federal and Provincial Governments to 

convene another Commission of experts and I have no hesitation in believing that a favourable report 

will result. 

 

Mr. Diefenbaker had evidently not read this report since the Commission itself does suggest the setting 

up of another commission; and also acknowledges that it has not made a complete study. However, I 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, that a health centre or clinic, established at Watrous, through co-operation of the 

Federal and Provincial Governments, making use of hydrotherapy in the treatment of arthritis and 

rheumatics, which is of recognized value according to the authorities I have quoted, irrespective of the 

quality of the water, would provide an institution where it would be possible under governmental 

supervision, if necessary, to discover by actual experiment and results, the full benefits which might be 

received from those waters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have taken more time than I intended to when I started. I, therefore, move this 

Resolution. 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier):  Mr. Speaker, I want to say just a few words with regard to the 

Resolution which is being proposed by the Members for Watrous and Last Mountain. There is very little 

or no need at all for me to repeat anything which has already been said by the mover of the motion. 

 

The Royal Commission which was set up to investigate the curative and therapeutic values of Manitou 

Lake was set up because last year the Member for Watrous brought a Motion into the House, which was 

passed by this Assembly, asking the Government to appoint such a commission. Now we set that 

Commission 



March 6, 1947 

 

631 

up; we didn’t try to tell the Commission what their decision should be. 

 

I take some umbrage at the radio address which was given by the Federal Member, Mr. Diefenbaker, the 

Federal Member for Lake Centre, who suggested that just when everything was going merrily along 

towards establishing some sort of a health spa at Watrous, we appointed a Commission knowing 

perfectly well that the Commission was likely to make a report which would be detrimental to the 

interests of that community. Of course, that is most unfair both to the Government and to the 

Commission. The Government appointed the Commission, as has already been pointed out, made up of 

first, two members nominated by the Medical Profession in the Province of Saskatchewan, the college of 

Physicians and Surgeons. We, ourselves, selected two men who are not medical doctors, but who are 

scientists: Dr. J.G. Rempel, former professor of chemistry at Regina College and now professor of 

chemistry at the University of Saskatchewan; and our own Dr. W.A. Riddell, who is head of the 

provincial laboratories; and then Mr. O. Wingrove was chosen as chairman in order to have a layman 

along to keep the scientists and the doctors with their feet solidly on the ground. 

 

That was the Commission that was appointed and I do want here to express, on behalf of the 

Government I am sure and of this Assembly, our thanks to them for the work which they have done. 

They are all busy men. They gave their time for what was only a very nominal fee. They had to do this 

in their spare moments and they acknowledged, very frankly, that they had not been able to give this the 

very thorough investigation to which it was entitled and suggested that further investigation should be 

carried on. But they have done, within the limited amount of time they had and with the limited amount 

of date at their disposal, they have done a very worthwhile job as I think can be shown by reading the 

report and the appendices. 

 

It would not be a reflection on the Commission for anyone to say that they started out with preconceived 

notions, or that they were trying to do any harm to the people of Watrous or Manitou Beach. I have had 

one or two letters from people who are most enthusiastic about the medicinal properties of Manitou 

Beach, who feel that the Government shouldn’t have allowed a commission to make a report such as 

this. But, of course, the Government has no control over the report made by the Commission and 

wouldn’t want to exercise such control if we had it. But the real reason for some people feeling that way 

is that they hadn’t an opportunity to read the report and that, as the Member for Watrous has said, the 

newspaper reports of the report were unfortunate. I am not blaming those who wrote the report, they are 

accurate in terminology, but most of us are not familiar with the terminology used by people doing a 

scientific job. I think we will see that when we take just a moment or two to deal with the two main 

recommendations of the Commission. 

 

The first recommendation was and the first investigation was concerned with the whole problem of the 

water level of that lake. They pointed out that the water level had been receding steadily, that it had 

come to such a place that the saline content of the water was so high that the salts were beginning to 

crystallize which is a very dangerous thing to happen to any lace that you are going to use for 

hydrotherapy and they pointed out that there wasn’t any use even in carrying out an extensive 

investigation into the therapeutic values of the water if there 



March 6, 1947 

 

632 

wasn’t going to be any water. So they said the very first thing that we recommend before anything else 

is done, before any more money is spent is that something should be done to raise the water level of this 

lake. But even apart from having any curative value it is an excellent health resort and the water level 

should be raised if that is at all possible. They pointed out that it is not within their field of investigation, 

none of them were engineers and it is not within their scope to suggest how that could be done. They 

give some evidence as to recommendations made to them by persons who have made some study of the 

question, but they did suggest that the very first thing that ought to occupy the attention of the 

Government was the question of raising the water level and saving the lake itself. 

 

I say with reference to that that the staff of our own Water Rights Branch have been giving a good deal 

of thought to this question and making some study of it, taking soundings on runoffs in various districts 

surrounding the lake and have done some work with the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration to 

see if together they can work out what will be an economical and practicable plan for diverting water 

into Lake Manitou so as to raise the level. It is too early yet for me to make any dogmatic statements as 

to whether or not it is practicable and whether or not such a program can be carried through between the 

Provincial Government and the PFRA, but I can say this, that the matter is certainly being gone into by 

those who are qualified to investigate and we should have a report from them shortly and on the basis of 

that report will be able to determine whether or not a project should be undertaken with a view to 

diverting water into this lake with a view to raising its level and making it available to the people who, 

year after year, come here to spend part of their holidays. So that was the first problem and that to them 

was the basic problem, but if that problem isn’t dealt with all the other questions which were referred to 

them might just as well not be considered. 

 

The second thing to which they devoted their attention was whether or not the waters of this lake 

assuming they could be raised and the lake would be prevented from disappearing entirely, whether or 

not these waters were beneficial in character and here, Mr. Speaker, is where there has been a good deal 

of misunderstanding, for which I blame no one. they say in the report, and I read it and one can see 

immediately upon reading it, how the average person feels about the statement. They have this to say: 

 

As a consequence the Commission has nothing in the way of definite scientific evidence as to the 

medicinal value of Little Manitou Lake in the treatment of arthritis or skin diseases and must rely upon 

the opinion of experts whose comments are based on general experience of hydrotherapy. 

 

Now on the basis of that a great many people took it for granted that the Commission was saying, 

therefore this lake has no curative value whatsoever and would be of no value as a mineral spot. Now to 

take that sentence out of its context and not to read the report as a whole, would be most unfair to the 

lake and to those who are advocating the use of the lake. The Commission drew a distinction between 

medicinal value and therapeutic value. Now to those of us who are laymen it is not as easy to make that 

distinction and I am sure that when I am finished explaining it you will have even less idea as to what 



March 6, 1947 

 

633 

the distinction is. But I ask the House to keep in mind that of four of these men, two of them are 

scientists and two of them are medical doctors, who are dealing with facts, who when they say have 

proof of medicinal value must be able to substantiate that in a laboratory. They must be able to 

substantiate it with case histories. As the Member for Watrous has said in Appendix H, there are a few 

individuals who appeared before them and told of benefits which they had received, but there were no 

case histories, there was nothing to indicate what their condition was before or what was afflicting them 

merely the symptoms which they could describe. 

 

Dr. Stipe, who has been doing work at the lake for a considerable period of time, has kept case histories 

but he felt that the ethics of his profession wouldn’t permit him to turn these case histories over to the 

Commission, that they were, after all, confidential documents relating to conditions between himself and 

his patients and, of course, the Commission didn’t press the matter at all. Therefore, they had no case 

histories and they had nothing that could be placed before a scientific body as proof positive of there 

being chemical constituents in the water that would bring about chemical changes in the body and have 

a definite medicinal result. they do say this about it, and I quote here from page 18: 

 

The very high content of sodium sulphate and magnesium sulphate makes it a very strong laxative and 

as a consequence of the composition would be chloretic and stimulating to the liver. 

 

So while they say it has no medicinal value and on the basis of that, the immediate assumption was that 

it had no value at all, they point out that their only reason for saying that it has no medicinal value is first 

they hadn’t adequate data. They would suggest that later on once the level of the water is guaranteed that 

a further investigation might be made by competent persons who could devote full time to an 

investigation to look into the chemical constituents of the waters and to keep some case histories on 

people who are treated. But they do, Mr. Speaker, make very definite statements about the therapeutic 

value of the water and by that I mean that they argue that while they had nothing to prove that this water 

has any medicinal effect on the human body, while it doesn’t bring about an chemical changes in the 

human body, there are two things about it that make it very worthwhile. 

 

The first is that having a very high saline content this water will hold heat much longer than ordinary 

water and consequently patients bathing in this water can have heat wrapped around a limb that is 

inflicted or some part of the body that is inflicted, that heat will continue around that affected part of the 

anatomy much longer than with ordinary hot water. So heat which has always been recognized as having 

a beneficial effect on the human body, that heat can be applied if under proper supervision, for long 

periods of time in water of this sort when it wouldn’t be possible in ordinary water. 

 

The other point they make which is of equal value is that this water, having a very high salt content, is 

buoyant and because it is buoyant a body which is racked with pain, the limbs tend to float in the water. 

It is possible in that kind of water to carry on a muscular re-education which would otherwise be 

impossible. Members who are familiar, for instance, with 



March 6, 1947 

 

634 

the Kenny Method of treating poliomyelitis, know that the secret of Sister Kenny’s treatment wasn’t 

merely the hot bath treatment but the fact that she was the person who first laid emphasis upon the need 

for muscular re-education of the person who had had infantile paralysis. It has been found that this 

muscular re-education is easier in water that is buoyant so that the limbs tend to float rather than being 

heavy and having a great deal of pain. 

 

The Member for Watrous has already quoted some of the statements made by medical authorities who 

answered the questionnaire sent out by the Commission. I don’t think he quoted Dr. L.W. Gorman of the 

Albany Hospital in New York, who says: 

 

The use of hydrotherapy, both general and as spas has been found of value in the treatment of patients 

with rheumatism, arthritis and their allied conditions. It cannot be considered as curative, but with 

proper programs of treatment in this field many patients obtained distinct relief. 

 

Then there are several pages of the report of these various doctors and in Appendix “H” which 

contains the statements made by some of those who appeared before the Commission, I would like to 

quote some of the statements made by the members of the Commission themselves which do not 

appear in the report, but which are in the appendix. 

 

I think Dr. Rempel’s statement for instance in point. Dr. Rempel has a high reputation in the province as 

an outstanding chemist. He said: 

 

I feel that the whole angle of arthritis – from that angle there is some value in this water. If there is 

some value there the people who have arthritis can come here and get relief, and I think we would be 

justified in recommending some government supervision so that more people can get the benefits for 

arthritis. I think there is sufficient evidence to warrant that recommendation. If some benefit can be 

derived insofar as skin diseases are concerned, then I say, by all means go ahead. 

 

And Mr. Wingrove, who was chairman said: 

 

I feel convinced that there must be something in the water; add environment or anything else you 

wish, which must have beneficial effect n arthritis, etc., and I intend to include afflictions of the skin. 

Testimony that we have had leads me to believe that there must be some benefit in connection with 

skin diseases and I would strongly recommend that there be some steps taken to maintain the level of 

the water of this lake for its medicinal properties as well as for a lake resort. I would recommend that 

the Government take some action so that the people, irrespective of their financial conditions, can get 

the benefit of this lake. I think this would be a great asset to the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Dr. Brachman, who is a dermatologist in this city and who felt that it hadn’t any great medicinal value 

insofar as skin diseases were concerned, may have differed with some of the other members in that 

regard, but said this: 



March 6, 1947 

 

635 

I can’t offer a lot except that from the investigation up-to-date I am completely in accord with the 

summary of my colleague from the university – Dr. Rempel – that there is no benefit in the water as it 

is at present except the buoyancy which makes it more useful for some types of arthritis, some 

diseases of the skin, some types of muscles and joints through polio or other infections that is in the 

water itself. 

 

Dr. Brackman finished his statement by saying to the chairman: 

 

I am agreeing with you that it has some value in certain types of arthritic conditions. Whatever benefit, 

little or not, that skin diseases have received here is coincidental. No one can explain why they got 

better, but there is sufficient evidence of some help in arthritic conditions and the need of the resort is 

so great, that we should go on record and say that the Government should do something. 

 

Dr. Johns, who was the other medical doctor says: 

 

Dr. Brachman has covered my ground very much and I am quite in accord with what he as to say. 

 

And so on – I don’t want to weary the House; I merely want to point out that I think that the erroneous 

impression given by taking the one sentence out of its context, which was quite correct insofar as the 

men who wrote it were concerned – with scientific scrupulousness they were saying that they had not 

any evidence which they could accept as scientists that it has medicinal values. But they repeat again 

and again that this water has therapeutic values. Some therapeutic value they can explain, as I pointed 

out, in the matter of heat and in the matter of buoyancy in the treatment of arthritis and rheumatism. 

Some which they can’t explain in the matter of skin diseases, but which they admit have been cases 

where the people suffering from skin diseases – particularly eczema – have been helped, but they are not 

prepared to say that there is any proof of it; while there seems to be indications that these people have 

received some benefits. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think the Commission has made a good report. I am quite frank in saying, and 

they would be the first to say it and have said so to me personally, that they don’t suggest for a moment 

that they have made the kind of exhaustive report that would be possible. They had neither the time nor 

the facilities or the case histories to conduct such a report; but they have made a preliminary 

investigation and on the basis of their recommendations they point out two things as I have said: 1. That 

we should take some steps at once to work with the PFRA and to divert water into Little Manitou Lake 

in order to raise the water level; 2. That we should take steps to improve the sanitary conditions. They 

deal with sewage. The Commission recommends that the Government take steps to ensure that all salts 

or other products produced from the water of Little Manitou Lake shall conform to a standard of quality, 

labelling and advertising in accordance with Dominion regulations. They suggest that a group of expert 

engineers ought to look into the matter of diverting water to the lake. But it seemed to me that what was 

the most important of their recommendations was that the Commission recommends that a further study 

establish the fact that the water level can be maintained; that a further investigation be conducted with a 

view to using the lake as an arthritic or poliomyelitis centre. That, 



March 6, 1947 

 

636 

Mr. Speaker, is something which I know the Government would want to do if the other conditions can 

be carried out. 

 

It is estimated – there are no definite statistics – that there are probably more people in Canada suffering 

from arthritis and rheumatism than from tuberculosis or cancer. Statistics are very hard to get. When 

people have cancer or tuberculosis they usually report to a doctor and statistics are gathered by the Vital 

Statistics Branches of the various provinces; but when people have rheumatism or arthritis it is very 

seldom that they report to a doctor and even if they report to a doctor, it isn’t at all likely that the doctor 

will send in the figures as it has never been considered a very important matter. We have every reason to 

believe that there are many thousands of people in Canada, and a good many in Saskatchewan, who are 

crippled by rheumatism and arthritis. Some investigation is being carried on as to the possibility of there 

being a close relationship between arthritis and some animal diseases, the very matter being discussed 

the other day by the Member for Gravelbourg; and there is a field of investigation there which needs to 

be pushed to its ultimate conclusion. There isn’t anything we need more here on the Prairies than a 

centre for the treatment of arthritis, rheumatism and poliomyelitis. We have as the Members know, a 

poliomyelitis clinic at Saskatoon, using a form of the Kenny method of treatment which has had a great 

measure of success. But there is need for a larger centre and for a centre that will deal, not only with 

poliomyelitis, but also with arthritis and rheumatism. The only place on the Prairies that people can go 

to is the mineral spa at Banff; and some excellent work has been done there, but they have limited 

facilities and many people, of course, can’t afford to go the long distance to Banff. 

 

On the North American continent we have not made much use of mineral spas. In Europe and in the 

United Kingdom for two or three centuries mineral spas have been a part of the social life of the 

community – “taking the baths” as they were called, was a very common thing and has been for two or 

three centuries; but not much use has been made of mineral spas on this continent. There is a growing 

interest in the whole field of hydrotherapy and I haven’t any doubt in my own mind that if we could 

locate a place where a water level could be maintained and if it could be shown that that water -- as has 

been shown here – has therapeutic values, I think that such a place would be a logical centre for a clinic 

for the treatment of arthritis, poliomyelitis and rheumatism. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I want to say on behalf of the Government that we are proceeding with the 

investigation insofar as the diversion of water is concerned and maintaining the water level. If that can 

be brought about, we are prepared then to take the next step suggested by the Commission, namely, an 

examination of the whole field of hydrotherapy in relation to this lake to see if that would be the logical 

place at which to erect a clinic for the treatment of the diseases which I have mentioned. Naturally, the 

people who live around Manitou Lake and Watrous and my ho. friend, the Member for Watrous, are 

interested in this from the standpoint of their local pride and the having a health centre in their 

community; but the Government, of course, must always have the larger picture in mind and that is first 

of all that if government funds, public funds, collected from the taxpayers of the province are to be 

spent, they must be spent only after the most careful investigation to see to it that the results which we 

are likely to obtain will warrant the 



March 6, 1947 

 

637 

expenditure. I feel, personally, after reading this report – and particularly after reading the appendix – 

that if the water level can be maintained, there is every indication that this is the logical place at which 

to erect the kind of centre that is so badly needed here on the Prairies for the treatment of people 

suffering from arthritis and from rheumatism. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I shall support the motion. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  I would like to ask – the main report of the Commission was tabled this afternoon in 

response returns. Did I understand that this appendix “H” is also to be tabled? Are we to get copies of 

that. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  No, I pointed out when I tabled it, Mr. Speaker, that the appendix ‘H” are the 

questionnaires and admissions made by various people and are so voluminous that we are simply tabling 

them as an appendix. copies are not available because it is very voluminous, but the appendix is being 

tabled along with the report. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION – DISTRIBUTION TO MUNICIPALITIES OF MONIES IN RESERVE FUND 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier):  Mr. Speaker, BEFORE THE Hon. Member begins, I wonder if I 

might raise just the Point of Order. I wonder if I might draw your Honor’s attention to Beauchesne’s 

Rules and forms, Standing Order No. 60, citation No. 558 which says: 

 

Motions advocating public expenditure or the imposition of a charge, if the motion be framed in 

sufficiently abstract or general terms, can be entertained and agreed to by the House. Resolutions of 

this nature are permissible because, having no operative effect, no grant is made or burthen imposed 

by their adoption. 

 

And in Standing Order No. 61, citation 562 says: 

 

It shall not be lawful for the House of Commons to adopt or pass any vote, resolution, address or bill 

for the appropriation of any part of the public revenue, or of any tax are impost, to any purpose that 

has not been first recommended to that House by message of the Governor General in the Session in 

which such vote, resolution, address or bill is proposed. 

 

May I further, Your Honour, draw to your attention the decision which was handed down on 

Wednesday, February 15, 1939, as recorded in the Journals of the Legislative Assembly, page 91, in 

which some resolutions were referred to the Speaker by the Attorney General of that day. The Attorney 

General gives a long report which I shall not, I don’t think is necessary to read to the House. Yes, the 

Speaker gives a long report to the House which I don’t think I need to read. It contains page 91. 

 

Let me interject at this point, that I cannot accept the restricted interpretation placed on the word 

“Resolution” as 



March 6, 1947 

 

638 

suggested by the hon. Leader of the Opposition. Suffice it to say that on a motion made, the House 

resolves. 

 

The presentations agree upon the general principle that the right of initiation in “money” Motions lies 

with the Ministers of the Crown upon the recommendation of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

This does not mean that private members are not permitted to move resolutions which place the House 

on record as favoring a specific cause which may involve the expenditure of public money or taxation, 

directly or indirectly. Such resolutions, however, emanating from private members must be couched in 

“abstract and general” terms, so that they cannot be construed as an “Order” of the Assembly, and, 

therefore, mandatory upon the Government. 

 

And he goes on to discuss the terms sufficiently abstract in general and says: 

 

The question then arises as to the wording of Motions of this nature in language which will be 

“sufficiently abstract and general” and could not be construed as being mandatory upon the 

Government. The usual formula “that in the opinion of this Assembly” is not sufficiently abstract if it 

is followed by such a phrase as “the Government should immediately introduce legislation which will 

provide” or “the Government be requested to make provision for”. Such Motions may commence with 

the phrase “in the opinion of this Assembly” but should be followed by such words as “it is advisable 

that consideration be given.” It has recently been decided in the House of Commons at Ottawa 

(Hansard 20
th

 February, 1936, vol. 1 at pages 361, 370 and 371) that a “recommendation” or “opinion” 

of the House if adopted becomes in effect an “order”. An example of this is the wording used in the 

Crown’s Recommendation which reads “His Honour the Lieutenant Governor recommends for the 

consideration of the Assembly.” 

 

And then His Honour, the Speaker at that time, proceeded to outline the eight resolutions which have 

been referred to by the Attorney General on page 93. He says: 

 

I rule as follows on the admissibility of the Motions under review: 

 

Motion No. 1 – Mr. Valleau – Can be allowed to stand, being vague and inconclusive in its 

phraseology, providing it does not become apparent during the debate that of necessity a charge on the 

province is entailed; in such event the motion would of course be subject to challenge. 

 

Motion No. 2 – Mr. Benson: Must be withdrawn. It is specific and mandatory and involves the 

conversion of contingent liabilities into direct liabilities and affects jurisdictions other than the 

Government. 

 

Motion No. 3 – Mr. Johnston: Must be withdrawn. Is distinctly mandatory upon the Government and 

its execution might involve a charge on revenues. 

 

Then a resolution by Mr. Brockelbank, resolutions 4, 5, 6 and 7 must also be withdrawn, and I submit, 

Mr. Speaker, that 



March 6, 1947 

 

639 

the same would apply to Resolution No. 4. It is said that in the opinion of this Legislature the 

Government should at an early date determine and put into operation a plan for the distribution to the 

rural municipalities the $1,260,000 now held in reserve account, and so forth. That such a resolution 

would in effect be an order upon the House rather than something recommended to the Government for 

its consideration. I hold, Mr. Speaker, that on those grounds the motion is definitely out of order in its 

present form. 

 

Mr. W.J. Patterson ((Leader of the Opposition): Mr. Speaker, on the Point of Order. This money 

belongs to no one, but the Provincial of Saskatchewan. This is money which was levied for the public 

revenue tax in those years. It has been set aside for trust funds or reserve funds. The money does belong 

to the Province of Saskatchewan and no one else, and, therefore, it is calling upon the Government to 

expend money which rightfully belongs to the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I further draw your attention to the motion quoted by the Premier, or the ruling made 

in 1939, that Motion No. 2 by Mr. Benson must be withdrawn. It involves the conversion of contingent 

liabilities into direct liabilities. For that reason it was ruled at that time that the motion should be 

withdrawn. 

 

Well, if the Hon. Minister wants to argue on that basis I presume this might be regarded as a contingent 

liability of the Province of Saskatchewan to the rural municipalities of the province. They do not so 

regard it, neither does the public, but if the Government wants to put order on that basis they can argue 

so. 

 

An Hon. Member: They have the money anyhow and they won’t let go. 

 

RESOLUTION – WOOL BONUS 

 

Mr. B. Putnam (Humboldt):  moved, seconded by Mr. Murray (Gull Lake): 

 

That since the Federal Government has intimated that payment of the wool bonus under the Wool 

Bonus Policy will be discontinued, and as in the opinion of this Assembly, continuance of the said 

Policy is vital to the sheep industry of the Province, this Assembly urge the Provincial Government to 

request the Federal Government to continue participation payments, as in the past, through the Wool 

Bonus Policy. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, we are asking that the Dominion Government be requested to continue to 

contribute to the bonus on wool, we are not asking for something new. For the last four years there has 

been a four cent bonus on standard grades of wool in this province. The Provincial Government has paid 

this bonus and the overhead or charges connected with it and the Dominion Government has refunded 

two cents on the four cent bonus on wool. 

 

The correspondent from the chairman of the Agricultural Supply Board indicates that in the Estimates 

for this year, they have included money for this contribution. However, the 



March 6, 1947 

 

640 

Rt. Hon. J.G. Gardiner, the Minister of Agriculture, has indicated to the Department of Agriculture here 

that the Federal contribution will be discontinued. 

 

Mr. Speaker, possibly I am not the best qualified Member of this Assembly to present the views of the 

wool board in this connection. I am not a wool producer at the present time, however, in years gone by I 

have raised sheep. I have sheared sheep and know something about the handling of this valuable 

product. This province has something over 500,000 head of sheep. About 70 per cent of these sheep are 

in small flocks in the agricultural areas and on the farms of this province, leaving about 30 per cent in 

the larger flocks on the range or ranch areas of the province. 

 

I shall try to discuss this Resolution from the angle of the farmer who has the small flocks of sheep. 

Perhaps the average farm in this province is not adaptable to large flocks of sheep. By large flocks, I 

mean 100 or perhaps several hundred sheep. when you get into the industry at that extent it requires 

considerable expensive fencing and the rotation of pastures. Perhaps, no doubt, some of the Hon. 

Members know, and yourself, Mr. Speaker, that sheep do not do well if continued on the same pasture 

throughout the season. The Hon. Member for Gull Lake is seconding this motion. Possibly he will have 

something to say on it. I believe he lives in that part of the province where they run sheep under ranch 

conditions and he knows the answers to that side of the question. 

 

I believe that there is a place in this province for many more sheep than are raised at the present time. I 

believe that we could well afford to have – not 500,000 sheep, but perhaps 2 million sheep in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. On thousands of farms a small flock of sheep would be a great addition to 

the income of that farm. They largely live on feed stuffs that would otherwise go to waste, and as weed 

scavengers and something to clean up the back lot and the fence corners, they are of inestimable value. I 

know of a couple of small flocks of sheep in my own community and I know that the wool from these 

sheep, perhaps $50 or $60 worth coming at the time of the year when there isn’t much other farm 

income, can contribute a great deal to keep the homes going in many instances. So, Mr. Speaker, I do 

contend that there is a place for many more sheep in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Sheep Breeders’ Association has passed a resolution asking that this bonus be continued. The 

quality of Saskatchewan wood during the few years that the bonus has been in operation has improved 

immensely. Warehousemen contend that there is no comparison between Saskatchewan wood and 

Manitoba wool. Manitoba doesn’t have the bonus, and Saskatchewan does. The wool producer is 

becoming grade conscious in the same sense the wool producer is becoming grade conscious in the same 

sense that those of us who sell a can of cream – we take pride in getting a table cream or special grade 

for our cream. In the same sense the wood grower is becoming grade conscious in this province and 

taking pride in getting the top grades for his wool. 

 

I would like you to understand, Mr. Speaker, that this bonus is not paid on the lower grades of wool; 

those grades containing black wool or black fibre within the wool; or dirty wool and taggy wool and all 

that sort of thing. Those grades are becoming less and less, we believe, due largely to the bonus that is 

being paid for superior grades of wool. With the price of 



March 6, 1947 

 

641 

wool at about 25 cents, it pretty well hangs in the balance. If the producer can get a little more than that 

it is an incentive to produce good wool and market it under the best of conditions. If it goes very much 

below that, there isn’t very much in it and he is inclined to become discouraged. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in view of what this bonus has done in the years gone by and for what little expense it 

will be to the Federal Treasury, I believe that we are justified in asking that the Federal contribution be 

continued. Mr. Speaker, I am glad to move the Resolution. 

 

Mr. A.C. Murray (Gull Lake):  Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this Resolution, I do so in support of it 

for the reason that the Federal Government and the Provincial Government saw fit in 1943 to pay a 

bonus on wool. 

 

I am going to quote some figures to show that it costs considerably more now to produce wool than it 

did at that time. Therefore, I believe that this wool bonus should be continued as before. As the Member 

for Humboldt mentioned, the amount is not very large for the Federal Government, going fifty-fifty with 

the Provincial Government. The figure for 1945 is $55,412. Not quite that much has been estimated for 

1946. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking to this Resolution I am not doing so from the experience that I have had in 

handling sheep, as I don’t believe I am in the same position even as the Member for Humboldt. He 

mentioned that he had owned some sheep, I never have. But I have lived in a district where there are a 

great many sheep. In the constituency of Maple Creek, in the part leading off from about Highway No. 

37 which goes through Gull Lake and Shaunavon and from there west – that part of the Gull Lake 

constituency and the whole of Maple Creek constituency – there is one-fifth of the sheep in 

Saskatchewan in that district, so you can see that it is considered quite a sheep part of the province. that 

is what we call the short grass country and is adapted to sheep. 

 

There are a great many parts of the province which are far more adapted to sheep than any other lines of 

stock. The Member for Humboldt mentioned that in other parts of the province there are small flocks 

and he said – which was wrong – I think he mentioned that when they got something over 100 or 150 

they were considered large flocks. We do not consider that they have sheep in the southwest part of the 

province. But there are a few small flocks. Some of the homesteaders that homesteaded on submarginal 

land found that they could not make a living on grain growing and have branched out into flocks of a 

few sheep and cattle and have had up to now very economical units. 

 

I would like to state a few of the difficulties of some of the ranchers. The Member for Humboldt 

mentioned some of the improvements since this wool bonus has been brought into being, in 1943, 

through quality and cleanliness and proper methods of handling the wool; also in shearing, rolling the 

fleece and tying and properly packing it. As the Member mentioned, it has improved considerably in 

Saskatchewan over what it has in Manitoba. As possibly the Members know, in order to make a success 

of sheep ranching as we call it up in our country, you need considerable experience; but some of them 

have gone into it without experience and learned the hard way. You need considerable experience to 

make a success of the business. 



March 6, 1947 

 

642 

I want to quote some of the figures on how expenses have gone up in the last few years. We used to 

consider that shearing sheep was worth 10 to 12 cents per sheep. This past year or two the price has 

gone up to 20 and 25 cents per sheep. Also the twine and wool sacks, which is quite an item to the sheep 

man but I think one of the larger items is the man that looks after the sheep, a sheepherder as he is 

called. I can remember back a few years ago when you could hire those men for possibly $10, $20 or 

$25 a month and now they can demand and get $100 to $125 a month and their board, which is a pretty 

fair price I would say for that sort of a job. 

 

The success of a sheep man depends to a great extent on the man he has herding sheep and, of course, on 

the dogs that he has with him. As you know a sheepherder without his dogs would be just about like a 

man out hunting without a gun, he just couldn’t herd sheep. But as I say herders are getting very scarce 

and I know of several ranchers who have gone out of the business because they simply cannot get 

herders. It is not a very desirable job and mostly they have their summer camps away from what you 

might call civilization out on a lease. There they see very few people and it is not a very desirable job 

and since the War, the beginning of the War, there are very few people taking up that type of business. I 

know that the Sheep Breeders Association has tried to get herders from the Old Country without very 

much success, but I just quote some of those figures to show how the sheep man’s expenses have gone 

up. I have been told by a sheep man about a year ago, that he was making about the same at that time out 

of his sheep as he did back in the ‘30s. So that the sheep man’s problems haven’t been solved through 

the War like some of the other types of ranching and farming. 

 

This is not a subject, Mr. Speaker, that I think needs to be labored, but as I say I am supporting this 

because the Governments believe that this bonus should be paid in 1943 and some of the figures that I 

have quoted, the increases to the sheep man in prices to him since that time, I believe that we should 

support this motion. Therefore, I take great pleasure in seconding this motion. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

RESOLUTION – DEVELOPMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN RIVERS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. D.H. Heming (Moose 

Jaw City): 

 

That this Assembly, through the Provincial Government request the Federal Government to give 

immediate consideration to and take earliest possible action on development of the Saskatchewan 

Rivers to provide: 

 

1. Waters for irrigation of – 
(a) land served by these river systems; 
(b) land in the Qu’Appelle Valley, and adjacent thereto, and any land lying adjacent to dams 

on the South Saskatchewan River if developed for power purposes; 

 

2. A much needed source of water supply for the Cities 



March 6, 1947 

 

643 

of Moose Jaw and Regina, and for urban communities within the serviceable area; 

 

and urge the said Government to expedite all engineering, agricultural and economic surveys 

necessary to determine the location of dams on such river systems suitable for power development 

similar to that suggested in the “Acres Report for Fort a la Corne.” 

 

Hon. J.W. Corman (Attorney General):  Mr. Speaker, so much could be said on this Resolution that 

I am afraid that if I open it up at length I might provoke an adjournment that would keep it on the Order 

paper and for that reason I would warn that whoever has business following me that they had better be 

ready for it in about five minutes. 

 

I would like to say, however, Mr. Speaker, that this irrigation water scheme has been a matter very close 

to my heart, not only since the PFRA have taken it under their wing, but even before that. This is not a 

new scheme. Prior to 1938 when I first went over to the City Hall at Moose Jaw, the city engineer, Mr. 

Ellison Fox of Moose Jaw and an associate of his, Mr. A.E. Martin, also of Moose Jaw, had worked out 

the details of a vast irrigation water scheme using the South Saskatchewan River. I might say at that 

time, it was prior to 1938, I am not sure of the year, at that time had arranged for the financing of a 

scheme very similar to the one that the PFRA have in mind now. The reason, Mr. Speaker, is to show 

that this scheme that the PFRA have in mind has been found economically, financially feasible, private 

interests were ready to put their money into it and we all know that private money doesn’t go into a 

gamble, it doesn’t go into a scheme without some chance of success. I think that point should be 

stressed, that this scheme is not only socially, will not only pay social dividends, but will also pay 

financial dividends as shown by the fact that private money was ready to go into it. The reason that 

scheme was not proceeded with, I understand, was because of some difficulty in getting water rights 

from the Government of the day and I am not complaining about that, they may have been quite right, 

but the scheme, Mr. Speaker, is feasible. 

 

I am not going to deal with the benefits or the advantages that would accrue from irrigation. I think out 

here, in the West, we are all sold on irrigation. I don’t think we need anymore speeches on that. I don’t 

think we need anymore instruction on that or anymore education. I think we have all graduated from that 

school and I am not going to say anything controversial. I think to avoid that I will go at this thing 

backwards by sneaking up on it and read, first, from a short editorial in yesterday’s Star-Phoenix in 

which it says this: 

 

Mr. H.C. Long, the managing editor of the Lethbridge Herald was right when he said in Regina that 

week that there must be strong support if irrigation plans for Saskatchewan and Alberta are to be 

carried out. Expressions of pious wishes have filled the western air for years. It takes more than wishes 

to get huge irrigation projects underway. It takes millions of dollars and a government willing to spend 

that. As Mr. Long pointed out there is great pressure on the Federal Government to spend less money 

and reduce taxes. True, the Government has decided on a $110,000,000 project for harnessing 



March 6, 1947 

 

644 

the waters of the Saskatchewan River, and so on, but this money has not been appropriated. the need 

for irrigation must be kept constantly before the Government. That is one way in which a strong 

Irrigation Association can perform a useful function. 

 

In Saskatchewan there is a River Development Association, I might say, headed by my good friend Mr. 

Harold Pope of Moose Jaw. 

 

Plans have been made for a Western Recommission Association to be organized at a meeting this 

summer. Such organizations should be active in studying the West’s irrigation needs. 

 

And I would stress these words, Mr. Speaker,. 

 

bringing them forcibly to the Government’s attention and in giving sound leadership to public opinion. 

 

That, Sir, is the view of the Star-Phoenix and the best method to proceed. I am drawing to the attention 

of the House in that connection, a statement made by the Right Hon. James J. Gardiner and reported in 

the Regina-Leader Post of April 20
th

 and I certainly don’t read this to stir up any controversy. I am not 

going back to promises that were made at the time of the Federal election by different parties. I could 

say something very interesting on that. I am not doing that, but I am simply just asking Members to 

consider what we should do. 

 

The Star-Phoenix says that the way to get the scheme is to build up a strong organization in this 

province to bring pressure to bear on the Government. Now, Mr. Gardiner said on April 27
th

 of last year, 

and the Leader-Post quotes him in this way: 

 

Mr. Gardiner emphasized that the Federal Government did not need to wait for suggestions or pressure 

from municipal government, municipalities, societies or any other groups before proceeding with this 

water conservation plan. The Government, thus, did not need the endorsation of the South 

Saskatchewan River Development Association to begin work on the South Saskatchewan River. It had 

already decided to go through with this. 

 

This was a year ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the Estimates today a sum amounting to $10 million was earmarked for the carrying out of 

surveying and engineering projects in the immediate future. It was the Government’s intention to draw 

from this sum to complete engineering and survey work necessary. 

 

Mr. Gardiner spoke with all the assurance with which one could speak in dealing with Estimates. Mr. 

Gardiner declared that these Estimates would go through if no others do. All political parties have 

spoken in favor of this. 

 

Speaking on the project in which his audience was most vitally interested – the South Saskatchewan 

River project – the Minister declared that he had instructed Mr. Spence, Director and so on, to proceed 

with the necessary surveying and engineering plan which would be subject to the Government’s 

engineering experts. Some time this summer he declared a decision would be 



March 6, 1947 

 

645 

reached on where the dam on the South Saskatchewan River should be placed. It would be on one of 

three sites. At this time, it will be noticed, Mr. Speaker, the site of the dam had not been chosen or 

decided on. And then Mr. Gardiner concluded: 

 

As soon as the site has been finally decided upon, contract would be let and work would proceed 

immediately. 

 

What I, principally, would like to draw to the attention of the House is that the Star-Phoenix and Mr. 

Gardiner do not agree as to what should be done. The Star-Phoenix thinks that we should keep bringing 

pressure to bear on the Government, and I gather that Mr. Gardiner tells us that if we will just mind our 

own business that everything is hunky-dory down there. 

 

In conclusion, I would just like to read from the announcement – this is the latest announcement by the 

Rt. Hon. James G. Gardiner – made to a meeting of the Board of Trade in Moose Jaw on January 21
st
 

and I quote, still from the Regina Leader-Post: 

 

Rt. Hon. James G. Gardiner, Federal Minister of Agriculture, told the annual meeting of the Board of 

Trade Monday night that a site for a dam on the South Saskatchewan River has been located about 20 

miles north of Elbow, but the Government, for several reasons, will not be in too big a hurry about it. 

 

In the first place Mr. Gardiner said the dam would cost $15 million to complete. Mr. Gardiner concluded 

with this part of the speech: 

 

However, we should be in the position to report on its possibilities during the coming Session and to 

consider proceeding with securing funds with which to proceed during the next Session. Much 

additional information must be secured before risking the future of this project by a Parliament which 

is expected to check carefully the expenditures of the taxpayers’ money. 

 

I am not going to be critical, but the latest statement of Mr. Gardiner’s is that at the 1947 Session he will 

report on possibilities and at the 1948 Session consideration will be give to methods of obtaining the 

money. 

 

Now, I have read the statement of April 1946 in which he said that ‘as soon as the site has been finally 

settled’ – and in Moose Jaw on January 21
st
 last he told us the site had been chosen – ‘as soon as the site 

has been finally decided upon, contract would be let and work would proceed immediately.’ 

 

I am not going to do any more in regard to what I have read, Mr. Speaker, than to say this – and I 

believe this applies to Members on both sides of the House – we would like to know what we should do 

to get this scheme. We are told by Mr. Gardiner that there is no use of this Association set up to further 

the development of the river scheme; there is no use of them making further representations. He told us 

that last April; the Government was gong ahead. Well, now we see that they are not going ahead, Mr. 

Speaker. I believe Mr. Gardiner is sincere, but at the best he doesn’t expect to do anything in 1948 

except at that time to consider means of getting the money; and he throws out the suggestion that he has 

a Parliament down there that is not 



March 6, 1947 

 

646 

going to give him the money. Now, I close with this thought. I wish, and I know I have the help of the 

Members on the Opposition side, who support the Government at Ottawa, in devising some means out 

here in the West to do something to help us get that scheme underway. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION – CONSTRUCTION OF BRIDGE AT SASKATCHEWAN LANDING 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. H. Biggs (Swift 

Current): 

 

That this Assembly urge the Dominion Government to commence immediate construction of a bridge 

at Saskatchewan Landing, as a part of the South Saskatchewan River development programme, in 

order that existing facilities of transport across the South Saskatchewan River at that point may not be 

interrupted when the proposed dam at Elbow is completed. 

 

Mr. A.T. Procter (Moosomin):  Mr. Speaker, this Resolution is somewhat involved with the debate 

which has just been adjourned and in speaking to this Resolution it will be necessary to repeat and refer 

to some of the things that have been said in connection with that Resolution. 

 

May I say to you, Sir, that reference was made by the Hon. Minister of Highways to the statement of the 

Hon. Mr. Gardiner, (as he then was) that the bridge of Saskatchewan Landing would be built in the year 

following the election of 1944 if the Liberal Government had been returned to power. Now the records 

of the Highways Department show that considerable work had been done in preparation, actual 

preparation, for the building of that bridge. Moreover I may say, and say frankly, that the matter had 

been discussed by the Government of that day and it was the intention of the Government of that day to 

seek and build the bridge concerned in this Resolution. Had we been returned to power, that bridge 

would have been built. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend waves his hand and so forth. That matter was a matter that had been 

determined as a matter of policy and I know whereof I speak. Mr. Speaker, at that time, the whole idea 

of the bridge at Saskatchewan Landing was one whereby we sought an easy grade down to the bed of 

the Saskatchewan River, with an easy grade from the bridge up on the other side. Since that date the 

matters, which have been discussed in this House in connection with the irrigation project and the dam 

at Elbow, have in a measure caused other considerations to enter into the project. But let me say this, 

Sir, that there is a distance of approximately 12 miles shown on the highway map where Highway No. 4 

turns west at Stewart Valley – about 10 miles south of the river and I think it is about two miles north of 

the river. There lies in that 10 miles a portion of the bed of the Saskatchewan River and I see no reason 

whatsoever why the Provincial Government should not proceed with the scheme with the idea of 

building, not a low level bridge, but a high level bridge across the Saskatchewan River in that area. It 

does mean, Sir, and I freely acknowledge that it means the seeking out of a new site for the bridge. It 

means, also some difference in the matter of the approach. 

 

In connection with this dam at Elbow, as was correctly said by the Minister of Highways – and I am 

sorry the is not in 



March 6, 1947 

 

647 

his seat – under the proposed scheme if developed, the water in the Saskatchewan River at the 

Saskatchewan Landing, the old sight for the bridge would raise approximately 53 feet. I am, myself, by 

no means convinced that it is not possible to have a high level bridge east or west of that sight at 

approximately the cost of the former bridge, which my Department estimated that I think the figure was 

$430,000 – it may have been somewhere between $400 and $450,000. Let me say this to the hon. 

gentlemen who have spoken on this bridge question, just to keep the record square, that in my own 

opinion from the knowledge that I acquired when I was Minister of Highways of this province, this is 

the logical sight at which another bridge over the Saskatchewan River should first be built. However, I 

would not wish to mislead the House and I am sure the hon. gentlemen who spoke on this Resolution did 

not wish to mislead the House, when they indicated that this was the ferry which had the heaviest traffic 

on it to cross the Saskatchewan River. That statement was not correct, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If we take the Fenton Ferry in the list of ferries of vehicles and automobiles and so on, we find that 

automobiles at Fenton were 9,885; Saskatchewan Landing 7,785; but when we come to the item of 

trucks at those two ferries we find that there were 6,232 trucks ferried over the Fenton Landing – by the 

way that ferry is up near Prince Albert – and 3,953 trucks over the Saskatchewan Landing. Similarly, 

when we come to the question of passengers – Fenton Ferry carries 32,123 and animals is a slight some 

4,000 extra over the Saskatchewan Landing Ferry. As a matter of fact the Lacross Ferry down in the 

neighborhood of Blaine Lake is probably the busiest ferry in the Province of Saskatchewan and you will 

find there that over the Lacross Ferry there were 10,523 cars, 3,012 trucks, but when you get to 

passengers, there were 56,000 over the Lacross Ferry compared with 32,000 over the Saskatchewan 

Landing Ferry. I just mentioned these figures and Members will find the figures I am quoting in the 

Highways Report for 1945-46 on page 42. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that those of us who listened to the hon. gentleman, the Minister of Highways, who 

made the same statement certainly conceived the idea that the hon. gentleman was trying to tell us which 

was the busiest ferry across the river. I accept my hon. friend’s statement but I say that it was very plain 

in listening to the speeches, and I am sure the hon. gentleman will not deny it, that the impression that 

Members in the House received from those speeches, was that the Saskatchewan Landing Ferry carries 

the heaviest traffic and that the only purpose including any figures in connection with it was to show 

that. Understanding that, Mr. Speaker, let me say this, the best ground – and I also arrived at the 

conclusion that the bridge should be built there first, rather than at Lacross – was that the fact that 

Highway No. 4 is a trunk highway from the extreme north of the province right across Saskatchewan 

Landing through Swift Current and down to United States. For that reason I believe that a bridge built 

there, there would be considerably increased traffic there, that is the basic reason and the proper reason. 

It should be a sign for the building of this bridge first, notwithstanding that there are more passengers on 

these other ferries, after all, when you come to running a ferry, the matter of ferrying passengers and 

cars and so forth, it is not nearly so dangerous or difficult as the matter of ferrying heavily loaded trucks 

and it is the truck route which should receive consideration first. I tell my hon. friends that I am 

completely in agreement with them, both that this bridge should 



March 6, 1947 

 

648 

be built there first. I am not in agreement with the statement that the dealing of the construction of the 

bridge should be unduly delayed. 

 

We have run into the operation of the PFRA for several years in this Province of Saskatchewan. I took 

down the figures quoted by the Hon. Minister of Highways as to the two highways that were effected, 

No. 19 and No. 42. Let me say that I think it is quite correct that a large portion of those two highways 

would be flooded by this dam at Elbow when it was built. Let me also say this, that in all our experience 

with the PFRA, where the PFRA flooded the highways or flooded the bridge or rendered it necessary for 

a bridge to be raised by reason of their operations, there was immediately an adjustment and payment 

made by the PFRA for all the damage what was done. We had to divert one or two highways and as a 

result of their operation the PFRA said the water level will go so high, so much of the highway will be 

effected, and you build the highway around and we will pay for it. The same thing exactly would have 

happened if this Government had done what I conceived to have done after they built this bridge. As a 

matter of fact, that was the time when this bridge should have been built because if the bridge had been 

built then and it became necessary to either change the location or to build another bridge, the PFRA 

would have paid for the whole cost of that bridge to the province. 

 

I have indicated that I think that there is room there for a high level bridge and I am more convinced of 

that in that we find by reference to the maps of this province, again, that both railroads, CNR and CPR, 

contemplated crossing the Saskatchewan River at that location and having constructed lines both from 

the south and from the north. The line of the CPR is built on the north down to White Bear and from the 

south it is built up to Stewart Valley. Our reference to the map will show that it is a very short distance 

between those two points and it is quite plain that the CPR intended to cross the Saskatchewan River 

there when the construction of railroads in the province stopped. Similarly you will find that short 

distance to the east and the north, the CNR at – I am not sure if I said the CPR to White Bear, it is the 

CNR to White Bear, the CPR to Mattador and the CNR had constructed down to White Bear and they 

had also constructed from the south up to Main Centre, again both railroads heading for a crossing of the 

river at this general location of this point. 

 

There is another thing to be considered. The recent speaker today, the Minister of Highways, the other 

day, sought to create the impression, first, that they couldn’t build this bridge at the present time because 

this dam was going in at Elbow. Then they proceeded to try and create the impression that the dam at 

Elbow wasn’t going to be built for a considerable time. Well, Sir, if that is true, how long can these 

people afford to wait at Saskatchewan Landing for a bridge across there? They waited too long now. 

They have been unfortunate in making the change that they made or they would have had that bridge. 

Let me say something else in connection with that, Sir, and that is – oh, yes, the Provincial Treasurer 

laughs and grins, of course that is his privilege, but I think that you will find no one in this province, 

municipal or otherwise, who ever heard me make the statement that a certain thing was going to be done 

in connection with the highways of this province, that it wasn’t done or that a municipality was going to 

get a grant that they didn’t get the grant and I am quite willing to let the man who 



March 6, 1947 

 

649 

dealt with the Highways Department during the time that I was Minister, to let them say whether they’re 

prepared to accept what I have said here as to whether that bridge was going to be built or whether it 

was built. But that isn’t all, Sir. There is another thing. It is quite possible to put that bridge in even yet 

at the low level site and the loss to the province would not begin to be anything like what has been 

intimated here. 

 

If the bridge is put in by the province and the PFRA dam at Elbow is unduly delayed, when they start 

their building they will pay following the experience we have always had, they will pay the additional 

cost and it won’t be a loss of $425,000 or $450,000 at all, because it is the easiest thing in the world to 

build the type of bridge that would be perfectly satisfactory at that Landing and to float it to a new 

location for a bridge across the river. The only things that would be lost, if it was put in at this present 

location, would be the approaches and the piers and you can build a timber trussed ring connected bridge 

over there which can very largely be salvaged. 

 

I suggest to this Government and to the mover and seconder of this Resolution, first, that consideration 

should be given to building a high level bridge. I think that that will be found to be practicable because 

the road is deliberately, at the present time No. 4 Highway, is deliberately built and the crossing is put in 

so as to get an easy grade down to the river and an easy grade up the other side of the river. If there is to 

be a rise of water in the future of 50 feet deep it would seem to me that the reasonable thing to do is not 

to accept the present site, and by the way the estimate given was $2 million for a bridge at that site, even 

with a 53 foot rise in the water it seems to me out of all character for the length of the bridge that would 

be required. But suppose that it does, suppose it is so. I say that the proper contingency, the proper thing 

to do is to explore a high level bridge there. And I suggest to the Hon. Member for Swift Current and the 

Hon. Member for Elrose that they bring pressure on this Government to have that very thing done. I 

suggest further that that bridge, if they can’t build a high level bridge, which would allow for the 53 feet, 

that the bridge should be put in at the Landing of the construction and types that I have mentioned that if 

the building of the Elbow dam is delayed as the Minister of Highways and the Attorney General seem to 

indicate might be the case, that the great part of the cost, the present cost, can be salvaged out of that 

bridge and the PFRA, when they do put in the Elbow dam, will pay the difference. 

 

We don’t even need to consider the question of the flooding of these highways, that the Saskatchewan 

Government is going to have any responsibility for that, unless conditions have been completely 

changed. I am assured that conditions haven’t been changed, wherever highways, or wherever expense 

in connection with executed undertakings have been interfered with by the PFRA, the PFRA have paid 

without question and been very generous in seeing to it that any monies expended by the province in 

building highways that were flooded or building bridges that had to be raised or removed and rebuilt 

was always accepted as part of the Dominion cost on the PFRA project. Now, I am going to say that I 

am quite sure the Hon. Members are interested and honestly interested and bona fide interested, in 

getting this bridge. I am going to say to them that the surest way to get that bridge is to go ahead and 

build it and after having explored the possibilities that I have said that when the Elbow dam 



March 6, 1947 

 

650 

comes in and that bridge is found to be flooded, the PFRA will assume the extra cost in connection with 

the bridge. 

 

I am going to also say to the Hon. Members and to this Government that it is one of the most difficult 

things that I know to get the Dominion Government to assume the costs of building bridges over the 

river such as the Saskatchewan River, either north or south, because that is a thing that is common all 

across Canada where they have rivers, and so forth. The Dominion Government, never in my experience 

and I don’t care what government it is, we have had both Conservative Governments and Liberal 

Governments, we have never had a Dominion CCF Government, Mr. Speaker, and we never will have, 

but I say that any Federal Government of any political complexion will be extremely loathe to hand over 

to this province two million dollars to build a bridge over the Saskatchewan River. The matter can and 

should be approached from the angle that I have indicated here today, Sir, and I am therefore going to 

move, seconded by the Hon. Member for Arm River: 

 

That the Resolution be amended by striking out the word “Dominion” in the first line and substituting 

therefore the word “Provincial” and by striking out all the words after “Landing.” 

 

Now, in making that amendment to the motion, I do so in the light of what I have said that I think the 

time has come when the bridge should be built. I think that the province will assume a responsibility for 

a reasonable amount of money, that a large part of the cost of that bridge can be salvaged and that the 

extra cost will, both for the highway and the bridge if it is found that it is not successfully to be operated 

at its present location, will be refunded to the province when the dam is built. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ruled the amendment out of order. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY 

 

Mr. Speaker:  The Lieutenant governor transmits Estimates of certain sums required for the service 

of the Province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1948, and recommends the same to the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer):  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Lloyd: 

 

That His Honour’s message and Estimates be referred to the Committee of Supply. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer):  Following established custom, Mr. Speaker, I shall first 



March 6, 1947 

 

651 

review briefly the economic situation in the province as revealed by the statistical records of 

production in the major fields of activity. Naturally, agriculture, as our chief industry, claims first 

attention in such a review. 

 

The estimated total value of the principal crops (Wheats, oats, barley, rye and flax), in 1946, was 

$332,242,000 as compared with $315,730,000 in 1945, an increase of $16,512,000. The increase is 

almost wholly attributable to the better wheat crop of 200,000,000 bushels valued at $228,000,000, 

which exceeded the 1945 figures by 32,000,000 bushels in yield and $33,000,000 in value. 

 

As predicted by farmer members of the Government side of the House, during last Session, a 

considerable acreage (700,000 acres in fact) was taken out of oat production and sown to wheat, 

resulting in a drop of production of oats to 117,000,000 bushels valued at $58,500,000, in 1946, 

compared with 143,000,000 bushels valued at $71,500,000, in 1945. Barley, in acreage sown, total 

production and value of crop, showed a similar decline from the 1945 figures, with 46,000,000 bushels 

against the 54,500,000 of 1945, and a value of $29,900,000 against the $35,425,000 for the previous 

year. Rye, from increased acreage, slightly higher average yield and a total production of 3,400,000 

bushels valued at $6,562,000, scored a 50 per cent increase over the corresponding figures for 1945, 

though the fact that prices ranged 30 cents per bushel more than in the previous year was contributory 

to the higher total value. Flax yielded a crop of 3,400,000 bushels valued at $9,280,000, which was 

lower, but not markedly so, than for 1945. 

 

Turning to the livestock statistics, it becomes evident at a glance how accurate was the forecast made, 

last year, by the farmer members of this side of the House, when they predicted that Federal 

agricultural policies would inevitably be reflected in reduced livestock production, particularly in 

regard to hogs. The records show that the livestock population on Saskatchewan farms in 1946, as 

compared with 1945, was lower in horses, milch cows, other cattle, and swine. The sole exception, in 

this connection was sheep and lambs, in the number of which a slight increase was recorded. The most 

marked drop was in the number of hogs on farms – 757,000 in 1946, compared with 1,006,600 in 

1945. 

 

If further proof were needed of the foresight of those members who so accurately foresaw the trend, 

the number of hogs marketed during 1946 was 513,000, compared with 942,000 in the previous year. 

While other livestock marketings were below those of 1945, in no case was the decline so conspicuous 

as in the case of hogs. 

 

The creamery butter make, during 1946, fell 4,000,000 pounds below the 41,039,582 produced in the 

preceding year, and cheese production dropped to 350,611 pounds from the 366,243 make of 1945. 

 

The 1946 wool clip of 2,420,000 pounds was 60,000 pounds higher than in the previous year; but 1946 

was a poor year for honey producers, the output of 3,955,655 pounds being little more than half the 

record production of 1945. 

 

Not unexpectedly, therefore, in view of the figures I have given, the estimated cash farm income from 

the sale of produce, in 1946, is $16,205,000 less than in the previous year – and 



March 6, 1947 

 

652 

this despite the fact that $19,692,000 was received on Wheat Participation Certificates, last year, as 

compared with only $5,208,000 in 1945. The total cash income for the year is estimated at 

$398,853,000 as against $415,058,000 for the preceding year. In 1946, total cash receipts from the sale 

of the principal grains amounted to $267,921,000, a drop of approximately $10,000,000, while from 

livestock and livestock products the aggregate income was $119,912,000, a drop of almost 

$7,000,000. 

 

The overall recession in agriculture, however, is slight and, of course, temporary; and certainly not 

ominous to anyone aware of the capacity of the province to produce, the skill and adaptability of our 

farmers, and the almost universal need for the foodstuffs which Saskatchewan can produce in 

abundance. Resilience is as characteristic of our prairie soil as it is of our people; the Government has 

implicit confidence in both. 

 

Turning now to other features and factors of primary production in Saskatchewan, during the past 

year, I see in the records much to encourage our optimism, much to embolden our enterprise. I turn to 

a scene of bustling activity, of pioneering in many fields of development. I survey a variety of natural 

resources beginning at long last to integrate with our agricultural industry, and opening vistas of an 

industrial future in which dreams of a balanced economy are transformed into realities. 

 

Mineral production, following the peak demand of the war period, received a setback with the 

cessation of hostilities and in the early stages of the changeover to a peace-time economy. Loss of 

tonnage in the base metals, however, was more than offset by rising prices, and, according to the 

Dominion Bureau of Statistics, the value of mineral production in Saskatchewan, for the calendar year, 

1946, shows an estimated increase of 7.5 per cent over the figures for the preceding year. I am 

informed that the recently announced price-raising action on base metals will mean an increased value 

for our mineral production of more than 50 per cent. 

 

Metallic minerals produced during 1946 had an estimated value of $18,911,394 compared with 

$18,164,035, for 1945, in spite of lower output in the base metals. Increases were noted in production 

of silver and gold, while tellurium (though the production is small) figured more strongly than ever 

before. A table of the comparative figures, showing varieties, quantities and estimated values, for the 

calendar years 1945 and 1946, may be of interest to Members: 

 

 

1945   1946  

Metals Quantity Value Quantity Value 

     

Cadmium    107,741 lbs. $   106,663     99,000 lbs. $   120,780 

Copper 65,900,701 lbs. $ 8,270,538 61,080,000 lbs. $ 7,808,000 

Gold    108,568 oz. $ 4,179,868    112,000 oz. $ 4,116,000 

Selenium     41,209 lbs. $    79,121     68,000 lbs. $   108,700 

Silver   1,425,457 oz. $   670,435   1,483,000 oz. $ 1,240,530 

Tellurium       395 lbs. $      758      8,667 lbs. $    11,334 

Zinc 75,413,951 lbs. $ 4,856,652 70,500,000 lbs. $ 5,506,050 

     

  $18,164,035  $18,911,394 

     

 



March 6, 1947 

 

653 

New and projected developments in or related to the mining industry indicate the greater interest being 

taken in Saskatchewan’s mineral resources. the Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting company at Flin 

Flon, for example, anticipating future mining developments, has contracted for a new 21,000 horse 

power hydroelectric generating unit for its power plant at Island Falls. The new unit will cost 

approximately $1 million and, when installed, will increase the power output of the generating station 

to 111,000 horse power. 

 

The Newcor Mining and Refining Limited, also, is nearing completion of a 100-ton ore treating plant 

at Douglas Lake, near Flin Flon. Newcor ore is arsenical gold. The company hopes to do custom 

millwork for other small concerns having properties in the area. 

 

Prospecting is becoming more active in the province, some 301 claims having been staked and 

recorded during 1946. The areas of present activity include: Athabasca Lake, Wollaston Lake, Jo-Jay 

Lake, Nistoassini Lake, Shunea Lake, Sulphide Lake and a number of points in the Churchill mining 

district, which includes Amisk Lake and the Flin Flon areas. 

 

Sodium sulphate production, 1946, aggregated 105,768 tons valued at $1,030,546, compared with the 

93,068 tons, valued at $884,322, produced in the preceding year. As Hon. Members are aware, the 

Government is establishing a sodium sulphate recovery and refining plant at Chaplin Lake. This 

venture in the field of social ownership will be operated by a Crown Corporation known as 

“Saskatchewan Minerals,” and is expected to be in production later this year. Two reservoirs have 

been constructed into which brine from the lake has been pumped. The salt precipitates from the 

saturated solution during cold weather. Already a large tonnage of Glauber’s Salt has been precipitated 

in this manner, and is now available for the proposed refining plant. 

 

Clay products produced, in 1946, had an estimated value of $379,156, an increase of more than 

$100,000 over the previous year’s production. Sand and gravel used was well above the 1946 total, 

aggregating 2,011,994 tons, valued at $974,513, compared with 1,237,695 tons, valued at $563,276. 

Structural quartz was down 11,000 tons to 130,000 tons, valued at $45,675. 

 

Noteworthy increases were reported in production of the fuels (coal, natural gas and petroleum), 

during the 1946 calendar year. Coal output, which had fallen off, during 1944.45, due to the closing of 

Armed Forces’ establishments in the province, has made an excellent recovery. The 1946 production 

from Saskatchewan mines aggregated 1,508,309 tons, valued at $2,448,715, and was only 156,000 

tons short of the record production year of 1943. Though last year’s tonnage was 24,686 tons below 

that reported during 1945, its value exceeded that of the previous year’s output by $121,633. 

 

Some 201,000 M. cubic feet of natural gas was produced in the province in 1946, as compared with 

162,824 M. cubic feet in 1945, $58,765. Last November, the town of Unity was placed on the pipe line 

supplying gas from the Unity field and, during 1946, three wells supplied the town with 53,325 M. 

cubic feet of gas. Other towns served with natural gas from Saskatchewan fields are: Lloydminster, 

which consumed 144,890 M. cubic feet 



March 6, 1947 

 

654 

in 1946, from five wells in the local field, and Kamsack, which used 53,325 M. cubic feet from six 

wells in the adjacent area. Five additional wells were drilled in the Vera-Unity gas field, during the 

year at considerable distances from the producing wells. 

 

May I inform Hon. Members that the Government is considering the advisability and desirability of 

the Province entering the pipe line industry as a common carrier. 

 

Petroleum output, in 1946, totalled 146,000 barrels, a tenfold increase over the figure recorded in the 

first year of operations. Hon. Members will recall that it was in April, 1946, that National Grant No. 1 

well struck oil in the Lloydminster field, the first real oil discovery in Saskatchewan. That discovery 

was quickly followed by other wells and, during 1946, sufficient wells encountered oil to establish the 

existence of a commercial field in the Lloydminster area of Saskatchewan. Twenty-one wells were 

producing last December. The Husky Refining Company, of Cody, Wyoming, is erecting a refinery 

with a capacity of 7,500 barrels per day to treat oil from this field. An oil cleaning plant, already 

established in relation to the field, is increasing its capacity from 40,000 to 80,000 barrels per month. 

 

Desiring to aid development of this field, the Government is conducting research into cracking 

methods of refining Lloydminster crude. A pilot plant has been established in Regina, in which the 

merits of a new cracking process are now undergoing test. 

 

Gas and oil drilling activities in Saskatchewan have shown the presence of widespread common salt 

(sodium chloride) deposits at varying depths from 3,300 feet to 7,000 feet, extending roughly from 

Radville to Lloydminster. The beds, as encountered in the bore holes, have thicknesses up to 400 feet. 

As Hon. Members are aware, development of a $1 million salt industry in the province is to be 

undertaken, this year, by the Prairie Salt Company, a subsidiary of Dominion Tar and Chemicals 

Company Limited. A production minimum of 7,500 tons of salt annually is projected. The company 

will operate the deposits under an agreement with the Government which amply safeguards the public 

interest. 

 

Summing up, the figures for mineral production during 1946 show an aggregate estimated value of 

$24,019,000 as compared with $22,336,074 in 1945. 

 

The total value of forest products produced in 1945-46 was $7,153,849.09, a slight increase over that 

for the preceding year. Wild fur production for the same period, showed a substantial advance over 

1944-45 figures, the total value of the pelts being $2,770,908.03 compared with $1,543,663.07 for the 

previous year. Value of fur farm pelts also rose considerably, the comparative estimates being: 1944-

45, $767,066; 1945-46, $888,764.54. The commercial fish catch in 1945-46, showed a slight decline 

in value at railhead from the catch of the previous year, the figures being $1,184,145 as against 

$1,318,649 in 1944-45. 

 

This review would be incomplete if I failed to make reference to electric power development in 

Saskatchewan. A further step in the Government’s program of ownership of public utilities was 



March 6, 1947 

 

655 

taken when the entire Saskatchewan holdings of Canadian Utilities Limited were purchased by the 

Province. With the exception of one private company and a few isolated units, the electric power 

industry in the province is now under public ownership. The expansion of the Saskatchewan Power 

Commission’s holdings and services is well illustrated by the comparative figures showing the 

positions as at December 31 in 1944 and 1946. 

 

 1944  1946  Increase 

      

Miles of Transmission Line  1,626   2,651   1,025 

Towns and village served    146     255     109 

Number of services 12,989  28,014  15,025 

 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have made no mention heretofore in this review of the potentially valuable potash 

deposits discovered in the province, to which attention of Hon. Members has been drawn by the 

Minister of Natural Resources, and which have been the subject of many press reports originating both 

in Regina and in Ottawa. Incorporating that discovery in the general picture so barely sketched by the 

statistical record, and summarizing impressions gleaned from this brief review, I gain a sense of a 

Saskatchewan marching toward a new day of wider horizons and greater opportunities for the energies 

and initiatives of its people. It conjured up a scene of new enterprise and expansion. I see in it 

complete refutation of the prophecies and the forebodings of those who, fearing some vested interest 

would be crushed, declared that advent of a CCF Government would drive private capital and private 

enterprise from Saskatchewan. 

 

If further refutation be necessary beyond the facts of the statistical record, I would repeat what has 

been so often said in and out of the House: this Government recognizes that private enterprise has a 

place in our economy – private enterprise of the right kind, that carries with it no threat of 

monopolistic exploitation of our people. I would repeat, also, with your permission, figures already 

given to this House at this Session: that, from July 1, 1944, to January 27, 1947, 335 provincial 

companies, with a total capitalization of $34,409,000, had been incorporated in Saskatchewan; 65 

extra=Provincial companies, with a capitalization of more than $70,000,000, had come into the 

province, and that 1,307 partnerships had been formed – all since the present Government took office. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker,, so long as it is prepared to contribute to the economic advance and security of 

the people of Saskatchewan, private capital and enterprise need have no concern over the policies of 

this Government. We recognize fully that, under the existing framework of our national economy, 

there is wide scope for private capital. It may, with profit, engage in the utilization of our primary 

products, perform services and provide consumers’ goods at lower cost, undertake speculative 

ventures, and provide training and employment for our people. 

 

In the past, this Government has followed the policy of extending its technical services, not only to 

assist co-operatives, but also to aid private enterprise in formulating plans for industrial development. 

Now it is hoped that a further step can be taken. The time is now ripe, I believe, to set up a revolving 

fund through which we propose to extend financial aid to co-operatives, municipalities, private firms 

and corporations seeking to establish approved industrial plants and projects within this province. 



March 6, 1947 

 

656 

This Government itself, through its Crown Corporations, is already showing the way in industrial 

development. I need not remind this House, Mr. Speaker, that under previous administrations, little 

aid, and still less action, was ever undertaken to foster secondary industry in this province. As a result, 

Saskatchewan had always lagged far behind other provinces in developing this part of her economy. 

We may lack some of their natural advantages, but the present Government has not been deterred from 

striking out boldly to make up for lost time and lost opportunity. Our hand has been immeasurably 

strengthened by the support of the people of the province. For they have by the support of the people 

of the province. For they have come to realize that there are many fields of industrial and commercial 

endeavor in which social control through their elected representatives is superior to the traditional 

method of private control. 

 

Thirteen Crown Corporations, engaged in a wide variety of industry, manufacture and service, have 

been financed by the Industrial Development bond issue and advances from the Provincial Treasury. 

These were advances, I should like to stress, Mr. Speaker, fully authorized and approved by the 

Members of this House. And I may repeat here, that during the six months period from April 1 to 

September 20, a profit of nearly 13 per cent per annum was realized on advances of three million 

dollars made by the Treasury during that period. 

 

The criticism has been raised that the Crown Corporations do not pay interest on advances from the 

Treasury. But the people of Saskatchewan, through their Government, are in actuality the 

shareholders, rather than the creditors, of the Corporations. As a consequence they will receive 

dividends from their investment, as the Corporations earn profits to be paid into the funds of the 

Government. These dividends, indeed, may amount to much more than normal interest on advances. 

 

Nor are the Crown Corporations merely money-making operations designed to earn profits. They 

serve, as well, a distinct social purpose and their policies are guided always with regard to social 

considerations. As a typical example I may cite the case of the Saskatchewan Timber Board. 

 

During the period of its operations, the Timber Board has opened six retail years. From these yards the 

Board made lumber available to the people of Saskatchewan at a retail selling price 10 per cent below 

the lawful maximum permitted by the Wartime Prices and Trade Board. Moreover, the Timber Board 

has not availed itself of its right under Federal Timber Control regulations to export one-half of its 

supplies of lumber to the USA or elsewhere to be sold at higher prices. These prices would yield the 

Board at least 50 per cent more than it realizes on wholesale sales in Saskatchewan. The net cost of 

these policies during the six-month period, April 1 to September 30, has been $40,000 which would 

have been added to the profits of the Timber Board had this Crown Corporation not been anxious to 

assist the people of Saskatchewan in securing greater supplies of lumber at lower prices. 

 

I may present the social significance of the Government program of industrial and commercial 

development in other human terms. 

 

In the six-months period from April 1 to September 30, the Power Commission and thirteen Crown 

Corporations produced goods and performed services worth $2,887,474.42 to the people of the 



March 6, 1947 

 

657 

province. As at September 30, employment was provided for a total of 844 persons, and the total 

payroll for 6 months amounted to $759,439. Apart from the Power Commission, the thirteen 

corporations employed 622 persons and in six months paid out salaries and wages totalling $495,776. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the concrete achievements accomplished in the Government program over a 

very short time. In spite of all alarm, private capital and enterprise, I repeat, has not been driven from 

the province and will continue to be an important factor in our future development. But the people of 

Saskatchewan themselves, through co-operative organization and their socially-owned public 

enterprises are playing an increasingly important part in the expansion of a more diversified economy 

in this province. To attain this objective this Government has pushed the program of industrial and 

commercial development to utilize natural resources, to provide necessary goods and services, to make 

employment available for the many varied skills and talents of our people at fair wages, and to ensure 

a growing measure of social betterment and economic security. 

 

The Public Accounts of the Province for the year ended April 30, 1946, were tabled on February 11
th

. 

These show that there was received on revenue account a total of $39,275,647.05, an increase over the 

previous year of $5,159,077.09. The main increases in revenue were: 

 

Liquor profits -- $3,978,885; Dominion Subsidy -- $1,080,127; Gasoline Tax -- $1,006,737; Education 

Tax -- $697,099; Natural Resources -- $427,186. 

 

On the other hand there were decreases as follows: 

 

School Lands -- $614,007; Public Revenue Tax -- $932,447; Automobile Licence Fees -- $454,303. 

 

The expenditures on revenue account were $38,784,813.75, an increase over the previous year of 

$6,884,269.40. 

 

The Public Accounts for 1946-46 show that there was a surplus on the year’s operations of $490,833. 

 

Up to January 31, 1947 revenues have reached $29,870,178 compared with $26,311,556 during the 

same period, last year. 

 

Education Tax receipts are $927,000 greater than during the first nine months of the previous year. 

The tax receipts indicate that a great deal more has been spent on consumers’ goods than during the 

war years. Present indications are that last year’s record collection of $5,592,244 will be exceeded. 

 

Gasoline Tax receipts are $791,658 higher for the nine-months’ period ending January 31 than for the 

same period a year ago. Despite the fact that many of the roads have been closed because of the 

excessive amount of snowfall, I am confident that Gasoline Tax collections will be greater than for the 

previous year. 

 

A year ago we budgeted for revenues of $40,031,335 compared with actual revenues of $39,275,647 

for the year ended April 30, 1946. I am confident that our revenues will exceed the estimate made a 

year ago, and that we again shall finish the year with a balanced budget. This will be done, 

notwithstanding the fact 



March 6, 1947 

 

658 

that our fiscal year ends on March 31
st
, in accordance with the legislation passed at the last session of 

the Legislature and thus will be only for an eleven-month period. 

 

A year ago, I expressed the hope that an agreement with the Dominion Government would be arrived 

at, which would guarantee the Province sufficient revenue to discharge its responsibilities, and which 

would enable the Dominion to take whatever action was necessary to maintain full employment and a 

high national income. At that time I referred to the conferences that had been held. On April 29
th

 a 

fourth meeting between the Dominion and the Provinces took place, when the Dominion Government 

presented certain amended proposals. After five days of deliberations the Conference broke up. Since 

that time there have been no further meetings between the Dominion and all the Provinces. 

 

In the Budget Address of Rt. Hon. J.L. Ilsley given on June 27
th

, 1946, an offer was made to the 

individual Provinces. This offer provided that the Provinces would agree not to levy any taxes on 

personal incomes or on corporations other than a 5 per cent tax which would be levied uniformly and 

the proceeds of which would belong to the Dominion. The Provinces would also give an undertaking 

not to levy Succession Duties. In return for these three undertakings, the Dominion Government for 

the 5-year term of the agreement would provide that each Province receive a guaranteed minimum 

annual payment equal to $15 per capital based on the 1941 actual, or the 1942 estimated, population of 

the province, whichever was the greater. It was also agreed by the Dominion that these payments 

would be increased in proportion to increases in population and in gross national production. As an 

alternative, any Pr was entitled to receive 150 per cent of the annual receipts under the Wartime Tax 

Agreement. It was also provided that the payments for no Province would be less than $2,000,000. 

 

It was agreed that the Provinces would be free to tax profits from mining and logging operations, and 

any such taxes would be treated as a deductible expense for Dominion Income Tax purposes. The 

Dominion also agreed to pay to the Provinces one-half of their net Corporation Income Tax collections 

from companies whose main business is the generation of electrical energy, gas or steam. In the case 

of Saskatchewan, the guaranteed minimum annual payment was to be $13,400,000. 

 

At this point I might state that the proposed payments were not based on the principle of fiscal need. 

The Province of Saskatchewan has always claimed that a great deal of the wealth and income of this 

Dominion is concentrated in two or three large provinces, and that most of the head offices of 

corporations are situated in Ontario and Quebec. We have felt that these provinces get an unfair share 

of the tax revenues based on the profits of these corporations and on the personal incomes and estates 

which been earned in all parts of the Dominion. While we realize that the Dominion’s offer did not 

provide for a fiscal need subsidy, yet, we do recognize the fact that it is more equitable than the old 

system of allowing each Province to collect what it can. The Government of Saskatchewan was the 

first to notify the Dominion Government that we were prepared to meet with them to work out an 

agreement on the basis of the terms laid down by the Minister of Finance in his Budget Speech. 

 

Several conferences were held with the Dominion during the next few months. On November 9
th

, we 

completed the details of a 



March 6, 1947 

 

659 

Taxation Agreement to be recommended to this Legislature. Since that time, however, certain 

amendments have been made to the Dominion’s offer. These have resulted in increasing the amount 

received by the provinces from the Dominion. In the case of Saskatchewan, under the latest proposals, 

which will be submitted to this House within a few days, the Province will receive a minimum 

guaranteed payment of $15,257,000. 

 

I would like to emphasize that the acceptance of this proposal will not mean that Saskatchewan has 

been able to receive what we would have had if the original proposals of the Dominion Government in 

August, 1945, had been accepted. This agreement only covers the field of taxation. The original offer, 

in addition to the fiscal arrangements, also provided that the Dominion Government would accept the 

full responsibility for old age pensioners over 70 years of age. The Dominion also agreed that they 

would contribute 50 per cent of the cost of an Old Age Pension Plan for persons from 65 to 69 years of 

age who are unable to care for themselves. The proposals also provided for a Dominion contribution 

of 60 per cent of the cost of a health program including hospitalization and medical care at an 

estimated cost of $21.60 per capita. 

 

The Dominion also agreed to accept the full responsibility for caring for all those persons who were 

able to work but could not find employment. They agreed also to contribute a percentage of the cost of 

Public Works programs to be arranged by the municipalities and the provinces. 

 

Failure to achieve agreement with the Provinces at the Conference, last April, has been very costly not 

only for Saskatchewan but for every province in Canada. It has resulted in the provinces not having 

been able to attain that degree of social security that is necessary to face the post-war period through 

which we are now passing. There is one ray of hope, however. The Dominion Government on several 

occasions in recent months has declared that the social security measures still remain an essential part 

of the program of the Federal Government. It is my hope that, in the immediate months that lie ahead, 

the Dominion Government will proceed with these measures that are so essential to the welfare of our 

people. 

 

I am very happy to be able to announce to the House, tonight, the settlement of two other long 

outstanding problems. One of these is the settlement with the Dominion Government in connection 

with the payment for the natural resources alienated by the Dominion from 1905 to 1930. By an 

agreement dated March 20, 1930, Saskatchewan received from the Dominion all the unalienated 

resources. At the same time a commission was appointed to report as to what sum should be paid to 

the Province, in order that Saskatchewan could be placed in a position of equality with the other 

provinces of Confederation. This commission was appointed in September, 1933, and reported in 

March, 1935. Two of the members of the commission recommended a payment of $5,000,000 to the 

province by the Dominion as compensation for the retention by the Dominion of the province’s natural 

resources. Mr. Justice Bigelow, in a minority report, recommended payment by the Dominion to the 

Province of over $58,000,000. 

 

It is interesting at this time to note that the agreement of March 20, 1930, made provision for an 

agreement to be entered into between the two Governments following the receipt of the commission 

report. Up to November, 1946, no agreement had been 



March 6, 1947 

 

660 

reached and the payment of compensation in respect of the natural resources of Saskatchewan had 

remained unsettled. Previous governments have taken the stand that the amount of the award of the 

commission was insufficient. The Dominion, on the other hand, has refused to consider payment of 

any additional amounts. Thus, for many years, the Dominion and the Province have remained in state 

of deadlock. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has now agreed to withdraw all claims for any further 

compensation from the Dominion Government over and above the amount of $5,000,000 plus interest, 

the total now amounting to almost $8,000,000. We have done this in conjunction with the settlement 

of another long outstanding problem, namely the Treasury bills given by the Province to the Dominion 

during the ‘30s. It was felt by both Governments that the two problems should be linked together in 

any settlement. I am thus unable to tell you exactly what amount has been accepted in final settlement 

of the natural resources problem. We have received the amount of the original award plus an 

agreement by the Dominion to cancel a substantial amount owing by Saskatchewan on the treasury 

bills. In other words this agreement in respect of natural resources is linked up directly with the 

settlement of the treasury bills. 

 

I am very happy also to be able to announce to the Legislature, tonight, that this very ancient and 

contentious problem of relief treasury bills has at last been settled. The Province and the Dominion 

have agreed that the Province shall pay to the Dominion the sum of $36,000,000 in full settlement of 

the $80,000,000 of treasury bills held by the Dominion Government. In arriving at this settlement it 

was agreed that the 1938 seed grain treasury bills, having been settled the previous year, would not 

receive any further consideration. 

 

For many years the Province of Saskatchewan has contended that the drought and depression of the 

1930s was such as to constitute a national emergency and that relief treasury bills should have been 

wiped out. On the other hand, the Dominion Government believed that they had already made their 

contribution to the emergency by providing over $120,000,000, in addition to the advances made to 

the Province in return for the treasury bills. I need hardly remind the Members of this House that these 

treasury bills were for the most part given by the Province to the Dominion for advanced made to 

Saskatchewan in the early ‘30s when people here found themselves in the position where they could 

not care for themselves. During this time, the people of Saskatchewan suffered a reduction in income, 

unparalleled in peacetime, in any other civilized country. The net agriculture income of $200,000,000 

a year had fallen to an actual negative amount in 1931 and 1932. Provincial income fell by as much as 

two-thirds. Rural Relief expenditures amounted to nearly two-thirds of the total municipal and 

provincial revenues from 1931 to 1939. Thus, it became necessary for the Dominion to advance 

moneys to the Province both for direct relief payments and for agricultural relief. 

 

No province in Canada required assistance to the extent that did Saskatchewan. Every other province 

was able to finance a much greater portion of its own costs out of its own funds. 

 

The settlement made with the Dominion Government provides that the Dominion will cancel the 

outstanding interest on direct relief, amounting to $5,700,000. It provides also that the 



March 6, 1947 

 

661 

Dominion will cancel 50 per cent of the $61,300,000 for direct relief. 

 

The Province’s share of $30,650,000 will be repayable in equal annual instalments over the next thirty 

years, without any interest payments. 

 

The Province must assume the full responsibility for payment of all moneys advanced by the 

Dominion, for works programs and for moneys advanced for capital and other ordinary government 

purposes, amounting in all to $13,400,000. From this amount we deducted the amount of the natural 

resources award which, with interest, amounted to $8,000,000. Thus, there remains $5,400,000 of 

treasury bills which are the responsibility of the Province alone. These will be paid off in equal annual 

instalments in the next thirty years, with interest at 2 5/8 per cent. 

 

Thus it is that, by payment approximately $1,250,000 annually for the next thirty years, we shall be 

able to liquidate completely the indebtedness of $80,00,000 which was bearing interest at 3 per cent 

annually. The total annual payments to be paid by the Province are approximately one-half of what the 

interest alone amounted to on the treasury bills. 

 

The settlement of these two problems has not been all that I would have like it to be, but I want to 

assure every Hon. Member of this House that it was the very best we could do. I believe we can agree 

that the settlement was fair and reasonable. It is one which will enable the Province to be on a more 

even footing with many of the other provinces of Canada insofar as our debt structure is concerned 

and one that already has resulted in a great improvement in our credit position. 

 

This afternoon, I tabled the estimates for the coming fiscal year. These estimates provide for a 

considerably higher budget than last year. Estimated receipts are $45,591,101 compared with 

$40,031,335, last year, while expenditures at the same time are estimated at $45,571,114 compared 

with $39,996,889, last year. Again, we are budgeting for a surplus. 

 

I recognize that there may be some misgivings about our ability to raise this amount of revenue. I want 

to assure the House, as I have done on two previous occasions, that, based on careful examination of 

present receipts and economic conditions, I believe these revenues will be attained. 

 

At the same time I would be failing in my duty as your treasurer, if I did not point out to you that we 

have been living in a period of great prosperity when revenues were buoyant, and that I anticipate that 

the revenues of the Province will not enable us to go any further in the extension of social services and 

economic development, unless the Legislature is prepared to find some new source of revenue. 

 

The increased receipts are due mainly to the increased subsidy as a result of the Dominion-Provincial 

agreement, rather than to any overall increase in taxation. 

 

In addition to the increased subsidy, the Dominion Government has withdrawn from the gasoline tax 

field. During the Dominion-Provincial Conference the Dominion was urged to give up those fields of 

taxation which they had entered during the war. The provinces requested that the Dominion do not 

levy gasoline tax, amusement tax, sales tax on electricity, and the pari-mutual tax. In December, the 

Hon. D.C. Abbott announced that 



March 6, 1947 

 

662 

the Dominion was withdrawing from the taxation of gasoline stating that the Dominion recognized 

that this was more logically a tax for the provinces who were responsible for highway construction. 

The Dominion will be vacating this tax field on March 31 next. 

 

Commencing on April 1
st
 the Provincial gasoline tax rate will be increased by 2 cents a gallon, making 

a total tax of 10 cents. The additional revenue to be secured will be used entirely for highway 

construction work. This will enable us to accelerate our program of providing an adequate system of 

all-weather highways. 

 

The Province of British Columbia has already announced that it will levy a 10 cent gasoline tax. It is 

expected that the other provinces will use this field of taxation which is being vacated by the 

Dominion Government. 

 

As announced in the Legislature last week, if the municipalities request the Province to do so, we are 

prepared to levy a tax of 2 cents a gallon on all gasoline, diesel fuel and distillate used for agricultural 

purposes, with the understanding that moneys raised in this manner will be distributed to the 

municipalities and Local Improvement Districts to be used in the construction of roads. 

 

No budget address of a Saskatchewan Provincial Treasurer would be complete without some reference 

to the Education Tax. The tax has been objected to for three reasons: 

 

(a) It is a regressive tax. (b) It is a nuisance. (c) The money is not used for Education. 
 

Two years ago I agreed the tax was a regressive one, because any tax applied on foodstuffs is regressive. 

At the last session, however, the tax was removed on foodstuffs and meals. This has made the tax a great 

deal less regressive, for now the tax paid is more directly related to income. 

 

The tax was certainly a nuisance when it had to be paid every time a person bought a meal or a few 

groceries. Now, it is required to be paid much less frequently, and so a portion at least of the nuisance 

value has been removed. 

 

Provincial expenditures on Education have increased very greatly in the past three years, with the result 

that now the Education Tax is being used to pay a much greater share of educational costs, as evidenced 

by the following table of Provincial expenditures on Education. 

 

1943-44 $4,073,089; 1944-45 $4,500,789; 1945-46 $5,389,600; 1946-47 $5,578,655; 1947-48 

$6,880,154. 

 

From this it can be seen that educational costs have increased by 70 per cent in the past four years. 

 

It has been decided to make available for Education an additional $1,300,000 rather than to abolish the 

Education Tax and be forced to reduce our expenditures. We realize there is a demand in certain quarters 

for this tax to be abolished, but feel the needs of education far outweigh the political advantage to be 

gained by abolishing the tax. 

 

We are, however, proposing certain amendments in conformity 



March 6, 1947 

 

663 

with our policy of removing the more regressive features of the tax. These will include the removal of 

the tax on all drug prescriptions, patent medicines, soaps, cleansers, second-hand goods, weed control 

chemicals, weed control chemicals, weed sprayers and animal feeds. 

 

Other than the increase in Gasoline Tax and the increased list of exemptions from Education Tax, there 

will be no changes in taxation this year. 

 

The expenditures on current account for the next fiscal year are $45,571,114 compared with 

$39,996,889 for the current year, an increase of $5,574,225. It is expected that every province of Canada 

will have increased budgets for the next fiscal year. Already British Columbia has announced an 

increase in expenditures from $42,089,608 to $58,781,334, an increase of $16,691,726 in one year. 

 

The main items responsible for the increase in our expenditures are: 

 

(a) Refunds to farmers on 1938 seed grain -- $700,000. (b) Payment to Ottawa on treasury bills -- 
$1,200,000; (c) Increases in Civil Service salaries -- $1,000,000; (d) Highways -- $1,000,000; (e) 

Education -- $1,300,000; (f) Agriculture -- $800,000. 

 

The settlement of the treasury bills problem has undoubtedly improved the Capital position of the 

Province, but has added a burden of $1,200,000 to our current expenditure budget, for which we can 

show no additional service. 

 

The same is true of the refunds being paid on the 1938 seed gain. In addition to the $700,000 shown last 

year, and again this year, as being paid to Ottawa in settlement of this problem, we have included an 

item of another $700,000 for refunds to those farmers who paid more than 50 per cent of their 1938 seed 

grain accounts. 

 

Under the policy announced previously, the Government is collecting 50 per cent of the principal 

advanced for the 1938 seed grain. Out of a total of $6,626,664 to be collected to January 31
st
, the total 

receipts were $3,163,933. It is our hope that collections can be speeded up during the next few months. 

In additional to the above amount there has been paid to the Dominion Government from Provincial 

funds, $745,123.72. 

 

As at January 31, a total of 13,975 applications for refunds under the 1938 seed grain adjustment policy 

had been accepted, and remittances totalling $1,037,731.17 had been made. 

 

For many years it has been recognized that the salaries paid Civil Servants in Saskatchewan have been 

disgracefully low. The $1,000,000 provided in the budget for increases will put the salaries paid by 

Saskatchewan in a position comparable to those paid by other provinces and by the Dominion, with few 

exceptions. It is my hope that the result will be a much higher degree of efficiency and a much greater 

permanency in the civil service. 

 

During the next year, the Province will spend $5,539,000 from current account and $1,405,955 from 

capital account, a total of $6,944,955, on highway construction and maintenance. The condition of the 

roads in Saskatchewan had made it necessary for the Government to increase expenditures for this 

purpose. In the past two years we have been unable to spend the entire 



March 6, 1947 

 

664 

amount of the vote because of shortage of equipment, materials and labor. This situation, however, has 

improved, and we are confident that the entire vote will be used this year. 

 

A comparison of expenditures shows that a great deal more is being spent on highways now than 

formerly. 

 

1943-44, $2,852,060; 1944-45 $3,294,788; 1945-46 $3,908,367; 1946-47 $5,600,000; 1947-48 

$6,944,955. 

 

In addition to the above there are the capital charges amounting to $1,460,371 annually, for highways 

constructed many years ago, and which were never paid for. The bonded debt outstanding for highway 

construction now amounts to $31,204,830. 

 

The Province, next year, will spend a total of $8,405,326 on highways, including the carrying charges on 

our debt. We expect to receive $8,500,000 in Gasoline Tax receipts and automobile licence fees. From 

this it is quite apparent that we cannot spend more on our roads than we are now doing, unless we use 

other revenues. 

 

It has been our policy to construct the highways from current account as much as possible. Any large 

increase in highway construction, however, will make it necessary to reconsider this policy. 

 

In accordance with our announced policy of assuming greater responsibility for education, the present 

budget makes provision for increased grants for schools of $1,120,000, and for the university of 

$80,000. We realize that, in many districts, educational costs are still high; but are confident that the 

increase to be made this year, amounting as it does, to an average of over $200 per school district, will 

remove much of the burden. This will be particularly true in the poorer districts as the increased grants 

will be given largely on an equalization basis. 

 

In recent years we have heard a great deal about the present Government’s lack of interest in agriculture. 

It has been stated that the agricultural expenditures were entirely too small in relation to the total budget. 

A comparison of current agricultural and co-operative estimates with expenditures of 1943-44 is of 

interest: 

 

1943-44 -- Agriculture $470,180; Cooperatives $23,473; 

1947-48 -- Agriculture $1,609,792; Co-operatives $189,273. 

 

These figures indicate that there is $1,305,412 more to be spent on agriculture than in the year ending 

April 30, 1944. But this only tells a part of the story. As indicated earlier, seed grain debt payments of 

$1,400,000 will be made next year, and, in addition, large sums will be spent by different Departments 

on various services which will be of direct benefit to agriculture. 

 

The estimates do not provide for any great increase in health and social welfare expenditures, the total 

being $15,260,189 compared with $14,399,473 last year, an increase of $860,716. These figures take 

into account the proposed transfer of the mental institutions from the Public Works’ Department to the 

Health Department. 

 

This year we have divided the Health vote into two parts, the first vote being for the matters under the 

control of the 



March 6, 1947 

 

665 

Department, and the second vote for those functions administered by the Health Services Planning 

Commission. 

 

For some time now, we have been aware of the necessity of increasing the payments to our old age 

pensioners. Shortly after our election to office we made provision for free hospitalization, medical care, 

drugs, dental care, optical care and nursing services for the old age pensioners. We also increased the 

pension from $25 to $287 per month, with no additional assistance from the Federal Government. 

 

We have endeavoured, without success, to have the Dominion Government increase the amount of the 

pension and reduce the age. We are still hopeful that we can get the Dominion to pay their regular 75 per 

cent of the cost on the basis of at least $30 per month. We do not think we can allow this class in the 

community to struggle along on $28 per month any longer, particularly in view of the increased living 

costs. 

 

Therefore, the Province is prepared to raise the maximum pension payable to old age pensioners and 

blind pensioners to $30 per month, effective April 1
st
 next. 

 

We have hear in recent weeks of the assistance being given in other provinces to municipalities and 

schools, as a result of the Dominion-Provincial agreements. In this connection, I would like to quote a 

statement in the Regina Leader-Post on February 28 as follows: 

 

Manitoba was proposing to pay out approximately $3,000,000 a year from its federal grant to provide 

assistance to municipalities, school boards and other local governing bodies. Alberta planned to 

abolish the provincial tax on land, thus easing the burden of land taxation by over a million dollars. 

And British Columbia had indicated steps would be taken to implement a report which recommended 

substantial additional financial assistance to the municipalities. 

 

I am sure we all commend these governments for what they have done to assist the local governing 

bodies, recognizing as we do that the increased cost of government affects the municipalities and school 

boards adversely, as it does senior governments. At the same time, I am afraid the author of the 

statement is woefully ignorant of what the Province of Saskatchewan has done, and is doing, this year, 

to assist the municipalities and school boards. We have not waited until the completion of the 

Dominion-Provincial agreement to recognize their problems. During the past two years the Province has 

relieved the municipalities of many responsibilities which have assisted them very greatly, and this year 

we propose to assist them still further. 

 

I would remind Hon. Members that school grants have increased by over $2,000,000 in the past three 

years. The provision of health services, formerly a municipal responsibility, has been undertaken by the 

Province at a cost of $2,000,000 above that of 1943-44. Grants for municipal roads have increased by 

$320,000 during the same period. Increased social welfare services for mothers and neglected children 

have relieved the municipalities of a burden costing the Province $850,000 more than was spent in 1944. 

 

This year, we shall spend $1,400,000 on the 1938 seed grain settlement, a direct responsibility of the 

rural municipalities. 



March 6, 1947 

 

666 

We shall also be required to find a total of $1,200,000 this year, in settlement of treasury bills given in 

the depression years to relieve the municipalities of a responsibility that was too great for them. 

 

These few items alone total $7,770,000, an amount considerably greater than the additional subsidy that 

is being received this year from Ottawa. No government in Canada has done what we have to assist the 

municipalities. We recognize at the same time that they have a very serious problem which will require 

much attention. I want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, we shall do all in our power to help find a solution 

for this problem. 

 

In addition to these items mentioned, the Board of Revenue Commissioners has issued orders, during the 

first ten months of this year, cancelling direct relief accounts owing by the municipalities to the Province 

to the amount of $135,892. 

 

It has already been announced that legislation will be introduced at this Session to cancel 1935, 1936 

and 1937 seed grain advances, amounting in all to $21,833,000. The 1938 seed grain advances, which 

were cancelled in 1945, amounted to $9,973,000. Other cancellations of seed grain and relief accounts 

incurred back to 1917, amounted to $7,381,232. These three items alone amount to $39,187,232. But 

these are not the only debts that we cancelled. In November, 1944, we cancelled our share of the direct 

relief advanced to those in need during the depression years amounting in all to $33,000,000. 

 

I trust, therefore, it will not be forgotten that we have cancelled accounts totalling $72,187,232, when 

comparisons are made with the generous actions of other provinces. 

 

Relieving the municipalities of a burden of $39,187,232 has meant additional revenues for them and, in 

fact is equivalent to a very large annual grant – much larger than what is being proposed in adjoining 

provinces. When considered along with the $7,770,000 annual payment for municipal responsibilities, as 

previously mentioned, it can be seen quite easily that Saskatchewan is doing far more than any other 

Province to assist local governing bodies. 

 

In previous years I have emphasized the fact that we were passing through a period when revenues were 

very buoyant. We have been told we should establish reserves for the future. It is my opinion that one of 

the best ways to do this is to reduce the public debt and improve our credit position, so that, if it 

becomes necessary to borrow money, it can be done at reasonable rates of interest. In conformity with 

this policy, our debt has been steadily reduced during the past three years as is indicated in the following 

table: 

 

 Apr. 30/44 Apr. 30/45 Apr. 30/46 Dec. 31/46 

Bonded Debt $125,244,945 $127,455,993 $119,793,133 $117,030,213 

Treasury Bills   99,910,900  106,272,254  100,237,246   99,193,808 

Contingent 

Liabilities 

  20,016,607    1,904,002    1,851,512    1,395,654 

Gross Debt $238,172,452 $235,632,249 $221,881,891 $217,619,675 

Less Sinking 

Funds 

  23,919,341   31,000,477   28,708,827   29,946,705 

Net Debt $214,253,111 $204,631,772 $193,173,064 $187,672,970 

 



March 6, 1947 

 

667 

From these figures it can be seen that the total net debt has been reduced by $26,580,141 since April 30, 

1944. 

 

To this amount may be added the $44,000,000 by which the treasury bill indebtedness will be reduced as 

a result of the settlement with the Federal Government, making a total reduction of over $70,000,000 in 

two and one-half years. 

 

The foregoing figures do not take into account the bank balances. My hon. friends opposite will be 

pleased to learn that the $8,000,000 they left in the bank is still there. Indeed, it has actually grown to 

over $10,000,000, in spite of the debt reductions and heavier expenditures of the past two years. 

 

During the present fiscal year the following maturities were paid off: 

 

June 15 $200,000 3½ per cent Short-term debentures. 

Sept. 15 $150,000 3½ per cent Short-term debentures 

Nov. 1 $108,900 4 per cent Short-term debentures 

Nov. 15 $2,000,000 5½ per cent 25 year debentures. 

 

In addition, on November 15, we refunded $3,000,000 of the 5½ per cent debentures with a new 16-year 

3¼ per cent issue, at a cost to the Province of 3.52 per cent. 

 

As announced in the Legislature on February 20 last, arrangements have been completed to refund the 

April 15
th

 maturities totalling almost $5,000,000. These were short-term bonds bearing 3¾ per cent 

interest, and a cost to the Province of 3.18 per cent. These refunding have resulted in new all-time low 

interest rates for bonds issued by any Saskatchewan Government, and have brought the average rate on 

our bonded debt down to approximately 4.4 per cent. 

 

The removal of the 10½ per cent exchange on the American dollar in July, 1946, was of great assistance 

to the Province in the past year. It enabled us to carry out the November 15
th

 refunding operations in 

Canada. 

 

In additional to this, it gave us an opportunity to re-pay $2,250,000 borrowed in New York in July, 

1945, without having to pay a premium. This money was borrowed in American funds at that time in 

order to pay off the $2,250,000 of 4½ per cent, 20-year debentures. The net cost to the Province of the 

borrowed money was ¾ of 1 per cent per year. 

 

At the time the money was borrowed, the exchange on American funds was 11 per cent, so that this 

action of the Government resulted in a net saving to Saskatchewan of $230,000. 

 

I am pleased to report that the market for Saskatchewan bonds continues to improve. Two years ago our 

5 per cent bonds due in 1958 were selling at 91½. They had risen to 113 one year ago. Today they are 

selling readily at 116. This is further evidence of the investing public’s confidence in Saskatchewan – a 

confidence that will not be misplaced. It will continue to be the policy of this Government to protect the 

interests of those who invest their savings in the resources of the province. 

 

A year ago I stated: “The people of Saskatchewan will not be frightened by a $50,000,000 budget or a 

$60,000,000 one if necessary. They will measure a Government by the way it spends the money, and by 

the people’s economic and social position as a 



March 6, 1947 

 

668 

result of the spending. If they realize that money is being spent on public development and socialized 

undertakings that will improve their position economically and increase their security, they will gladly 

support such expenditures.” 

 

It is my belief that if we are going to utilize and co-ordinate the resources, man-power, and finances to 

effectively provide security it will be done only through a planned economy. We recognize that private 

enterprise has never been able to provide enough jobs for all except in wartime. Our people have 

learned, through the sacrifices and sufferings of war, that it is possible to achieve full employment and 

the economic security that goes with it. This was done by planning the Canadian economy in wartime. 

It is going to be very difficult to convince the people of Saskatchewan that, if economic planning was 

necessary in wartime, it should not be essential, also, in times of peace. We recognize that the social 

and economic security of our people can be guaranteed only through a Federal Government operating 

democratically in the interests of society. 

 

Nevertheless, we believe it is our duty to do what we can, as a Province, to assist in attaining that 

security for our people. It is a definite obligation on our part to see that the economy is functioning to 

its greatest capacity, insofar as we can. For this reason we are prepared to increase very greatly our 

expenditures on agriculture and natural resources, believing, as we do, that these expenditures will 

provide us with a wider base upon which industry can expand. For this reason, also, we are prepared to 

increase our expenditures for public development and socialized industries, particularly in the field of 

power, highways and telephones. 

 

During the past two years we have invested in many new industries in the Province, with a view to 

assisting our primary industries and providing a more diversified economy for the Province. I am 

confident that these policies have been and will be of great assistance in stabilizing the income of the 

people of the Province. Economic activity largely determines the amount of revenue available for 

governments. 

 

In presenting this budget, I do so confident that my hon. friends opposite, as in the past two years, will 

declare that it will ruin the Province, and that it will drive us deeper into debt. To them I would repeat 

what I said in 1945: 

 

The Province cannot be ruined as long as every person in need is being cared for; as long as every 

human being has an opportunity to develop to the limit of his or her ability, and as long as health 

services are available to those in need. 

 

What we require today is a revolution in our attitude toward the purpose of public finance. I refuse to 

accept the idea that a balanced budget is the only factor in our financial proposals. I agree that a 

balanced budget is desirable, and am presenting such a one tonight. But the 



March 6, 1947 

 

669 

real task is to assure the security of the people. A budget may be balanced on their poverty or their 

misery. As long as I occupy the important position of Provincial Treasurer, it shall be my aim to 

balance the budget, keeping in mind the needs of the people of the Province. The budget, rather than 

being a ‘monetary budget’ alone, must also become a ‘human budget’ which will guarantee a 

minimum of social security to all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to assure you tonight, this policy has been maintained. At the same time we have 

honoured every obligation of the Province, and by so doing have restored our credit. 

 

And so it is with confidence that I present these financial proposals for your consideration at this time 

– proposals that look forward to a new world that is in the making, and not backward to the ld world 

that is passing away; proposals that recognize new responsibilities… 

 

New occasions teach new duties: Time makes ancient good uncouth; 

They must upward still, and onward, who would keep abreast of Truth. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 


