



















































Hansard: January 31, 1947


8 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Fourth Session — Tenth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, January 31, 1947. 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

RECORDING OF DEBATES AND PROCEEDINGS 

 

Hon. T. C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, there has been a desire for some years in several of the 

Provincial Legislatures to have a Provincial Hansard. I believe the Province of Ontario set up a 

Provincial Hansard some years ago of a limited sort. That is, I believe they brought in court reporters 

who took a shorthand report of the proceedings which were later transcribed and I think some eight or 

ten copies were made, one given to the Leader of the Opposition and one to the Leader of the 

Government and the others filed with the Clerks so that any Member might consult them or make 

reference to them from time to time. I think that has worked with some measure of success. I can’t speak 

for other Legislators but I do know that one or two of them have been investigating the question of a 

Hansard. I do not know how far they have proceeded. 

 

The difficulty in our own Legislature, in so far as the Government has been concerned, has been 

twofold; first, the scarcity of highly trained stenographers who have sufficient speed and experience to 

enable them to take the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly like this; and secondly, they bear 

considerable expense involved in having a large staff of stenographers for that purpose. It may be that 

the equipment submitted for trial by the Dictaphone Company of Canada may solve part of this problem 

by providing a record of the proceedings and then enabling us to have copies typed of the proceedings 

and having them available here to the Members. It may be that as a result of the experiment here we may 

find in time that this is even better than a shorthand report. I know that there always has been some 

dispute as to whether or not a shorthand reporter, in places where they’ve had Hansards, have managed 

correctly to catch the exact words which were alleged to have been uttered by the speaker and by this 

type of recording it may be that we shall be discovering a way by which we can have a very accurate 

Hansard. 

 

Indeed, and my own feeling is, in view of the fact that no expense is involved, that’s always a 

consideration for one with Scotch blood, I think that the experiment might well be tried in order that we 

might see whether or not a Hansard, of a limited sort, could be procured for the Provincial Legislature 

without too great an outlay at this time. 

 

Therefore, I would like to move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the Honourable Leader of the Opposition, 

Mr. Patterson: 

 

That this Assembly having heard the explanation of Mr. Speaker, agree to co-operate with the 

Dictaphone Corporation Limited to the experiment of recording Debates and Proceedings by 

Dictaphone and that for 

  



January 31, 1947 

9 

 

 

purposes of the experiment, Mr. George Stephens be appointed Editor of Debates. 

 

Mr. W. J. Patterson (Leader of the Opposition): — I, first of all, want to agree with what you said 

that before any steps were taken you consulted with me and I agreed, as you know, Sir, that this should 

be undertaken. At the time, I didn’t raise the question specifically because I presumed, of course, that 

any discs, or belts was that the other term that we used, would become the part of the records of the 

Assembly and would, of course, be available to any Member of the Assembly just as Returns and 

other documents that are tabled. I presume that is the case but I would just like to be reassured on that. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. T. C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, it is customary early in the session to make reference 

to the passing of any of the Members of the Legislature or former Members of the Legislature. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity of saying what I am sure is in the minds of all the Members of this 

Assembly. The shock with which we received the news a few weeks ago of the death of Dr. J. T. M. 

Anderson, former Member of this House and former Premier of the province. There is no need for me, 

I think, to make any extended remarks extolling either his virtues or his accomplishments. 

 

The present Government, although belonging to a different political persuasion from the late Dr. 

Anderson, thought sufficient of his accomplishments and of his high qualities as an educationalist to 

secure his services for a considerable time prior to his death, and that in itself, I think shows, without 

any oration of mine, just what high esteem he was held in by the Members of the Government and 

particular by those who are interested in the field of education. 

 

Therefore, without any extended remarks I should simply like to, with leave of the Assembly to move, 

seconded by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Patterson: 

 

That this Assembly record its profound regret at the loss suffered by this province through the death 

of the late Dr. James Thomas Milton Anderson, of Saskatoon, Premier and Minister of Education of 

Saskatchewan from 1929 to 1934, who, for many years before and after his accession to the 

Premiership, served this province faithfully and well as educationalist, public servant, and as a 

distinguished Member of this Assembly in which, for a time, he was also Leader of the Opposition. 

After a brilliant scholastic career, he came west from his native Ontario as a member of the teaching 

profession, was a school inspector from 1911 to 1918 when he was appointed Director of Education 

among New Canadians in the province, his experience as such being reflected in the authoritative 

book, “The Education of the New Canadian”, of which he was the author. First elected to the 

Assembly in 1925, Dr. Anderson, then leader of the Conservative Party, became Premier following 

the elections of 1929, and as head of a Coalition Government 

  



January 31, 1947 

 

10 

he led this Assembly at a time when it was confronted with the manifold and difficult new problems 

resulting from the world-wide depression of the early 1930s and the onslaught of the drought. At the 

time of his death, he was again doing splendid and exemplary work in the public service as Acting 

Superintendent of the School for the Deaf at Saskatoon. Prominent in various community activities 

and a former District Commissioner of Boy Scouts, Dr. Anderson is mourned by a large segment of 

the population of this province. 

 

Further, that this Assembly extend its sincere condolences to all members of the family of the late 

Dr. Anderson, praying that Divine Providence may sustain and comfort them in their sad 

bereavement. 

 

Mr. W. J. Patterson (Leader of the Opposition): — I associate myself and those Members of the 

Opposition who sit with me, with the sentiments expressed in this resolution. It was my privilege to be 

a personal friend of the late Dr. Anderson from the time he first came to western Canada and many 

years before he became active in political life and I do have some personal knowledge of his 

outstanding abilities as a teacher and as an educationalist. 

 

The Premier has referred to the fact that his Government saw fit to appoint Dr. Anderson to a 

responsible position in the Department of Education, notwithstanding a difference of political ideas. 

That is equally true of the party that I speak for, because under a Liberal administration Dr. Anderson 

was appointed first an Inspector of Schools and subsequently Director of Education among the new 

Canadians. 

 

I believe that in his most recent appointment he has continued the very excellent services which he had 

given in earlier years and I agree with the Premier that his loss is a distinct loss particularly in the 

educational field in this province and I join with him in extending every sympathy. 

 

Lt. Co. A. W. Embury (Active Service Voters’ Representative): — Mr. Speaker, may I also 

associate myself as one of the younger generation. I have not, of course, had a personal acquaintance 

with Dr. Anderson or any familiarity to the extent of either of the speakers who preceded me, but I 

must say that his great reputation was known to us all and has been for many years and his career and 

the respect in which he is now held is inspirited indeed. It is in his success that I say a few words and 

associate myself with him. 

 

(Name not shown on transcript): — I would like to associate myself with this resolution and with 

the remarks of the Leader of the Opposition and Members that sat in the House here while Dr. 

Anderson was Premier of this province. 

 

He became Premier of Saskatchewan during one of the worst depressions the country had ever 

experienced and as Premier of the Government here he had, I believe, one of the toughest times in the 

administering of the affairs of this province of any leader the Government ever had. I sat on this side 

of the House at the time he was Premier as an Independent supporter of the 

  



January 31, 1947 

11 

 

Government. I want to say that he had a fine personality and his personal treatment and consideration 

of myself and those Independent Members associated with me was of the highest, and I regret very 

much his passing. I wish to associate myself with the sympathies expressed in his passing to the 

members of his family. 

 

Hon. T. C. Douglas (Premier): — As Leader of the House I should like to move, seconded by Mr. 

Patterson, Leader of the Opposition: 

 

That the Resolution of condolence on the death of the late Dr. J. T. M. Anderson be communicated 

to the members of his family on behalf of the Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. T. C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, one other death that has, I am sure, impressed itself 

upon the minds of the people of Saskatchewan and, indeed, the people of Canada; I refer to the death 

of the late Cardinal Villeneuve, who passed away a short time ago. The people of Saskatchewan are 

particularly interested in the passing of Cardinal Villeneuve, because of the fact that he, at one time, 

was stationed in this province, at Gravelbourg. Those of us who came to know him during his stay 

here, had I am sure, the highest possible regard for him both as a churchman and as a Canadian. 

 

I think, however, the full appreciation of his work and his value as a church statesman and as a 

Canadian was made apparent during the war years. During the years of the war, I think it is not too 

much to say, that probably the influence of Cardinal Villeneuve, along with that of the late Rt. Hon. 

Ernest Lapointe, did more than that of any other two individuals to help to maintain a spirit of national 

unity and to bring into support behind the war effort a large section in the province of Quebec and in 

other parts of Canada. Those were crucial years — years during which it would have been very easy 

for Canada to break asunder or for wounds to have been inflicted upon our body politic that it would 

have taken a quarter of a century to heal. I think we are not always properly aware of the great part 

that was played by Cardinal Villeneuve in helping to maintain that spirit of national unity and to get 

the whole-hearted support behind the war effort which was so essential if victory was to be achieved. 

 

For that reason I move, by consent of the House, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Patterson: 

 

That this Assembly records, with deepest regret, its acute sense of the loss suffered by the people of 

Canada in general and the Roman Catholic community in particular, through the death of His 

Eminence Rodrigue, Cardinal Villeneuve, Archbishop of Quebec, who, in addition to being a great 

churchman, a brilliant scholar, and a most distinguished and universally admired and revered citizen 

of his native Canada. Born son of a shoemaker, his exceptional talents and exemplary devotion won 

him widespread recognition and almost meteoric promotion from priesthood to college 

professorship, to superior, to bishop and to archbishop, and finally to the Sacred College of 

Cardinals as a Prince of his Church. 

  



January 31, 1947 

 

12 

Saskatchewan, in which he served as Bishop of Gravelbourg from 1930 to 1931, had followed his 

career with the keenest interest, had recognized him as a true friend and had deemed it a privilege 

to have had the opportunity, brief though it was, of associating with and of learning the sterling 

qualities of heart and mind of this great Canadian. It is, therefore, reflecting the sentiments of all 

people of Saskatchewan, irrespective of racial origin or religious creed, that this Assembly pays 

this tribute to the memory of the late Cardinal Villeneuve, and intimates to Members of the Oblate 

Order and of the Roman Catholic community generally, how universal was the esteem in which 

their great leader was held, and how universal throughout Saskatchewan is the sorrow at his 

passing. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — There are some men who make a tremendous impression upon you whenever you 

happen to meet them and become acquainted with them. This was particularly true of His Eminence, 

the late Cardinal Villeneuve. I could not claim what might be called an intimate acquaintance with 

him, but I did have the privilege and the opportunity of meeting him on a number of occasions. As I 

have said no one could meet His Eminence, could converse with him, without being impressed with 

the tremendous and wonderful personality which was his. I fully agree that with his untimely death 

the Dominion of Canada has lost one whom we could ill spare and who, as the Premier has stated, in 

his various capacities and primarily as a Canadian citizen, made a tremendous contribution to 

Canada and the well-being of Canada particularly during the war years. 

 

Hon. I. C. Nollet (Cut Knife): — I should like to associate myself with the Resolution of the Hon. 

Premier and the Hon. Leader of the Opposition in the moving of this motion with regard to His 

Eminence, Cardinal Villeneuve. I had the opportunity last summer of first meeting His Eminence 

and was much impressed by his broadminded acknowledgement that Canada was made up of various 

religious denominations. I was impressed by his degree of equality and I think that this philosophy 

would be given expression to by Cardinal Villeneuve. We are not only reminded that we in Canada 

are made up of many denominations, the world is comprised of many denominations. I think that in 

most church groups we have set a good example for other church leaders to pattern their lives after 

and for us to pattern our own lives after. After all the central figure, the acknowledgement that the 

fundamental structure of the Christian principle is tolerance, and we as human beings have 

everything in common. I think on different occasions Cardinal Villeneuve gave expression to that 

point of view. I do trust that as a result of his philosophy we will have greater religious tolerance not 

only in Canada but throughout the world. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:45 o’clock p.m. 

 


