



















































Hansard: March 25, 1947


1073 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session – Tenth Legislature 

39
th

 Day 

 

Tuesday, March 25, 1947 

 

The Assembly met at 11:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

RESOLUTION – TIMBER WOLF BOUNTY 

 

Mr. L.W. Lee (Cumberland) moved, seconded by Mr. Harris (Torch River): 

 

That this Assembly commend the Saskatchewan Government for its policy of paying a $25 bounty on 

timber wolves, and request the Government to make representations to the Government of Canada 

urging assistance to the Provinces in their efforts to reduce the ever increasing loss of fur, big game 

and domestic stock by payment throughout the Dominion of a bounty of $25 on timber wolves, in 

addition to the amounts now being paid by the affected provinces for the destruction of these 

predators, or, in the alternative, by the payment of a uniform bounty of not less than $25, throughout 

the Dominion, to be shared on a 50-50 basis by Provincial and Federal Governments. 

 

He said: About two years ago there were complaints about the timber wolf increase but to date 

apparently very little has been done by the Federal Government about it. The menace since then has 

become more desperate. In fact, it has become so desperate that the Provincial Governments throughout 

the Dominion have been forced to pay bounties out of their Provincial Treasuries. As we know, the 

Saskatchewan Government leads the rest of the provinces in raising the bounty from $10 to $25 a head 

and other provinces  have recently followed the footsteps of the province. 

 

The situation in the North in regard to big game and fur is definitely critical today. That is, it is coming 

to the point where our big game as well as fur is going to become extinct unless we do something about 

it and do it quick. The reason for the increase in the numbers of timber wolves is quite hard to diagnose. 

There are a number of things that enter into it that could have a bearing on it. One thing that, no doubt, 

would have a bearing on the increase of timber wolves is the fact that fur in the last few years has been 

of very little value. At one time, about six years ago, their pelts were selling as high as $25 or $30 a 

piece. At that time when the fur was valuable the trapper made a special effort to catch and get these 

timber wolves for the value of their hide. However, the last three, four years, the pelts have been 

practically valueless, so that the initiative to trap them hasn’t been there, simply because it wasn’t 

profitable and a timber wolf is a large animal, he is not to be compared with the coyote at all. His habits 

are very different from the coyote. The coyote will usually have a certain area that he will stay in for 

months at a time, maybe for a year, where the timber wolf might be in Saskatchewan today and a week 

from now in Alberta. He might 



 

March 25, 1947 

 

1074 

travel right across the Dominion so that they are much harder to control, they are harder to trap and we 

know today that they are definitely a menace right across the Dominion. We notice in our sport 

magazine in Quebec and Ontario, guides, a few years ago used to take 10, 15 or 20 hunters back in the 

bush in the fall and each hunter came out with an animal, a game animal. Today, or the last couple of 

years, they’re coming out empty handed and they are blaming it onto the timber wolves. The timber 

wolf has depleted the animal down to the point where they simply aren’t there. And it is not only the big 

game. Out in British Columbia there are thousands of dollars worth of damage caused to livestock, 

sheep and poultry. The British Columbia Federation of Agriculture made a survey last year in 

co-operation with the Beef Growers Association, the Sheep Growers Association, the Registered 

Trappers Association and the Fish and Game League and a number of other associations. This survey 

shows that the timber wolves were definitely getting to be such a menace that it was forcing ranchers to 

go out of business; that is, they were thinking of selling all their stock on account of the great losses 

from timber wolves. As a result of this survey, they sent in a resolution to their Provincial Government 

asking for a bounty of $50 per head for timber wolves. To show what a menace they have become, the 

same resolution only asked for $40 on cougars, and cougars have become very numerous in the last few 

years in British Columbia and they asked for a $5 bounty on coyotes. Since that time, in fact quite 

recently, the British Columbia Government raised its bounty from $10 to $20 on timber wolves. 

 

It is not only big game that suffers for the trappers are suffering all through the Dominion, in a loss of 

fur. A timber wolf won’t pass off any animal at all. If he gets the chance to get a hold of them and tear 

them to pieces he’ll do so and especially a fox. He delights in chasing fox and catching them and then 

tearing them all to ribbons. If he is hungry enough he might eat some of it but in most cases he just 

simply tears them all to pieces. And a timber wolf, or a pack of timber wolves will follow a trappers line 

and will destroy every animal that they come to in those traps that are still alive. So some of the trappers 

in the North lose as much to the timber wolf as they catch or are able to sell in fur. In other words, some 

of them lose almost half their catch to timber wolves. 

 

Another thing that might have some bearing on the increase of timber wolves is the fact that in the last 

few years the rabbits have been very scarce in the North. As we know, rabbits increase and die off in 

cycles. They are affected with a disease about every six to seven years and they die off and at these 

periods you can travel for miles through the North and never see a rabbit track at all. However, after 

they have died off, it seems as though the disease leaves them and they start on the increase and in the 

matter of three or four years there are rabbits everywhere. They increase very rapidly. During the last 

two years rabbits have been very scarce in the North. In fact, you could travel for miles and never see a 

rabbit track at all. There is no doubt that because the rabbits have been so very scarce the wolves have 

been forced, in order to survive, to go after the big game animals; and we know that it takes more than 

two or three pounds of steak to satisfy a wolf’s hunger. He is a large animal and we’ve found quite a few 

cases where two or three of them would kill a deer and not leave anything but the bones, the horns and a 

little bit of hair so we know what they can devour at one time. 



 

March 25, 1947 

 

1075 

Another thing in regard to the rabbits that might have a tendency to keep them scarcer than they have 

been in the past, the rabbit’s hide up until a few years ago wasn’t worth anything. Today in the North on 

account of the scarcity of the fur, the trappers have gone after the rabbits and are killing the rabbits for 

the pelt. The pelt today is worth from 25 cents up to a dollar. If a trapper can catch three, four hundred 

rabbits it will just about keep him over a year, that is, in food. So that might have some bearing on the 

scarcity of rabbits. I know it definitely has on the squirrels. We used to find that the bush in the North 

was full of squirrels. You could hear them chirping and running all over. But since their hide became 

valuable today you can travel for miles in some areas of the North and never see a squirrel at all simply 

because they have been trapped out by the trappers. 

 

To prove that just what effect timber wolves have on big game, in the Banff National Park some years 

ago, they didn’t bother to have any hunters or trappers in the park to put down the wild animals, as a 

result of that the timber wolves increased to the extent that the game animals within the park were 

almost extinct. Then they sent Government trappers and hunters in these and killed off the timber 

wolves and immediately the game increase began in a fewer years, almost to the pint of being a 

nuisance, so that definitely shows that by controlling the timber wolves we can increase the big game 

animals. 

 

Now, we are doing everything possible in the province, other provinces are doing likewise, to increase 

the beaver population. We’ve come to realize that the beaver is one of the greatest animals we have in 

the forest, that they serve in holding up the water levels and almost every province has passed laws to 

protect and preserve and increase the beaver. The beaver is a delicacy to the timber wolf and reports 

coming in from various provinces indicate that the timber wolves in many places are living on these 

beavers. The province is passing laws, putting on high penalties against men who catch the beavers and 

here we let the timber wolf go in and live off the beaver. It doesn’t make sense to me. I noticed myself a 

couple of years ago while driving through the North and inspecting several beaver houses I found one 

beaver dam and house where the timber wolves had the mud around this pond all tracked up. Apparently 

they had been camping there and living off these beavers for months. There is very little game in the 

country. In fact we didn’t see any game, so apparently that was the only source of food that they had. 

The beaver will usually make runways and paths, sometimes two or three hundred yards away from its 

pond and house into thickets where it cuts down small trees and drags them into its dam and pond. Well, 

these trails and paths are ideal places for the timber wolves to catch the beaver. All they have to do is lie 

down along side the trail and when the beaver comes along just jump on him and the beaver is 

practically helpless when a timber wolf gets a hold of him. So, I’m quite sure we are losing thousands of 

dollars every year by the timber wolf killing the beaver. 

 

This same situation is apparently the same right across the Dominion. I have noticed in the sport 

magazine, complaints coming in from the hunting clubs, the guides to the trappers and wardens, so that 

it is not a provincial or confined to one province alone. In Quebec I have noticed a number of articles. 

Quebec is noted for being the province of the big moose, the biggest moose heads ever taken out of 

Canada were supposed to 



 

March 25, 1947 

 

1076 

come from Quebec. I have noticed in the last two years that complaints from the hunters and guides that 

they claim that the moose is almost depleted in areas due to the increase in timber wolves. The 

provinces, most of them, are beginning to realize the seriousness of the situation. Just here the other day 

Ontario increased their bounty on timber wolves to $25. Alaska is paying $30 bounty on timber wolves, 

$25 on coyotes. The State of Washington is paying, I think it is either $30 or $35 on timber wolves and 

other states are doing likewise. Alberta has another scheme coming up this year, they intend to hire 

government trappers and hunters and they are going to try to reduce the number of timber wolves by that 

method. I know from experience down in the United States that that method does not work out very 

satisfactorily. It might work out in one area, you might happen to get a good government trapper that 

knows his stuff and he’ll really earn his money in trapping wolves; but as a general rule the bounty or 

that is the price for heads of timber wolves comes very high in hiring government trappers. We haven’t 

enough expert wolf trappers in the country to make that possible. The best method is to pay so much per 

head in a bounty and the trappers who already are in the field, and we have them all through the North, 

if you pay them enough they will get out and they will catch the wolf. They’ll eliminate them down to 

the point where they won’t be the menace they are today. Once you get the numbers reduced down to a 

certain point this bounty then won’t amount to anything. It might take two or three years to diminish 

them and it would no doubt cost a little money for a year or two in doing it, but after that the cost to the 

Government would be very little. 

 

The fact that the timber wolf is scattered all through the Dominion, up into the North West Territories, 

this should be a federal proposition or at least the federal government should co-operate with the 

provinces to eliminate this pest, because the provinces have nothing to do with the North West 

Territories and we know from reports coming from there that their caribou herds are being reduced 

considerably the last few years due to the large increase in the number of timber wolves. 

 

I therefore move this Resolution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. J.B. Harris (Torch River):  I believe that the Government of Saskatchewan through the 

Department of Natural Resources should certainly be commended for the paying of a bounty of $25 on 

timber wolves, I mean four-legged ones. I feel sure that a goodly number of people have benefited from 

a monetary point of view as well as doing a service to the country as a whole by helping to rid our land 

of these pests. It is unnecessary for me to labor the point just how much loss the timber wolves caused to 

fur, to big game and to domestic stock. The Hon. Member for Cumberland has very concisely explained 

and proven the issue, at least in my mind. Therefore, I feel that it would ill behove me to add to the great 

superfluity of language that is so often imposed upon this Legislature. However, I might say that wolves 

or their pelts too at that price do not respect provincial boundaries. Wolves are a national menace. They 

travel from province to province when they’re alive and in my opinion the pelts travel from province to 

province after they’ve been taken off the carcass as well. Therefore, I believe that it is only just and fair 

that a uniform bounty should be paid right across the Dominion. Certainly I would like to see a much 

larger bounty than that paid at present. However, you know there is that old 



 

March 25, 1947 

 

1077 

saying that half a loaf is better than no bread. Well, certainly you will agree with me that half a wolf 

would do far less harm than a whole one. I am pleased, therefore, Mr. Speaker, to second this motion. 

 

Hon. J.L. Phelps (Minister of Natural Resources):  I wish to speak on behalf of the Government in 

regard to this Resolution. I think that it is quite possible that many in the House don’t appreciate the 

destruction of the timber wolves in the North. I am sure in my own case I had no idea. I heard them 

talking about it but it is something that doesn’t seem to take effect with us until we have seen it 

demonstrated and the effect of the destruction of the timber wolves in the North certainly has not been 

overestimated in my opinion. 

 

At the Wild Life Conference that was held and which the Game Commissioner for the Province of 

Saskatchewan attended just a very short time ago, a matter of about three weeks, this matter was 

discussed, the destruction by timber wolves of the game of our north country. The north country is a 

reservoir for game for the Dominion as a whole and we are becoming keenly aware of the destruction 

and the depletion of our game and one of the reasons for it, not the only reason, but one of the reasons 

for it is the tremendous inroads on that game by timber wolves. There are some it’s true that argue that 

you need these predators to keep nature in balance but I’ll submit, Mr. Speaker, there is plenty of 

evidence to prove today that it is out of balance on the wrong side of the ledger. When we take into 

account that these predators in the North live the year round on the animals that they prey upon it gives 

us some idea of the tremendous inroads in game, wildlife and fur bearers that is taken every year. So 

therefore, the need is apparent. 

 

The fact that interprovincial boundaries mean nothing to a timber wolf is also very apparent to anyone 

and the fact that no matter what we may do in Saskatchewan and that point again was driven home to me 

most forcibly up on the north boundaries of our province last summer. No matter what we do there, the 

timber wolves come in from the North and the North West Territories which is a virtual breeding ground 

for timber wolves and is admitted to be. So, therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is apparent that something must 

be done on a broader basis than simply on a provincial one. There has been some criticism in the House 

that we have always asked the Federal Government to do things for us but I note this Resolution, Mr. 

Speaker, is making provision, there are two alternatives provided here and we are making provision and 

asking the Federal Government to go in on this plan on a 50/50 basis. I think that would be a very fair 

basis on a proposition of that kind. I think, Mr. Speaker, that if an all out effort was made, I do not think 

we can eradicate them entirely, in fact, I don’t expect anyone hopes to do that but we certainly could 

bring those predators to a point where they would certainly be under control. As I have said before, if we 

are going to protect our game there is very little use of us spending a great deal of money on 

conservation and development programs and have a group of predators of this kind preying on them all 

the time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the House knows, the Government took things in its own hands a short time ago and 

declared a bounty of $25 apiece. I mentioned to the House once before that so far as I’d be concerned 

I’d be prepared to go even further than 



 

March 25, 1947 

 

1078 

that. I think that at the same time the House would recognize that the first two or three years, possibly 

four or five years would need an increased appropriation to take care of it but then the experience has 

been where countries adopted that plan that it soon begins to taper off and you get down to a fairly stable 

level. But I believe we’ve got to have something more, Mr. Speaker, than a bonus. If you are going to 

pay a bounty for timber wolves or coyotes it must be high enough to provide an incentive for people to 

go out and destroy them, to hunt them, otherwise, all you have is just a bonus, you give a person just a 

little bit more for a thing that he was going to get anyway. That isn’t going to reach the objective. I say, 

you’ve got to make it high enough to induce people to go out and actually hunt them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been a number of suggestions made that the Government employ so-called 

professional hunters. I don’t know what group of people would fall in that class but people who would 

be trained and on government payroll. Mr. Speaker, from my point I would not care to experiment with 

an idea of that kind. I would rather believe the proper people to carry on that work, assist in the 

eradication of predators are the residents or the people in the area concerned and certainly they are the 

ones that should be given encouragement to assist us in this program. I would like to say that the success 

attained so far has been very encouraging. It has cost quite a sum of money it’s true but I certainly never 

have any hesitation on signing an authorization for the payment of timber wolf bounty. The method we 

have of paying so much for timber wolves the year round irrespective of the condition of the pelt is 

certainly an inducement and I might cite to the House a case when I was up North last summer visiting 

Stoney Rapids where we saw quite a stack of timber wolf pelts. The hides had been taken off and they 

were in there to get their fifty dollars. So far as we were concerned we were glad to pay fifty dollars for 

a timber wolf pelt before they had done any tanning than we were to pay fifty dollars for a prime skin. 

Therefore, as I say, it has worked out very satisfactory and governments have found that it is better 

business to pay the bounty and take the fur on which the bounty has been paid. There are not the 

opportunities then for any miscarriage in regard to the operation of a bounty under a plan of that kind. I 

would report to the House that our plan at the present time has worked out very satisfactory indeed. Mr. 

Speaker, on my part and on behalf of the Government I would certainly associate myself with the 

motion before the House and I would commend the Members for the North on bringing it to the 

attention of the House. I think they have done a service to the province and to the wildlife of 

Saskatchewan as a whole and I think the Members should be informed of the problems of that north 

country. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION – PRAIRIE FARM ASSISTANCE ACT 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River) moved, second by Mr. Patterson (Leader of the Opposition): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the Government of Canada that consideration be given to 

amending subsection (b) of section 7 of the Prairie Farm Assistance Act to provide that farmers, 

resident in an ineligible township which is adjacent to an eligible township 



 

March 25, 1947 

 

1079 

and whose average yield of wheat is eight bushels or less per acre, shall be entitled to the benefits of 

the Act. 

 

He said: I think on many occasions we have been dealing with this particular subject and just the same I 

make no apology for bringing it up again. The administration of the PFAA in western Canada for the 

application of the Act has been of tremendous benefit to the farmers in the three western provinces. 

Nevertheless, there are certain inconsistencies and certain difficulties in the administration of that Act 

which makes it practically impossible to do justice in every case and that has been apparent ever since 

the Act was put n the Statute Books and was applied to the three western provinces. Some amendments 

have been made to try to overcome these inconsistencies and these difficulties but it has never and I 

don’t think it ever will be applied in the sense that it will be 100 per cent equal and just in every case. 

 

A few years ago there was some amendment made to the Act which permits this where there is a bonus 

area, (that means a basic township included in the bonus and qualified for the bonus) but you could go 

into the adjoining township. If you could find there a block of one-quarter of the township or nine 

sections which would lend itself to block out on rectangular lines, (the outside boundaries must be 

straight, there couldn’t be any jog in the lines) to take in any particular section and so on there must be 

rectangular lines through that nine section block, that was the minimum. Of course, you could have 

more. You can have two blocks in one township or three if you can get it on that basis which I have 

stated. Of course, in every case the average yield within that block must be eight bushels or less on the 

acre. Now, that has improved the Act to some extent. I think it has benefited the farmers to some 

considerable extent but nevertheless, as we go on and get more experience in the application of this 

provision of the Act, we find from year to year that it caused a great deal of discrimination and injustice. 

 

Therefore this amendment has been prepared which simply asks that subsection ‘b’ of section 7 be 

amended to provide that where you have a basic township qualifying as a bonus area, the board or the 

inspector would be permitted to go into the adjoining township where you have an area of that particular 

size and adjust all farmers within that adjoining township on an individual basis. That means that you 

have nine sections where you might get a block. But that there are many other farmers outside that area 

who are in just as bad position or whose crop is eight bushels an acre or less, you could go all over that 

township and adjust the individual farmer on the basis of that township and adjust the individual farmer 

on the basis of his crop. He might qualify under the eight bushels an acre for the bonus, now that would 

be a remarkable advance in equalizing and giving justice to the farmers on the prairies. 

 

I am not going to spend any more time, Mr. Speaker, I could go into many things in regard to this Act, 

the operation, the amounts of benefits and so on, that it brought to the farmers but I am not going to do 

that. I only ask the House to support this Resolution because it is a step in the right direction. It doesn’t 

go all the way but I think if you are ever going to get that Act to operate 100 per cent, Mr. Speaker, you 

will have to put the whole administration of that Act on an 



 

March 25, 1947 

 

1080 

individual basis. There are certain almost insurmountable difficulties in the road of doing so and 

therefore I have great pleasure in moving this Resolution. 

 

Debate adjourned on the motion of Mrs. Trew. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. L.F. McIntosh (Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative Development) moved second reading 

of Bill No. 88 – An Act to amend The Co-operative Associations Act. 

 

He said: In this Bill the amendments proposed to the consideration of the House make provisions for the 

setting up of certain types of a federation of –co associations. In recent months the Co-operative 

Wholesale Society has laid out a plan for regional lumber yards, lumber yards that will service a number 

of local –co associations within a given district or a given region. These will be known as a federation of 

local co-operative associations for the purpose of handling marketing, distributing lumber and building 

materials. The same principle applies to regional petroleum associations, a given number of local 

co-operative associations could under these amendments set up a regional distribution of petroleum 

products. These amendments also, this Bill rather also makes provisions for labor co-operative 

associations, co-operative associations for the handicapped people such as the blind and it also clarifies 

the position of the co-operative association in regard to the purchasing and selling on credit. It makes 

provisions also for the co-operative associations to take out mutual or death benefits and superannuation 

for their members and their employees. It makes provisions also for the dealing or handling of the 

distribution of unallocated surpluses in the event of a co-operative winding up business or going into 

liquidation. With that brief explanation, Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in moving second reading of Bill 

No. 88. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River):  There are a few points in this Bill that I would like to touch on 

and that is the one that concerns the winding up of an association. I notice that the Minister has only 

gone half way. He has only picked out associations which are of a benevolent or non-profit type such as 

community halls, other things of that sort. Proper provision is made for the taking care of any claim, any 

outstanding shares or any liabilities and all that sort of thing. I have no fault to find with the provision in 

the amendment which proposes that assets are not needed to cover all liabilities and claims against 

associations including the invested capital. I think its along the right line and I am sorry to say that the 

Minister has not gone all the way and applied it to any co-operative organization the money must be 

provided in the community, it is all provided in the community and the benefits and the development of 

that organization are tied up with the community. Anyone who put a little money in there has done so to 

service himself. He has, if the provisions of the Act have been complied with, received during the years 

a certain nominal interest on capital invested. He has received a certain over-charge more for goods than 

what the actual handling charges, taxes and so on, overhead of different kinds were needed to carry on. 

Now after all these things are taken care of, why 



 

March 25, 1947 

 

1081 

should not provision be made for all co-operative organizations of this type, I don’t mean wholesale and 

producer co-operatives, but I mean consumers co-operative associations in case a winding up becomes 

necessary to benefit under this Act. 

 

As a matter of fact, I don’t mind telling this House that in our association in the town of Davidson, we 

made a provision for that four or five years, I think about four yeas ago, and we have had bylaws 

approved unanimously by all the patrons and shareholders of that association and we are quite a large 

institution, Mr. Speaker. The last two years we took some $450,000 in business; $432,000 during 1946, 

so we are really not a small association. We have quite an asset there, but if the day should ever come 

that winding up of the association should be done for some reason, provisions are made in our bylaw, 

approved as I said unanimously by all the shareholders, I think it is four years ago, that after the bank 

loans or all outstanding obligations have been taken care off, the capital invested and loaned capital paid 

back to the patrons and the members of that organization, the rest goes toward a community fund, or will 

be used for scholarships to young men and women in that particular community, taking in the boundary 

which that association is serving. 

 

Now, this Bill, in this amendment here – why should it not go all the ay and then, Mr. Speaker, I think 

we could say that we are on a really sound co-operative basis and I regret to say that hasn’t been done in 

this Bill. I think it should be done. 

 

Hon. L.F. McIntosh:  I share the Hon. Member’s sentiments in relationship to a co-operative which 

is or should be a non-profit organization. The co-operative which the Hon. Member for Arm River had 

reference to, I think if I recall correctly was organized in 1914 and it is going and working its way 

towards its 35
th

 birthday. I think possibly if all co-operatives in the province had been operating for a 

substantial number of years it may have been possible to have carried on all the way in respect to the 

distribution of any surpluses that have not been allocated. However, we have a very substantial number 

of new co-operative associations and they are being organized continuously and they were not agreeable 

to going the distance in which the Hon. Member for Arm River suggested that the co-operative 

organization should go in the allocation of any surpluses that are not allocated to the individual 

members. So we felt that this would be a step in the direction in which we hope to see all the 

co-operatives moving in the not too distant future. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:00 o’clock p.m. 


