



















































Hansard: February 26, 1947


446 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session – Tenth Legislature 

20th Day 

 

Wednesday, February 26, 1947. 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. J. Phelps (Minister of Natural Resources) moved second reading of Bill 25 – An Act to amend 

The Land Utilization Act. 

 

He said: At the present time the Act reads that only land suitable for agricultural purposes or unsuited to 

agriculture would be taken over by the Land Utilization Board. It has been found in practice that some 

of these lands at the present time may be unsuited to agricultural purposes. Taken over by the Board and 

later by transitional period, they may be found to be suitable and there have been cases where they have 

actually been authorized to go back into agricultural pursuits that the economy in that particular district 

may change. Therefore, it is thought at this time to widen the Act to make it possible for the Land 

Utilization Board to take in any land which has been diverted by means of taxes and has been negotiated 

by the municipalities or by the other means contained in the Act. 

 

Now, the other point which I might draw to the attention of the Board or to the House, is the widening of 

the membership of the Board, which will provide for the inclusion of two new members. One would be a 

member of the representatives of the Agricultural Representative Committee and the other will be the 

Superintendent of the Lands Branch of the Department of Agriculture. That would be two additional 

members to that Committee to determine whether or not these lands would come under the Board of 

Allocation. The third point is the transfer of this Act to the Department of Natural Resources or to the 

Department of Agriculture from the Department of Natural Resources. At the present time this Act is 

administered by the Department of Natural Resources and it has been agreed that land suitable for 

agricultural purposes, together with grazing lands as announced from the Speech from the Throne would 

be transferred for administration purposes to the Department of Agriculture. It is deemed expedient to 

transfer the Land Utilization Board as well. The amendment to the Act provides for that transfer. I don’t 

think there is any other point, Mr. Speaker. Those are the main points in the Bill and I would move 

second reading of Bill 25 – An Act to amend The Land Utilization Act. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Does this mean, Mr. Speaker, that they can extend the power of 

the Board and to pass an Order-in-Council to include a whole municipality under The Land Utilization 

Act, thereby extending the scope and including or extending the equity in that municipality to come 

under the Land Utilization Board? That has actually been done in order to secure a quarter section in my 

district, by an Order-in-Council passed specifying the whole municipality as a Land Utilization. I would 

like to know if this extension of power will also include that the Minister or the Government will then 

have a power to add the particular area that is classified as submarginal land under the Land Utilization



February 26, 1947 

447 

Act. What’s the answer? 

 

Mr. Phelps: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the question, if he wants me to answer it now, I am prepared 

to do so, if there is any further discussion. Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the Hon. Member’s question, 

the fact that the amendment is now before the House, will not alter the point that he raises. That 

provision is made in the Act in another clause and this amendment will not alter it one way or the other. 

This amendment, as I’ve said before, simply widens the classification of land and has nothing to do with 

whether or not the Land Utilization Board can request an Order-in-Council and have any particular 

municipality brought within the regulations. It has no bearing on that one way or the other. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — True, the powers of the Land Utilization Board are not obvious, but the lands which 

may be brought under the control of the Board is considerably amended by this proposed amendment 

and to that extent, certainly, it does increase the power of the Board, because it will considerably 

increase the kinds and types of land over which they will have control. 

 

Mr. Phelps: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the Hon. Member’s statement, I would like to say that by 

widening the representation on the Board, as proposed in the Bill, I think the public interest is amply 

safeguarded. We will have on that Board, the head of the Agricultural Representative Service of this 

province together with the Superintendent of Lands of the Agriculture Department. It is anticipated that 

this will be turned over to the Agriculture Department. The whole idea back of the Land Utilization 

Board and a principal which has been continued by this Government is to see to it that every effort is put 

forth to see that the land is utilized to the best possible economic advantage. I think that the House can 

rest assured that that is the sole purpose of the function of that Board. I think its activities over the years 

have been very satisfactory under this Government and under the former Government. I said before that 

any land which comes under its jurisdiction, its first responsibility will be to see to it that the best 

economic use is made of the land over which they have control. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Then this amendment with this change in the Act does not give the Minister or the 

Government power to add the particular area that is classified as sub-marginal land under The Land 

Utilization Act. But does it give you that power that is the point that I would like to hear? 

 

Mr. Phelps: — Mr. Speaker, I tried to make myself quite clear on this point. I said that formerly the Act 

only provided for lands unsuitable for agriculture and in that sense it will widen the scope of the Act but 

other lands could be bought for the purpose of securing better utilization. That is the purpose of the 

whole Land Utilization Act, as the Member knows, and it is one of the things that there has been a great 

field of study given to during the past two years. There is a Land Utilization Committee sitting quite 

regularly on which there is representation from the Saskatchewan University and they are studying ways 

and means of the best utilization of all our lands including the land that 



February 26, 1947 

448 

is handled by the Land Utilization Board. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. J. Phelps (Minister of Natural Resources) moved second reading of Bill 36 – An Act Respecting 

Dominion Electric Power Limited and The Saskatchewan Power Commission. 

 

He said: I would like to inform the House that this Bill might be regarded as a winding-up Act. The 

purpose of it is to wind up the affairs of the Dominion Electric Power Company which as the House has 

already been informed was taken over by the Saskatchewan Power Commission sometime ago. 

Negotiations have been proceeding and for sometime we have operated the company as a company. 

Later steps will be taken to absorb it into the commission and negotiations are just about now completed. 

Arrangements have been made to call in the bonds which were issued which are not outstanding. The 

only other liability of the company is a promissory note. Arrangements have been made to absorb that 

liability, and at the present time ending the time of the completion of the assignment of the bonds and 

the other legal formalities that must be gone through. The Power Commission is operating the Dominion 

Electric as a trustee until all of these transactions can be consummated. 

 

Now the purpose of this Bill, as I said, is to wind up the affairs of the company and to relieve the 

Commission of the necessity of taking over individual contracts. Mr. Speaker, this is not a new 

principle, it is the effect, of course, of taking over the company as we would take over all the debts, the 

liabilities and the assets of it and that has all been arranged for as I explained before. For the information 

of the House, this is not a procedure that is new. Often times, Mr. Speaker, we desire to have a precedent 

and there are several precedents for an action of this kind. 

 

In 1939, an Act was passed in this House respecting the Mundon and Weston Trust Company and the 

Standard Trust Company. Now there were certain transactions at that time between those companies and 

there was a desire to have a winding-up Act to relieve them of the necessity of going through a number 

of details that would be involved otherwise, and the Legislature at that time on the request of the 

company passed a winding-up Act. 

 

Again in 1934 an Act was introduced in this House, an Act respecting The Trust and Guarantee 

Company and the Union Trust Company, another case of amalgamation and absorbing one company by 

the other. Again in 1937 the former government was requested to pass a similar Act to this one, almost 

identical, Chapter 97, An Act respecting Saskatchewan General Trust Corporation and that Act was 

passed providing the same thing almost in identical terms as is now before the House. Again in 1939 the 

former government, Chapter 97, An Act respecting the Co-operative Creameries Limited. Therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, I cite these as precedents for doing the thing that we are suggesting to the House, that we 

give consideration to at this time. 

 

I don’t think that there is any new principle, Mr. Speaker, in the Bill – any matter that cannot be 

discussed in Committee of the Whole. Therefore, I now move second reading of Bill 36. 



February 26, 1947 

449 

Mr. W.G. Patterson (Leader of the Opposition): — The second paragraph of the Bill says: 

 

Whereas the Saskatchewan Power Commission has caused all the outstanding bonds issued by the 

Dominion Electric Power Limited to be redeemed. 

 

I understood from his remarks that they had been called. Has the redemption been completed? 

 

Mr. Phelps: — Mr. Speaker, it is in the process now. I think by the latter part of this month. Now, in a 

few days the whole transaction will have been completed. 

 

Mr. Procter: — Mr. speaker, may I ask the hon. gentleman how is the Dominion Electric Power 

Limited created, is it by private Act? 

 

Mr. Phelps: — Mr. Speaker, I am not in the position, I believe it will be under the Dominion 

Companies Act because they had property in other provinces. As the House knows they had property in 

British Columbia, a small property there on the border. They had property in Alberta and they had one 

plant in Manitoba, so I take it that they would be operating under a Dominion charter. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if that is so, how does the Minister propose in this Bill to dissolve 

the company? 

 

Mr. Phelps: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the one point that I did not explain, I didn’t think it was really 

necessary, as the House knows and I reported to the House I believe almost a year ago, the Commission 

was operating the Dominion Power Electric and at that time saw fit to sell all the property outside the 

Province of Saskatchewan. There is no property outside the Province of Saskatchewan and hasn’t been 

for quite some time. That has all been liquidated, has all been cleaned up and the only property that now 

remains under the old Dominion Electric Company is in the Province of Saskatchewan. That facilitates 

the transaction materially, as my friend will understand. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — I suppose this can be obtained in Committee, Mr. Speaker, but I just suggest to the 

Minister that he had better give consideration to the fact that this Bill is apparently a provincial Bill 

winding up a Dominion company. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. O. Valleau (Minister of Social Welfare) moved second reading of Bill 27 – An Act requiring 

Insurance against Certain Losses resulting from Certain Motor Vehicle Accidents. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the House will recall that a year ago we passed a Bill for an Act under the same 

title. I might mention to the House at this time that when we were preparing the amendments to that Act 

the amendments were so numerous and extensive that it was thought desirable, instead of amending the 

old Bill, to bring in a completely new Act. The Act which is now before 



February 26, 1947 

450 

the House and which if passed by the House will come into effect on the 1st of April at which time the 

former Act will be repealed. 

 

I thought this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, that I might give for the benefit of the House a brief resume of the 

operations of the former Act, of the financial position, in order that the House might more accurately 

determine the wisdom of passing the Bill which is at present laid before us. First I thought that I would 

deal with the service which has been rendered to the people of Saskatchewan by the present Act – then 

take up the financial position of the fund – then deal with the proposed changes in the new Bill as 

compared to the old one – then with some of the problems of administration and how we propose to 

meet them and finally with certain small changes in the rates. 

 

I recall last year mentioning to the House the difficulty which arose in working out a plan, a plan such as 

involved in this comprehensive Automobile Accident Insurance Act, due to the scarcity, indeed the 

almost entire lack of statistics, covering the operation of such an Act. I have some information. We have 

done some analytical work on the accidents which have occurred up to the present time and it is the 

intention of the office to immediately analyze the accidents completely, giving the cause, where they 

occurred, the location, the occupation of those who were injured. But in the meantime it might be 

possible for me to give certain necessarily incomplete analysis in order to show that some of the fears of 

some of the people were not entirely realized in the operation of the Act. I was told last year, Mr. 

Speaker, by some people that all of the accidents occurred in the cities. I was told by others that all of 

the accidents occurred out in the country. They are actually pretty fairly well divided. Out of the first 44 

claims which have been completely settled for death cases, we find that 35 were rural and 20 occurred in 

towns or cities and of those first 44, 19 were farmers . . . 

 

Mr. Patterson: — Pardon me, those figures don’t add up. 

 

Mr. Valleau: — 35 and 29. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — 64, is it not? 

 

Mr. Valleau: — Pardon me, yes that was out of the 64 just reported. I was inadvertently taking the 

figure 44 for which we had completely paid. Out of the 64 deaths which had been reported, 19 were 

farmers, 7 were laborers, 6 were housewives, 5 were students and 1 each of a number of other 

occupations. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Have you got the information as to the residences? 

 

Mr. Valleau: — I have not got that information. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — 35 were rural and 29 urban? Is that it? 

 

Mr. Valleau: — Yes, 35 were rural and 29 urban. 



February 26, 1947 

451 

Mr. Patterson: — As I understood the Minister, the 35 accidents took place in rural territory and the 

balance in the city, is that – or urban territory, is that correct? 

 

Mr. Valleau: — Yes, that is the analysis that I have. I am not absolutely certain on that but that is my 

understanding of the analysis. As I have said, we have not yet completed the final analysis. It is 

sometimes difficult and without considerably more information than we have been obtaining to 

determine whether they were rural accidents. We have been taking the post office of the individual and 

in many cases we find that the post office of the farmer is in a town or in a city. We are going to have to 

do considerably more work in order to be able to get a clear-cut indication of the proper allocation as 

between the rural and urban. 

 

Again, in the first 1,100 claims paid, I find the same difficulty. Our books at the moment show that 510 

of those were rural and 593 were urban. This would appear logical that while the deaths possibly occur 

more frequently out in the country districts the minor injuries, or the injuries will more frequently occur 

within the cities. Out of the first 1,340 claims that were filed, 750 were filed by passengers in 

automobiles, 418 were filed by drivers and 172 by pedestrians. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Will you repeat those figures? 

 

Mr. Valleau: — 750 passengers, 418 drivers, 172 pedestrians. And of the pedestrians injured, 126 of 

them were injured in the cities or towns and 46 in the rural areas. We also have 45 bicycle riders or 

bicyclists, I don’t know whether that is the correct word or not. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Cyclists. 

 

Mr. Valleau: — Cyclists, is it, were also injured. One of the interesting things that does appear though 

in the analysis of the claims that have been paid is that a remarkably few according to our legal adviser, 

would have been eligible to sue for compensation under ordinary public liability claims. Out of the first 

sixty-four deaths it is our opinion that only about 5 per cent would have had a legitimate claim, had the 

person who caused the accident been insured under Public Liability Insurance. We did sample some 200 

cases of other injuries and we find there that the claims could have been sustained or could have been 

incurred in approximately 12 per cent of the cases. 

 

We have also a number of cases which are not eligible for settlement under the Automobile Accident 

Act. I have here a list of 15 claims that were made on the office for which we were obliged to disclaim 

responsibility. Two of those were pedestrians, Saskatchewan residents, who were killed outside of the 

province, one in Alberta and one in Minnesota. Obviously the Act, as the House will remember, did not 

provide for compensation to a Saskatchewan person who is a pedestrian and who is killed outside of the 

Province. Had they been occupants of a Saskatchewan car they would have been protected, but since 

they were not occupants of a car, but were killed as pedestrians, they 



February 26, 1947 

452 

were not protected. We had another application, or another claim, in which the coroner’s verdict was 

suicide and we disclaimed responsibility. 

 

There are four cases which are covered by Workmen’s Compensation Board Accident Fund, four cases 

of deaths. I might say here very frankly that there is a certain dual coverage in regard to those who are 

covered by the Workmen’s Compensation Board Act. We have taken some steps to mollify it, as I will 

explain later, but the situation still exists and will exist until we have had time to survey the situation 

more fully. 

 

There are three other cases of individuals who were killed for whom we are not liable because the 

person who was killed was operating a car or motor vehicle without a driver’s licence. At first sight it 

might seem a rather severe penalty. A man who is caught without an operator’s licence may be fined $5, 

$10 or $15 – I forget just what the fine is – but in this case the man’s family may lose three or four 

thousand dollars because he is operating that car without a licence. Yet looking at it from the other 

angle, the situation is, that all of the motorists of Saskatchewan have joined themselves together in an 

insurance fund to protect one another and if an individual, entirely apart from the illegality of the action 

chooses to stay outside of the insurance fund we can scarcely bring him back into it after the accident 

has occurred. But I would impress on the House that they should, as far as possible, advise the people 

who are driving cars in this province to be sure to obtain their driver’s licence because in the event of 

accidents the Act provides that we are unable to pay compensation to the driver of a car who is operating 

without a driver’s licence. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You’d pay the passengers. 

 

Mr. Valleau: — We pay the passengers, we pay anyone who is injured, pedestrian or otherwise, but we 

do not pay the actual driver or the car. There is one further exception. If the owner of the car is also in 

the car and is injured we do not pay the owner because on the owner lies the responsibility of seeing that 

is car is operated by a person who is qualified under the Act to operate it. 

 

We have one other case and again one that I think we could well draw to the attention of the public; a 

person killed while riding on a portion of a motorcycle not designed for seating of passengers or 

carrying of a load. That is a very common practice but the Act provides that on a motor vehicle that the 

passengers must either be seated where the proper seating accommodation is or where a load is normally 

carried. One tractor operator, of course, was not covered under the previous Act although he is covered 

under the Act which we have before us at the present time. Now if I might deal, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Mr. Minister, are these cases all under this 200 or are they out of the 1,340 cases? 

 

Mr. Valleau: — These cases are all cases of deaths. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — No, no, but you said that you had taken a sample of 



February 26, 1947 

453 

200 cases, there were 1,340 accidents and 200 cases as samples. Now, is this the sample out of the 200 

or out of the 1,340? 

 

Mr. Valleau: — These cases I have just been dealing with were all death claims which of necessity we 

are refusing, that is there were 15 here out of the 65. I’m giving the House an indication why we refused 

the settlement in those particular cases. In regard to the financial situation of the province we estimate 

today that the total income premiums written as of April 1st this year, they’re estimating there will be a 

little money come in yet, but the total will reach $1.8 million. The losses incurred or those which we 

anticipate will occur between now and the first of April, will total $320,000. We are setting up the 

estimated expenses (again I’m only giving approximate figures because the year is not yet ended). I 

think that the House is entitled to the information as closely as we can give it, we are estimating that, for 

expenses $136,000, approximately 10 per cent on the premium income. 

 

We are also proposing to set up reserves covering provision for catastrophes. We are also setting up a 

reserve for possible depreciation of securities and we have interest on securities coming. I’m not going 

to weary the House with all of the figures, although I have them here and as closely as we can estimate 

at the moment our situation as of April 1st will be the amount left of $744,000 for what we call an 

equalization fund and which will be available in future years for this particular purpose. In addition to 

that we will have in reserves about $133,000 all together. Now at first sight, Mr. Speaker, it might seem 

that that is rather a remarkable statement on what is on an insurance plan. 

 

Our loss ratio was 24.50, that we spent in compensation for losses, or we have spent or will spend until 

the first of April 24.50, 24 1/2 per cent of our premium income. When it first became apparent to me 

that we were going to have a very considerable margin I started then to check a little more carefully into 

the experience of other insurance companies just to see what they did under similar circumstances. I 

went back into the fire insurance in the Province of Saskatchewan from 1940 until 1944, the five years 

inclusive. I found that in the fire insurance field the private companies averaged a payment of 26 1/2 per 

cent, 26.49 to be exact, payment of losses as against their premium income – just slightly more, just a 

slightly larger proportion than we paid. Their expenses, of course, were considerably higher. Where we 

estimate our expenses to be very close to 10 per cent, I find that these other companies in commissions 

and which, of course, we do not pay under this Act, were paying out nearly 25 per cent, 24.95, and in 

their other expenses, including adjustments, administration expense, were paying out 22.18, or a total of 

47.13 per cent of their premium income went out in expenses as against 10 per cent which we are 

spending under The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. So one might assume that had this particular 

Act which we are considering at the moment, had it been operating under a private insurance company 

that the financial picture at the end of the year would have been something like this – $325,000 paid out 

in losses, $611,000 in expenses, $200,000 in reserve and another $264,000 to look after taxes and to pay 

their dividends to their shareholders which would have taken care of the entire $1.3 million. 

 

If, I might be permitted, Mr. Speaker, to paraphrase an 



February 26, 1947 

454 

Hon. Member of this House, a phrase which he has used on different occasions, both last year and this. I 

would say that the private insurance business is the greatest hoax ever perpetrated upon an unsuspecting 

public. I don’t know if it would be correct – $1.3 million and pay out $300,000, I say that’s a pretty fair 

hoax. The point is, of course, that we do not propose to continue doing that. We did it in the first year. 

We were aware last year that we did have a very large margin. I must confess that the margin is greater 

than I expected but that was due to the fact that our statistical information was not sufficient to allow us 

to come to the point that we wished to cover and I am not at all sure that the present Bill will exhaust all 

of the funds which will be collected. I do hope that year after year I will be able to advance the benefits 

covered by this Act until we do come very close to providing a balance one year after another. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I am very sure your premiums are far too high now. 

 

Mr. Valleau: — Well, the Hon. Member says he is very sure we are still too high. I’ll be back here next 

year, Mr. Speaker, to possibly amend it again. I hope my hon. friend is also here. 

 

Now, if I might deal with some of the changes in the compensation plan. We have found in the operation 

of the Act that there were a number of spots in which we did not provide the compensation that we 

would have liked due to the limitations of the Act and we are proposing in this Act for the consideration 

of the House certain changes. Under the Act at present the death benefits are limited to a maximum of 

$5,000 for one person. $3,000 to the primary dependent who is usually the wife and an additional $2,000 

to be distributed to the children. The Bill proposes that this be changed to a maximum of $10,000. The 

wife still to remain at $3,000 and $7,000 to be available for distribution among dependent children. 

Again the rate for the secondary dependents will remain as it was last year, $625 for each child. This 

will simply look after an additional number of children. 

 

We also last year made no payment on behalf of children who were killed under the age of sixteen. At 

that time the situation seemed to be that there is probably in most cases no direct financial loss incurred 

by the parents at the death of a child. Due to the representations which have been made in regard to this 

point we are suggesting that the age at which we will pay compensation to the parents upon the death of 

a child should be reduced to ten years, but not the full $1,000. We will start at $500 for a child of ten 

years; $600 at 11 years of age, increasing $100 per year until the child at the age of 15 the parents will 

be entitled to $1,000 should that child be killed in a motor car accident. $1,000 will remain constant 

from 15 years until 18 years of age inclusive. 

 

Also, if the House will remember, we provided under the old Act that $1,000 would be payable to the 

estate of a person who had no dependency either primary or secondary. Yet we found that in the 

operation of the Act that frequently we came upon a case where there was a partial dependency, not a 

full dependency but a partial dependency – a boy working at home, or working out and bringing his 

wages home, his father was also working. We couldn’t say that the father and mother were fully 

dependent 



February 26, 1947 

455 

upon him. We couldn’t make a $3,000 payment on account of that boy being killed but nevertheless 

there was a definite financial loss and so we are providing payment this year that in the case of a partial 

dependency where there is a regular definite contribution by the person killed to the support of father 

and mother or brother and sister and this is the only place that the brother and sister enter into the 

picture. Where there is a definite regular contribution then the office, instead of $1,000 will be able to 

pay $2,000 even though the dependents of the deceased can not prove full and complete dependency. 

We are also cutting out the item which stated that we would pay regardless of everything else $1,000 to 

the estate of a deceased person. In some case we found difficulty in finding anyone to whom to make 

that payment and unless there is some measure of dependency and with this partial dependency clause in 

we believe that we will be able to pay all cases in which there is an equitable situation at all. The $1,000 

will be continued as last year to a husband on the death of a housewife. 

 

We also received a number of representations in regard to injuries occurring other than on a public 

highway. This year the Act is being changed to include all those injured in a motor car accident 

anywhere in Saskatchewan. A licensed motor vehicle moving anywhere in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, which means that the farmer hauling grain with his licensed truck from his combine to 

his granary, will be protected or the coal dealer who is hauling part of the time on the railroad yards and 

part of the time backing on private property into the house will also be covered under the new Bill where 

they were not covered last year or during the current year. The injuries outside of Saskatchewan, 

occupants of a Saskatchewan car operating outside of the province anywhere in Canada, the United 

States or Newfoundland will be protected, but in those cases the injury must occur on the public roads. 

We are retaining that feature of the Act so far as accidents occurring outside of the province are 

concerned. 

 

Another case was that of two young men, residents of Saskatchewan, who were killed while driving in 

an Alberta car in the province. Their dependents were technically barred from claiming compensation 

because they were occupants of a visiting car. We are changing that under the new Bill. We are 

proposing that it should be changed to provide that a Saskatchewan resident will be protected while 

riding in any motor car in the Province of Saskatchewan. He will not be protected outside the boundaries 

of Saskatchewan while in a car not registered here. The Saskatchewan person will be protected in 

Saskatchewan no matter what car, whether it’s an Alberta car, an American car or a Canadian car. 

 

Also, those who were excluded from the benefits last year were the occupants of motor vehicles not 

required to be licensed and that included the farm tractors. This year we are making a definite exception 

in regard to farm tractors. The driver of a farm tractor who is involved in an accident with a licensed 

motor vehicle will be covered by the Act under the new Bill. I want to make that perfectly clear that we 

are not covering a farmer who was injured driving a tractor on his farming operations, an unlicensed 

tractor. If he simply rolls the tractor over into the ditch and he is injured that is not covered under the 

Act but if he is involved in an accident with a licensed motor vehicle then he will be protected. 



February 26, 1947 

456 

The collision insurance is a completely new feature. It is one that I had in the back of my head last year 

but I was very timid about trying to carry it along until such time as we had further information. But we 

believe that the amount left in the fund at the present time, with the experience that we have had, that it 

will be possible for us to introduce collision insurance. The collision insurance will mean that the office 

will pay for all injuries on a private car in excess of $100. The owner of the car will pay the first $100 

themselves, the balance will be paid by the insurance office. On farm trucks the situation will be the 

same excepting that in the case of trucks of more than two ton capacity the owner will pay $150 with the 

insurance office paying the balance. The largest trucks – I am not going to weary the House by taking 

time to give a resume of the rates, they are all in the last issue of the Saskatchewan Gazette, but the 

largest trucks and buses will have a deductible of as high as $400. May I again explain that the 

deductible means that the individual who owns the car will be responsible for the first $100 or for the 

larger amount on the other vehicles with the Government insurance covering the balance. The studies 

that we have made, and again may I say that I am not for a moment suggesting that we have been able to 

get an accurate picture of the injuries or the damage which occurs to cars involved in collision (collision 

includes collision with a standing object, a car upsetting in a ditch would be involved in a collision) but 

as nearly as we can analyze the pictures of the cars which are damaged, cars and trucks to an amount in 

excess of $25, between 30 and 35 per cent are between $25 and $50; between 35 and 37 per cent . . . 

Yes, and again it is only an estimate – between 30 and 35 per cent of the cars damaged will be between 

$25 and $50; between 35 and 37 per cent of them will be from $50 to $100 and again between 30 and 35 

per cent will be over the $100. Now those are only estimates. You can get figures that will show you 

half a dozen combinations but as nearly as we can analyze them we have come to the conclusion that 

that is approximately correct and we are estimating that next year we will have between 3,000 to 3,500 

cars to repair. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Mr. Speaker, there is one point I would like the Hon. Minister to clear up – were the 

damages $150? Do I take if from you that you only pay the $50 and the insured still pays the $100? 

 

Mr. Valleau: — The insured will pay the first $100, we will page the $50. If a car is damaged to the 

extent of $150, the insured pays $100, we pay $50. If the car is damaged to the extent of $500, he pays 

$100 we pay $400. If the car is damaged beyond repair, we arrive at the value of the car and pay him for 

the car less the $100. He carries the $100 risk all the time. I am aware, Mr. Speaker, that it might be 

considered much more desirable if we were to cover insurance down to $25 and many people who do 

carry insurance do take a $25 coverage. May I say here that even if I were sure that we had plenty of 

money to do it, I would not be prepared at this time to enter into the administration of a plan of a $25 

deductible until we have had time and opportunity to develop our routine, to develop our administration 

and get an experienced staff. 

 

I would also point out that in the Province of Saskatchewan a car and a truck are necessary in many, 

many occupations, especially in the rural areas and a great many people who live 



February 26, 1947 

457 

in the urban areas. A man who has damages to a car that costs him $75 can usually find $75 to repair it 

and go to work again, but if he has damages to a car that cost him $500 many people would be utterly 

unable and would be deprived of the use of the car which might be essential to their business. In this 

respect at least we are giving protection to the economy of the province as well as to the individual 

citizen concerned. 

 

In the administration of the Act and I mentioned just a moment ago that the administration of the Act 

will involve training of staff and will unquestionably require a good deal of experience before we iron 

out all of our difficulties, that in the collision insurance we propose to have some adjusters of our own. 

We also propose to make use of the private adjusters who are doing business in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. The idea in the handling of the adjustment will be that our adjuster will contact the owner 

of the car and will first make him a cash offer, based on what he believes it will require to repair that car, 

less of course the deductible amount. If the insured person declines to accept it then the Act provides 

that he may elect to have the car repaired. In other words, he can say to us, “I am not satisfied to take the 

amount that you are offering, therefore, you had better take my car and fix it up.” We are rather hoping 

that in the actual working out of the Act that we will be able to give a certain amount of, shall we say 

leeway to our adjusters, so that if they run across a man who has $150 damage done to the car that he 

will be able to say, well now I can make a cash settlement of this on my own initiative and then refer the 

matter to head office in order that the man may get his car immediately into a garage and start to get it 

repaired. In the larger accident it is quite obvious that the car is going to be held up for a considerable 

length of time anyway. In most cases we will require the adjuster to contact the office before they arrive 

at the figure which should be offered for the damages done to the car. 

 

Now, when we come to the question of electing to repair, the question arises as to where we are going to 

get these cars repaired. Some people seem to be under the illusion that the insurance office intends to 

start into garage business. I can assure the House, Mr. Speaker, that I think I have plenty on my hands at 

the moment without starting into operating a string of garages. That’s my own feeling about it at least. I 

was rather interested in an editorial in the Leader-Post, which is a newspaper published in the city of 

Regina, an editorial which I must confess I did not entirely agree with but I was rather intrigued by one 

sentence. It said that we should take the cars to the garages and tell them here you can take this car and 

fix it for a certain price, set down the price that we will pay and you will either fix it or you will go out 

of business. That was really the effect of the sentence. I must confess that I would not dare take such 

arbitrary or dictatorial action. I would not for a moment suggest to the garage men that because we 

happen to control all of the garage business, or we will control to a certain extent at least, a measure of 

control of those cars which are damaged beyond $100, that we should go to the garage men and say, 

here you are going to work for us for a certain price. But if it were possible to set up a list price of what 

it would cost to repair a car, it might be possible to work out a price that would be satisfactory to the 

garage man and to the individual. Unfortunately, there is no such list price available, no such price list in 

existence for body damages. And if the Hon. Members of the House 



February 26, 1947 

458 

who have had the experience of taking a car which has been damaged in a collision into a body shop 

they will find that when they go and say to the proprietor, now I want my car fixed, he goes out and he 

looks at the car and out of his experience, the years that he has had, he will provide an estimate of what 

it will cost to repair that car. If you also, on the other hand went to the same garage man, or to a 

neighboring garage and said I want the main bearing put in this motor, he doesn’t go near your car he 

goes to his books and he looks at this list price and says, what is the model of the car and so on and then 

he gives you a price. So that to a very large extent, at least body work has been done based upon the 

respective ability of the adjuster and the body shop man to arrive at an agreement as to what the repairs 

to that car should cost. Now in surveying this situation I came to the conclusion that in some cases we 

would have adjusters who would be very astute business men and who would use the fact that they have 

a large volume of business to a certain extent at least under their control in their own area, and who 

would be inclined in order to build their own reputation, to drive the price of repair work down to the 

point where the average man operating the garage or body shop could not continue to do so 

economically. 

 

That is the one side of the picture. On the other side of the picture is the fact that we will have in the 

insurance office $800,000 of public money of which we are the trustees and for which we must get the 

greatest possible value. How are we going to arrive at a value of what it will cost to do a body repair job 

when there is no set price or nothing in existence that would give us an indication of what a set price 

should be? I have no doubt that at the end of four or five years experience, or possibly six or seven years 

of experience, that we would be able to work out what an average job should cost. We propose to take 

photographs of the damages, to have as complete a description as possible of those damages to the car. 

Then we will set that against the cost that it cost us in this garage or in a garage somewhere else to fix 

and over the years – five, six or seven years could probably work out approximately what our adjusters 

should offer in the case of damages. But I do not believe that it is advisable to wait that long and so I am 

suggesting that if this Bill meets the approval of the House, Mr. Speaker, that we will in the insurance 

office set up one garage, and that in that garage we will take into consideration every item of cost. We 

will pay approximately the same wages as the men who are in the private trade are payed. We will also 

take into consideration the cost of overhead, of rentals, of depreciation of taxes, the cost of management, 

many of which items the average garage man hasn’t time to figure in his costs. Sometimes, and I have 

seen this done myself and I am sure other Hon. Members have seen it done, the garage man simply 

calculates the amount of hours of labor without taking into consideration the cost of maintaining his 

equipment or his building, which is one reason why garage men so frequently go broke in the Province 

of Saskatchewan. I think all Hon. Members are well aware in the garage business the money that is 

made, if it is made, is made in the front office. It is not made back in the work shop. By doing this, by 

being able to calculate every item of cost, by being able to keep a careful check of the type of car and 

exactly what it does cost, we will be able to establish a list price or something that will be at least a 

guide, a tentative guide to our adjusting staff when they go out into the country to make a settlement. 

Having done that we may then be able to follow up and develop the idea which the Leader-Post 

advanced that we would be able to 



February 26, 1947 

459 

to arrive at an arrangement, a tentative arrangement with the body shop operators throughout the 

province in order to give us the price which should be paid to them. May I again assure the House, Mr. 

Speaker, that as far as the garage business is concerned I have seen some of my best friends go broke in 

garages. On behalf of the insurance office I have no desire whatever, have never had any desire to get 

into the garage business but I am desirous to give both the public who are putting the money up and the 

garage operator who is operating a legitimate business a fair deal on both sides. 

 

In the operation of the Act and again in connection with the administration of the Act we will find two 

spots where it will be necessary to use a referee. The one place will be where the insured has elected to 

have the car repaired and after the car has been repaired the insured says to us, “I’m not satisfied with 

that job.” Then it will be necessary to refer the job to a referee for decision between the two. The second 

place where dispute arises as to the value of a car which is completely wrecked, as to its value before it 

was wrecked in order that we may make settlement. I might point out here also that under the Act fire 

and theft damage are excluded. The compensation plan while it is designed for compensation for injuries 

to individuals in cars, also as I pointed out last year, provides a large measure of public liability and 

property damage protection. If we are in a position to repair all the cars in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, owned by the people of Saskatchewan, then if an individual is involved in an accident he 

is protected to the amount that the insurance office spends on the car. That will give a very large 

measure of property damage protection. It will give a much larger amount of property damage protection 

than has ever been enjoyed by the people of Saskatchewan before, because actually very few of our 

people in the past have taken out insurance at all. 

 

Now the changes in rates may touch upon another matter which has received a good deal of publicity. I 

think I have it here, that is in regard to the rates which were charged last year on motorcycles. I 

remember when the rates were being prepared that the manager of the office came to me and stated that 

the available statistics would appear to indicate that a motorcycle should carry a premium rate six times 

in excess of an ordinary four wheeled motor vehicle, an ordinary passenger car. At that time it seemed 

extreme that we should charge a car $5 and a motorcycle $30 and yet our experience during the past 

year has shown that that is approximately the case. I wish again to impress upon the Members of the 

House the fact that it is impossible to decide accurately the insurance rates on the basis of one years’ 

experience, but our experience over the past year with the motorcycles at a $15 rate has been this, that 

instead of a 24 per cent loss as we anticipated in the over-all business, the motorcycles will give us a 68 

per cent loss, even though they are paying a premium of $15 instead of $5. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — You’ll still have quite a profit on them. 

 

Mr. Valleau: — We received from them $11,000 up to February 15th and we paid out $7,500 and if you 

add 10 per cent to that making it $8,600 you haven’t such an awful lot of profit. One more death would 

have wiped the fund out completely. In this case, may I point out again, that instead had we rated all the 

vehicles on the same basis as we rated the motor cars, $15, we 



February 26, 1947 

460 

probably should have set the car at about two dollars and a half. Under those circumstances in view of 

the fact that we propose next year to give policemen insurance it has been decided to leave the 

motorcycle rates exactly where they were last year. Most of them are not terribly expensive, probably 

the best of them would be four or five hundred dollars or something like that. We won’t run into the 

heavy repair jobs that we may in some cars. I’m not any too sure that $15 under the new plan will go to 

show a clear margin on the motorcycles over another year. We have changed the rates on the private 

passenger cars. We did that in order to lower the rates on part of them and to raise the rates on the 

others, in order that the premium paid might bear some relationship to the insurance which is being 

received. It is obvious that a man driving a 1933 or 1934 car worth $300 or $400 is not getting the same 

collision insurance that the man who is driving a $1,500 or $1,800 car is receiving. On the other hand 

due to the fact that we are providing property damage he is getting protection there. A man might only 

have a $150 car and a quarter section of land but if he was the man who caused an accident wrecking a 

$2,000 car or a tank truck or a truck of any kind, he might lose not only his own car but his farm as well 

if it were his responsibility. So we are giving to that individual who is driving on the road a measure of 

public property damage protection which is the only thing which has been given by the other insurance 

companies in their insurance policies which they sell across the land. 

 

However in view of the fact that there is a difference in the value of the collision insurance to the 

individual we have stripped the rates to cars; we’ve reduced the $5 to $4.50 and on the other class raised 

it from $5 to $6, the break being made on the 111 inch wheel base, which is not entirely a satisfactory 

measure in which I hope we will be able to find some more satisfactory method before another year has 

passed of making a break between the different valuations of cars. We estimate that the licence fee will 

be reduced on 37 per cent of the cars and will be increased on 63 per cent of the cars. Other changes, the 

truck and bus operators licences, operator’s licences – last year the truck operators paid $3 insurance and 

the bus operators $2 – this year we have reduced them to a flat $1 the same as the operator of a private 

car. That is in recognition of the fact that many of these men have the dual coverage of which I 

mentioned earlier, the coverage of the Workmen’s Compensation Board and of the Automobile 

Insurance Act. At some of the country points we have reduced the rate on taxis from $120 to $100. 

There are some points where very small business is being done by the taxis and we have reduced their 

rates there. The city buses last year were charged a flat $225, this year we are charging a rate bearing 

with the size of the bus, $60, $150 and $225 and those over 25 passengers at $300. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that that probably gives the House a certain amount of information which may 

enable them to form some judgment as to desirability or otherwise of the Bill which is before the House. 

I therefore move second reading of Bill 27. 

 

Mr. A.W. Embury (A.S.V.R.): — Mr. Speaker, as the House will recall when the Act was introduced 

into the House at the session last year, even those who are not in general agreement with this 

Government were prone to agree that the efforts of the Hon. Minister of Social Welfare to meet this 

commonly recognized public matter or danger, or concern, of road accidents and the damages which 

flow therefrom 



February 26, 1947 

461 

was a proper field of government intervention and that he had chosen a means to try and improve that 

situation and to do what he could to set up a fund for all intents and purposes out of a solution to the 

difficulty, at least in part, has been sought and in part found. 

 

There are people who think that the answer is compulsory insurance. I believe that the Hon. Minister in 

his studies into the question will have found that some years ago that it was tried, I think, in the State of 

Illinois where public, compulsory insurance was made absolutely necessary to every person holding a 

licence. I think the experience in that jurisdiction in those years, (it was some years ago now, as far back 

as 1935) but it was found that the loss rate went up very sharply and public liability and property 

damage insurance by reason of the rise and loss rate show that it inflicted a very considerable hardship 

on automobile vehicle operators. I think it was on that account that the scheme was eventually 

abandoned, because of the rising cost of the operation. I have it on the authority of a person who has 

made a very considerable study of this question, a person who probably everybody knows, Mr. C.M. 

Prusman, who said the reason it went up so abruptly there was because it was generally known to all the 

public that every person was covered by insurance and there was an insurance company back of every 

automobile on the road as a result the claims multiplied, the cost of litigation was piled on top and that 

did a great deal to increase the total cost. 

 

We on this side of the House who scrutinized the Hon. Minister’s Automobile Accident Insurance Act 

last year did not offer very serious objections to it because, for my part at least, I felt that it was a proper 

field in which the Government should operate and a proper matter for them to try and cure. However, 

the introduction of the replacing of the old Bill by this Bill goes a very great deal farther. Here we have a 

change from what is nothing more than a fund. I always thought the Hon. Minister was wrong to bring 

in the idea of insurance at all in the Bill of last year. It was simply a fund set up to reimburse those who 

were injured on our roads. This goes a great deal beyond that. Here we have a scheme put into effect 

which covers public liability, passenger hazards, and assume collision risks and that is the straight 

matter of insurance not simply a matter of a fund at all. It does hardship to the middle man in 

Saskatchewan – not any financial dictator, not anybody like that, but the middle man who is handling 

the standard insurance, there are many hundreds of them in this province. To a very considerable extent 

the Government is assuming the responsibility of giving coverage which the middle man, as I call him, 

on the street is now selling. You are going to do him out of some portion of his business. 

 

There is another aspect of it which quite seriously gives me some concern. Under the Bill last year there 

was an enormous surplus. I think the Hon. Minister said something in the neighborhood of $300,000 

was paid out in claims and left with a surplus of $750,000. Now that is an enormous surplus. One would 

have expected that a fair trial be given to the matter of simply setting up a fund and producing the 

amount which the taxpayer is going to have to pay or the operator of an automobile is going to have to 

pay. I hope the Hon. Minister will correct me if I am wrong but my recollection of it was that when he 



February 26, 1947 

462 

introduced the Bill last year he chose the figure of $5 with the car licence more or less arbitrary because 

he didn’t quite know what his costs would work out at and if it was too much then he would take steps to 

properly reduce that and to make it connect with the actual expenses of which he was faced over a 

period of time. Now we don’t find those happenings at all. It gives concern along the general lines of my 

criticism of the Government up to now that instead of using that enormous surplus to reduce the costs to 

the people and continue to give the same protection to the public, you still retain your fund and indeed 

allow it to go on for several years at the present rate. He uses the fund to carry himself further into 

private enterprise and encroach upon those who are trying to make their living in the insurance business. 

Now that is what I was talking about the other day when I was expressing the honest anxiety of a great 

many people that the Government was trying to do that. It is making great profits and those profits are 

being used to further their control into all our lives. That is the criticism I have of the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are other features of it instead of the rates being reduced downward today I think I am right in 

saying that, I am not anxious to misquote the Hon. Minister, but I think the rates generally are being 

revised upwards, in the general sense. I think people who are very seriously affected in the matter are 

those that are trying to make an honest living in their own occupation and here you have the 

Government practically saying that all automobile insurance should be carried with them. Employees of 

the Government are going to have to do the job of adjusting and the private adjuster is going to be put 

out of business. I know nearly a dozen veterans who are employed in that business today in Regina in 

private firms. Now they are working on automobile adjustments. They are working for private firms and 

they would like to continue to do so. I think that in this country of ours they should have the right to do 

that. But the adjusting department of any insurance office will have to be closed up and I think the Hon. 

Minister will have to agree that that will be necessary. 

 

An Hon. Member: — When? 

 

Mr. Embury: — Well, if the Hon. Minister is going to let the private enterprise man do some of his 

work for him that is a different matter. But as matters stand he has the adjusting department, a part of the 

insurance office, they are civil servants and very clever ones, and I reasonably expect that that 

department will take on the job of handling all these adjustments. The people of Saskatchewan are not 

interested in declaring war on these private adjusters. They are not financial dictators in the matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend from Rosthern seems to be under the impression that in this policy the 

Government, where a repair job has to be done sends that job to a government garage. We have a work 

shop here and as a matter of fact I think I may have had some say in recommending it to the House when 

it was set up. Now they have a great many automobile repair jobs and as I understand it there are cases 

in which the Government Insurance office has preferred to have the repair jobs done in that garage. I 

don’t want to suggest anything to the Minister that is not correct but that is a commonly accepted idea. I 

am certainly under the impression that the Hon. Minister has recommended that 



February 26, 1947 

463 

certain repair jobs or order with respect to certain repair jobs that those be done in the government 

garage which is here. The Hon. Minister said in the House today, “I’m not interested in going into the 

garage business. I have enough on my hands now without the handling of garages.” That is my best 

recollection of what the Hon. Minister said. There is a garage here now in Regina. It isn’t administered 

by the Hon. Minister at all as I understand it. It comes under the Hon. Minister of Reconstruction and 

Rehabilitation and if there was a government garage or a series of government garages I no doubt 

wouldn’t know if the present policy was carried out regarding the administration of the garage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the garage men haven’t received very much insurance from the Hon. Minister. I believe, 

generally, Mr. Speaker, that the Bill goes a great deal farther than any government should consider its 

duty to go. On the whole principle of the Bill, I am opposed to it. 

 

Mr. W.J. Patterson (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, the attitude and position of this 

group with respect to the imposition of the compulsory insurance on the motor vehicle owners and 

operators of the province were made sufficiently clear in the session one year ago when the present law 

was introduced and it is not necessary for me to repeat it at this time. The Minister has told us that in 

connection with the garage business he has ample to do so as he is not tempted to embark on that 

particular activity. But he has gone a very great deal farther – proposes to go a very great deal farther in 

his duties and his responsibilities and the worries in the proposed enlargements of the application of 

government insurance to motor vehicles in the Province of Saskatchewan. If he really is serious that he 

cannot undertake garages he might have saved himself some little worry and some little work had he 

been satisfied to leave the automobile insurance scheme as it was adopted one year ago. 

 

A year ago we were told that a committee to investigate this whole matter had been giving the subject a 

great deal of study and consideration and they had held a great number of meetings. Whether the same 

procedure was followed in connection with the expansion of the principle I do not know. I am in 

agreement, with the Hon. and gallant Member from the Mediterranean area in that it seems to me that 

the application of the Government scheme with respect to personal injury, loss of life or accident which 

involved personal injury is a very different matter from the application of a Government and compulsory 

scheme to what might be called as merely material damage or material loss. So that I would suggest, 

first of all, that this Bill embarks on a new phase of insurance, quite apart from and quite distinct from 

that phase of insurance which we undertook by passing a Bill one year ago. 

 

I realize that in connection with these matters there has been and there always will be a great deal of 

difficulty in securing accurate statistical information that will enable any person, either the government 

or a private company, to carefully and accurately establish costs and percentages and ratios of death in 

the city and in the country and all that sort of thing. But there is one feature of the information which the 

Minister gave us this afternoon which I am somewhat at a loss to understand and that is an 

administration expense of approximately 



February 26, 1947 

464 

ten per cent of the total revenue. When we remember that this particular insurance plan, or scheme, pays 

no taxes, federal, provincial or municipal, pays no agents commission, doesn’t have to advertise, doesn’t 

require stationery, doesn’t issue policies, has no postage to pay and carried out no re-insurance, it seems 

to me that with those factors in mind that a ten per cent administration cost is a very high one. 

 

Somebody referred to the Morse by-election, but I say again as I said on a previous occasion in this 

House, that I had never during the Morse by-election, or at any other time, prophesied or forecast that 

this scheme would not be a success from a financial point of view. In the Morse by-election I ventured 

to suggest that at the end of the year the scheme would have a surplus or a profit of half a million 

dollars. Very shortly after that some statements appeared in the public press which tried to minimize the 

prophesy or the forecast that I had made by suggesting that the season was coming when there would be 

more accidents and that sort of thing. But the net result as explained to us by the Minister today is a very 

handsome surplus, and that after paying what I regard as rather an exorbitant administration cost and 

setting up reserves referred to. The net result, Sir, is this, that the motorists of the Province of 

Saskatchewan were charged approximately between $3 and $4 for one dollars worth of service. In other 

words more than twice or three times as much was collected from them to provide the service that the 

scheme offered. That much more was collected from them than was necessary. The planners of the 

scheme certainly were not very close in their computations or in their working out what might happen. 

Now I sincerely hope that they are closer to the mark in connection with this particular plan than they 

were one year ago. 

 

The Minister has referred to the collision insurance and as I have already said that is taking the 

Government into a different phase, compensation for damage to property, material damage which, in my 

opinion, is an entirely different field and so far as the difference between Government enterprise and 

private enterprise, entirely different arguments apply than would apply in connection with physical loss 

or payment for loss of life or injury or damage to the person. He indicated in his remarks that the 

deductible feature was to be $100. I don’t think that amount is quoted in the Act. I think it is left to 

regulation by Order-in-Council but I presume that is the intention that the Order-in-Council will provide 

that amount. I looked through the Act but I could not find $100 quoted anywhere. 

 

Now in referring to the percentage of accidents to the car suffered by collision I think the Hon. Member 

for Moosomin suggested that 80 per cent of them would be under $100, the loss would be less than 

$100. Were those the figures, I think it was 80 per cent. According to the figures quoted by the Minister 

this afternoon, as nearly as he can arrive at it, it will be something over 70 per cent. But that leaves the 

impression that the loss will be paid in the remaining 30 per cent of the cases. But when you take into 

account that where the damage is over $100 this scheme will only pay the damage over and above the 

$100, actually the percentage of the total damage suffered by cars and motor vehicles in the province. 

When you eliminate all those that are less than $100 and deduct $100 in all cases over $100, it will mean 

that in the final analysis a very small percentage of the total loss sustained by collision will be paid 

under this plan and that the motorist will continue in the 



February 26, 1947 

465 

future, that is provided that he didn’t buy an insurance policy from a private line company. A very large 

percentage of the loss suffered in this connection will continue to be carried by the owners or the 

operators of the motor vehicles of the province. So I say that I would not go so far as to use the term 

‘hoax’ but it might be justified. I am going to say this thing has been presented in a much more attractive 

form than will work out in actual operation. 

 

Now the Minister has referred to the fact that he proposes to establish a garage. I presume that is the one 

that is talked about for North Battleford, to determine and to ascertain costs of doing certain jobs. Well if 

we can judge by the experience in the past, Sir, the establishment of one garage in North Battleford, or 

wherever it may be, will be followed next year by the establishment of five or six at other points in the 

province and ultimately, provided this Government is retained in office, the entire taking over of the 

garage business and body repair business in the Province of Saskatchewan. The incentive or the desire 

or the purpose of establishing this first one may be very commendable in some ways but judging by our 

experience in other respects we can only expect it will be the thin edge of the wedge and will gradually 

be extended and made of general application. 

 

I am not going to oppose the Bill because the principle has already been adopted by this Legislature but 

there are many items and details which we propose to raise in Committee and try to have them corrected 

and try and give the people of the province something more nearly what they had been led to believe 

they are going to obtain than the Bill actually provides. 

 

Mr. J. Gibson (Morse): — The Hon. Member, the Leader of the Opposition, says that regarding this 

Bill as presented, the people were being led to believe that they were obtaining protection. I can’t think 

of his exact words, but he meant that as the Hon. Minister had presented this explanation to the House 

the people had been led to believe that they were going to receive greater protection than they would 

receive. At the same time the Hon. Leader of the Opposition in explaining this part of his address said 

that in the past all of the people had been in the habit of paying all of that expense already unless they 

were insured by private companies. Did he lead us to assume that he meant that when a man had his car 

insured by a private company, that the private company paid all the costs? 

 

Mr. Patterson: — I’m just finding out, or ascertaining, or deciding what the question was. The point I 

was trying to make was this, if I may be permitted to repeat my statement. There is, admittedly, a 10 per 

cent spread between the Hon. Minister and my friend, but there is admittedly 70 per cent of the damage 

to cars, talking of the material damage to cars, that where the damage is less than $100, consequently 

that percentage of the total damage that is done to cars in this province will not come under this Bill. 

The remaining 30 per cent will have deducted from them $100 in each case. In other words if a man has 

$125 loss he will only recover $25; if he has a $150 loss he’ll recover $50. The point I was trying to 

make is that when all this is through in respect to the total damage that is suffered by motor vehicles, 

collision damage, that probably only 10 per cent, maybe not that much, will be paid to the owners of 

these cars under this scheme. So the individual owner 



February 26, 1947 

466 

will continue in the future as in the past to carry the greater percentage of any loss that he may suffer by 

collision. Now I just mentioned incidentally that private individuals can in the future I presume as in the 

past, protect themselves against that loss by insuring with the ordinary companies as I do myself and as 

a great many other people do. 

 

Mr. P.G. Hooge (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, when this Bill came before the House a year ago, I 

already had expressed my belief in that feature of it which compels people to take out a line of insurance 

which they should at their own discretion. The argument of exploitation at that time was put forth. That 

argument certainly falls to the ground because the Minister has told us that there is an enormous profit 

made in this insurance. Now, of course, you’ll expect that he had no available statistics; the estimate at 

that time might have been excused if he were now using this surplus to reduce the rate but he is retaining 

it. I think this is certainly an example of that exploitation which this Government so soundly condemns 

in connection with private companies. 

 

I am very much concerned however with this matter concerning the establishment of the repair of the 

damages to cars. We have in the constituency of Rosthern, I think around fifteen or sixteen garages; all 

of these pay business taxes and real estate taxes to the various towns and villages in that district and I am 

very much afraid that their business may be affected by this legislation. The garages during the last few 

years have not been doing a flourishing business because they have not been able to sell cars. Generally 

a garage not only repairs cars but also engages in the sale of new cars, used cars and so on. Owing to the 

limited supply of cars their business has been greatly reduced and for that reason the business of these 

garages has been curtailed to a large extent but naturally they hope that at least that part of their business 

consisting of repairing of cars could be retained by them. 

 

Now, it is suggested that a garage be set up at North Battleford, apparently as a sort of an experimental 

station to ascertain the amount that should be properly charged to certain repairs. This would no doubt 

be owned by the Government and wouldn’t have to pay any taxes – business or real estate taxes, and I 

expect that they would make their charges accordingly; figure the income, they would figure their 

expenses, so the experience of a garage at this time would hardly be a proper precedent to follow in the 

case of those who have to pay the tax. The result I think will be this – that the private garages will not be 

able to do the work at the rate fixed by this North Battleford garage and the Government will take that as 

an excuse to wreck the chain of garages and they will do all the garage business in this province and this 

industry which has been employing hundreds of men in this province so far will be another of the private 

enterprises which will be taken over by this Government in its scheme to socialize industries of this 

province. I therefore am opposed to this feature of the Bill entirely. 

 

Mr. J. Benson (Last Mountain): — I just want to say a few words with regard to this Act and I might 

say at the outset that I would have been much more pleased had the Government retained the Act as it 

was originally and provided further insurance under its other insurance schemes. I think the public 

generally appreciates the benefits that were derived from The Automobile Insurance Act. I believe the 

Act 



February 26, 1947 

467 

could have best been continued under that particular Act and the surplus that has been built up could 

have been used to provide a substantial surplus and to give cheaper insurance during the years to come. I 

think that when the Government attempts to go into any business like Automobile Accident Insurance 

that the sole purpose of the Government should be to establish that insurance on the basis of cost. It 

should be operated on a mutual basis. There should be no idea of any profits being made and I am glad 

to see that the Minister has a little bit of different idea than I understood he had when he introduced the 

Bill a year ago. 

 

I also noticed on the calendar that he sent out this year that the surplus earning of this company will be 

used to provide other social services. Of course, in a way we are providing other social services by this 

Act by extending the Automobile Insurance to cover damage to property. I believe that when any group 

of men, any particular groups of men such as drivers and owners of automobiles are paying for a service 

as under The Automobile Accident Insurance Act and any part of that money is used to provide a tax for 

other social services – then that is a wrong principle, because in that way you would be levying a tax 

against a certain group of people to provide services for other people who made no contributions 

whatever to that particular tax. I’m glad to see that the Minister has change his views in that particular 

respect. Now I think the Government would be well advised to carry on The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act as it is and carry on the property damage under their other insurance Act, on a voluntary 

basis but as it links up with this Act I think that the good features of The Automobile Accident Insurance 

Act far outweighs what I consider the poorer features of the other proposition, therefore I am 

duty-bound to support this particular Bill. 

 

Mr. W. Burgess (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — I find myself in a somewhat difficult position of knowing 

whether what I have to say now should best be said on second reading or in Committee of the Whole 

and so, Mr. Speaker, I know you will, if you see I’m away out of order, just wink at me and I will sit 

down very quickly. 

 

I have found myself in the somewhat difficult position of explaining my own views on the insurance 

question. We have had two insurance Acts brought to the House which I was able to support 

enthusiastically. The one was The Automobile Accident Insurance Act and when it was before the 

House the previous session I spoke in favor of it. I was also in favor of the general idea of the 

Government making available an insurance company, an insurance services perhaps more correct, which 

people might use voluntarily to purchase their own insurance needs. I then found myself in the position 

of being opposed to one or two clauses and when it was all over I certainly found that almost no one in 

the country knew what I wanted by insurance and perhaps they could be justified in that. I didn’t go 

along all the way and my stopping place was a bit confusing perhaps to some of the public and maybe I 

won’t clarify it much now. 

 

I do think this, Mr. Speaker, that the Government was well advised when it brought in The Automobile 

Accident Insurance Act because it was on the right ground when it made the automobile provide the cost 

of the accidents to people which might arise by reason of the use of the automobile. I think it was 

perfectly 



February 26, 1947 

468 

justified in making that compulsory, as a matter of fact I don’t think it would be feasible any other way. 

I think it might have been justified in considering an extension to cover a compulsory insurance that we 

might carry against the loss that might be caused to other peoples property by reason of us driving 

automobiles. But when they put in the Act a compulsory feature that we must carry insurance against 

loss to our own property I think they are going too far. I think that I ought to have the right or privilege 

to carry insurance against my own property damage or not as I see fit but I do think that I should be 

compelled to carry insurance against a loss that I may occasion to the other fellows property. 

 

This insurance Act dealt with something in the nature of public liability. I would have been 

enthusiastically for it, but as it is I must say, Mr. Speaker, that I question, not perhaps to voting against 

the Bill because to vote against a bill would do away with the other things which I have told you, Mr. 

Speaker, I enthusiastically support. But I want to attempt to clarify the idea that is in my mind. I am in 

favor of the insurance where it covers a lot of the damage that may be done to the people. I am or I 

would be in favor of compulsory insurance against damage that may be done to the peoples’ property. 

But I am not in favor of insurance on my own property. And for garages, I must say, Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t think they are necessary. I don’t think they are advisable and I don’t think they are in line with that 

which ought to be the policy of this Government. 

 

Mr. A.T. Procter (Moosomin): — Many Members will be reminded of that fact that when this Bill was 

introduced in the first instance I said that it is the greatest racket that has ever been forced on the people 

of Saskatchewan in the form of an insurance business. Well, thinking that over after I heard the figures 

that the Hon. Minister quoted I venture to say that I was absolutely correct. I might perhaps have 

substituted for the word racket because the operations for the past year have certainly shown that it is not 

insurance as insurance is properly understood. As I understand it when I take out an insurance policy the 

premium that I pay bears some relation to the protection which I am to receive and when the policy 

whether it be a policy of the Government or whether it be a policy of a private insurance company or 

any other kind of policy when the premium collected from it is so far beyond the protection given to me 

as it appears to have been in this case, it certainly gets outside the understood principles of insurance 

altogether. Here we have the Government giving the automobile owner, or perhaps I should say the 

motor vehicle owner, no opportunity whatever to exercise any choice in the matter of this particular 

form of insurance. 

 

I am not opposed to a proper fund being created to which those who suffer injuries from another vehicle 

accident can receive protection. But I do say, Mr. Speaker, and for the hon. gentlemen in this House, that 

that fund and the creation of that fund should be placed on the principles that I have outlined. That is, if 

a man is to be given no choice as to with whom or the amount or the terms of his policy then there 

should only be taken from that man a sufficient amount to insure that those suffering the damage from 

the operation of motor vehicles are fully protected. I think that is a sound principle. I think that is a 

principle which should have been adopted in this Act. I think it is a principle which all of us have been 

talking about right along. 



February 26, 1947 

469 

Here we have $1.3 million taken out of the pockets of the motorists in the Province of Saskatchewan. I 

pointed outlast year and I point out again that the motorists have been put under too great a 

responsibility. There is no question on that now on the virtue of what the figures have disclosed in the 

first year of operations. But that isn’t all. I pointed out last year and I point out again that it is quite 

direct that the motorist should share responsibility for all the accidents and all the damage that he incurs 

and for which he would normally be responsible. There are, however, and I don’t think the Minister 

should deny it in this Bill, benefits given to those who suffered the lost. I said last year and I repeat 

again that insofar as that feature is concerned I don’t disagree with that feature. I wouldn’t oppose that 

feature but I say that that feature and that the cost of that part of the insurance should not be carried by 

the motor vehicle owner at all. It should be carried as part of the social service of this Government to the 

whole of the people of Saskatchewan, so that there should be and if this thing was sound and equitable 

and fair there should have been a contribution by the Government to this fund. Now if there had been it 

would have been so much worse. Here we have taken from one select group $1.3 million. We have 

repaid not only the damage for which they were responsible but for the negligence of those who caused 

their own damage, $320,000. In other words, we have taken a rate 400 per cent too high. I am being 

charged four times more than I should be. I leave it to you, Sir, I know there has been a great deal of talk 

about the grain exchange in this House at one time or another. 

 

I remember being completely outraged when I was examining one of the grain exchange firms who dealt 

with the price they received for farmers. They were paying the farmer $6.60 a ton for the grain and they 

were selling it, after splitting it into three grades, all the way from $12.50 to $22.50 a ton. As I came out 

of the run I heard a member of that firm say, “those blanks (I won’t say that word) are on to our racket.” 

Well, just see the portion here they paid the farmer, $6.60 and sold quite a bit for $12.50, about twice the 

price; they sold some of it for $18; and they sold some for $22.50. It seems to me that the people of the 

Province of Saskatchewan are quite justified in saying to the Minister – these figures prove to us that we 

are on to your insurance racket. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will the Hon. Member please withdraw that remark. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Well if you say I have to withdraw it, Mr. Speaker, I’ll gladly withdraw it but the 

people will arrive at their own conclusion and watch the proper term to apply to it, I can’t think of one 

that is parliamentary. 

 

Now, Sir, there was another thing that has not been touched on in connection with this insurance Bill. 

We were told that certain features of the insurance Act were excluded from the operation of the 

Government in the insurance business and we ask why they said the resources of the Province of 

Saskatchewan are behind the Government Insurance Corporation. Therefore, we don’t need the 

safeguards that we have imposed on public companies doing insurance business, such as the 

establishment of reserves, inspections and all these other things that are extremely costly. Well, if that is 

the case and if that is the reason and it was the reason that was assigned to us, why the 



February 26, 1947 

470 

process of the insurance Act which provides for deposit for securities and so forth, is withdrawn from 

this Act. Then I say there is no necessity for any surplus in connection with this insurance company at 

all. Let us at least stand on one ground or the other. Let us say that his insurance company is backed by 

the Province of Saskatchewan and therefore we do not need to impose on it, the responsibility for 

inspection deposits, licences and so forth. Let us do as we have done with a great many other of these 

things, say all right we will endeavor to collect the proper premium as closely as possible and if there is 

a shortage it will be a charge on the consolidated fund of the province and thereby we justify the fact 

that we have not required it to submit to the rules ordinarily and normally applied to insurance 

companies in the province. But I say again, Sir, that that is an additional reason for lessening the 

premium. 

 

The Minister, too, have made a number of changes in connection with this Act. I think the Minister 

himself said in referring to motor cycles that he anticipated that he could give the same coverage to 

automobiles at a rate of about $2.50 a car, instead of the $4.50 that he tells us he is going to impose upon 

us. He also told us that even with the motor cycle cases he had made a profit of about 25 per cent. 

 

An Hon. Member: — There have been more accidents since. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Up until February 15th. Well, I haven’t any picture of very many motor cyclists 

running around the country at the present time, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think he will have a great many 

accidents since. But if he made 25 per cent profit on those and he can give us that insurance at $2.50 and 

still make a profit, it seems to me . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . a socialist. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Oh yes, but the Minister is only a socialist when it comes to my property and your 

property, but when it comes to his property he forgets his socialism and he wants a profit apparently a 

great deal larger than private industry wants. He is one of these particular kind of socialists. It is alright 

for the fellow that has no cows to socialize the fellow that has three cows; but the Minister does not 

believe that he has three cows entering into socialism so he collects the profit. And that is what he is 

doing here. So, again, Mr. Speaker, in connection with the collision damage, this was all pointed out 

before. The Minister was told last year that his rates were altogether out of line, as it proved to be. He 

was told about this collision question. I have no hesitation in saying to him today, and I believe that his 

own departmental figures and the examinations that he made will show him that his rates are just as 

badly off today as they were last year with profits too high, ridiculously high. The Minister’s payments 

will be cut perhaps a few hundred thousand dollars but he could give a proper coverage at this rate 

without damaging his fund at all. And he could still leave all that money that he extracted from the 

pockets of the motorists, unfairly and unduly last year, as a reserve fund. Now, I don’t want to go into 

the details of the various clauses of this Act, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Fines: — Will the hon. gentleman allow 



February 26, 1947 

471 

a question? If, Sir, the statement is correct that the fund is going to be in better shape as a result of this, 

tell me why it is the private companies charge $14.02 for a similar type of insurance just for a collision, 

that is $100 deductible. The average rate is $14.02. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — I can tell my hon. friend this, that when we see the benefits that this Hon. Minister 

takes as against the benefits that are conceded to the private insurance company, it is very easy to see 

why this is so in the private companies. I’ve never been an insurance agent and I’m not one today, but I 

have had enough examinations of insurance agents to know something about them. There is 

approximately 25 per cent of the first premium paid in commission. Well, there is 25 per cent of my hon. 

friend’s $14.02. Yes, then on top of that the private insurance company, as I have already pointed out, 

has to deposit a fund with the Provincial Treasurer – has to submit to very rigid examinations – has to 

carry all these safeguards which the Hon. Minister sidesteps because he says the province is behind him. 

I think next time he goes up for election he may find us not so much behind him as he thought. Then on 

top of that, Mr. Speaker, the private insurance company has to pay a very heavy corporation tax, as the 

Hon. Member knows, a very heavy income tax to the Government. The private company has to pay a 

very heavy tax to this Government, it has to pay a municipal tax, it has to pay all these other charges and 

in addition it does not take the $100 liability. I haven’t got the rates but if I remember rightly some of 

the companies are issuing a policy very much below the $14 rate and I think I can furnish my hon. friend 

with one of them too. With this collision at $100 I think my hon. friend is quoting some rates that have 

special clauses in the policy. 

 

Mr. Fines: — No, no. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Well, I think you are nevertheless. 

 

Mr. Fines: — No, Mr. Speaker, the rates are the average rates for the last five year period and provide 

for the private companies assuming, or rather the individual, assuming the first $100. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend knows something else in connection with that $14 rate. But in those 

policies while it is possible to get one coverage, the usual coverage is what we call the five-point policy 

where you get the benefit of the five points with a special rate and a $10 – $20,000 liability; not this 

little sum the Minister pays and I don’t blame him for thinking most of us are only worth $5 or $10,000 

dead because that is all we will be worth if he is in office long enough. 

 

Now all those things come, Mr. Speaker, to this whole question – as the Provincial Treasurer spoke, 

there is no man in this House that knows better how the insurance premiums are rebated and the 

protection given. There isn’t a man in this House knows better than the Hon. Provincial Treasurer and I 

challenge him to show me any private company that has made proportionately the profits of his brother 

and colleague the socialistic Minister in charge of the insurance Bill. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Show any company that paid them back either. 



February 26, 1947 

472 

Mr. Proctor: — I don’t see you paying it back either. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . paying it back next year in further benefits. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Now, I said a number of small changes here, but I hope the Minister will correct me if 

I’m wrong. He tells us that for those small changes 63 per cent of the cars are going to pay a higher 

premium and the balance are going to pay a lower premium. I submit to the Hon. Minister that again he 

is doing the most unjust and unfair thing in connection with insurance policies. The man who drives a 

$250 car may be able to cause the same damage as the man who drives a $3,000 car like the Minister. 

 

Mr. Fines: — I never drove a $3,000 car in my life. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Well what did the one you are driving now cost you or cost us, $2,400 – $2,500? When 

I drove one I paid $1,350 but I notice these Ministers all drive high priced cars – they are socialists. 

However, that car that’s driven by the Minister is getting far more protection for the rate paid than that 

fellow that has the $150 car and I think that there should be some relationship in the premiums charged 

to these cars. Certainly we an all create the same damage. Even one of these kids with a bug as they call 

it can kill a man on the street and there is some excuse at least for charging him the same rate insofar as 

it relates to that feature, but when it comes to premiums of total disability and so forth why should that 

fellow who can only get $150 pay the same amount as a man who is going to get $2,400 or $2,500. 

That’s wrong we all know it’s wrong and it’s indefensible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, I’m just going to say a word or two about two other features of this Bill. The first one is in 

connection with the garages that are being set up. You know, Mr. Speaker, I am told that in the seas 

there is a kind of a shark that when he is hunting for prey he has a pilot fish that goes ahead of him and 

leads him to the prey. I rather think that as far as the garage men are concerned this garage that the hon. 

gentleman is going to set up is a kind of a pilot plant that will lead the Hon. Minister into the 

information by which in the finish we shall see not only government garages all over the country but we 

shall see enforced throughout the country a rigorous set of fixed prices. Now that may or may not be a 

good thing, it depends on how far the Minister takes all the considerations into effect that he should take 

into effect. If he doesn’t do any better on that job than he has done on the insurance job all I can say is 

that the garage men will have to call on their Heavenly Father’s assistance if they are going to exist at 

all. 

 

The other thing I want to mention is that already by virtue of this kind of legislation, the Minister knows 

and every Member of this House knows that out in the country today it’s almost impossible to get a bona 

fide taxi driver to operate because these fees have been piled on. Extra licences, extra insurance, extra 

this, extra that, to an extent that most of them have said, well I won’t run a taxi. To men who travel 

there, I so far cannot give any personal evidence on the fact but I am very firmly of the opinion that 

there are a lot of men who are taking passengers around this country and charging them for doing it that 



February 26, 1947 

473 

have been driven to do that without a licence, a regular taxi driver’s licence, because of the very thing 

that the Minister is doing. The more this is piled on, the more unreasonably it’s piled on the more it’s 

going to continue and the more that this type of people who indulge in that sort of thing operate on the 

roads the more accidents we are going to have. There is a happy medium at which these fees can be 

fixed. When they are fixed too high people evade them and the Minister may think that he is going to 

gain in the end. Mr. Speaker, he will not do it. 

 

I am opposed entirely to the principle of this Bill for the reasons that I have expressed. I am in favor of a 

fund created by the motorist to protect all these classes of people. I am in favor of the Government 

making a contribution to that fund to protect those of our people who through their own negligence and 

not the negligence of the motorist are injured. I believe that proper principles of insurance should be 

adopted in connection with this and I am not very fussy whether you call it insurance or what you call it 

but some proper principles should be adopted by which the motorist pays into a fund to protect those 

who suffer from the accident but I am against the motor vehicle operator or driver being muffed in the 

amounts and in the manner in which he is being muffed by this Bill for the protection that is being given 

to him. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — I hadn’t intended to say anything but there are one or two 

points I was asked that I would like to answer first and that is that it is impossible to find sufficient men 

to go into the taxi business to serve the needs of the province at this time. My hon. friend pointed out 

that there were many points where people would not go into the taxi business because of the increased 

rates, increased fees. I want to assure you that our problem today is not getting men to apply for licences 

to operate taxis, our problem today is the opposite. The problem today is to try to eliminate a great many 

of the people that are applying for licences. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Your problem is to catch the ones that are running illegally but you don’t know it. 

 

Mr. Fines: — We have adopted a policy, Mr. Speaker, of limiting the number in proportion to 

population. That has now been reduced to one for every 750, in this last year, one for every 750 

population. Today in all the leading cities and towns we have far more applicants than we have licences 

to give them. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Have you any figures on the number that are running without a chauffeur’s licences 

and yet collecting fees? 

 

An Hon. Member: — He doesn’t associate with those kind of people. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Well, I keep my eyes open and I see plenty of them. 

 

Mr. Fines: — I have no acquaintanceship with the underworld but I am advised that there are very few 

licences outside of the 



February 26, 1947 

474 

leading cities and towns of this province in which that situation has been true for a great many years. All 

through the war years when my hon. friend was the Minister in charge of the Highway Traffic Board in 

most of these towns there were no livery licences obtained but the practice which he refers to as being 

prevalent now was very prevalent at that time. Now, I have endeavored to check it and to see that the 

persons that are operating their cars for hire have a licence. 

 

My hon. friend just concluded by saying that he was in favor of funds to provide benefits to the persons 

who were injured. Well I am glad he has changed because I have here the Journals for last year and I 

find here, Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend was one of those whose name was down as being opposed to this. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — And I am opposed to this Bill. I am going to vote against it. 

 

Mr. Fines: — Opposed to the principle of giving benefits to persons injured, that is what it was last 

year. On that occasion he moved that this be given a six months hoist; seconded by the Hon. Member for 

Rosthern. In other words he didn’t want the principle which he now states that he is in favor of. But I am 

glad because he is not alone, Mr. Speaker, there are thousands of people throughout this province that a 

year ago were opposed to this too that today are heartily behind us and so I am glad that he has joined 

that large number. 

 

Now my hon. friend wanted to know something about rates and what private companies paid. I quoted 

some figures in this House the first time we got into this insurance business when I introduced the 

original Bill giving the Government the power to go into the insurance business. On that occasion, Mr. 

Speaker, you will recall that I had some percentages and showed that in practically all types of insurance 

in this province the persons who pay the premiums received credit in benefits, amounts ranging from as 

low as 6 per cent to the highest of 60 per cent – the average being somewhere in the neighborhood of 20 

to 30 per cent with what they received back. Well now, we find that in this particular fund the rate is 

running low somewhere between 20 and 30 per cent but with all these additional benefits that are being 

provided this year there is only one thing I’m afraid of, Mr. Speaker, and that is that we are not going to 

have very much of a surplus at the end of the year. I shall be very much surprised if we do. For this 

reason a private company has to have $14.02 on the average to provide $100 deductible collision 

insurance. And let’s not forget, Mr. Speaker, that in these cases there must be negligence proved, 

everyone is not protected, there must be negligence proved in this case. Now if we are going to have 

$14.02 per private company then I think it is very unreasonable to expect that the Government can 

provide this at a maximum of $6 and provide protection irrespective of whether a man is guilty of 

negligence or not. I think the rate is very, very low and I am confident that my hon. friend will be proved 

to be very much wrong a year from now when he says that there will be just as big a surplus this next 

year as last year. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — That’s what you said a year ago. Right? 

 

Mr. Fines: — No, Mr. Speaker, it was 



February 26, 1947 

475 

stated a year ago that we had absolutely no statistics of any kind at all and that this fund was set up and 

at the end of the year we would be in a position . . . (inaudible) 

 

Mr. Proctor: — There isn’t one case in a hundred goes to court. 

 

Mr. Fines: — No, indeed. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Yes, indeed. 

 

Mr. Fines: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to just say in conclusion that there are the two principles. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — That’s a good one. The lawyers wouldn’t get paid if they didn’t give any more service 

than you do. 

 

Mr. Fines: — The principle of the accident which my hon. friend is now supporting and which he 

opposed a year ago, (I want to congratulate him on reversing his position there) and now that we have 

accepted that as a principle, now that we are giving these people this other amount for nothing or for $1, 

I don’t see why he should object. He did make one very good point and that is that it seems unfair that 

the man with the $2,000 car, I believe he said $3,000 – I haven’t see many of those around, the man with 

the $2,000 car would receive the protection for the same as the man with the $500 car. I agree with him 

that that does seem probably to be not just right but it’s a very, very difficult problem to work out 

anything which will eliminate that completely. I would say that even with private companies they have 

two or three ranges. They don’t attempt to take the actual value of every car. For instance a car that may 

be worth $1,600 and one worth $1,200 the premium would be probably identical in those cases. So that 

it’s impossible to work out all these little details. The main thing is the general principle and to make 

sure that the people in the province are getting their insurance for a great deal less than they could 

possibly get it under any system of private company insurance. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, before the hon. gentleman sits down could he tell us what becomes 

of the profits received through the private insurance company and the Government Insurance company? 

 

Mr. Fines: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I answered that question in this House two and one-half years ago and 

after the rebuke I got from the Insurance Dealers Association in Montreal, I hesitate to say what 

happened. At that time, Mr. Speaker, I pointed out that most of that money went out of this province. I 

gave the percentage that went over to Great Britain and the percentage that went to the head office 

located in other provinces. The statement was not denied by the Insurance Association but they did point 

out that the tremendous amounts that were left here in the province, the tremendous expense, and my 

hon. friend has verified that this afternoon he referred to the 25 per cent for the collision insurance paid 

to agents and all these other things. But a great deal of it does go outside of the province – it doesn’t stay 

here at all. It goes right out to the United States, Great Britain, other parts of Canada. 



February 26, 1947 

476 

Hon. O.W. Valleau (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, there are just one or two points I 

would like to mention which have been raised in the debate. The Hon. Leader of the Opposition raised 

the matter of what he suggested were the excessive administration costs. We are estimating them at 

present to be at the end of the year, the end of March, approximately 10 per cent. When I compare that 

with the expenses of other insurance companies I consider it extremely low even taking into account the 

fact that we pay no commissions for the premiums. The total of all Canadian insurance business other 

than fire insurance, their total expenses or their total ratio in 1944 was 42 per cent. And if we take off a 

20 per cent average premium we still have 22 per cent administration which is considerably more than 

twice as much than we anticipate this year. I think possibly the fairest comparison to give would be the 

comparison with the Workmen’s Compensation Board which is administering a fund which is 

something of a similar nature to that of the automobile accident insurance and I find that over a six-year 

period their average administration expense from 1940-45 inclusive was $8.10. Now the Workmen’s 

Compensation Board has an old established routine, well set out, and I think that if we come within 2 

per cent of reaching their figures on our first year of operation that we are doing very well indeed. 

 

There are a number of other points which I might take but I don’t wish to take the time at this late hour. 

But to those who enjoy mental arithmetic I would like them to for a brief moment (I’ll wait for my hon. 

friend to return because I want him to hear this) he was suggesting that the difference between the $4.50 

and the $6 rate were not enough to compensate between a man driving say a $250 car and a man driving 

a $2,500 car. Supposing we break that down. The man who was driving a $250 car was paying $4.50, let 

us estimate $2 of that for accident, sickness, injury, compensation, that leaves $2.50. We take $1.50 out 

of that $2.50 to cover his public liability protection which he does have under this plan, that leaves him 

paying $1 for his collision insurance. Now we take the man with the $6, who pays the $6 premium, take 

the same $3.50 away from him to cover the accident plan and the public liability, that man is paying 

$3.50 for his collision insurance. Three and a half times as much to spread between the two. Now my 

hon. friends can take those figures and work them out any particular way they like but they will find that 

with a dollar and a half spread, between four and a half and six dollars, but getting the same protection 

on the compensation, the same protection on the public liability, that really the percentage as spread on 

the collision insurance is really very heavy indeed. 

 

I would like again, Mr. Speaker, to use some figures that I used earlier this afternoon, in view of my 

hon. friends remarks about rackets, hoaxes and so on. During the years in which he was a Minister in 

this House I would like to again read in 1940 the Fire Insurance Companies doing business in the 

Province of Saskatchewan returned to the insured 25.11 per cent of the premiums. In 1941 they returned 

20 per cent – 20.20 per cent of their premiums that were returned in losses. In ’42, 28.14; in ’43, 24.7; 

and 1944 they got up to the tremendous point of 34.42. An average over the five years of 26.49 per cent. 

I am rather . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — And how much taxes did they pay? 



February 26, 1947 

477 

Mr. Valleau: — I am rather surprised that my hon. friend did not take their very, very low return to 

their policy holders into consideration during those years. We have, (I am sorry the Hon. Member for the 

Mediterranean area is not here), there is one point, two points I wished to mention, the adjusters who 

were going to be put out of business, (Oh no) only 10 per cent of the cars in Saskatchewan were insured 

previous to last year. Now ever car which has damage over $100 is insured and will require the services 

of an adjuster. A man that is looking for – a good smart man – looking for a job, the adjusting job is a 

job to get into at the present time. There will be more of them required than ever were required before in 

the province. The Hon. Member for the Mediterranean also asked me why we didn’t use the 

reconstruction garage. Well let me point out this that as is already known and known to the Hon. 

Member better possibly than some of the rest of us, that that reconstruction garage is set up for the 

purpose of training men, not for the purpose of trying to establish the costs of doing jobs. The Leader of 

the Opposition tried to, and I don’t think he had analysed clearly in his own mind the cost of repairing 

cars. He took the percentages that I gave him of the number of accidents in the various groups and 

suggested that because there was only 30 per cent of those over $100 that naturally we are going to be 

paying a very small percentage of the claims. Let me point out that in the groups between $50 and $100 

he only has at the most $40 repairs to pay for. The company is carrying a $40 deductible. The man has 

$90, it cost the company $40. Or if he has an $8 damage, it cost the company $30. But when you get up 

over the $100 you may have a loss that will run you into $2,000 on one car, or $1,500 or $1,200. You 

have all of those very high losses because there is no ceiling on the 30 per cent of the cars and between 

30 and 35 per cent of the cars which are damaged above the $100 deductible level. While in the other 

two brackets, between the $1,500 and between 25 and the 50 you have the limit when you start to figure 

the number of cars which suffer damage. I think that covers pretty well the points which have been 

raised in the discussion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer moved second reading of Bill No. 39 – An Act to impose a Tax 

on the Income of Certain Corporations. 

 

He said: Before I introduce the Bill to ratify the agreement between the Dominion and the province, this 

is a part of that agreement. I might say, Mr. Speaker, that this is a very historic occasion because this is 

the first Bill that has been introduced in any Legislature in Canada, or in the Dominion to ratify the 

terms of the Dominion-Provincial agreement, so that it is of very significant historical importance. I 

might say that last July when the Budget Address of, or rather in June, made a certain offer to the 

various provinces. The offer is well know to Hon. Members and I shall be dealing with it more fully 

later on so all I shall say at this time is that this Bill is one of the terms of that agreement. Any province 

would agree to introduce a bill of this sort to levy 5 per cent tax on corporation income. 

 

I might say that this whole Bill has been prepared by the 



February 26, 1947 

478 

Department of Finance at Ottawa. We have had nothing to do with the drafting of the Bill. I just this 

morning received from Dr. Clark, a number of amendments to the Bill, in fact so many that it may be 

necessary to have the Bill reprinted. Minor amendments, but there are so many of them that it might be 

advisable to consider reprinting the whole Bill. Now, Mr. Speaker one thing I would like to emphasize is 

this, the province does not benefit from this. We levy this tax, the entire proceeds to go the Dominion. 

The money will be collected under the terms of the Dominion Income War Tax Act insofar as it relates 

to corporations. The phraseology of this Bill is the same all the way through except that there are certain 

provisions which the Provincial Treasurer must carry out rather than the Minister of Finance and any 

monies that are collected will be collected by the Dominion authorities. There will be a subsequent Bill 

brought in to give us the authority to make an agreement with the Dominion Government to collect his 

money for us and the amount collected will be deducted from the subsidy. We will be credited with this 

amount and it will be deducted from the subsidy payable to us. 

 

Now I might say the reason for the 5 per cent Corporation Tax Act is to give those provinces that do not 

go into the agreement an opportunity whereby they can levy a similar tax and not penalize their 

corporation taxpayers beyond the 5 per cent amount. In other words, last year the Dominion collected 40 

per cent tax on corporations. They have now, commencing the first of January reduced that to 30 per 

cent. This additional 5 per cent which will be levied on all those provinces, in all those provinces that 

enter into the agreement with the Dominion will make the uniform rate 35 per cent, except in those 

provinces that do not sign. Those provinces that do not sign may therefore levy the 5 per cent 

Corporation Tax Act and keep the proceeds themselves and their corporation taxpayers will be in 

exactly the same position as those who fought to do without. Of course if there wasn’t any 10 per cent 

on these non-agreeing provinces they would do so, but they can within the 5 per cent without penalizing 

the corporations of the province. And that is the reason why it has been necessary for the Dominion to 

adopt this policy. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said before I think possibly I should have had the agreement but there are some 

points still that we are working on with Ottawa and that is the draft as it should be and we thought to get 

this in and get it into Committee and get on with the work. I move seconding reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:00 o’clock p.m. 


