



















































Hansard: February 10, 1947


170 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Fourth Session — Tenth Legislature 

8th Day 

 

Monday, February 10, 1947. 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. J. Gibson (Morse) for an 

Address-in-Reply. 

 

Hon. C. M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate I should 

like first of all to extend my hearty congratulations to the Hon. Member for Morse. I have had the 

pleasure of listening to a number of maiden speeches in this House but I want to say to the Hon. 

Member for Morse that his is one of the finest and one which was a credit not only to himself but also a 

credit to the electors of Morse constituency who had the good sense to send him here. I should like also 

at this time to congratulate the Hon. Member for Morse on his election. I regret that I was not able to 

play a greater part in the campaign but I did have the privilege of spending one or two days there. I was 

very interested in the debate in which the Premier and Mr. Rupert Ramsay spoke. An invitation was 

extended to the then prospective leader of the Liberal Party, Mr. Culliton and also to the five Liberal 

MLAs or anybody else who would speak on their behalf but unfortunately none of them turned up. It 

was most regrettable because we did have a very enjoyable and profitable afternoon. The Leader-Post I 

think stated the issue very well in its editorial of May 6th, at which time they stated — and I quote from 

that journal: 

 

The Liberals have taken a new lease on life in the past six months and are concentrating their forces in 

Morse. A win for the Liberals would have a great deal of significance for the party throughout 

Saskatchewan. It would mean that the people once again are thinking along Liberal lines. Victory for 

the CCF on the other hand would mean that the party is not losing the following it is supposed to have 

lost in the past six months. It would mean further, that the people are satisfied with the CCF 

Government and are willing to string along with it. 

 

 I need hardly draw any conclusions from that. They are self evident; that is, the people of 

Saskatchewan are not thinking along Liberal lines and secondly the people of Saskatchewan are satisfied 

with the CCF Government and are willing to string along with it. 

 

 This has been the third test of strength and in each case the Government has been returned with an 

overwhelming majority. Indeed there was another test of strength indicated and that was in the federal 

election of 1945; so that one might say that this Government has had an opportunity to have its policies 

tested by the people of Saskatchewan on four different occasions. 

  



February 10, 1947 

171 

 

On each and every one of those occasions we received a mandate from the people to carry on the work 

which we have started here. 

 

 I would like also, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate the seconder, the Hon. Member for Meadow Lake on 

the very splendid contribution which he made. I think the statements that have been made in recent 

months concerning the north country were most effectively replied to in the few moments that Hon. 

Member for Meadow Lake spoke. 

 

 I would like also at this time to join with my Leader in extending our regrets that the Leader of the 

Opposition has seen fit to withdraw from the public life of this province. While we do not agree with 

many of the things that he said and we did not agree with many of the things that he did, yet we cannot 

help but feel that he was sincere in those things that he did and in the things that he said and so we join 

in expressing our sorrow that it is necessary that he should leave us. 

 

 I would like also to express my regrets that the Hon. Member from Moosomin has not been feeling 

well. I do not know if it is generally known that this is a recurring trouble of the First Great War and I 

think that we feel all the more keenly because of that. I want to say to him that while this afternoon I 

probably shall deal harshly with some of the things he said yet I don’t want it to be construed as being 

personal in any way. I have the greatest admiration and respect for him as an individual and I do hope 

that he will be speedily restored to health so that he can take part, not only in the deliberations of this 

Session but will be able to continue until the people of Moosomin make their decision at the next 

election. 

 

 Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition might feel slighted if I do not make any reference to 

what he said but I think that he was so completely answered by the Premier that it is needless for me to 

say anything further. One little bit of advice I would give him (probably it is presumptuous on my part to 

give him advice) and that is that we expect a man who holds the high position of Leader of the 

Opposition to be constructive and to do more than to criticize the Members of the Government. I thought 

that the Leader and all Members of his party would have taken to heart the statement that was made at 

their convention last summer when speaking in Saskatoon on August 6th, as reported in the Leader-Post, 

Mr. J. D. Knowles, a former Liberal Member of the Legislature for Wilkie stated and I quote now from 

the Leader-Post of August 6th: 

 

We have sat on our fannies for five years and did nothing but criticize. The time has come for a great 

awakening and with the election of a new leader enthusiasm should rise to a point where this party can 

renew its pledges to the people. 

 

 I would suggest to my hon. friends that they take that criticism from one of their own Members 

seriously and cease from this petty criticism and give us something constructive. I thought, for example, 

that in the concluding remarks, the other day, of the Hon. Member from Moosomin, his reply to the 

Minister of Education was one of the most feeble things that I have ever listened to in this House. The 

criticism of the Minister’s remarks consisted simply of telling the Minister of Education that he wasn’t a 

fit person to be in charge of administration of education in this province and that he would not want any 

of his 

  



February 10, 1947 

172 

children to be attending the schools as long as the present Minister was in charge. 

 

Mr. Procter: — A lot of people agree with me. 

 

Mr. Fines: — I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that that is not the feeling of the Members on this side of 

the House or the feeling of the vast majority of the citizens of this province. I would say that the hon. 

gentleman is not an unbiased judge. I would say also that the time for this calling names should be over. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Fines: — I don’t think the Minister of Education needs anyone to defend him. The people of this 

province have already seen sufficient of his works. They know of his sincerity and they know that the 

education of the young people of this province is in hands that it can safely be entrusted to. 

 

 I would also suggest that our friends across the way cease this business of quoting from unknown 

persons, this reading these fictitious letters, fictitious statements without being able to place the 

responsibility on anyone. I could draft something and read it to the House. Any one of us could do that. I 

think the time for reading these anonymous documents should be over. These quotations from these 

unknown persons in Meadow Lake were probably just as fictitious as many of the arguments used by the 

Hon. Member for Moosomin. For example, he referred to Chitek Lake, forty miles north of Meadow 

Lake. Well, I was quite interested in this place. I found out later that there is no such place forty miles 

north of Meadow Lake. There is, however, a Chitek Lake about 50 miles southeast — perhaps that is 

what he was referring to. Or again, when he referred to the CCF ‘slate’ in the civic elections in Regina. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I presume that I should know the Members of the CCF Party who were running in 

the civic election and out of that whole ‘slate’ that ran in the civic elections this year there were only two 

or three out of a list of fifteen or twenty, that I recognized as being members or supporters of the CCF, 

so that when the Hon. Member talks about the CCF ‘slate’ in Regina, again he talks about something 

which I think he has not a full knowledge of. Then, too, think of the amount of time he spent trying to 

convince us that we should allow the Crown to be sued because of the vast number of Crown 

corporations that we were building up. Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we did was to give to 

the people of Saskatchewan the right to sue these Crown corporations. It is included right in The Crown 

Corporations Act, that they will have the right to sue and be sued. 

 

 The Hon. Member tried to make out that the Hon. Member for Meadow Lake was exaggerating in 

connection with the population trends in recent months from the Liberal Party about how the population 

of this province is leaving because of the policies of the CCF Government. I want to deal for a moment 

or two with that. In 1941 the official census of Saskatchewan was 896,000. In 1944 the year that the 

Liberal Party went out the population was down to 846,000, a drop of 50,000. In the last two years the 

population has dropped from 846,000 to 824,000, a drop of 22,000 in two years or an average of 11,000 

per year. Compare that with an average of approximately 17,000 per year during the period the Liberals 

were in office. Take our 

  



February 10, 1947 

173 

 

neighboring provinces. What do we find there? We find that at the same time the Liberals were losing 

50,000 in Saskatchewan, in Alberta the population went up from 796,000 to 818,000 and in Manitoba 

the population went up from 730,000 to 732,000. In Saskatchewan in three years under Liberal 

administration the population went down 50,000! What about the last two years you will say? Well, in 

Alberta the population went down by 22,000 in the last two years, exactly the same as it did here in 

Saskatchewan. In Manitoba it went down from 732,000 to 719,000, a drop of 13,000 in the two-year 

period. So when my Liberal friends and their new Leader go about this province stating that the CCF 

policies are responsible for the decline in population in the last two years, I would ask them to remember 

what happened in the previous three years when they were in power. 

 

 The Hon. Member for Moosomin is perturbed about the Saskatchewan News which was used in the 

Portage by-election. (I think, Mr. Speaker, that is pretty small.) The statement was made during the 

election campaign and was denied. The statement I made at the time was that there had been no 

quantities of any pamphlets sent to Portage la Prairie. Now, I have no doubt that a few copies of 

pamphlets did get to Portage la Prairie. I have no doubt about it at all. But, Mr. Speaker, I have in my 

hand a little book which I received in the election campaign of 1944 from a very irate woman who 

brought it over to me one evening and said: “Mr. Fines, do you know what these dirty Liberal skunks are 

doing in Regina? Here they are; they are giving out literature which is put out by the Government!” This 

one is entitled, “Some Legislation and Government Services Affecting Women and Children”, and is of 

interest to women, “issued under the authority of the President of the Council.” I told her I would not get 

too excited about it, that this was the first one I had seen and I was sure that they were not distributing 

them in very large quantities. Then after I read it I was more convinced than ever, Mr. Speaker, that if 

this was all the Liberals could do for women and children that the pamphlet certainly would not help 

them very much to get results. Now we did not get angry because a certain person happened to get a 

certain government pamphlet. I think that my hon. friend is jumping to conclusions when, because a few 

pamphlets happened to make their way into Portage la Prairie, he says that the Bureau of Publications 

was supplying these in large quantities. 

 

 I would like, Mr. Speaker, to spend just a moment or two on this question of the Bureau of 

Publications. I am very proud of the Bureau. I have had some very nice compliments about it. In fact I 

was told by one of the officials at Ottawa that the material which was supplied by the Saskatchewan 

Bureau of Publications was of the highest quality of that put out by any government in Canada. I thought 

that was very nice. It is an old ‘gag’ this business of Oppositions criticising governments for putting out 

publicity. We have the same thing over in Great Britain, where recently Mr. Churchill attacked the 

Labour Government. On that occasion he was replied to by Mr. Morrison, I would like to quote the reply 

because Mr. Morrison sums up what I consider to be a modern objective of government literature as 

distinct from political. This is the quotation: 

 

There is no question of using their services either detrimentally or otherwise for party political ends. 

They are the citizen’s right to know what is happening and we do it as a political duty and not as a 

means 

  



February 10, 1947 

174 

of protecting the Government against criticism. We can do that for ourselves. What is clearly a 

necessity of modern democratic government is that the public should have a means of knowing what is 

happening and there is a duty as well as a right on the part of the Government to let them know what is 

happening. 

 

 Last year there was some criticism in the House of Commons because of an item of $640,000 to be 

spent on Canadian Information pamphlets. At that time the Hon. Brook Claxton got up and I would like 

to quote what he said. Denying that the Government had in the past or intended in the future to 

disseminate propaganda through its information services Mr. Claxton then gave a description of the 

services offered through the CIB. Among these were, and this is quoting from Brook Claxton: 

 

Descriptive booklets as well as a regular daily airmail service, a weekly summary of news and a 

monthly publication. These were the things that were put out by the Dominion Government in order 

that the people of Canada would know how their money is being spent, that the people of Canada 

would know what is happening. 

 

 Last summer the Leader-Post on July 10th, stated that more than half a million dollars is required to 

pay the salaries of the 262 public relations and publicity men and their staffs employed by the various 

departments of the Dominion Government to grind out releases and information on governmental 

activities and announcements. Half a million dollars for 262! When you compare that, Mr. Speaker, with 

our measly little $32,600 for our seventeen employees it makes us look like little minnows. 

 

 Then again last fall the Regina Leader-Post went after the CBC. The Saskatoon Star-Phoenix at that 

time, October 8th, wrote a very interesting editorial. They stated, (I quote the Star-Phoenix): 

 

A booklet issued by the CBC presenting 47 pages of interesting information is seized on by this 

newspaper, the Leader-Post, in order to belabor the National radio system. The booklet, it says, is paid 

for in the final analysis by the taxpayer. This is misleading. Does it make the same criticism of every 

page of publicity issued by other public corporations from the CNR down to the CCF Horsemeat 

Factory? The public, it says, will get only one side of radio arguments from this booklet. Does it 

expect the CBC to finance the publicity of a private radio station? The CBC is trying it says to explain 

its policy and impress the public. Next to providing the best radio service it can at the best level of 

public interest we can think of nothing more logical for the CBC to do than to explain its policies and 

impress the public. As a matter of fact it has been too backward about doing this in the past. 

 

 Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say that previous governments of Saskatchewan have not taken the people 

of this province into their confidence as much as they should have done. The people of this province did 

not have the information which they were entitled to and which they were prepared to pay for. 

  



February 10, 1947 

175 

 

 Now I would like to leave that and go on to another statement made by the Hon. Member for 

Moosomin. I am afraid the hon. gentleman could be accused not only of exaggeration but also of 

minimizing. For instance, he stated in this House that not a dozen farmers in Saskatchewan received 

benefits under The Farm Security Act. I wonder how he will explain that in the light of the reply to the 

question which was tabled just before he started to speak! The Farms Loans Branch alone had benefitted 

490 farmers in the province. 

 

Mr. Procter: — How many farmers are there in the province? 

 

Mr. Fines: — Four hundred and ninety received benefits from the Farms Loans Branch through The 

Farm Security Act. The Natural Resources had 98 cases — there were 588 cases. Yet my hon. friend 

says that there were not a dozen in the whole province benefitted by this legislation. 

 

Mr. Procter: — And there are 140,000 in the province. 

 

Mr. Fines: — Another statement of the Hon. Member for Moosomin was that no one without money 

could buy land unless they have at least 50 per cent of the total price to be paid in cash. Well, I want to 

say to my hon. friend that it is not the farm security legislation that is responsible for that. It is the 

conditions under which our farmers are living today. Our farmers are compelled to pay for this land 

because there is such a demand for it; there is so much competitive bidding for every parcel of land. The 

people are offering to pay these large amounts. Today (this is something probably our hon. friends 

across the way do not realize), today, our people are in a much better financial position than they were 

when they were in power. For instance the farm debt when we started two year and a half ago was some 

$232,109,000. Today, that farm debt has been reduced to $97.5 million, a reduction of $134.6 million. 

Sixty per cent of the farm debt has been wiped out in this province. No, my friends, it is not because of 

legislation. Under Liberalism, of course, you did not have to pay as much for your land. Everybody 

wanted to sell their land. Why, the farmers could not even give it away! In many cases they simply had 

to abandon it, walk out and leave it. And as for the statement that the CCF will socialize the land, well I 

am not going to spend much time on that because we have listened to it for so long. In 1938 and 1944 

the people of Saskatchewan didn’t believe the Liberals and I am sure they won’t believe them now. 

Some new evidence was brought in: the Member for Moosomin spent several minutes trying to prove 

because the Silkin’s Bill had been passed in Great Britain and because the CCF has aims similar to that 

of the British Labour Party that therefore we will have similar legislation. I want to say again that the 

CCF has no intention of socializing the land of this province. What we are trying to do is to get the land 

into the hands of more and more of the people of our province and I think we are being very successful 

in doing so. 

 

 Well now we have an invitation here, at least one half of us, not all of us. One half of us have received 

an invitation to go ‘back’ into the Liberal Party. I want to say to my hon. friends we on this side are 

looking forward we are not looking 

  



February 10, 1947 

176 

backward. There is very little left of the Liberal Party. That old party formerly stretched from sea to sea 

with a government in practically every province of the Dominion. What do we find today? Outside of 

the Maritime Provinces, not a single Liberal government anywhere in the Dominion of Canada; not one 

with the single exception of the Maritimes. Go to Quebec, go to Ontario, Manitoba, Alberta, British 

Columbia. No Liberal government s anymore. I am afraid, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing left for us to go 

to, if we left the CCF to go to that party. 

 

 My hon. friend spent some time on the profits of the Crown corporations and made some predictions 

which were very interesting. First of all he stated the Power Commission was going to be No. 1 (the 

reasoning was most interesting). It was due to the high rates based on high taxes. Well, I would like to 

say to my hon. friend that he is the last one that should . . . 

 

Mr. Procter: — I desire to correct my hon. friend. What I said was that if you took off all the taxes 

from the profits there would not be any profits. 

 

Mr. Fines: — What my hon. friend tried to tell us was that if we paid the taxes which formerly the 

private companies had paid to the municipalities, to the province and the Dominion, there would be no 

profits. I would like to say to him first of all that out of this $414,000 profits for the year, approximately 

$240,000 was profits made by the Power Commission proper — not on the Dominion Electric at all. 

Now that’s something that is hard for them to understand: how we could make $240,000 profit when 

they made deficits. Let us start at 1940 for instance. (There is a deficit right up to 1939.) In 1940 the 

profit was $3,000; in 1941, $12,000; 1942, $16,000; 1943, $22,000; 1944, $32,000. Then the CCF 

Government came in and the profits jumped to $156,000 for 1945 and this year to $414,000 out of 

which $240,000 was for the Power Commission and the other as a result of the acquisition of the 

Dominion Electric. I would like also to remind my hon. friend that he said in this House on March 8, 

1945, that the purchase of the Dominion Electric was a bad deal for the people of Saskatchewan. I have 

it here. 

 

Mr. Procter: — It sure was and I repeat it. 

 

Mr. Fines: — And he repeats it. I want to say to my hon. friend that it may be a bad deal looking 

through his glasses but looking at it from the point of view of the people of this province I think that it is 

one of the best deals that has ever been made in the history of Saskatchewan. Two years ago when this 

deal was being considered I made the statement based upon the current income that we would be able to 

pay for the common stock within three years, that in six years we would have control of the common 

and the preferred stocks and that in about twelve years the province would own all the assets. There is 

only one thing wrong with that statement. I was entirely too pessimistic. I did not realize that in two 

years the Dominion Electric would have made sufficient to pay for its common stock and that in a good 

deal less than twelve years everything including the bonds will be paid out of the earnings of the 

Dominion Electric. No, Mr. Speaker, it has been one of the best deals that we have ever made and I will 

agree with my hon. friend that the Power Commission will be one of the best of the Crown corporations. 

  



February 10, 1947 

177 

 

There is no question about that — but not for the reasons given by himself. I would also like to remind 

him and other Members of this House that since this Government has started to administer the Power 

Commission there have been two reductions in rates. Fifteen cents was the maximum rate under the 

Liberal Party. Today it is 10 cents. The rates have been reduced, two years ago from 15 cents to 12 and 

last year from 12 cents to 10 and in spite of these reductions we are steadily increasing the profits. Then 

my hon. friend stated that the next one would be the Printing Company. 

 

Mr. Procter: — I must again correct the Minister: the second was the Insurance Company and he has 

got the two mixed. 

 

Mr. Fines: — Well I’ll deal with them in reverse order if he does not mind. He stated that the Provincial 

Treasurer would see that the rates are high enough to show a good profit. Well I have in my hand 

something which my . . . 

 

Mr. Procter: — Mr. Speaker, again I must correct my hon. friend. I said the Insurance Company would 

be second. Go on with the Insurance Company and I said that the rates for the printing would be high 

enough. 

 

Mr. Fines: — Well, that’s what I’m talking about. I am talking about the Printing Company. I stated 

that my hon. friend stated that the Provincial Treasurer would see that the rates for printing are high 

enough to show a good profit. Is that right? 

 

Mr. Procter: — That’s right. Now you’ve got it straight. 

 

Mr. Fines: — That’s right, now we are together. Now then, I have in my hand the King’s Printer 

Contract Price List and I notice the date is July l, 1938 and attached to it is the Gazette for July 23, 1943, 

making certain amendments to it. Now, Mr. Speaker, these are the rates that are still being charged 

today. There has been absolutely no change in the rates paid for printing either to the Government 

Insurance Company or to any other company. I would remind the House that the Government Printing 

Company is doing a little less than half of all the government’s printing being done and we are using the 

rates that were here during the depression years now in spite of the fact that paper costs are about 50 per 

cent higher, labor 20 to 25 per cent, hours 10 per cent reduced; yet, in spite of all that we are still 

maintaining the same rates and our profits the first year were 30 per cent on the investment and this year 

our profit for the Printing Company will be 45 per cent on our investment. I wonder and I challenge the 

Hon. Members opposite to tell us what must have been the percentage of profit made by the private 

companies in this province away back in the depression years when the costs were only a small part of 

what they are today! 

 

 Now the third one was the compulsory Automobile Insurance or the Insurance Company and my hon. 

friend spent some time on this new compulsory Automobile Insurance. Well I want to say to him . . . 

  



February 10, 1947 

178 

Mr. Procter: — No! Again I must correct the Hon. Minister. What I said was that making the insurance 

compulsory took away from the schools and so forth where the Government paid a grant — it wasn’t on 

automobiles at all. 

 

Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll come to that. My hon. friend and every Member of this House knows 

— yes and hundreds of thousands of people in the country will all know that my hon. friend did deal 

with this question of compulsory Automobile Insurance and again repeated that it was the greatest 

political hoax ever perpetrated on the people. 

 

Mr. Procter: — Not in dealing with the profits from Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Fines: — Never mind, we’ll come to that! I want to say to my friend that this may be a great 

‘political hoax’ as far as he is concerned. It was not though to the families of the 65 persons who were 

killed. It is no ‘great political hoax’ to the 1,300 that were injured. Another thing I would like to remind 

him of that out of those 65 persons that were killed, with the ordinary liability insurance which the 

private companies put out, only 5 per cent would have been able to receive any benefit whatever. In 

other words out of all those people there were only four whose families would have had any benefit at 

all, only four and the same with the others, only 12 ½ per cent out of the 1,300 (approximately 160 

people) would have received benefits while 1,200 would not have received a thing for their injuries. 

 

 Now it is true that we are going to have a good surplus in that fund but I want again to say to my hon. 

friend last year it was stated in this House and stated outside of the House that every dollar would 

remain in this fund. That surplus which we have been fortunate enough to build up this year will be kept 

in reserve and will be used in case we need it in years to come. One never can tell in this insurance 

business when you are going to have a bus, for example, run over by a train with 30, 40 or 50 people 

killed. A thing like that would be a tremendous burden on any insurance fund. 

 

 I was interested when my hon. friend stated the other day that this $100 deductible collision insurance 

was of little value, that only 5 per cent of the people would benefit from it. That is the exact statement as 

reported in the Leader-Post and I took it down the same way; that the Government would only pay for 

one collision case out of twenty. 

 

Mr. Procter: — That’s right. That’s what I said. 

 

Mr. Fines: — Now then on the same day I noticed that the Leader of the Opposition stated the damage 

in 80 per cent of the collisions is less than $100. Now if I subtract 80 from 100, that would be 20 per 

cent, the Hon. Member for Moosomin says 5 per cent. These, Mr. Speaker, were in the same paper on 

the same day. 

 

Mr. Procter: — Yes, one is an estimate from the garage men. 

  



February 10, 1947 

179 

 

Mr. Fines: — One is an estimate and the other is a guess. I would say as a matter of fact that neither one 

of them is right, that neither one of them knows what he is talking about. I want to say further, Mr. 

Speaker, that I don’t know and I challenge anybody in this province to tell us because there are no 

records whatever. There are no records of the accidents of $2, $5, $10 and $20 and so on, so that both 

gentlemen were guessing and because their guesses happened to be, one four times as great as the other, 

we cannot hold that against them too much. 

 

 Now, Mr. Speaker, what does this $100 deductible really mean? Well, I have made some 

investigations to find out what the ordinary rate for this type of insurance is and I find that the average 

premium is $14.02 for the $100 deductible, that is, $14.02 from a private company. My hon. friend 

would have us pay collision over probably $50. 

 

 In that case, private companies would charge $26.30 premium; or probably he would have us pay over 

$25 where the premium is $35.77. I would remind the Hon. Member that first of all the people are 

getting the accident insurance benefit on an increased scale going up to as high as $10,000. In addition 

to that, they are getting the collision insurance over $100 something which when purchased from a 

private company (the two taken together, the public liability and the accident) would cost approximately 

$20. They are getting it for $6 here. I want to say further that what they are getting for $6 is worth a 

great deal more to them than they would get from any private company because as I indicated before to 

only 5 per cent of those persons in Saskatchewan who were killed would any benefits have been paid in 

those particular instances and in the case of those injured only one in eight would have received any 

compensation under the ordinary public liability insurance. 

 

 So, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Members may oppose this Bill when it becomes before the House just as 

they did last year when the original Bill came before the House. But I want to say again that I am 

confident that when another year comes around we are going to have a demand on the part of the people 

that we extend these benefits even to a greater degree. People are beginning to realize the tremendous 

benefits as for instance the young woman who was knocked down while crossing the road and who said: 

“I would have had a hard time to pay even the doctor’s hospital account if it hadn’t been for the 

insurance protection even without considering the monthly cheque to myself which paid for my rent, 

food, clothing, etc. I had no one I could look to for help of this kind.” 

 

 There are dozens of letters on file in the insurance office to prove that the people of this province do 

appreciate it even if the Hon. Member for Moosomin does not. 

 

 With regard to the Old Age Pensions, I suppose I should not butt in on a private quarrel between the 

Premier and the Hon. Member for Moosomin. The Premier agrees with the Hon. Member for Moosomin 

that the amount of the pension was $23.02 just prior to the election but the Hon. Member for Moosomin 

did not agree yet that the pension was only $17.53 for the year prior to the election. The point the 

Premier tried to get across was that the CCF Government did not wait until just before another election 

to raise the pension to $27.55 on the average. 

  



February 10, 1947 

180 

Mr. Procter: — I think he tried to put something across but did not get away with it. 

 

Mr. Fines: — In addition to that we provide health services which are the equivalent of $3 per month 

making an average of $30.55 compared to the $23 which was put in just before the election of 1944. The 

Member for Moosomin criticized the Government for providing only $3 cost-of-living bonus while they 

gave the civil service a $20 cost-of-living bonus. We are the first to agree that our old age pensioners 

don’t get enough but I think that criticism comes with very, very bad grace from a former Member of the 

government, particularly the one charged with the administration of The Old Age Pensions Act which 

when they found that the rising cost of living made salary adjustments necessary, what did they do? 

 

Mr. Procter: — Raised the pension $5 with Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Fines: — Yes, raised the salaries of heads of boards by a thousand a year. That is what you did. 

Raised the salaries $1,000 a year. You raised other high paid civil servants $300 a year. You raised the 

rank and file of married employees $10 a month and you gave the single employees a cost-of-living 

bonus of $5 per month. Yet at that time, Mr. Speaker, nothing whatever was done to the Old Age 

Pensions. It was not until a year later that anything whatever was done to the Old Age Pensions. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — And then they raised it a dollar and a quarter! 

 

Mr. Fines: — Yes, their sole contribution was $1.25 a month. I think it comes with very bad grace, as I 

said before, for the Hon. Member to criticize this Government for trying to give the civil servants a 

decent cost-of-living bonus. I know that decent rates of pay were something which was far from the 

minds of my hon. friends when they were in office as I shall show later. 

 

 Now, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to announce today that a new agreement has just been signed 

with the Civil Service Association. Premier Douglas and the Union officers attached their signatures to 

the agreement, the end of last week. This agreement is based upon the new classification and pay plan. 

For the first time in the history of this province there has been established a scientific relation between 

the various positions within the civil service. A scale of salaries with equal pay for equal work, 

irrespective of sex has been established. This scale consists of six ranges so that for five years 

employees will be able to receive automatic increases before they attain the maximum salary for their 

position. In the meantime, of course, there will be opportunities for promotion to higher positions. Never 

before have the civil servants of any province had a greater guarantee of security. As long as any civil 

servant does his or her work faithfully and well there will be no interference with his employment. 

Seniority will be recognized for all positions within the agreement. Commencing April 1st the office 

employees will work for five days a week resulting in Saturdays free and a 37 ½ hour work week. 

Offices will be kept open on Saturdays with ‘skeleton’ staffs who will 

  



February 10, 1947 

181 

 

receive time-off in lieu of their work for Saturday morning. 

 

 There has been some criticism of the number of civil servants and the increased salaries. We have no 

apologies to offer for either, Mr. Speaker. We do not believe that we should work our employees 60 

hours a week as was the case in the mental hospitals under the previous administration. These hours 

have been reduced to 48 with the hope that we can make still further reductions. The other departments’ 

hours have been reduced to 48 hours or to 44 and in some cases even 40 hours a week. 

 

 To implement this new classification and wage plan will cost about $1 million in the next fiscal year 

but we believe that these increased salaries will result in more permanency and in higher standards in the 

civil service. The promotional opportunities, the provision for accumulated sick-leave for extended 

illnesses, together with the superannuation benefits and the better scale of remuneration should go a long 

way toward making the public service a career, thus raising the efficiency of the whole service very 

considerably. 

 

 As an indication of what I mean may I say we had to spend more money on salaries in order to attract 

into the civil service the best type of young person. In order to give these returned men coming back 

from overseas enough to keep their families in decency we had to give them much better rates of pay. 

We could not continue to pay our laboratory technicians, for example, skilled people, $960 a year in 

addition to a $7.50 monthly cost-of-living bonus in each case. Under the new agreement they start at 

$1,800. For Public Health nurses, one of the most responsible positions in the whole province with a 

wonderful opportunity to do a tremendous amount of good, the remuneration was just $100 a month, 

$1,200 a year. Today they start at $1,560 and will go up to $1,980. Stenographers — $60 a month was 

the 1944 rate with the $7.50 cost-of-living bonus. Under the new agreement these girls will start in at 

$85 a month. Male clerks started at $960, today they will start at $1,260. Our school superintendents — 

men that we put in charge of the educational system of this province, men who will go out throughout 

the length and breadth of Saskatchewan, hours being no object to them; who will travel over all kinds of 

roads into these little country schools — (I’m sure my hon. friends will agree with this) have been raised 

from $2,280 to a starting point of $3,000. We feel that if we are going to get the right type of men in 

education we have to be prepared to pay them a much better salary than was paid before. 

 

 Now let us take a look at the Telephone Department which the Leader of the Opposition looked after 

for so many years. I find that the operator started in at Regina at $45 a month during their learning 

period and then they went up to $83. This is all plus $7.50 cost-of-living bonus — $45 to $83. Today 

those operators start at $80 and go up to $120. Clerical staff were working for $55 to $115 — today they 

start at $80 and go to $145. Male clerical workers started at $60 and went to $180 — today they start 

exactly the same as the female clerks at $80. No longer is there any difference between the salaries paid 

men and women — equal pay for equal work, irrespective of sex. 

 

 I mention just those few instances, Mr. Speaker, to show you why the costs of government have gone 

up, why the costs of education for example have gone up. My hon. friend criticized the fact that there are 

increases in school taxes. Of course 

  



February 10, 1947 

182 

there are increases in school taxes. We all know that it is costing more today for education than it did but 

is it not true of a great many other things? One type of education that a great many of us get is what we 

read in the daily paper, the Leader-Post. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — And what an education! 

 

Mr. Fines: — What do we find there? We find that the cost of that education has gone up from 15 cents 

a week to 25 cents a week, a 66 2/3 per cent increase. 

 

 I should like at this time, Mr. Speaker, to thank my friends opposite for their offer of support in 

connection with the Dominion-Provincial Agreement. It is not all that we would like to have had but it is 

the best we could get. One thing I would like to emphasize about it (and I shall have a great deal more to 

say when the Bill is introduced): this is not the Dominion’s original offer. The Dominion’s offer to the 

provinces was a great deal better than it is today. Today all we have is the taxation and receive certain 

sums of money. The Dominion has not assumed the responsibility for old age pensions nor has it 

assumed the responsibility of 60 per cent of the cost of health services. It has not assumed responsibility 

for the unemployed and has not assumed the responsibility for contributing a share of the cost of work 

programs. These are things which we still hope to get; things which the Dominion has promised will be 

available to the province when agreements are completed with all the provinces. 

 

 My hon. friend the Member for Moosomin I should like to thank at this time for his one constructive 

suggestion. He spoke here for an hour and 32 minutes and he did make one constructive suggestion in 

his concluding remarks . . . 

 

Mr. Procter: — That’s a great deal better than what you have done. 

 

Mr. Fines: — . . . and that is to give the municipalities one-third of the increased subsidy from the 

Dominion Government. Now he is quite worried about these municipal governments because the former 

Farms Loans Board lands are now Crown lands and don’t pay taxes. I would like to tell my hon. friend 

that there are only about two hundred of them. Total taxes only amount to $12,000 or $15,000 a year. 

Divide that among 300 municipalities — $40 each. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — That’s pretty nearly as good as their grants. 

 

Mr. Fines: — That is not going to break them. Then, too, he is worried because of the fact that the 

Crown companies were not paying any taxes. May I remind him that there was a government board 

which was much more remunerative than any of the Crown companies or shall we say than all the 

Crown companies together. Yet, while their government was in charge of that industry — the liquor 

industry — from 1929 to 1934 how much did they give the municipalities? Nothing; never a dollar did 

they pay any municipality. 

 

 I want to say to my hon. friend that it is a very laudable 

  



February 10, 1947 

183 

 

proposal to give one-third of the increased subsidy and I think it is in keeping with the new Liberal 

program but one cannot help notice the difference in the Liberal promises and their performances. On 

August 8th, 1946 the new Liberal platform appeared. We have heard very little about it as yet, Mr. 

Speaker, in spite of the fact that Mr. Tucker says: “There will be a provincial election in Saskatchewan 

this year. I am more certain of it than ever before.” Well now, surely the people of Saskatchewan on the 

eve of a provincial election are entitled to know what this Liberal program is. I notice that Mr. Tucker 

went to some length last year when he went back to Ottawa to put the provincial program on the record 

of the Federal Parliament. Why should we not have that same courtesy extended to us? Why not have 

that program put on the records here because it is here, not in Ottawa, that the election is going to be 

fought? Surely in the two hours the Leader of the Opposition spoke he could have outlined that Liberal 

program for us or he could have had his chief lieutenant the Hon. Member for Moosomin do so. Why 

didn’t they? Is it because it might embarrass Mr. Tucker, calling as it does upon Ottawa to do so much? 

You know the other day the Leader of the Opposition chided the private Members on this side for 

introducing resolutions asking Ottawa to do certain things. I want to say to the Leader of the Opposition 

that I have studied a number of provincial political programs but I have never seen one quite like this 

one. I am going to give you some of the highlights first. 

 

 Agriculture — To support the Dominion Government in its effort to stabilize returns to the farmers of 

this province. 

 

 Irrigation — In co-operation with the Federal Government to utilize all available water for irrigation 

projects. 

 

 Grain Marketing — To support the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

 Prices of Farm Products — To support the principle of higher prices (although they voted against it 

here in this House about four years ago). 

 

 Co-operation — To recommend and urge on the Federal Government the need for enactment of a 

Dominion Co-operative Act. 

 

 Federal Marketing — To request the Federal Government that a Federal Marketing Act be set up. 

 

 Price Control — To urge the Dominion Government to retain price controls where necessary. 

 

Mr. Phelps: — Is that the provincial program or federal? 

 

Mr. Fines: — The Provincial Liberal program. 

 

Mr. Phelps: — You would never know it. 

 

Mr. Fines: — Highways — The Saskatchewan Liberal Party believes there should be in the province a 

system of inter-provincial federal highways to be constructed and maintained by the Dominion 

Government. 

  



February 10, 1947 

184 

 Railways — That Federal and Provincial authorities do their utmost to bring the Hudson’s Bay Route 

into popular use. 

 

 Finance — To press the Federal Government to increase exemption for income tax purposes for a 

married man to $2,000 and for a single person to $1,000. 

 

 There you are Mr. Member for Canora! Last year, Mr. Speaker, when the resolution similar to this was 

put on the Order Paper by the Hon. Member for Canora, Mr. Feeley, the five Members all hiked out into 

the ante-rooms so that they would not have to vote. They did not want to take a stand and not one of 

them dared to stay in here while the vote was going on. The Hon. Member for Arm River went out 30 

seconds before the vote was called. 

 

 Social Services — The Federal Government and the province to establish a contributory 

superannuation scheme. 

 

 Labour — To establish a national labour code. The establishment of Dominion and Provincial labour 

relations board. 

 

 Education — To secure further Federal assistance for education. 

 

 Veterans — Commend the Dominion Government for its excellent program of Veteran legislation; to 

co-operate with the Dominion Government in clearing and breaking up available land. 

 

 Health — To proceed to enter into a special arrangement with the Dominion Government to establish 

a contributory state aided health insurance scheme. The cost of this plan would be $21.60 per capita 

provided as follows: Dominion 60 per cent; province 20 per cent; municipalities 10 per cent. Those poor 

municipalities that a few moments before were broke and needed one-third of our revenues! Now the 

Liberal program is going to assess them 10 per cent and the individual . . . 

 

Mr. Procter: — You just refer to what you got from Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, there are 15 planks in the new Provincial Liberal platform. I want to be 

perfectly fair and say that that is not all that the new Liberal program proposes. It is much more 

ambitious than that. I would not have the House infer for one moment that the Liberal Party in the 

province does not propose to do anything itself. Indeed, Mr. Tucker would be a very, very busy man. No 

doubt, Mr. Speaker, he would want to be the Provincial Treasurer so he could put into practice his 

monetary series. I understand that Mr. Tucker is one of those who believes there should never be any 

shortage of money as long as we have a printing press around. I understand that ‘Jerry’ McGeer taught 

him that some years ago. 

 

Mr. Douglas: — Mr. King untaught him though. 

 

Mr. Fines: — Well now, Mr. Speaker, what does this new platform propose? 

 

 That residential agriculture schools be established and that scholarships be provided. That is very 

laudable — something that 

  



February 10, 1947 

185 

 

will have the support of the House in fact something that is now in effect in a limited way and something 

on which we are improving and I hope will be able to carry out in a much more ambitious way than we 

have up to the present. Now to do this, Mr. Speaker, to provide scholarships, to look after these students 

and to establish these various schools, the minimum figure to implement this program would be 

$300,000 annually. 

 

 A rural electrification program: I have had some figures prepared for me on that but I find if we want 

to electrify the Province of Saskatchewan in a period of fifty years that we have to start in now and 

spend a minimum of $1 million with increased expenditures each year thereafter; but $1 million is an 

absolute minimum that can be spent to start to provide rural electrification in the province. 

 

 Grants for gravelling all the main market roads. Well, we have 300 rural municipalities and about 50 

LIDs — let us leave the LIDs out and say we give a grant of $2,000 to each of the rural municipalities. 

There is another $600,000. 

 

 Annual payments to be paid municipalities. Well, my friend over here wants to give them a third of the 

increase in subsidy but I don’t think that he could put that across. I think that if we give them say in 

$1,000 a piece that would be $300,000, Mr. Speaker, we will put it down at that. I am trying to make it 

as cheap as I can for my hon. friend. 

 

 Then, too, they are going to make all Government-owned commercial and industrial operations subject 

to local taxation. Now of course they had their telephones and they had their liquor stores and they have 

had all these commercial organizations for many, many years and in the past no taxes have been paid. 

But assuming that they do carry this out (if they ever had the chance) it would cost them at least 

$100,000 per year. 

 

 The adjustment of truck licences and to reduce the licences on farm trucks. Even if they did no more 

than put them where they were before would require approximately $150,000. 

 

 Substantial increases in old age pensions. I don’t know what they mean by that word ‘substantial’ but 

supposing we put $10 a month (which I am sure Hon. Members would agree would not give the old age 

pensioner very much) but if we gave them say $10 a month additional for the 16,000 old age pensioners, 

that would mean a total expenditure of $1.9 million per year. 

 

 Then they are going to care for the crippled under-privileged and aged. They are going to have homes 

all over the province and bring these people in and care for them. We have had a survey made on the 

cost of providing this service and we find that it could not be done for less than $1 million per year. 

 

 The province to accept a much larger share of the cost of education. Well, Mr. Speaker, I wondered for 

a long time what they meant by a ‘much larger share’ but Mr. Tucker answered it on the radio a short 

time ago when he told us that at the present time in Saskatchewan we are only paying approximately 20 

per cent of the cost of education, whereas British Columbia and Ontario are paying 50 per cent of the 

cost. So we shall have to do the same as British Columbia and Ontario under this new Liberal 

administration and we will have to find an additional $5.7 million to pay 50 per cent instead of 20 per 

cent suggested. 

  



February 10, 1947 

186 

 To generously assist in building and equipping schools. Well we are spending some money on that but 

I am afraid that we cannot say that we are ‘generously assisting’. If we are going to be generous and take 

just a thousand schools a year and spend $1,000 apiece on them, it will cost us $1 million annually. 

 

 Then a scholarship fund of at least a half million dollars to assist worthy students who attend nursing 

schools, high schools, normal schools, vocational schools, universities, postgraduate courses — 

$500,000. If they gave them a scholarship of $1,000 apiece they would be able to give only 500 each 

year but if they reduced it to $500 apiece, they would be able to give 1,000 a year. Anyway they are 

going to spend $500,000. There is just one niggle in this scholarship fund of at least a half a million. I 

have been wondering if they really intend to make it a half-million dollars a year or to establish a fund of 

a half-million and spend only the interest at three per cent (that is $15,000 a year) and pick out about 

fifteen students a year. I do not think they will be that niggardly. I am going to credit them with the 

intention of spending the whole $500,000. 

 

 To provide for the care and training of the physically and mentally handicapped. Well, the lowest 

estimate I could get on that was $200,000 and that would only scratch the surface I was told. 

 

 The health program. They do not believe we should be collecting $5 from individuals but that we 

should only be collecting $2 instead of $5. That statement has been made by many Liberal speakers in 

the last few months. Well, the other $3 then that has now been collected from individuals would have to 

be made up by the Government which would cost an additional $2.5 million. 

 

 Then, Mr. Tucker added something to the program at Maidstone, on November 14th. He is going to 

build highways to attract tourists into the province. Well, the Minister of Highways will tell us that 

unless you can spend at least $2 million a year to build these hard surface roads and to attract the tourist 

we won’t get very much results. There we are, Mr. Speaker: $17.2 million and I still have not taken into 

account certain capital expenditures. These are very difficult to assess in terms of cost but I want to 

assure the House that they are very ambitious. For instance, a farm settlement scheme under which 

farms can be purchased with Government assistance at low rates of interest. 

 

 All I can say there, Mr. Speaker, is that I am still trying to clean up the mess from the last Liberal 

Farm Loan scheme. It is going to cost the taxpayers of this province $6 million to clean it up. That is 

what they lost the last time and from the calibre of the men I have seen working on behalf of the Liberal 

Party the last two or three years I cannot think there is much hope of them doing any better in another 

one in the future. 

 

 They are going to purchase modern highway equipment and make it available to the municipalities 

without cost. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, why the Liberals did not buy the highway machinery for their own 

highways! If they had done so we would have been able to have had a great deal more work done in the 

last two years. There was very little equipment of any kind when we came in here and most of what 

there was was nearly worn out. Isn’t it wonderful how a Liberal Party out of office can be so much more 

generous than one that is in office? It’s marvellous, isn’t it? 

  



February 10, 1947 

187 

 

 Finally, Mr. Speaker, there is to be a guarantee to farm owners who sell their lands that the purchase 

price will be paid. Isn’t that a beauty? A guarantee to farm owners who sell their land that the purchase 

price will be paid! The Liberals must be expecting that conditions are going to be very bad when they 

get in, when they have to make such guarantees in order to get people to sell their land. What an 

opportunity to use Government funds to buy votes, gain support and many other things. No, Mr. 

Speaker, that day ended on July l0th, 1944. Never again will the people of this province go back to it. 

They don’t want any guarantees of this kind. 

 

 Now these three capital expenditures would require several millions of dollars. I don’t know how 

many, nobody else knows how many. But this would all be in addition to the $17.2 million annual 

disbursement which is necessary to implement this new progressive Liberal program. 

 

 Now let us take a look at it and see what it means! During this current year we are spending about $40 

million for current purposes. I want right now, Mr. Speaker, to give the House a little warning of what is 

going to happen next year. There has to be something added to that. We have $1.2 million to pay Ottawa 

on these treasury bills under our agreement. We have $1 million which I just told you about for 

increased civil servants’ salaries. We have about $1.5 million for this hospitalization fund. Instead of 

making money for the province as Mr. Culliton and some of his friends said we are, there is going to be 

a deficit. And there will be at least $.75 million for the 1938 seed grain refunds. This makes a total of 

approximately $44.4 million as a minimum budget for next year. And now Mr. Tucker comes along and 

proposes an additional $17.2 million or a total budget for current purposes of $61.6 million. Our 

revenues this year are estimated at $40 million. For the next year we shall have received from Ottawa an 

additional $5 million. Thus we should normally have about $45 million but of course the Liberal Party 

would immediately abolish the Education Tax which yields us $4 million so that their revenue could 

only be $41 million. It looks, therefore, as though once more we would start the old going-into-debt 

policy, so well-known in Saskatchewan under Liberal administration. If the Liberals were elected and if 

they carried out their promises it would mean a deficit of $20.6 million provided, of course, that they 

maintained existing services. The first proviso is probably the more unlikely, as is the one concerning 

their promises. Anybody who has read the 1931 platform and has seen how little of it was carried out in 

13 years knows just how much opportunity there will be for them to carry out this program. 

 

 The other proviso was that the Liberals maintain existing services. Well, we are told in the platform 

that they are going to reduce the cost of government. I challenge the Leader of the Liberal Party in this 

House or the Leader outside the House to be more definite and let us know where they will reduce these 

costs. I am not ashamed of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that expenditures in three years have increased by $10 

million. I am not ashamed of that. In fact I am very proud of it. Why am I proud of it? Because of the 

places we have put that money. We have used it where it will do a tremendous amount of good for a 

great many people of this province who are unable to care for themselves. We have used that money in 

order to develop our natural resources, to develop agriculture and to provide highways on which our 

people can travel. What would the Liberals cut out? Well, here are some of the places we have increased 

expenditures. 

  



February 10, 1947 

188 

 Highways. (I’ll deal only with current revenue. I’m not mixing it up with the capital like Mr. Tucker 

did the other night on the radio.) $1.6 million more is being spent today on highways than under the 

Liberal administration. Would they cut that? I challenge them to tell us; will they reduce that amount? 

 

 Education. Educational costs have increased by $1.5 million. I challenge the Liberals. Will they reduce 

the cost of education in this province? 

 

 On agriculture and co-operatives we are now spending $442,000 more than the previous 

administration spent. 

 

 Health. Costs have gone up $4 million. Will they reduce that item? 

 

 Natural Resources, $846,000. I want to ask them if they are prepared to reduce the expenditures on our 

natural resources. 

 

 On social welfare, to pay for Old Age Pensions, Mothers’ Allowances, Child Welfare. $2.6 million 

more is being spent by this Government than was spent in the year 1943-44. 

 

 For library services. $50,000 more was spent than in 1943-44. 

 

 There, Mr. Speaker, is your $10 million increase that this House has voted. A $10 million increase 

over what was spent by the Liberals in 1943-44. Which of these items are they going to cut out? 

Probably the Member for Arm River will tell us when he gets up to speak. 

 

 Would the Opposition reduce the expenditures on any of these items? Well, it is apparent they would 

for the Hon. Member for Moosomin in the News Letter of March 18, 1944 gave us an idea of what he 

considered were adequate services. This was replying to a charge made in a radio broadcast by CCF 

Leader, T. C. Douglas, that the Dominion and Saskatchewan Governments had been guilty of 

penny-pinching niggardliness in expenditures on social services. Mr. Procter stated that in 1941-42 the 

Government’s total expenditures on social services had been $9.9 million and that was a terrific amount 

to be spent. Compare that to the $18.4 million for social services this year! Nine million in 1942-43; 

$18.5 million today! 

 

 Now, Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt they would make certain savings. I have no doubt they would get 

rid of the economic planning board because they don’t believe in planning. I have no doubt they would 

wipe out the Adult Education Division because they don’t want people to think. I have no doubt they 

would get rid of the Public Service Commission, the whole staff, because they want to get back to the 

old patronage system and give jobs to those who support them. I have no doubt they would wipe out the 

Bureau of Publications because they don’t want the people to know what they are doing or shall I say 

what they are not doing. They would cut out the broadcast in the Legislative Assembly because they 

don’t want the people to get the truth as it comes out of this Chamber, they want to get it with the 

interpretation placed upon it by the Sifton and Davis papers of this province. But even if all these 

activities are curtailed or eliminated entirely it would mean a saving of only $300,000 so we would still 

be faced with a $20 million deficit. 

  



February 10, 1947 

189 

 

 Yes, Mr. Speaker, that is the choice the people of Saskatchewan will soon be called upon to make. Do 

they want a continuation of good, sound financial policies supplied by their provincial administration or 

do they want to go back to the old high taxation and mounting debt policy of the Liberal administration? 

When this Government took office in 1944 there was a total net debt of some $214 million. I am very 

proud of the fact that at the end of December this year that debt was down below $188 million, a 

reduction of $26 million in just over two years. I am proud too, Mr. Speaker, of the fact that we have 

been able to make an agreement with Ottawa to get rid of this old Treasury Bill problem with a total 

write-off of $44 million. When that deal is completed there will be a reduction in our debt of $70 million 

but if we go back to Liberalism and Liberal administration and they carry out this program which they 

put before the people of Saskatchewan in their convention how long will it be before we are back to 

where we were? In two and one-half years we will be back with $70 million debt saddled on us once 

more. 

 

 I have heard a great deal of talk about how in the two-year period, 1944 to 1946, the present 

Government has increased taxes. I want to say to you today, Mr. Speaker, that in that period of two 

years the present Government has reduced taxation in this province by an estimated $1 million, if we 

exclude the Hospitalization Tax and the Automobile Insurance premium, neither one of which benefits 

the general revenues of the province. In 1944-45 (the last year we had a Liberal budget) there was raised 

by taxation — including Education Tax, gasoline tax, public revenue tax, motor licences, income tax 

and succession duties, a total of $14.3 million. In the present year it is estimated that these same taxes 

will provide a total of $13.3 million. 

 

 I sometimes get just a little tired of Liberal speakers and editorial writers, complaining about the high 

taxes of the present Government when actually we have been reducing taxes during the period we have 

been in office. Why do they not turn their attention to the Federal Government, turn their attention on 

the taxes collected in Saskatchewan by the Federal Government! I have in my hand a copy of a 

statement ‘Comparative Statistics of Public Finance’, of the Dominion of Canada, the provinces and 

municipalities. This was presented, Mr. Speaker, to the Dominion-Provincial conference on 

reconstruction in August 1945. These figures are for 1943 and what do we find? Well, in 1943 the 

Dominion Government collected out of the people of Saskatchewan in income taxes $14.5 million. 

(More money collected in income tax alone than was collected from all the various taxes that the 

province levies). Corporation tax, including corporation income and excess profits, $3.8 million; 

succession duties, $203,000; amusement tax, $582,000; gasoline tax, $2.1 million; liquor tax, $3.6 

million; tobacco, $8.2 million (that’s quite a blow for the tobacco users) the tax to the Dominion 

Government $8.2 million or 60 per cent as much as we collect from all the various taxes in the province; 

sales tax, $16.5 million — they collect that in sales tax in Saskatchewan and yet there is such a holler 

going up the length and breadth of this province by the Opposition because of that Education Tax which 

they levied in 1937, that little 2 per cent tax out of which we are getting a mere paltry $4 million! Why 

don’t they strain their vocal cords a little bit in connection with the 8 per cent sales tax the Dominion 

Government levies and which produces for them a total of some $16 million; other taxes (this includes 

the 25 per cent luxury taxes and includes the tax on electricity and so on ) $6.1 million. This makes a 

total of $55 million collected 

  



February 10, 1947 

190 

in Saskatchewan in 1943 by the Dominion! For 1946 you can add 20 per cent to that because of the 

increased income and because of the increased gasoline consumption, the increased liquor consumption, 

the increased tobacco consumption, and the increased sales, more goods being available. You can add a 

maximum of 20 per cent to that, so that there is a total of some $61 million collected by the Dominion 

Government out of the people of Saskatchewan, and, in addition to that, I have nothing of the tariff, the 

customs duties on goods coming into this country. The late Norman Rogers (the brother of our editor of 

the Leader-Post), one of the most brilliant economists and one of the greatest men that has ever sat in the 

Government at Ottawa, estimated that the costs of tariffs to the people of Saskatchewan was $29 million 

away back in 1931; today, it would undoubtedly be considerably more. But if you put that $29 million to 

the $55 million without allowing for any increase, there is a total of $84 million which the Dominion 

Government is collecting out of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

 I want to ask my friends opposite if they think they are playing fair with the Government of 

Saskatchewan when they are constantly criticizing the taxes that are being levied here and not directing 

any of their attention whatever to the Government at Ottawa! I appeal to them to join with us in trying to 

get relief from Ottawa, either through Ottawa assuming a greater share of the responsibilities of this 

province, or else reducing the fields of taxation which they have, enabling us to get into them, so that we 

can provide the additional services. 

 

 Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a very splendid opportunity with the Leader of the Liberal Party sitting in 

Ottawa. I would suggest to him that he prove himself as a champion of the Saskatchewan people by 

getting these 15 planks in his platform implemented for us. The opportunity is right there to do it now! 

 

 I read you a list of some 15 points in the Liberal platform, which require the assistance of Ottawa. I 

would suggest that before he merits any confidence of the people of Saskatchewan, he should be able to 

get for us at least two-thirds of those implemented at Ottawa. After all, there would be little use of him 

asking Ottawa to do it after an election here, while he is right there. I understand that he is even a sort of 

a Deputy Cabinet Minister, one of those Parliamentary assistants and as such, he should certainly be able 

to get implemented three or four of his planks, at any rate, for us. Let him urge Ottawa to do these things 

now, not after an election. They want to see some action. Let him fight for Dominion assistance now for 

our health program! Let him get Ottawa to build this trans-Canada highway right now! We need it, 

today, not three years, or four years, or five years from now. Let him get further assistance for 

education. According to what the Hon. Member for Moosomin told us the other day, never in the history 

of the province were the municipalities needing help more than they do. Okay, if that is so, then, let us 

get this help from Ottawa right now. Let us have the Leader of the Liberal Party get this Federal 

assistance while he is there. And let him get these increased old age pensions now. Of course, there’s no 

doubt but that the Dominion Government will bring these pensions to $30 within the next month or two. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Sure they will. 

  



February 10, 1947 

191 

 

Mr. Fines: — But, that is not enough. My hon. friend from Arm River would not want to live on $30 a 

month. Of course, he wouldn’t. And I’m sure he doesn’t want those men and those women who have 

given the best years of their life to build up this province to live on $30 a month. He does not believe it 

is enough. He agrees with me they should have a great deal more and he agrees with me too that his 

Leader should be fighting for it at Ottawa and I am sure he will see that he does fight for it. Mr. Speaker, 

as a Federal Member and as a Parliamentary Assistant, he has a glorious opportunity to do these things 

for the people of Saskatchewan right now, not several years from now. I am convinced that the people of 

this province will not take their pre-election promises too seriously. Unfortunately we have had other 

Liberal programs just as radical as this one but after the election nothing ever happened. 

 

 The people of Saskatchewan have expressed their confidence in this Government on four different 

occasions. First of all, in the by-election in Shellbrook, the by-election in Wadena, the Federal general 

election in 1945 and the by-election in Morse in 1946. The Gallup Poll claims there is more CCF 

support today than there was in 1944 when the Liberal Party were all but wiped out in this province. An 

election now would finish the job. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it is a good time. I was very pleased that the 

Leader of the House, the Premier, the other day invited the Liberals to ask for a general election. I don’t 

think they want one. Their Leader has gone over this province from one end to the other. The response 

he has got has been very discouraging, very discouraging indeed. For public purposes, he states that they 

could win twelve seats but privately he admits they haven’t a ghost of a chance. 

 

 I think, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan have confidence in this Government. I think the 

Speech from the Throne, which has been placed before this House by His Honour lays before the 

Members of the House certain constructive proposals to round out the program upon which we have 

embarked. This year, I am confident that we will be able to make even greater progress having got a 

number of our Crown corporations in operation and having staffs trained to do the job. I have great 

confidence in the future and because of that, Mr. Speaker, I am confident that the people of this province 

will rally behind this Government. And so, as one of their representatives, speaking for the people of the 

constituency of Regina, I am going to support the motion. 

 

Hon. J. A. Darling (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to associate myself with all 

those who have gone before me in extending my congratulations to the Hon. Member for Morse for the 

admirable way in which he moved this motion. I feel that it was a pretty heavy assignment to give to a 

new Member on his very first occasion of sitting in the House and I can well appreciate the anxious 

moments he must have had prior to rising to his feet on that occasion. But after seeing the Hon. Member 

in action, after listening to him in caucus, I have no hesitation, Mr. Speaker, in forecasting for him a 

future in the political life of this province. 

 

 I, too, would like to congratulate the Hon. Member for Meadow Lake. There are some people in this 

House who can get up and speak and there appears to be no notice taken of it. 

  



February 10, 1947 

192 

But the Hon. Member for Meadow Lake never rises to his feet but that he provokes an attack from the 

Opposition benches. I don’t have that faculty. I believe I have a reputation in this House for being very 

easy on the Opposition, in fact, for leaving them alone and minding my own p’s and q’s. Why that is I 

don’t know, unless it is this, that it is usually my fate to follow a Cabinet Minister as I am doing on this 

occasion and when I take over I find them bruised and bleeding at my feet. It is more than my 

humanitarian instincts can stand to continue the attack. 

 

 As a farmer Member of this Legislature I would prefer to deal with agricultural matters. I always feel 

like doing that when I take the floor, but when I look over the Order Paper and see the number of 

resolutions dealing with agricultural matters, which are listed there one after another, I feel that there are 

going to be many opportunities to discuss agricultural affairs. 

 

 It was a small paragraph in the Speech from the Throne that prompted me to take part in this debate. 

Perhaps it escaped the attention of a good many Members but it deals with a subject that very seldom 

comes up in the House and on which we have an opportunity to speak. The paragraph reads as follows: 

 

A long-term parks development program has been started. This will provide increased accommodation 

and recreational facilities which will contribute to the greater enjoyment and health of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 Now it was that paragraph, as I say, that has given me the opportunity to draw to the attention of the 

Government some matters pertaining to park development and park maintenance. 

 

 But before I go on to that I want to take up the cudgels on behalf of the town of Meadow Lake because 

I had the benefit of a visit to that community last October, I believe. And I was surprised to hear the 

Hon. Member for Moosomin describe that area or that district as one which was on the skids, as it were 

— as one that was entering a depression or was moving downhill. I believe that it is a good thing for 

every Member of the Legislature when he can take the opportunity to visit the northern part of our 

province. I don’t think that anyone who hasn’t been there, as evidently the Hon. Member for Moosomin 

has not been, at least not since they moved Chitek Lake. I don’t think anyone can fully appreciate the 

development that is going on there. One would think to listen to some speakers that Meadow Lake was 

set in primeval forests and that the main industry was the sawing of timber. I found it an agricultural 

community and some parts of it are very good as far as agriculture is concerned. The land varies 

considerably but there were heavy crops, heavier than we ever see down on the brown soil of the central 

plains of Saskatchewan and there was more than just good crops. When I was there there was a farm 

strike in progress, which would seem to indicate that there were farmers there and there were five 

stalwart picketers marching up and down on the street from which the roads to the elevators and to the 

station led. Now I’m not going to say anything about the farmer’s strike but where you get a farmer’s 

strike you get farmers and where you see good crops you are usually in an agricultural community. 

 

 It’s true I didn’t see a sawmill because I didn’t see any timber upon which to use a sawmill but I did 

see hotels where I was just fortunate to get a room. I went to one hotel and they said, “No 

accommodation”, I went to another hotel and “No 

  



February 10, 1947 

193 

 

accommodation” and eventually I was able to get a room because it happened to be a Friday night. If it 

had been a Saturday night, I was told, I would have been out of luck. Then I began to look for a 

restaurant. There were plenty of them. If the Hon. Member from Moosomin had said that not all of the 

restaurants in Meadow Lake were particularly high class I wouldn’t have been able to take issue with 

him, because I had to look around a little bit before I could find a good restaurant but when I did, and 

there are a good many restaurants, I found them all busy. The Hon. Member for Moosomin says that one 

of his informants claims that he could fire a shot down the main drag without hitting anyone. Well, I 

have seen days last week when I would undertake to fire a shotgun down Eleventh Avenue without 

hitting anyone and if you choose the proper time you can do the same in Meadow Lake or Moosomin. 

 

 But I did find Meadow Lake different from any town that I have been in for a long time because of the 

air of the pioneer country — the air of progress and initiative and community building. The first building 

that caught my eye as I drove up from the South was the new school building which is in the course of 

construction. I was interested in it and I went over to it later on and I was told that it was a new high 

school. It really is a fine building, not the kind of building which would be established in a community 

which was expected in the near future to be a ghost town — full basement, substantial structure. 

 

 I found garages rather comparable to some of the garages in the city of Regina, if not quite equal to 

them in space, equal to them in service and very spacious too for a town of that size and there are several 

of them. I found the community more crowded with large capacity trucks than any community that I 

have ever been in. One of the informants of the Hon. Member of Moosomin had said that the trucks 

were pulling out. Now, there is an element of truth in that. I was speaking to a garage man and I said, 

“This must be a hopeful place in which to establish a business.” He said, “Yes, but there might be some 

slight recession as far as garage work is concerned.” He said, “We are losing some trucks because of 

Government regulations in the fishing industry.” But those regulations, Mr. Speaker, are, I find on 

inquiry, the regulations under which lakes are classified into “A” and “B” lakes. Unfortunately some of 

the fishing lakes near Meadow Lake are classified as “B” lakes and the fishing was stopped on those 

lakes. But this Government, the Department of Natural Resources, has set up since that time a filleting 

plant in Meadow Lake which will make it possible for fishing to continue again on those lakes and it 

may be that the truck situation will correct itself there. It may be that this Government has saved the 

fishing industry in the neighborhood of Meadow Lake. 

 

 Now, I don’t think I need to go on any further in connection with that town. It’s a thriving community, 

people are busy and they are optimistic and there is plenty of money around up there. While I was there 

the Hon. Member from Meadow Lake asked me to go with him to the nudist colony which has been 

established at Green Lake. I think it is worth while and should be of interest to this House to hear of that 

nudist colony. If the Hon. Member from Moosomin were in the House, and I’m sorry he isn’t, I’m sure 

that he would remind me that that colony was started by the previous Government or a previous 

Government, and I would agree with him. The present Government has carried on, and if Members of 

the previous Government were interested in 

  



February 10, 1947 

194 

the development I am sure that it would please them very much to see how faithfully the program was 

being carried on, expanded and improved. I think I’m correct in saying that we are profiting from the 

mistakes of the previous Government, and that is the natural course of progress. 

 

 I found there developments which surprised me exceedingly. I found a large, fully-modern building 

almost completed, which will be used as a children’s shelter for Metis people. It seems that there are a 

large number of neglected or orphaned children in a community of that kind and they have set up a very 

large and fully-modern, steam heated shelter for them. I hope the Hon. Member for Meadow Lake will 

correct me if I make a mis-statement. I made no notes except mental notes while I was there. I was told, 

too, that a large administration building will also be constructed. I believe, also, that another building 

similar to the children’s shelter is to be built. Then there is a large four-room school well on the way in 

construction. Those buildings will form four sides of a square and make a very attractive setting for the 

community. I think a great deal of credit is due to each Government department that has had a hand in 

that development. I believe the children’s shelter will be operated under the Department of Social 

Welfare. I understand the LID Branch of the Department of Municipal Affairs has something to do with 

the project and certainly, I would imagine, the Department of Natural Resources must be at least 

consulted in the matter. The whole project looks to me as if, far from being a sore on the face of the 

Province of Saskatchewan, the time might well come when the Metis people will be just a little better 

off than the rest of us who are living out here on the prairies, if that project really goes through. 

 

 The Superintendent, there is a man of vision, of enthusiasm and of understanding. I think that the 

Government is fortunate to have such an employee. I only had the opportunity to assess his qualities in 

an hour but he has not only the present in view, he has the future in view, and he visualizes for that 

colony a time when he hopes that the Department of Natural Resources will agree to a forest reservation 

in the surrounding area. He hopes they will be able, at some time, to reserve that area for the use of the 

colony because the Metis people enjoy working in the bush. 

 

 I might say that the buildings that are being constructed there, those that I have mentioned, are being 

constructed out of timber which had been cut by the people themselves and had been sawn and planed in 

a sawmill which had been rented for the purpose. Connected with the development there is a forestry 

farm or nursery where they are growing spruce trees from seeds which they propose to use in 

reforestation of the area immediately surrounding. I saw there half a million trees in the nursery stage, 

250,000 (if I am wrong the Hon. Member for Meadow Lake will correct me, those figures have just 

stayed in my mind), 250,000 trees which were in a frame covered with lattice work to keep the direct 

rays of the sun off and 250,000 which had developed from that stage and had been set out in a plot 

covering several acres. Now, it takes five years to grow a spruce tree from seed until it is ready for 

planting out in the forest and none of those trees had reached the five year period. 

 

 The Superintendent there said the Metis people enjoy that work. They like doing it and they like doing 

any work which has to do with wood. They like lumber and, of course, they like 

  



February 10, 1947 

195 

 

fishing and they like trapping and all those occupations are open to them in that area. So that there is a 

variety which they seem to need. They can go from one to the other and so round out the year’s work 

without becoming tired of any one monotonous job. I might say that, if I am correctly informed, the 

policy of the previous Government was to establish each family on a plot of forty acres. This was found 

impractical because it anchored the man there. Then they tried to farm the land all in one block but they 

found that after they had trained a man to say look after one branch, say the poultry, or the hogs or the 

dairy cattle, that he was just as likely as not to decide that he was going fishing or going hunting and 

they found that they were out of their man. So, at the present time the farm connected with the project is 

farmed and the laborers are paid for their work. But I was at that farm and I saw the livestock or a little 

of it. I saw the poultry, the poultry houses were immaculate, clean litter on the floors and the poultry 

were in well fenced runs and they were fairly high quality or Plymouth Rock poultry. They don’t 

attempt to raise breeding stock there just a commercial flock, but they made a very creditable showing. 

 

 I saw there a relique of the past, a flour mill which some previous enthusiast had shipped in there. It 

hasn’t been taken out of the crate. It’s still standing in the shed up there. I’d like to remind the Hon. 

Minister of Municipal Affairs that if he has anything to do with it that any time he wants a flour mill he 

can get one there because they didn’t tell us that they didn’t propose to make any use of it. But the whole 

project is entirely creditable and it’s worth anyone’s time to go and look it over. 

 

 Now, I come down to the park question. I have had a great many complaints from my constituents in 

and around Watrous of the condition of the provincial park there. It is for that reason that I am 

particularly pleased that the Government proposes a long term park development program. For a long 

time the provincial park at Watrous has not been cared for in an adequate manner. The people were 

hoping that with the advent of this Government that it would receive more attention. I am sorry to say 

that that has not been true. No one appreciates more than I do the good work which has been done by the 

Department of Natural Resources and it is wonderful that so much ground has been covered by that 

Department. I am sorry the Hon. Minister is not here but what he needs is bifocal glasses and to use 

lower lenses. He sees nothing south of the timber line. If it’s any closer than that why he just looks right 

over it. Now I don’t think he knows anything about it. I don’t think that he has been well informed in 

connection with that park. I might say that the conditions in the front of the Chalet might pass muster. I 

haven’t heard much about it. But the chairman of the Royal Commission which was set up to examine 

the medicinal qualities of the water down there, happened to go behind the Chalet. He met a man there 

who was a stranger to him and this man drew his attention to the general untidiness and lack of care 

about the back of those buildings. He said to him, not knowing him, “There is a Royal Commission 

sitting here today and they are going to look this property over. You would think they would tidy this up 

for one day at least.” Evidently that had not been done. 

 

 I’m bringing this up in the House because I have tried other ways and I have had no results. I wrote the 

Director of Parks. I got an answer on August 20th. He took immediate action after 

  



February 10, 1947 

196 

he heard from me. He went up to the park and he made a change. He didn’t fire anybody but he switched 

responsibility from one man to another. I thought the thing would be fixed up now but I was 

disappointed to find that there was no improvement at all. I don’t know how many of the people here 

play golf. I haven’t played since I came to Canada and I never did play where the greens were made out 

of sand, but they tell me that they have sand greens on the golf course at Manitou Beach and they tell me 

that there is a little ridge of sand around the outside of the green and when the ball comes to rest against 

that ridge their rules provide that they can move that ball a foot one way or another from the ridge so 

that they can play. But for years now there hasn’t been any ridge. There has been no clearly defined 

border to that green and the grass has been growing up through the sand. Old golfers in the town of 

Watrous have stopped taking out season tickets because the course is not in condition to play. 

 

 That is only part of it. On the Chalet beach because of the low water level at the present time there are 

many stones, unsightly stones, lying there on that beach. That is provincial property. In fact, the whole 

beach that passes in front of the village is the provincial responsibility, at the village limits and at the 

high water marks. There has been a splendid opportunity during those dry years to tidy up that beach, to 

remove those stones which are a nuisance and a menace to bathers and yet those stones lie to this day. 

On the Chalet beach which is of particular interest to the province, where one would expect that it would 

be kept tidy and neat, those stones were there at Christmas time, although a delegation had come down 

here last fall and protested against those stones being left there and had been informed that they would 

be removed immediately. So, the condition of the provincial park at Manitou Beach, I hope, will receive 

much greater attention from the Department of Natural Resources than it has in the past. 

 

 I’m glad to know that the Minister of Highways has given at least tentative approval to the hard 

surfacing of the highway between the town of Watrous and the beach. I might say that the reason that 

this is almost necessary is because there is a great deal of traffic there and in dry weather the dust clouds 

make it unsafe to drive on that three mile stretch. Car after car keeps a continuous curtain of dust and it 

is quite possible that the money spent by the Highways Department in hard-surfacing that stretch of road 

may well save the insurance office enough to pay for the hard-surfacing. 

 

 Now, there is no inkling as to what this long-term parks development may be. I hope that it envisages 

the development of summer resorts in many places in the province but we are not going to adopt a 

policy of concentrating on large parks. I feel that money might be better expended in developing a 

multiplicity of small summer resorts, than in centralizing on parks that might be even remotely 

comparable to that at Waskesiu. There are many small beaches that are shown on our highway maps as 

summer resorts and which when visited by travelling tourists just result in their going away in disgust. 

Either those things should be taken off the highway map so that no one goes in there or they should be 

fixed up in such a manner that a tourist isn’t misled to expect something that is not there. I don’t propose 

to suggest how this might be done but it does seem to me that there might be some sort of grant-in-aid to 

the owners of those small beaches which would enable them to provide 

  



February 10, 1947 

197 

 

facilities which make them attractive. 

 

 I wanted a day of relaxation last summer and so did my family and knowing that there was no 

relaxation for me in the vicinity of Manitou Beach I went up to Wakaw. I went to a little beach there 

called Poplar Beach and I found that (unfortunately, we are not on the air at this time) I knew the owner 

of that beach and immediately he took me into his back parlor and started to tell me what the 

Government might be able to do to help him with that beach. Now, I got out in a boat and nobody 

followed me so that I did have some relaxation but I thought afterwards that there was something in 

what that man had to say. 

 

 He has 40 acres on the lake shore at Wakaw Lake. Now, in some of the lakes in Saskatchewan the 

water level is a problem but on Wakaw Lake for some reason or other, the water level is as high as it has 

been for many years. It comes right up to the trees and the trees go right down to the water. You can take 

either way you like, all the way around the lake. You don’t look across the lake to a series of barren hills 

on the one side and trees on the other which is so common in this province, the trees are all around the 

lake. There is good fishing in the lake. There is good boating in the lake and there is good bathing in the 

lake and it is very pleasantly wooded. This particular beach at Poplar Beach has 40 acres along the lake 

shore and he has also a dance hall, store and some summer cottages where people go to spend a month 

or so in the summer. 

 

 But there is no provision for the casual tourist who may happen to drop in and tourists have been 

driving in there four and one-half miles from No. 2 highway and simply finding that there was no 

accommodation for them and going out again. It is reasonable to suppose that some of those tourists had 

come from the United States that they might plan their day’s journey to spend the night at this summer 

resort which is marked on our highway map; instead of that they find that there is no accommodation. 

 

 At this place also there is a nine hole golf course. I didn’t look it over but I was told that it could be 

just as good a golf course as a fair average golf course. Now, it would seem to me that if a plan could be 

worked out whereby the owners of little beaches of that kind, providing they were the right kind of 

people, could receive a measure of assistance. I don’t say spend a lot of money on it, but a measure of 

assistance to set up some cabins there to provide — well, this beach needs some sand on it — to do work 

of that kind and make our small beaches attractive places for the casual tourists to drop into. Then 

greater use would be made of our beauty spots of Saskatchewan and Wakaw Lake is certainly one of 

those. We would leave a better taste in the mouths of our tourist people and we would spread holiday 

and recreation facilities nearer home and to a greater number of people in Saskatchewan. 

 

 Now, I spoke on it long enough. I hope that what I have said will have some effect upon the care and 

maintenance of the park at Manitou Beach. In case I have been too severe may I say that no one 

appreciates more than I have, the work which has been done by the Department of Natural Resources, 

but there is a hole in the fabric and I feel sure that we have a right to expect that the whole program and 

policy of the Department will come up to the standard which has been set in other respects. Mr. Speaker, 

I support the motion. 

  



February 10, 1947 

198 

Mr. W. S. Thair (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker and Hon. Members, arising in this debate I wish to say a 

few words on behalf of the constituency of Lumsden which I have the honor to represent. I would first 

like to congratulate the Member for Morse constituency on his splendid victory in the by-election of last 

summer and on his excellent speech on Monday last. As for the youthful Member from Meadow Lake, I 

feel he excelled himself in the relating of some of Mr. Tucker’s northern goats. Likewise, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to say that Premier Douglas and the Hon. Mr. Fines, in characteristic manner, in my humble 

opinion had most effectively completed the job in exposing the wide and early as possible statement of 

Mr. Tucker in recent months and effectively laid low the remaining misstatements of both North, South, 

East and West. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, I believe this is one occasion when the elected Members may, if they so desire, discuss 

anything and make a general statement on a wide variety of subject matters pertaining to their 

constituency. I would like to make a particular reference, perhaps a brief reference, to crop yields, 

livestock and dairy production and prices, and perhaps make a brief reference to Government policy and 

other matters of common interest. 

 

 I am sure all the Members of this House appreciate the efforts of Premier Douglas and Mr. Fines, 

Provincial Treasurer, in their successful negotiations with the Federal Government on 

Dominion-Provincial Tax Agreements. The proposed annual subsidy to be granted to the Province of 

Saskatchewan along with the cancellation of a large portion of Treasury Bills given by former 

governments will, I trust, be of great assistance to the people of the province. I know they will. I might 

say that the provincial debt, including the Treasury Bills, had been reduced, I believe, over some 

$70,000. The provincial bond debt and the refunding issues have been refunded at the lowest possible 

rate. In the history of the province I think, it is around three or three and a quarter per cent and the 

provincial bonds are at the new high level. Apparently our Provincial Treasurer has made a Dominion 

wide reputation for himself in handling Saskatchewan financial problems this past two and one half 

years. In the words of a recent magazine article, I would like to quote: 

 

 For a member of the supposedly impractical plan, former school teacher Fines has caught on fast. 

 

 I agree with that, Mr. Speaker, caught on fast indeed. It is to be hoped that when at least seven of the 

nine provinces have reached satisfactory settlements of tax agreements that the Federal Government will 

not delay to implement its former pledge to give financial assistance to the Provincial Government and 

to all the provinces with regard to a national health scheme, increased social services, increased Old Age 

Pensions at 65; and that they will accept responsibility for national or Federal highways similar to the 

great national highways down in the nation south of us. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, with regard to farm production in my own constituency of Lumsden, I would just like to 

say a few words and that is to say that the field crops, particularly on summer fallow land from Kronau 

to Regina to Moose Jaw and Tuxford areas and north of the Qu’Appelle Valley and Lumsden are very, 

very excellent indeed with the yield running perhaps to 20 and 25 to 40 bushels per acre. At the same 

time, the northern area north 

  



February 10, 1947 

199 

 

of Qu’Appelle Valley south of Aylesbury and Chamberlain reported a much lower yield because of 

drought conditions. Assistance should be given to these farmers in a greater measure than PFA payments 

which if administered on a more equitable plan or basis or more nearly on an individual farm basis 

would be of great assistance. Or, an adequate crop insurance scheme supported by the Federal 

Government should be in effect to assist such farmers in the years of low crop yields. I understand from 

the Income Tax Department here at Regina, that very little has been done, in fact, nothing has been done 

this past year to make any change in the present PFA Act. 

 

 The hog production in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has found a new low level since 1943-44 and this 

is due entirely to two or three factors. One of them is the federal income tax. I had a letter from a man in 

my constituency who said and I quote: 

 

If Mr. Gardiner really wants hogs, let him persuade the Minister of Finance to exempt the revenue 

from hogs from income tax purposes. 

 

 If he can do this, and I doubt it, he will get so many hogs he may have to put deliveries on a quota 

basis like wheat. There is not any doubt that the federal income tax is a detriment to the raising of hogs 

and secondly, the discrimination against feeders of hogs who grow their own feed, and of course, the 

prevailing wheat prices are also detrimental. 

 

 There does seem to be a difference of opinion, Mr. Speaker, as to the value of the barley acreage 

bonus as compared to a high price per bushel, to obtain increases in barley production. I have tried to get 

all the information and keep an open mind on this subject. Mr. Gardiner, however, points out that the 

higher price per bushel of barley will not increase hog production to meet Britain’s requirements and 

that he is resorting, therefore, to the acreage bonus. 

 

 Now, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the Lumsden constituency, I would like to say a word about the milk 

question. Within the Lumsden constituency there is the greatest food, milk production area in 

Saskatchewan. This area produces milk for most of the cities of Regina and Moose Jaw which have a 

combined population, I suppose, of nearly 100,000 people. I regret to say that milk production has gone 

down rapidly this past year. A number of dairymen have gone out of business because of the high cost of 

labor, feed and replacement of equipment of all kinds. At the same time there has been a slight increase 

of milk consumption in the Regina area. But at the present time large quantities of powdered milk have 

been shipped from eastern Canada to both Regina and Moose Jaw and this is being sold to the people in 

the form of reconstituted milk or cream milk. 

 

 At the recent dairy convention held here last week in Regina, Mr. E. A. Strudwick of Fort Qu’Appelle, 

the Past President, formerly president of the Saskatchewan Dairy Association, made the following 

statement, and I quote: 

 

Certain outside factors that have affected the dairy industry of Saskatchewan during the past year were 

the high cost of labor, feed, also the rapid rise of cost of replacement and repairs. All three of these 

factors together he said made it increasingly difficult to produce milk on the basis which would 

provide a margin of 

  



February 10, 1947 

200 

profit, over the actual cost of production. 

 

 I heartily agree with the opinions of Mr. Strudwick after consulting a number of dairymen in my 

constituency. 

 

 But just how can these production factors be overcome? Shall we take the word of Mr. T. G. Taggart, 

who is chairman of the Agricultural Support Board when he said at the closing session of the National 

Dairy Council at the Royal Alexander Hotel, Winnipeg, lately and I quote: 

 

Floor prices will stabilize and maintain production at a higher level, not only for dairy products but all 

agricultural products. 

 

 Or shall we take his word a few days later when, again, Mr. Taggart warned farmers of the definite 

limitations of maintaining floor prices as they could take losses only for a short period. So we haven’t 

much hope from the Prices Support Board. 

 

 I believe, Mr. Speaker, that in order to increase production without adding to the consumers present 

cost of living it would be necessary for the Federal Government to resume payment of the former milk 

subsidy to producers. I have in my hand also a letter today from a city Member, the Federal Member for 

Regina City, Mr. J. O. Probe. In order that we might be in line with our Members in Ottawa who made 

this statement, if we are going to do anything about it we should introduce a private Member’s 

resolution to claim a petition to the Dominion Government protesting the removal of the producers 

subsidy on milk contrary to the will of Parliament. That is, it is removed contrary to the will of 

Parliament. This is well known throughout this House and contrary to the interests of most of the milk 

producers and the families of milk consumers. I repeat again, whether we like the subsidy business or 

not, from the standpoint of the consumer and the producers of milk in at least my constituency, I can see 

no better way nor no more fair way than to resume payment of the former milk subsidy to producers. As 

stated by Mr. Coldwell at the close of a recent address and I quote again on this subject, because it is an 

important one in my constituency: 

 

Any Government which can pay huge subsidies to the Steel Company of Canada, the Aluminum 

Corporations and the Canadian Pacific Railway, can surely afford to subsidize the producers and 

consumers of milk on which so largely depends the health of the children of Canada. 

 

 Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words about highways in my constituency. I am sure 

everyone is aware in this House, that Regina, that the Lumsden constituency, has a very large mileage of 

highways. I marked once, I think it was in one of the Department of Highways, that perhaps we have the 

most mileage of highways than any constituency in the province because of our geographical position 

surrounding both cities. And the official mileage said yes, I guess that is right, although the Yorkton 

constituency back in the years of Carl Stewart were certainly very close to the Lumsden constituency. 

But the highways, I might say, Mr. Speaker, are a vital problem in this Lumsden provincial constituency 

and as I said before because of a geographical position, because of the heavy traffic on highways leading 

to these two cities from all parts of western Canada, the great problem of the Department of Highways, 

as I see it in this constituency, is the reconstruction or rebuilding 

  



February 10, 1947 

201 

 

 

and the maintenance of already existing highways. Because of the traffic to and from Regina and Moose 

Jaw from all parts of the province, Lumsden constituency has, I believe, far more miles of provincial 

highways, both gravel and black top than any other constituency in the province. I would like to 

commend and here I must be careful, I would like to commend Hon. J. T. Douglas, Minister of 

Highways, on the completion of the Regina to Moose Jaw highway, black top highway, including the 

splendid overhead bridge at Belle Plain. 

 

 But, Mr. Speaker, before the Hon. Member for Moosomin, former Minister of Highways gets to his 

feet, I would just like to give credit where credit is due and I am a bit timid before such a mighty man 

but I would just like to say that some eight miles of this highway were re-surveyed and constructed by 

the former Liberal administration. Eight miles, just think, and I believe that the Highway diversion at 

Belle Plain was surveyed and the land was purchased for the place where the overhead bridge is now, 

before we took office. If I hadn’t said that I know that the Minister of Highways would have said it for 

me. But nothing more had been done. Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say that I believe there is this 

difference, that if there had been a Liberal Government in office instead of the present Government, it is 

quite likely we would have to wait for the completion of the black top as well as the overhead bridge 

itself, perhaps for another ten years. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, one of the most commendable measures passed at the last session of this Legislature was, 

I believe, the Compulsory Insurance Act and I am sure you are all well informed on this question. There 

were a total of 65 persons who lost their lives on Saskatchewan highways and I suppose there were 

injuries, non-fatal injuries to about 1,500. And I think it would be almost impossible to estimate the 

benefits of this Government’s Accident Insurance and what it has meant to the bereaved and injured 

because of these benefits. I am reminded of the conversation I had the past year with a Saskatchewan 

business man who said although he had not been a CCF supporter, I don’t think he ever intends to be a 

CCF supporter, but he felt greatly indebted to this Government for the treatments and benefits he had 

received following a bad accident down in the United States last summer. He said not only did they pay 

all his bills and disabilities of any kind connected with this accident but they sent a plane down there to 

bring him back to the hospital at Regina. Needless to say this man’s gratitude is duplicated I believe in 

many cases throughout the province. From being one of the most controversial Acts of the past session, 

it has become a pattern for other governments to follow in planning automobile insurance. I understand 

that Hon. Valleau who administers this Department has received enquiries from all the provinces in 

Canada and many of the States and other parts of the world. 

 

 As was mentioned in the Speech from the Throne, I don’t intend to go into that, the benefits are going 

to be extended to take care of collision damage or perhaps other damages at slightly increased costs. 

Now I would just like to say that at the recent annual convention of the Union of Rural Municipalities in 

Manitoba a resolution was presented urging the Manitoba Government to bring in a compulsory 

Automobile Insurance Act. Surely imitation is the sincerest form of flattery. Mr. Speaker, among 

accomplishments of this Government worthy of mention is the Hospitalization Plan made effective 

  



February 10, 1947 

202 

January 1st of this year. I believe it to be the most advanced. It is the most advanced health legislation 

anywhere on this continent. From a truly humanitarian standpoint I consider it to be a most important 

step in the extension of medical services to all of our people at the lowest possible cost. Now, under this 

Government, as has been said before, is set up four health regions now giving complete health services 

and two more will soon be in operation. 

 

 In the field of mental hygiene, I consider real progress has been made to date and when plans are 

completed for more space and personnel, better facilities, Saskatchewan will be foremost in its treatment 

of all types of mental disease. The Government has doubled its expenditure since it came into office on 

mental hospitals. Since 1945 mental hospitals have been free to all the citizens of Canada with twelve 

months standing. The only province in Canada extending these services to its people; and I’d like to 

quote again from a report in a magazine of the mental health situation in Saskatchewan from D. M. 

LeBourdais, after a recent survey of the mental institutions across Canada. The first of these articles, in 

which he said: 

 

The Government, the present Government of Saskatchewan, has been guided by a mental health 

program submitted in 1945 by the National Committee for Hygiene. On November 1st, 1946, Dr. G. 

McKerracher, formerly of the Ontario Hospital Services took up his duties as Commissioner of Mental 

Services. He told me the Government was backing him to the full in his task of bringing Saskatchewan 

mental services up to the proper, modern standards. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, as an actual dirt farmer, who lives on his farm nine or ten months of the year at least, I 

am well acquainted with and keenly interested in the troubles of farmers. I believe one of the most 

important tasks of this Government is the problem of giving stability to agriculture through proper land 

use and greater diversification and, I might say that a long term policy such as has been outlined by the 

Hon. Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Nollet, on many occasions during his first year of office in his Cabinet 

position. It is impossible to put this into practice in a few short months but I am certain that the 

provincial Department of Agriculture will press hard for such a program with, or without, the active 

assistance of the Federal Government. 

 

 I believe this can be greatly assisted by our Agricultural Representative Service which is now 

increased from 36 for supervisors over all the province; with one Director of Agriculture Representative 

Service, Mr. Brockelbank, former Professor of the Extension of the University of Saskatchewan. This is 

following out the recommendations of the Reconstruction Council under Dean Cronkite. I think if you 

turn to page 87 of that report you will find that we have followed this out very fully indeed. I believe 

that agricultural representatives can be of great service to farmers in all parts of this province, acting as a 

form of contact man or a liaison officer between farmers and the Department of Agriculture, similar to 

the county agent system which has been such a success in the United States. With the assistance of these 

local improvement rural municipality committees, some 300, some 325 of them, the agricultural service 

can bring to bear on the problems of the farmers the policy and practices which research has proven to 

be most 

  



February 10, 1947 

203 

 

effective and timely. 

 

 I would just like to point out, if I may, a few of these problems of the farmers and the assistance that 

might be given by the Agricultural Representative Service and other matters pertaining to the farm. I’d 

like to refer to such matters as the Soil Conservation Program which I think should be championed and 

urged by the Department of Agriculture. Perhaps the Provincial Government’s assistance to small 

irrigation projects; the problem of best types of land for cultivation; contour farming is necessary in 

some areas, in fact to the south a great deal; soil erosion which is a most important thing, something I’m 

very much interested in, various forms of soil erosion, both wind and water; the use of fertilizer; the 

chemical weed control and other farm methods of weed control. The agricultural representatives, in my 

opinion, may confer with farmers on greater diversification according to various soil types. We all know 

that some soil types are better fitted for growing wheat than others and that’s the subject of drought. 

Mixed farming should be encouraged to a far greater degree in many large areas where straight wheat 

growing is very hazardous. Special emphasis should be placed on hog production in order to fulfil our 

contract with Britain. I believe our whole productive capacity on farms and feed and fodder reserves 

created directly not only by the Department of Agriculture but we should urge most strongly that the 

individual farmers everywhere, especially in the south and southwest, should have feed and fodder 

reserves. This is just a brief outline of some of the services and the agricultural representatives and I 

believe that they will live up to our expectations. 

 

 Now, in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would like to set out briefly some of the aims, the old aims and 

objects of the CCF movement which are known to many of us for the last fifteen years and I wish to 

quote from the statement made by Mr. M. J. Coldwell in the opening of Woodsworth House, the new 

National CCF Headquarters at Ottawa: 

 

We rededicate our movement and ourselves to the crusade for that social and economic democracy for 

which this movement was founded. We shall continue to support every piece of legislation designed to 

improve conditions of Canadian people and similarly we shall always oppose every move of 

governments and monopolies who continue the exploitation of the producers of this country and we 

shall expose the economic dictatorship which threatened both the present and the future of our people. 

 

 Nor must our efforts end with the Canadian people. Recent events have proven that no nation can live 

to itself, that no nation enjoys prosperity and peace without the well being of all nations. As a private 

Member then, and I am sure I am voicing the sentiments of everyone in this House, I would therefore 

urge unanimous support of the United Nations and the World Food Board by all the people of 

Saskatchewan through all our elected representatives at Ottawa or here in this House regardless of their 

political affiliations. May I close by passing on to you the message of Mrs. Lucy Woodsworth, the 

widow of the CCF’s revered first Leader in speaking of her late husband at the opening of Woodsworth 

House, I quote: 

 

The results of his work showed that he knew all the 

  



February 10, 1947 

204 

time that the heart of the people is sound. If the people know that we are honest then those who are 

confused and uneasy in their minds will join our cause. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, I shall support this motion. I take leave to adjourn this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:40 p.m. o’clock. 

 


