



















































Hansard: March 21, 1947


1036 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session – Tenth Legislature 

37
th

 Day 

 

Friday, March 21, 1947 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Corman that Bill 

No. 65 – An Act to protect Certain Civil Rights be now read a second time. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Municipal Affairs):  Mr. Speaker, this Bill before the House, an 

Act to protect Certain Civil rights, should be regarded by everyone in the Province of Saskatchewan as a 

Bill of great importance in that it restates many of the principles by which we have been guided here in 

our province in the past and also emphasizes some points which during recent years have been shown to 

be very important. 

 

I was very interested in the debate on this Bill so far. If we look at the Bill, we will notice that Sections 

2,3,4, 5 and 6 of the Bill deal with those privileges and those freedoms which we have accepted as a 

matter of course: the right to freedom of concepts; the right to free expression or free speech; the right to 

free association; the right of people to organize as they see fit as long as they organize for lawful 

purposes; the right to freedom from arbitrary imprisonment – and we have not had any difficulty with 

that question here in the Province of Saskatchewan; and the right to have elections. These freedoms have 

without any question, Mr. Speaker, been accepted as the basic freedoms to which we are entitled and 

they are probably the most important of all because they are basic and they should be jealously 

safeguarded at all times. 

 

The Hon. Leader of the Opposition mentioned, when he was speaking on this Bill the other day that 

there was no danger of any loss of any of these privileges, that they were accepted. That may be to a 

considerable extent true, Mr. Speaker, but I think it is a good idea to restate our position in regard to 

these freedoms and to keep these things before the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But it is not altogether true, Mr. Speaker, that some of these freedoms have not at times been interfered 

with in this Province of Saskatchewan and I do not know for sure that the mere restating of these 

freedoms will make it more possible to enforce these freedoms and to guarantee these freedoms to 

everyone. That remains to be seen. I agree that the greatest support for freedom is the determined will of 

the people to determine that they are going to maintain these freedoms. There have been infractions in 

the past and I did not altogether agree with the Leader of the Opposition when he intimated that this was 

merely a restatement. It is still a little more than that. I believe the Leader of the Opposition in his 

speech said that 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1037 

this Bill should include safeguards against Government encroachment on the rights and liberties of the 

citizens of Saskatchewan and Section 6 of the Bill deals with the right to elections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I did some work a good many years ago under the liberties and freedoms that are set forth 

in this Act in organizing a new political party. In one district I ran into this situation that none of the 

people in that district dared to talk to me or to be seen with me. Why? Because, Mr. Speaker, this was a 

district that was almost 100 per cent dependent upon relief allowances for their living and they were, all 

of them, afraid to speak to anyone who was organizing a political party to oppose the political party that 

was then in power. That was in 1938. In 1940, there was a polling subdivision in the Melfort Federal 

constituency and I want to remind the Members of this House that in that constituency the majority in 

the election for the CCF was over 3,000. But in this one poll where the people were entirely dependent 

upon relief for existence, the vote was 80 Liberal and 3 CCF. This was Camp K if the Hon. Member for 

Moosomin would like the name of the poll. Some time after that, the Member elect and myself were in 

that area and we met many of the people in that area. One after another these people that we met on the 

road, or in their homes, stated to us that they regretted that they had felt they did not dare to do anything 

else but vote Liberal. They were afraid to vote CCF. Mr. Speaker, people didn’t get that way in the 

Province of Saskatchewan without some very strong influence being used on them. I say, Mr. Speaker, it 

is not only a good idea to restate these rights in these five sections of the Bill because they have been 

generally accepted in the past but to restate them for the purpose of emphasizing that we really mean 

that those freedoms, those liberties, those rights and privileges should belong to the people of this 

province. It is no harm either to mention in this Bill that the term of a legislature shall not exceed five 

years. We do not mind putting that in this Bill because we expect to live up to it. 

 

Now Sections 7 to 9 in the Bill deal with economic rights: the right to employment, the right to engage 

in occupations, the right to own and occupy property. I contend, Mr. Speaker, that without these 

economic rights the other rights and freedoms cannot endure very long so that these other three sections 

are just as important. They may not be termed the basic rights but they are things that people are entitled 

to: employment, the ownership of property and the right to engage in occupations no matter what may 

be their color, creed or race. Sections 10 to 12, Mr. Speaker, then refer to certain other rights to services 

and certain privileges. The right of access to public places, the right to membership in professional and 

trade associations and the right to our educational institutions and on those, again, I think I may say that 

very little comment need be made. 

 

Then we come to Section 13 in the Bill which is the section which prohibits any publications of any 

material that is, -- how does the Act say it – “tending or likely to tend to deprive, abridge or otherwise 

restrict because of the race, creed, religion, color or ethnic or national origin of any person or class of 

person,” and that too, I think, we can have no quarrel with at all. All the Members in this House, I 

believe, would agree that those things in the Bill are quite right and that they should be stated and that 

they should be emphasized. 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1038 

The Leader of the Opposition criticized this Bill chiefly because of certain things which were not 

included in the Bill. One of the most outstanding statements which he made was when he said, (I think I 

have his words correct), “sometimes I think that the people will have to fight to control the power of 

governments as they did to control the power of kings” and again he said: “This Bill should contain a 

safeguard against the eradication of capitalism.” Mr. Speaker, I could just imagine the Leader of the 

Opposition if he were living two or three hundred years ago trying to pass laws to prevent the people 

from doing away with the rule of absolute monarchies. I could imagine him trying to have laws passed 

to prevent the people from doing away with feudalism, or as my hon. friend behind me says, to pass 

laws to prevent the people from doing away with slavery because it would be an infringement on the 

liberty and freedom of the slave owner. When he states, “that sometimes I think that the people will have 

to fight to control the power of governments as they did to control the power of kings”, he shows his 

hand quite clearly. In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, he shows that he does not believe in democracy, that he 

does not believe that the people should have the right to either leave capitalism here in Saskatchewan or 

to eradicate it as they see fit. 

 

I believe in democracy and I believe that the people are going to eradicate capitalism and I believe that 

they should have the right to eradicate capitalism. That is their privilege. This world is an old world but 

the people who do this world’s work have not yet come into their full place of power and position which 

they deserve to have. They are coming and they are getting that power and they are learning how to use 

that power. And so, Mr. Speaker, I am rather disappointed that anyone in this House should suggest that 

we should put into the Statute Books of this province a law which would say to the people of this 

province – you cannot change, you cannot make progress, you must go no farther ahead on the road 

towards complete emancipation and complete freedom of the human race. 

 

The Hon. Leader of the Opposition said that there should be some provision in this Act to prevent the 

Government from fixing up elections in the province by means of gerrymandering constituencies. That 

is a subject which he would have been well advised to have left alone. All one needs to do is to look 

back over the history of this province, to look at the map of the constituencies of this province and if 

those constituencies were not laid out with two avowed purposes; first, to make it as difficult as possible 

for the people in those constituencies to organize a people’s organization. And second, to wiggle the 

boundaries so as to make as many constituencies as possible safe for the government in power of the 

day, if that was not done I’d like to have somebody really prove to me that it was not done. 

 

Then the Leader of the Opposition suggests that we might provide for ten Members in the city of 

Regina. Mr. Speaker, I never thought of it before, but in looking back over some of the facts and figures, 

I find this (and we didn’t do this), I find that there is a city in the Province of Saskatchewan with a 

population of about 20,000 which has two members and that there are some single member 

constituencies in the province with a population of 24,000. The Leader of the Opposition would have 

been much better off to have left alone that question of 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1039 

gerrymandering of seats in this province. 

 

I am entirely in support of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. I think that we will be able, in the future, probably to 

go farther to make a broader and greater statement of the freedoms and liberties which we regard as our 

heritage. But I want the people of this province to remember this, that if they are gong to retain their 

freedom then they must be forever on their guard. Eternal vigilance is the price of freedom. People will 

come along and suggest to the people themselves that in the name of freedom they should be restricted 

from making progress and put it in such smooth terms that some of them might even believe it. The 

people must be vigilant, the people must be willing to think about these questions and they must not 

allow themselves to be fooled. I shall support the motion. 

 

Mr. D.S. Valleau (ASVR):  Mr. Speaker, I am going to repeat the freedoms which we hear the most 

about today, they are called the four freedoms: freedom from want, freedom from fear, freedom of 

expression and freedom of religion. I do not remember exactly the order in which these were first 

enunciated, but I do know that in the minds of the people we have come to put ‘freedom from want’ as 

the first and best known of these. 

 

Today, ‘freedom from want’ is our greatest problem. I think that I can speak on this with a slight amount 

of authority, that it was stated over and over again that the boys who were serving overseas were 

fighting to secure the four freedoms. I think that it is important that we not lose sight of the fact that that 

was possibly the one factor in which we had a unanimity of opinion. I have heard the question asked of 

myself, sir, after I returned to these shores. I believe it was an uncle of mine who asked me: “If you were 

so anxious to be struggling for freedom, why is it that the first thing you did upon returned home was to 

get married?” That proves again the significance of freedom as such. It is not a thing which exists by 

itself, it is a concept that only comes into play when we visualize human beings in society together and 

freedom is interpreted as a lack of restriction from ones fellows, or it has been interpreted as a lack of 

restriction from ones fellows, or it has been interpreted that way in the past. I am not entirely certain that 

that is the best interpretation. 

 

In the past the peoples have looked upon freedom as absence of tyranny, and freedom could not exist, 

therefore, unless tyranny existed, or unless there was a struggle against tyranny. Rather than becoming a 

positive thing as it should have been, freedom was a negative thing, something opposed to something 

else. For example, we could see an ancient tribe living on a desert, instead of cultivating the desert soil 

and making it bloom like a rose as modern man would do. This native tribe would march a few miles 

and fight another tribe for the privilege of camping on an oasis, and they would be struggling for 

freedom from the oppression of the other tribe. Instead of taking the positive approach of trying to create 

something in the desert, they were taking the negative approach of trying to prevent another tribe 

oppressing them, and as man gradually got away from that idea and developed instead the idea of people 

co-operating together for the common good, and realized that man in association with other men can 

achieve higher freedoms, then he can, in opposition to his fellow men, see the concept of freedom 

greatly increased. 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1040 

I think it is highly significant that our outlook has changed and Roosevelt, the late President of the 

United States, was conscious of that change when he enunciated the four freedoms and placed among 

those four freedoms, the phrase “freedom from want”. It is also significant that he was not able to state 

that positively, that he had been our greatest exponent of more abundant life of a society of ample 

production and large amounts of material goods, but the language had not grown as fast as our ideas had 

grown and when he tried to express his idea of creative abundance in terms of the old ideas of freedom 

he had to use a double negative, he had to say “freedom from want”. Instead of implying that we would 

have plenty, he had to say “freedom from want”. 

 

In a positive society such a negative definition would no longer be necessary. For example, nobody 

demands freedom from lack of air, air is a very essential thing to us, we all breathe air. We need lots of 

it and yet no one ever considers that we should have freedom from the state of not being able to breathe 

air. Similarly the Hon. Member says we should have a little freedom from hot air and I think probably 

lots of people would agree with that. Similarly, the water situation. Nowadays, water is so plentiful that 

no one says we should have freedom from lack of water or freedom from thirstiness, but we still have 

not arrived at the time in history when food is so plentiful that the people give up worrying about lack of 

food. If food were as plentiful as water and as plentiful as air, we would no longer have to say that we 

need “freedom from want”, we would stop thinking about it. It would be a positive thing instead of a 

negative thing, and that is one of the things which we are working for in present day society. In a world 

of abundance, freedom from want is something which ceases to be needed. In a world of education and 

wisdom, freedom of expression and religion do not have to be stated. In a world of peace, freedom from 

fear is unnecessary. 

 

Unfortunately, we are still living in a negative and not a positive world. We still have to struggle against 

things to a certain extent instead of struggling for them and in that struggle, the native struggle for 

freedom, we find, as has been stated already, that at various periods in history, important charters have 

been made, important statements have been made, books have been written, laws have been passed 

codifying the concept that the world has reached at that date of what freedom is. Some of the most 

progressive concepts for freedom have come from the Anglo-Saxon world, but, Mr. Speaker, all our 

concepts of freedom have not come from the Anglo-Saxon world. Those of us who read Scripture can 

note that the ancient Israelites had developed a very high concept of freedom. In some respects, it has 

hardly been equalled since, particularly in the concept of the equality of sexes. Their concept of freedom 

was till more greatly enhanced when Jesus of Nazareth delivered the sermon on the Mount, bringing a 

concept of freedom which has never since been equalled in any codification of law or statement of 

principle. 

 

The Greeks, also, in the time of their early struggles for democracy, achieved quite a high plane. It is 

true that their democracy did not include the slaves that dealt with the aristocratic class and it is true that 

ostracism was their idea of election, but nevertheless they achieved a plane of though and of democracy 

which it would be well if the world would look back to it occasionally to get new hope. Roman law was 

finally codified and strengthened by Justinian who performed a monumental 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1041 

task and thereby set the principle of codifying law so that people would not be charged without knowing 

under what Statute or what principle they were being charged. In other sections of the world,  

Confucius in China was a great law giver and brought many principles of freedom. The French 

revolution in Europe brought to a head the growing European concept of liberty, equality and fraternity. 

Liberty being the struggle for freedom, fraternity and equality being the principles of a positive struggle 

for a better life. 

 

Thus do we see that freedom itself is not something that is limited to one race or to one creed. It is not 

something that is limited to the Anglo-Saxons, but it is something that is grown in all parts of the world, 

at all times and has been stated and codified at various times. Freedom from want has remained possibly 

one of the most important freedoms, and it is, in my opinion, that freedom from want will not be 

completely achieved until we have achieved the other freedoms. Freedom of religion was something that 

has been achieved at early periods in history. For example, under the old Roman Empire a very large 

measure of freedom of religion was achieved and in the growth of the American system of government 

in North America, freedom of religion is something which is necessary to an imperial form of 

government such as Rome had. It is also necessary to a federal type of government such as that which 

they had in America, in the United States. Today that concept has grown to many other countries not 

necessarily of a federal type. But in a nation such as ours, where we have large groups of various 

religions and ethnic groups, racial groups, it is very important that we observe the principles which 

proved so necessary to the growth of Imperial Rome insofar as freedom of religion is concerned. 

Freedom of expression was the next to grow and it grew during the latter pat of the liberal revolution 

and the industrial revolution. 

 

The Bill which we have before us, Mr. Speaker, is significant because it attempts to bring all these 

streams of thought together and express them in a slightly modernized form. Today, the restriction upon 

freedom which is the most depressive throughout the world is the restriction caused because of racial 

intolerance, or national, or religious prejudice, and in many parts of the world before the last war at the 

present time, sinister groups of people who were trying to keep the world as it is, or force it backwards 

in history had used racism deliberately as a method of creating class divisions. The Nazis used that 

method with very bitter results, the Fascist used that method and I regret to say that in some parts of the 

world such things are still going on. At the same time, it is something we can not with optimism that in 

may parts of the world racial tolerance is growing and that the so-called down-trodden races of the 

world are showing a growing awareness of their rights and the necessity of freedom and 

self-government and are undertaking the assumption of their responsibilities. I think it is something that 

we can note with pride that Great Britain has agreed to give freedom and independence to India and 

although we are not yet certain whether the Indians will accept that responsibility with all of the 

authority and responsibility that they should, it is significant that racial tolerance is growing in sections 

of the world at the same time that racial intolerance is growing. So that we find that today that issue is 

the issue above all others that we have to settle in our minds. 

 

There is more than one stream of human freedom, all of these 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1042 

streams today are flowing together. Every race, every creed, every color, every nation has made a 

contribution. The purpose of the Bill before us is to give these groups the creative rights of our 

community that all may contribute to the growth of a positive future in this province. Today, when the 

ugly warfare which is a parallel to biological warfare, the ugly warfare of racism, is being used in many 

parts of the world, is significant that the racial national tolerance is growing in this province. The future 

of the world depends upon the outcome of this struggle and this Legislature today has a chance to strike 

a blow in that battle for freedom. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Minister of Education):  Mr. Speaker, I take this opportunity to endorse the 

reasons of the Attorney General as to why a Bill of this nature is both justifiable and desirable at this 

time. I think, Sir, that we should not forget that we have very recently completed a war, a war to 

safeguard many of those rights which are mentioned in the Bill, but a war which liberal minded people 

everywhere meant to be more than merely something to safeguard. It was something which was gong to 

extend. 

 

I think, too, Sir, that it is not unfitting that we mention at this time, the passing and bringing into force 

the Canadian Citizenship Act. Some of the Members present will recall the ceremony in this Chamber, 

some probably were present at ceremonies in various other parts of the province. It seems fitting that the 

Legislature should, in a Bill such as this, reaffirm and remind, not only ourselves, but the people whom 

we represent of the privileges and the responsibilities of that Canadian citizenship. I do not share the 

opinion of the Leader of the Opposition because we have many of the rights mentioned in the Bill, that 

we should not take the opportunity from time to time of restating and reaffirming these rights and these 

responsibilities. There is a danger, I think, which all of us recognize in completion. There is always a 

danger of thinking that once we have said something, we have done. I believe that the Attorney General, 

in his excellent presentation, pointed out and emphasized that we enjoyed many of these privileges, we 

do repeat, Mr. Speaker, the same prayer each day in this House; frequently throughout the year, and the 

years, we sing ‘O’ Canada’. In the same way it is fitting that this Legislature make a statement of 

principle, and reindorse and reaffirm old principles which remain new. 

 

It was not intended, of course, that this bill would reform the world. I do think we need to remember, 

however, that the world does not make communities; that on the other hand communities make the 

world. But we are concerned here with our Saskatchewan community and our share in realistic world 

making. In the same way ideals are not superimposed. Ideals grown. We can provide the soil and 

fertility whereby these ideals may grow better and that is a part of our responsibility. I would hope, Mr. 

Speaker, that the contents of this bill, the explanation given by the Attorney General, and remarks by 

other Members possibly would be a subject of discussion in hundreds of communities throughout 

Saskatchewan, that organizations might study the Bill and consider its implications, that we as 

individuals and other individuals throughout Saskatchewan will ponder it in the light of its philosophy of 

tolerance and its philosophy of non-discrimination and examine, in that light, our own attitude towards 

our fellow-man. 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1043 

I do agree entirely with the Leader of the Opposition when he emphasizes that public opinion is the only 

permanent guard as to our liberties. The Attorney General emphasized the same thing, but it must be a 

public opinion which is enlightened, the public opinion which, if necessary, can become vocal. I think 

that the Legislature can rightly be expected to assume leadership in this way, that this Bill does provide 

an opportunity and an expression for such leadership. I agree too with the Leader of the Opposition that 

all of our rights are not written in this Bill. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that this Government has been writing 

a new chapter of the Bill of Rights in every session, that our Security Legislation, Labour Legislation, 

Health Legislation, Social Welfare and Educational enactments, all of them, being chapters in a Bill of 

Rights for the people of Saskatchewan. Most of them, Mr. Speaker, incidentally opposed by the 

Opposition. 

 

In his discourse, the Leader of the Opposition took us back into the history of the struggle and of the 

realization of many of our present liberties. I think most of us here enjoyed and appreciated his 

exposition. Like the Leader of the Opposition, Sir, I have read some history, I have read some before the 

Bill was presented and I have read some since. I cannot agree with all of his decisions, I do regret that he 

did not finish the story. It is true, of course, that the Magna Carta was a great achievement. It was a 

necessary step. But it represented in reality a victory for a group of barons, the large landlords over the 

kinds and it bore but little fruit at the time for the ordinary person. It did promise some fruits but for 

hundreds of years the great majority of the barons continued to exploit, and in many cases, to maltreat 

their tenants and serfs. It matters very little, after all, if when one is going to be starved, whether one is 

starved by a King or by a baron. Nevertheless it was a valuable step in removing control from the 

reigning monarch. It is a step which in itself, Mr. Speaker, as we are re-enacting here today, has been 

reindorsed at many times, and in many places, by many governments. 

 

In the same way the Bill of Rights to which he had reference was essential and was good. It was largely 

a guarantee to the parliament of the day, a parliament which did not represent the people and which, for 

centuries, did little to protect the people, but it was a step up the ladder to eventual government of the 

people, by, and for the people. But there, and I think, unfortunately, the Leader of the Opposition 

stopped. The great and significant story of the Industrial Revolution, the struggle of the working people 

against factory owners, and large landowners in order to obtain economic justice and parliamentary 

representation, the story was not told. I do submit, sir, that that phase of our development of our now 

accepted freedom, liberty, must not be omitted. The story of the Reform Bills of the nineteenth century 

widening parliamentary representation, the story of the Factory Act and similar legislation of the same 

period, which provided for economic freedom and more decent working conditions. The struggle of the 

commons to less power from the lords, the agitations of the Chartists which were howled down as 

revolutionary in 1847 and 1848, but which today with only one exception have been accepted. The 

whole story, Mr. Speaker, the abolishing of the Divine Right of Capital sis quite as important a chapter 

in our human liberties as in the story of the abolishment of the Divine Right of Kings. The story of these 

events are significant. The reaction of the manufacturers, of the land owners, of the privileged groups to 

these reforms is also quite significant. One might consider, for 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1044 

example, the Factory Act in 1847 (I think it was) which prohibited the employment of children under the 

age of nine years; which limited the employment of children under thirteen years of age to 48 hours a 

week; and which limited for those under 18 years of age to 69 hours a week. Interesting to note that this 

rather mild enactment considered by present day standards, of course, was opposed by the Liberals of 

the day who represented the industrials, and these reforms were opposed on three main grounds. They 

said first: that it would oblige manufacturers to reduce wages and to raise prices; that it took from the 

workmen the freedom of contract and that it would ruin industry and drive capital to other countries. I 

wonder, Mr. Speaker, where we have heard those arguments before, more recently. If my memory 

serves me rightly they are almost the self-same arguments used by the Members of the Opposition in 

this House against labor legislation proposed by this Government. 

 

It is of interest to note that these factory laws, this particular one I am referring to, was passed by the 

Tories of the day. They passed it because they wanted to get revenge on the previous Liberal 

Government, who had repealed the so-called Corn Laws, thereby reducing tariffs which the Tories 

claimed would ruin them and the lords and the large landowners. One historical writer, or one textbook 

and I am now referring to a textbook by West and Eastman which is being used in the Grade eleven and 

twelve classes in our Saskatchewan school rooms for sometime, says this: 

 

The story shows that neither division of the Capitalist class could see any needs of the working class 

that conflicted with their own unjust profits. 

 

Or we might have carried the discussion to a slightly later date, when there was a difficulty in the 

farming class, due to the fact that large landowners had gobbled up all the land. There was a little rhyme 

I think, current of that day, which said: 

 

The law locks up the man or woman who steals the goose from off the common, but leaves the greater 

villain loose to steal the common from the goose. 

 

Since indirect reference was made to larger units, I think the Leader of the Opposition might have read 

some English Educational History and have shown us how, in the early 1900s, in England and in 

Scotland the principle of larger units was excepted without a direct vote of the people. Or, he might have 

carried, up to date this story of British liberties, carried it to a logical conclusion, told us how these 

selfsame people who have contributed so much to the story and struggle of democracy, elected in 1945 a 

Socialist Government, a Government that believes in planning, a Government that has socialized the 

Bank of England and the coal mines, and which plans more extensive socialization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the evolution of the political, economic and social instruments of democracy did not stop 

with the “Bill of rights”, and it has not stopped yet. It is still moving and it is moving in the British Isles 

at least in the direction of the eradication of monopolistic capitalism to which objection has been taken. 

And it is moving that way because ordinary people, Trade Unions, Co-operatives and so on, realize that 

they cannot control their own destiny until the power of capital is 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1045 

subjugated to the importance of people. 

 

Reference was made to the denial in this province of access to the courts. Now, I presume that the 

reference was to the Labour Relations Board, and I think that it can very properly be argued that in 

respect of access to the courts, the setting up of boards such as these which function semi-judicially is 

really giving the public more access to the courts, not less. I think it would be found, Mr. Speaker, if one 

were to examine the origin of Boards such as this, that the reason was that in a large number of cases in 

which there had to be minute consideration of facts, the courts such as this expedite decisions. They 

reduce costs, but they save the time of the major courts for more difficult case. I think too it might have 

been proper to have mentioned that after all there is hardly a new principle in the Labour Relations 

Board, and it is an accident with regard to courts or it is lack of an accident in regard to courts. That 

Board set up in this province by the previous Government – I have reference, for example, to the 

Workmen’s Compensation Board – function on the same basis, and with the same restrictions as regards 

to people. Or to take an even more parallel force, we have had for a number of years in the province 

what is know as ‘Boards of Reference’ in the field of education. If a teacher loses a position, feels that 

that position has been taken away unjustly, she or he may appeal to a Board of Reference. The Board of 

Reference is established, representative of the employer, of the employee, and a chairman appointed by 

the Government and from this Board there is no appeal. The situation is the same, it may be a matter of 

taking away a teacher’s livelihood and there is, as I have said no appeal, which is in a very parallel field 

to which the Labour Relations Board operates. 

 

I could disagree, Mr. Speaker, with the Leader of the Opposition in another way. As I remember, he 

stated that fireworks usually came when things were being taken away from people. I do not want to 

disagree entirely with that. It is true in part. But if my memory of history serves me correctly, the 

greatest fireworks came when the people were trying to get things for themselves and were being denied 

those things by those who would maintain the Status Quo. Armed revolutions and labor risings have 

been caused largely by the denial of right to the ordinary people, by those privileged classes, or those 

controlled by privileged classes. 

 

Because certain semi-accusations at least were made against the present Government I think it is 

worthwhile that we review the history of the present Government. The Hon. Members will remember 

that we had, in this pr, farmers organizations, organized an educational groups, organized as a group 

which would present the point of view of farmers to organized government. The Hon. Members will 

remember, too that there came a time when the farmers realized that that type of ac tin was not enough, 

realized that if they were going to get a fair deal, then political action was necessary. The same situation 

was true with regard to labor. We had labor groups organized for the purpose of negotiating with 

employers and of arguing, or discussing with government. Gradually those labor groups realized that 

that type of action was not enough, that if they were going to get a square deal, political action was 

necessary. Then we have realization on the part of farmer and of labor that alone neither of them was 

strong enough to see that either of them got a square deal and we have the amalgamation of those 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1046 

groups in the formation, in this province, of the Farmer Labour Party, which later on became the present 

Co-operative Commonwealth Federation. I think it would be well if we were to think carefully about 

that title ‘Co-operative Commonwealth Federation’ because we do mean what it says. It is no accidental 

name. It has purpose and it has meaning. This rather small group grew rather considerably and they 

grew for several reasons. They grew, first of all, because of the logic and the validity of the platform 

which they were able to place before the people. They grew because of the leadership, because of men 

like Woodsworth, and Coldwell and the late George Williams, the present Premier and many Members 

of this House and many people outside of this House. And they grew too, Mr. Speaker, because of the 

denials of governments of the day, because of the inability, of the unwillingness of governments of the 

day to give them what they thought was a square deal. They grew because of their disgust of machine 

politics of the governments of the day and they grew because people were not afraid of losing their 

homes and their liberties but because people were losing their homes and their liberties. I think it well 

too that we review just briefly the record of this government insofar as providing improved liberties and 

freedom where the people of this province are concerned. 

 

In our Farm Security Legislation we have given there a liberty which farmers did not possess before, and 

in giving them that liberty have also improved the position of the other citizens of Canada, of 

Saskatchewan, who depend on the farmer. That in labour legislation, in improving the standard of 

wages, in improving the rates of compensation; in making it possible and encouraging them to organize 

and to bargain collectively, we have given them greater freedom than they possessed before; and thereby 

enhanced the freedom of the other people of Saskatchewan too. 

 

In our program of health, in our enactments with regard to old age pensioners and those in receipt of 

Mothers’ Allowances, we have given them the right and the freedom to receive medical treatment which 

previously was a freedom held by those who could afford to pay for it, but which is now recognized as a 

freedom of theirs, because, Mr. Speaker, they happen to be people. 

 

Then there was the suggestion of the Leader of the Opposition that we write into the Act a clause, as has 

been referred to by the Hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs, to prevent the eradication of Capitalism. In 

other words, I take it, that he wants to return to the days of unrestrained and unrestricted so-called free 

enterprise. I think we should look at the fruits which this so-called free enterprise system has produced, 

and admittedly there are many good fruits, a great many of them Sir. We have achieved a comparatively 

high standard of living, if we make our comparison with the standard of living in many other countries. 

But if we make our comparison with the potential which this great country of ours could provide, then 

perhaps the comparison is not so favourable. But, in looking back, the broad picture of one generation, 

the generation to which most of us here belong, we see the highlights of what this so-called system of 

free enterprise, in nearly every country in the world, has produced and those highlights are two 

world-wide wars and one major world-wide depression. 

 

This party, Mr. Speaker, does believe in real free 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1047 

enterprise. We contend that enterprise never has been free and never can be free under monopolistic 

capitalism. There are examples in Saskatchewan today of how certain dealers in goods are not willing to 

sell those goods to certain types of organizations. We have not had free enterprise insofar as it meant 

freedom of the individual to expand. Opportunities have been too unequal. Capital has weighted the 

scales. There are other fruits of this so-called free enterprise system. I should like to read to the House 

an editorial appearing in the Co-operative Consumer under date of March 1
st
. It has this to say: 

 

In a highly competitive society such as our own, everyone competes with everyone else and there are 

bound to be a few winners and many losers. This leads us to the second main conflict in our accepted 

way of doing things, the conflict between the supposed freedom of the individual to attain success and 

all the actual limitations which prevent him from doing so. We are told that we are free to make our 

mark in the world, but we find that we are hedged in by obstacles and circumstances beyond our 

control. While it is believed that any man can get what he wants if he is efficient and energetic, we 

also know that in fact the chances are limited for most people. When the expected goals are not 

attained, the result is a feeling of bitter disappointment and frustration. Our economic order also 

produces insecurity and anxiety resulting from low wages, fear of depression and unemployment and 

although our economic plight is no fault of our own, we nevertheless have feelings of personal quilt 

and loss of self esteem. 

 

Now this is the part which I want to emphasize: 

 

One of the leading psychiatrists, F. Alexander, has gone so far as to say: This insecurity and the 

frustration of having no opportunity to make use of one’s productive capacities are the main source of 

emotional maladjustment in our times, moreover a depression depends all the conflicts mentioned 

above. Competition during depression becomes keener and more ruthless although need for 

co-operation and solidarity becomes greater. The prospects of attaining success become almost 

impossible, but the ambitions are still there. What can be done to eliminate or at least reduce the 

effects of mental illness? Many psychiatrists and social scientists doubt that mental illness can be 

eliminated while we retain our present economic system. 

 

May I repeat that sentence. 

 

Many psychiatrists and social scientists doubt that mental disease can be eliminated while we retain 

our present economic system. 

 

They maintain that social conflicts must first be eliminated before any real solution of the problem of 

mental illness can be reached. That again, -ms is one of the additional proofs of a so-called free 

enterprise system. I should like to read from another page to indicate further possibilities of the so-called 

free enterprise system and I admit, Mr. Speaker, in reading, that the material which I have, has reference 

to the United States of America, but what is applicable in the 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1048 

United States is in some measure not entirely impart, in all occasions, but in some measure relatively 

applicable here. This is an article which appeared in the Glace Bay Gazette during the week of March 9
th

 

or March 16
th

 (I am sorry I haven’t the date), but it is an exclusive interview with Mr. O. John Roging, a 

former Special Assistant to the United States Attorney General and I want to read some of the things 

which this former Special Assistant to the United States Attorney General had to say, and he is speaking 

about now, Mr. Speaker, not ten years ago. 

 

The blueprint for American Fascism has been drawn along tested patterns. It parallels in sickening 

detail the course of Fascism in Germany and other lands. Under a smokescreen of anti-communism it 

promotes discrimination and disunity until a nation is hopelessly divided against self and existing 

government disintegrates. Again a principle target of a fascist state is the labor movement. Deprived of 

unions, working people can be driven to work harder and longer for less funds. In every Fascist 

country the labor unions were among the first victims … 

 

and so on. I must not take time to read it all. I do want to read one or two other parts. Particularly this: 

 

Hitler, you will recall, was engaged in rabble rousing and trouble making for many years before Fritz 

Thiessen and the other big businessmen decided they cold retain and extend their power only through 

a Fascist State. We are not quite reedy for it here. Big business is not now seriously threatened. It still 

controls virtually every phase of our economic and political life. It is representatives in Legislatures 

comply with the wishes of the men with money. If a threat to their control should ever rise, I am 

convinced large sections of top business in America will follow the Thiessen pattern. At that time the 

Fascists will receive whatever sums they need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit that a statement like that coming from a Special Assistant to the United States 

Attorney General can hardly be over looked in this argument of turning back free enterprise. This Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, and consequent discussion and self-examination can help us, not only in maintaining, but 

in extending those liberties which we cherish and which we wish to preserve. 

 

I would again emphasize, as has the Leader of the Opposition, that an enlightenment of public opinion is 

the only guarantee that we have. Enlightened public opinion which will result in continuing progressive 

government. Increased education, not only in extension quantatively, but in improvement qualitatively. 

Education which emphasizes training in how to think and I would urge the Member, Mr. Speaker, to 

take every opportunity to encourage the organization of study and of discussion groups. We have 

excellent opportunity under such organizations or such programs as the Farm Radio Forum and the 

Citizens Forum to cultivate our Saskatchewan habit of getting our feet under the table and talking 

together, thinking together, planning together. The extension of library facilities is of considerable 

importance, and of course the continuation of government that will continue to extend security and 

economic stability to the people is important. It is much more, Mr. Speaker, than a matter of 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1049 

protection of minority rights. It is the matter of building up the recognition of the importance of people, 

just because they are people, whether they are in a minority or not. People who are important, because 

they are people, whether they are black or white, American or Canadian, or whether they are old, or 

whether they are young. We need to cultivate more and more the importance of people just because they 

are people. 

 

I want to close by reading the closing paragraph of a book by the writer Pierre Van Paasen because I 

think it states clearly and well the ideals of progressive people, ideals which I think every Member in 

this House would subscribe to and which suggest the type of thinking and the type of pattern which we 

must have if civilization is not alone going to continue but is going to continue to exist. His quotation is 

this: 

 

Slowly the hopes and aspirations of mankind turn into concrete achievements. There is something 

utterly pathetic in all of man’s individual endeavors, but not in the collective march of humanity to its 

ideals. A day will surely come when men having grown tired of walking together, will turn to his 

buddy and on the day when we shall have learned to feel the sorrows and the joys, the suffering and 

the hope of others as our very own, that world order of love and justice for which the universe yearns 

and which the planets in the stillest nights are the splendid but imperfect symbol, shall have come 

nearer and on that day alone the brotherhood of man will become a reality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall support the Bill. 

 

Mr. A.W. Embury (Representative for Mediterranean Area):  It is as well I think, that the other point 

of view is presented at times. The debate upon this Bill of Rights introduced as it is by a Socialist 

Government, must of necessity be a matter of particular interest to the House and to all of the public. A 

great many people have not yet realized as is my submission that fact that Socialism is merely the 

political philosophy of soviet Russia, that is what I’ve said before in the House and that’s what I say 

now. Hon. Members smile at this, permit me to read the Article 12 of the Constitution of Soviet Russia. 

It says this: “The principle applied in the USSR is that of Socialism. From each according to his ability, 

to each according to his work.” A great many people, with matters pertaining to freedom are not taken 

for granted in a totalitarian state, that has been my theory, that has been my submission to the House. A 

great many people forget about it, but I believe it is worth considering, those rights have to be defined in 

a Totalitarian state, as the socialist plan for seed in Saskatchewan. I think it will be interesting to 

compare our progress with the history of soviet Russia. Mr. Woodsworth himself, a great forerunner in 

the CCF movement in Canada, has said there is no reason why we should not be able to carry out the 

soviet system in this country successfully, he was referring to Canada. 

 

Mr. Corman:  Could the Hon. Member tell us what he’s quoting from? 

 

Mr. Embury:  Well I’ll help the Hon. Member, I can get that reference 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1050 

for him. That system to have our freedoms guarded by impartial courts of justice, they have to be 

declined. The Hon. Attorney General says in introducing this Bill to the House that our freedoms are 

retained only by the thin walls of the court or words to that effect. Now, I like to think that our courts 

and the integrity of our courts are solid and not a thin wall at all, I would have honestly expected the 

Attorney General to have a better appreciation of the functions and strength of our courts than he seems 

to have. 

 

Mr. Corman:  I was quoting from Conservative newspapers from Toronto. 

 

Mr. Embury:  Two wrongs do not make a right, Mr. Speaker, that does not sound like an appointed 

privilege to me, it sounds like an interruption. His comments along those lines, Mr. Speaker, are these: 

In line with the general trend of the Government to criticize the officers of the courts and in some cases 

to deny access to the courts altogether, as they did in the Labour Relation matters and in some insurance 

matters. His comments will have the effect of making those walls just so much thinner. In this Act the 

very offence is defined in the Act itself, or to be tried by the very courts that the Attorney General 

speaks of so slightly. 

 

Mr. Corman:  Mr. Speaker, I rise on a Point of Privilege, I correct the Hon. Member. He’s repeating 

that I made those statements, which is untrue. I was quoting from a newspaper. 

 

Mr. Embury:  The House has agreed, the rights referred to and the privileges referred to, the 

freedoms referred to in this bill of rights, have been acknowledged on all sides of the House, has been 

sacred to us. The piloting of this Act through the House dealing with this precious subject has been left 

to the Attorney General. If he’s as good and useful an Attorney General as he is a radio comedian, we 

can consider ourselves well served. I leave it to the fair minded Members of this House to say whether 

that is the case. The Attorney General has stated that he considers this Act to be the most important Act 

that ever came into this Legislature. Now, Mr. Speaker, when the long term plan of this Government for 

the eradication of Capitalism from Saskatchewan has been accomplished, I wouldn’t be surprised if any 

Statute giving us any rights at all will be most important indeed to us all. How long, Mr. Speaker, do you 

think the Socialist Government will leave this Statute on the Statute Books? The Attorney General of 

Saskatchewan says in all humility that he’s introducing this Act in a spirit of tolerance, forbearance and 

moderation. He proceeds then to follow it up with some typical Communist jargon calculated to stir up 

class hatreds and internal strife. In the one and same speech, Mr. Speaker, this remarkable gentleman 

introduces a Bill to safeguard the rights, freedoms, of every person and every class of person, and at the 

same time talks disparagingly about the members of the Assiniboia Club. Lots of farmers, both 

successful and unsuccessful are members of that club. Many a man in that club, who started in life 

without a dollar, who had nothing but his brains and hands to work with, poor men, rich men, all kinds 

of men in that Club. The Attorney General went on and spent some time referring to the class of person 

which he says that 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1051 

I come from. Well I do not know what that class is supposed to be, he talked about my background, he 

talked and generally sought to discredit that as well as he could. I don’t know that I had any reason to be 

ashamed of my background, certainly not as much reason as he has to be ashamed of his background. 

 

Mr. Corman:  Mr. Speaker, I dislike having to rise so often, I think the hon. gentleman knows that I 

made no reference whatever to his background. 

 

Mr. Embury:  In connection with the background of the Attorney General. It has been a very 

opportunist political background. First Liberal, then Social Credit and then CCF. The Member of this 

House, who do so much talking to stir up dissension and class hatreds would be well advised to put 

something in their Bill of Rights to protect those who may be affected by all this slanderous, 

Communistic nonsense. The Hon. Premier said of me that other day, that I came from a class. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, the debate the other day was a totally different subject, the debate on that 

was concluded. The Hon. Member is not allowed, on the rules of this House, to quote from a previous 

debate. 

 

Mr. Embury:  Mr. Speaker, to that portion of the remarks and other remarks made by various 

gentlemen, in a similar sense to a class of persons, now in this Bill before us they are talking about the 

freedoms of every person and every class of person. I am referring to the general attitude of the 

Government as it is relative to this particular Bill on second reading of it and I would like very much, 

although I’m sure that the Hon. Premier is afraid of what I am going to say. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, I ask to be withdrawn the suggestion that I am afraid of what he is going 

to say, any person who has watched either the hon. gentleman or myself in this House will know that I 

am not afraid of him in here or any place else. 

 

Mr. Embury:  He said of me that I could not take it, that I cam from a class of persons who couldn’t 

take it. Well I think from judging by the consternation and few remarks that I may have caused and by 

the inadequacy of the Premier’s remarks about me the other day, that I can’t pay him the same 

compliment on either score, he can neither hand it out nor take it. 

 

Mr. Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, the Point of Order hasn’t been answered. I’m pointing out that my hon. 

friend is continuing the debate in this House which was closed. I have no objection to that if I’m allowed 

to continue it. The hon. gentleman is now replying to a speech which I made the other day under a 

previous debate. Now if that debate is to be continued I should be very happy, but it must work both 

ways. 

 

Mr. Embury:  Mr. Speaker, these are the gentlemen who bring this bill in. These are their notions of 

tolerance, forbearance and 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1052 

moderation. 

 

How long do you suppose this Bill will remain on the books after the Socialists have eradicated 

capitalism in Saskatchewan? I am particularly moved by the brave pretensions of the Government to 

champion the right of freedom. The tolerance forbearance and moderation shown by the Hon. Members 

opposite indeed to any effective critics of the Government must have been apparent to other fair minded 

Members of the House. To see the Hon. Premier and the Hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs and all the 

other Hon. Ministers exercising their wonderful tolerance and forbearance in moderation while I have 

been speaking on the two occasions in this House has been a wonderful example and an inspiration. 

What great admiration they must have excited among other people for those characteristics to which 

they lay claim. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am giving credit for getting four of them on their feet all at the same time. They all 

showed their moderation in tolerance and forbearance, altogether right in the middle of my speech. You 

can see the kindly light of tolerance and forbearance shining in their eyes when their fists weren’t in the 

way. Oh yes, the Socialists notion of the right to free speech are that all men shall have it provided they 

don’t use it to criticize the socialists. How long do you suppose this Bill will remain on the Statute 

Books, Mr. Speaker, when the Socialists have been successful in usurping a totalitarian control by this 

Government? 

 

The Hon. Leader of the Opposition pointed out so very ably the other day that all of the rights in this Bill 

have long been cherished by our people. There is a legal rule which says through interpretation, in which 

it is stated in Latin: “Expressio unius est exclusio ulterius”, in English that means; the mention of one is 

the exclusion of the other. In other words, where in a Statute you purport to define certain rights or 

conditions you do by necessary implication of law exclude others which have been omitted. The courts 

will assume that the Legislature has purposely omitted those so that generally under this Bill it could be 

argued that any fundamental right which the Hon. Attorney General may have omitted from the Bill, 

may have been construed to have been expressly omitted and purposely excluded from it and that is the 

legal rule of statutory interpretation. The courts will not take into consideration that the Hon. Attorney 

General, I don’t know, he seems to have taken time off between radio broadcasts to throw this Bill 

together, they’ll have to take it that he knew what he was doing. 

 

A few of the omissions have already been mentioned by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition. For 

example; freedom of enterprise. Now I am aware that in Section 8 there has been some reference made 

to that but I do not think it goes far enough. We’ll have to talk about the latter in Committee. The 

freedom of enterprise has been mentioned by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition and by others. It’s 

rather startling to think that by this Bill we may be excluded or that it might be interpreted in such a way 

that we did not have the right of freedom of enterprise. The little shop keepers, the little merchants, the 

independent farmers and all the other free and enterprising people of Saskatchewan had better keep a 

pretty close eye, I think on this so-called Bill of Rights. Freedom from discrimination upon political 

grounds, Mr. Speaker, has been omitted from this Bill. If one looks to see what happens to people in 

Russia, if they don’t subscribe to socialism you’ll see how important it is 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1053 

that that provision should be omitted from this Bill, especially when you are dealing with a socialist 

Government. There may be other important freedoms which the Attorney General may have overlooked 

and no doubt we will all have an opportunity to help him when the Bill goes into Committee. 

 

In the meantime, let me associate myself with the remarks of the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, this 

Bill is a callous, cynical piece of socialist whimsy or political preference. It’s a sort of a general 

anaesthetic administered to the body politic while the painful operation of socialism is preformed on 

them. I hope the Hon. Premier will try and say something in reply to what I have just said, he is very 

interesting and I hope we can keep him talking. 

 

Mr. D.Z. Daniels (Pelly):  A great deal has been said in the years gone by, from the pulpit, from the 

front of the classroom, from the stage and from the public platform about our unlimited opportunities in 

this land of ours. To those who went through the depression years with nothing but an occasional slice 

of bread under their belts, that freedom did not mean very much. When they did not have the freedom to 

earn a living, when they were turned away from the door of this free enterprise that is so much wanted 

today, that freedom did not mean a snap of the fingers to them and it was really a hollow thing. When 

you find in this fair land of ours and in other countries, signs over the store – some such person not 

wanted here, Jews not allowed, or a particular race not permitted to go in there – when you find that 

certain hotels will refuse to give accommodation to people because they have a certain type of color of 

skin and this might offend some of their other guests. Then I say that it is time that somebody said 

something about it and passed some laws to restrict this type of free enterprise. 

 

I can never forget the bitterness in the voice of a young girl when she was relating to me a little story of 

what happened during this last war. She had been a school teacher and we all know what school 

teaching meant in those days of depression. Many a school teacher left their jobs, not because they did 

not love that work, but because they saw no opportunity at all in it, went down East, not only because 

there was a little more money, but because they felt that they wanted to contribute a little of their efforts 

towards the greater war effort, towards the winning of a real victory. When she applied for one of these 

jobs they asked her certain questions and when they found out she was of central European origin, they 

told her she could not have a job. Mr. Speaker, four of her brothers – she had four brothers – were at that 

time in the Services. All had volunteered for the Services, two of them at that moment were overseas. 

Yet while her brothers were good enough to go and die for this country, she was not good enough to go 

and work in a war effort. That type of free enterprise is not a very free one. This prejudice is still with us 

in many places. It is a terribly divisive force and continues to be so in many communities throughout the 

land, deeply rooted in so many places and that smug feeling of so many people saying: “Oh, our gang is 

okay, but that other gang has B.O.”, is quite a prevalent thing. There are many types of prejudice that 

contribute to this divisive force. First of all there is the racial prejudice involving the color of skin, 

national origin, historical background and tradition. It deprives a great many groups social right that give 

political and economic right a meaning. One of the hangovers of the lack of 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1054 

planning in the early settlement of the West is the segregation of different groups of people who came 

out here to make Canada their home into solid blocks, has prevented them from being understood and 

from understanding other national and ethnic groups here in the West and has slowed down a great deal 

the process of Canadianizing these people and making them truly worthy of this great West. 

 

One other type of prejudice is class prejudice. It involves the type of work that you do, the clothes that 

you wear, the size of your bank account, or which side of the tracks you happen to live on. You see that 

sometimes in the larger cities, sometimes you see it out in the country too. The smugness and the 

up-turned nose at someone who just happens to be a menial worker – a person who happened to be 

wearing clothes bought somewhere, or at least they claimed they were bought on Fifth Avenue in New 

York, look down a great deal on those people who happen to be wearing overalls or ordinary work 

clothes, forgetting all the time that their luxury and all the fine conveniences in their homes, are made 

possible through the efforts of those people who go down into the bowels of the earth to dig up the coal 

to keep these people warm. Those people who will go out and do the dirty work on the farm, to raise the 

chickens and the pigs and to milk the cows so that they have something for their tables. If I had my way 

I would like to take some of these smoothies and have them go out and try to milk a cow and churn the 

butter before they have any of that butter to spread on their bread. Then they might have a little more 

respect for the farmer’s wife and daughter who have to go and do this work today. They would know 

and appreciate what it is to bring these things to their tables instead of having it brought before them as 

it is very often done. The simple folk that do the hard work should have the right to hold their heads just 

as high as anyone else. 

 

I recall, when I went to public school, we once took up the poem of Gray’s ‘Elegy Written in a Country 

Churchyard’. I remember certain verses that stick out of that poem that come back to me time and again. 

They run something like this: 

 

Let not ambition mock their useful toil, 

Their homely joys and destiny obscure; 

Nor grandeur hear with a disdainful smile, 

The short and simple annals of the poor. 

 

Perhaps in that neglected spot is laid, 

Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire; 

Hands that the rod of empire might have swayed, 

Or waked to ecstasy a living lyre. 

 

But knowledge to their eyes, her ample page, 

Rich with the spoils of time did not unroll; 

Chill penury repressed their noble rage, 

And froze the genial current of their soul. 

 

This describes, very ably, what often is the desire and the hope of many a young lad out on the farm, or 

in the factories, or the mines, or anywhere where they happen to be. They would too, if given the 

opportunity, aspire to some of those heights that other people have aspired to and gained, because of 

special opportunities that they have had. 

 

One other great means of segregation, often bringing about 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1055 

a certain amount of prejudice, is the segregation of different religious groups, the divisive force there 

because of lack of true Christianity and that segregation to religious faction is a mockery of the common 

tenant of all religions, the brotherhood of man. Then there are professional prejudices, Mr. Speaker, and 

they are far from eradicated from our province or from our land here. I recall how the papers just reeked 

with antagonism and criticism of the proposed Professional Act Revision, how they feared that some of 

the special privileges that they may have, or may not have under those Acts, might be tampered with and 

the papers played up this, in protection of those who are the friends of free enterprise. 

 

Not so long ago, I think that many Members of this House along with myself, saw a picture in the 

Capital Theatre here, a picture depicting the story of a great woman – Nurse Kenny – a lifetime of 

struggle; of trying to bring about a new cure that she had discovered. And what happened to her? Every 

time that she tried to get someone to recognize that importance of saving lives and the saving of health 

and bringing back people to normal health, she was turned down -because she was in a lower strata of 

society. She was only a nurse and how could the medical profession, according to what the picture 

portrayed, believe that someone below their strata, without the knowledge and the training that they had, 

bring about something different that could be better than what they had before. Not only that but therein 

(I am sorry that the Member for Maple Creek is not here when I say this), I could detect all through the 

picture the fact that she was looked down upon because she was a member of the female sex, and all the 

more reason why her discovery of a new kind of treatment for polio took well over 30 years before it 

was recognized. She went over three continents before it finally made certain headway and it is still held 

in prejudice in certain quarters of the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! In the debate on this Motion for second reading of Bill No. 65 – An Act 

respecting Certain Civil Rights – Members have been straying far away from the subject matter. I must 

ask Members speaking to the Motion to stay closer to it. 

 

Mr. Daniels:  Mr. Speaker, I feel that that has a bearing. This all deals with what we are trying to 

prevent and that is prejudice and certain intolerance that has been evidenced in the past, and that is why I 

said what I did. This thing that we call prejudice is very ably described here by Dr. Franklin Thery of the 

University of California, Los Angles, and I will quote from the Social Service Digest, Volume No. 11, 

of January, 1947. Here is what he says about democracy and the freedom of which this Bill speaks: 

 

Democracy in our nation is doomed if in the coming decades racialism which degrades and debases 

the basic concepts of Americanism is not reduced to the vanishing points. At least four-fifths of the 

American population harbor race prejudices and group hostilities in their mental framework. Over a 

long range period prejudices can be eradicated by: first, making available educational opportunities to 

all individuals and communities on an equalized bias. Second, greeting situations in which prejudice is 

not the profitable or desired mode of behavior. 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1056 

If necessary, prejudice must be made illegal and I think this Bill definitely tends to do that, Mr. Speaker, 

making job discrimination impossible, ending discrimination in public places, that definitely is 

contained in that Bill. Putting a stop to segregation and restrictive convenance in residential 

neighborhoods. I do not know whether that applies here, but the last one combating racialism among 

educators themselves. There are a great many organizations that fight for liberation and advancement, 

too often we will find that this liberation is for a special group, and that special group thinks of no one 

else in that battle but of themselves. I think that they would be far better off in these groups, wanting 

something for themselves, would say: I want this for the rest of society – if it is good for me, it should be 

good for others too, and when those people who oppose inequality, or fight those who foster prejudice 

may continue in their present complaisancy, that is if they do the fighting the way they are doing it 

today, those who enjoy special privileges will continue in a complaisancy so long as the Negroes are 

only fighting for the Negroes, and the Jews only for the Jews, and the Ukrainians fight for things that the 

Ukrainians want, and labor for the labor people, women only for women and so on down the line, off the 

long list of those who are discriminated against today, in many places in the world. But when all these 

groups can unitedly attack the source of inequality, when they fight for human equality instead of just 

for their own, then we will see complaisancy disturbed and ease become uneasiness. 

 

Now, in closing, I would just like to give you a little article that describes so ably what I have been 

trying to point out as what I feel will be the benefits of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. It is an article called 

“Martyrs and Heroes Fight Against Mans’ Inhumanity to Man’, by Robret McIver, Professor of 

Columbia University, who is a French philosopher and socialist who said: 

 

All I owe to you, I owe to myself; what I do for you, I do for myself; what I do against you, I do 

against myself. 

 

These words contain the core of the lesson we must seek to learn. The greatest peril of modern society is 

the exclusiveness of group against group in which the stronger group shuts out the weaker from sharing 

the benefits and opportunities of the common wheel and which the stronger grow proud and hard and 

intolerant and prejudiced, denying their common humanity in which the weaker groups grow bitter and 

frustrated so that on all sides anger increases and energies of men are turned from creativeness to 

destructiveness, from co-operative gain to universal loss and the consummation of this evil thing is here 

before our eyes the final inhumanity of man to man. 

 

Let us ask ourselves – what have the intolerant gained from their intolerance? What have their 

persecutors reaped after the persecution? When we read the history of what happened to Hitler and his 

crowd, we say – What have they gained? What did the Czarist Russia Achieve from its programs? What 

have the Nazis gained from their cry and fury against the Jewish people? They have gained the most 

terrible of all retributions, such ruin upon ruin that has never been visited on a country since civilization 

began. What did they gain against the Jews – against all groups but their own? They did against 

themselves. The same law holds, though it may waste the time, though the persecutors may triumph for 

a season, hatred breeds hatred, as fear breeds 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1057 

fear. Men sold the dragons teeth and the dragon could, alas, arise and devour them. 

 

Now, I do not want to bore the House with the full text of this, but I want to say that there is indeed an 

urgent need for enlightenment for a different outlook and I hope that this Bill will bring about those very 

things, will help to be a guide to the people, as the Hon. Minister of Education mentioned, I too hope 

that it will be red in a great many places throughout the country. There is urgent need for it. We have 

never really tried it in its fullest contents. This same person said in his closing paragraph: 

 

Now is the time. There is another and even harder victory to win, a victory of the mind, not of the 

sword, for this fight we have never yet formed our ranks, we shall be fighting for the truth, for the 

brotherhood of man, for the well-being and the unity of our land. If we keep these banners before us, 

we shall conquer in the end. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, can be considered as the contribution of this province of ours towards that fight for 

eradicating the prejudices and things that tend to divide us and keep us apart. If we need these things 

among individuals, we need understanding and a common goal of this kind and I say that we need it 

among provinces, among nations, all through the world, seeing that we have just passed through a 

terrific war, and we still have to settle the things and win the things that really were fought for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, believing that this Bill will do a great deal towards this very thing that we so much need in 

the world today, I will support it wholeheartedly. 

 

Mr. W. Burgess (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley):  Mr. Speaker, when a question as fundamental as that dealt 

with in this Bill No. 65 is before the Legislature, I feel that it is a privilege to express myself on the 

matters involved. Some people might argue and do ague that it is unnecessary to pass a Bill of rights in a 

province like Saskatchewan. It is perhaps true that we are less troubled by the evils of intolerance than 

most people. That, if true, is something for which we ought to be thankful. The fundamental principles 

involved in this Bill can hardly be restated too often. Freedom is a right of man. It is something that has 

been upheld by the best minds of all the ages. The contribution of any people to the welfare of the race 

might very fairly be measured by the contribution that they have made to the freedoms and liberties of 

mankind. 

 

The Greeks, mentioned before in this debate, with their democratic methods of government, their 

equality under the law, made the greatest contribution which was made by that great race to the history 

of mankind. The Hebrew writings, which formed the basis of our so-called Christian civilization, taught 

nothing if they did not teach the right of man to be free. The ancient story of the Israelites labouring 

under their taskmasters, and the sin of Pharaoh (his sin, by the way, was that he would not set the people 

free) is a story of a people seeking freedom of expression, freedom of worship, freedom to develop 

according to the dictates of their conscience, and to develop the God-given right of man to be free. The 

history of the race is nothing more 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1058 

nor less than a story of the struggle for freedom against enslavement, a battle between right and wrong. 

Our human institutions must be recognized as more good than evil if their effect is a wider acceptance of 

the principles of liberty. 

 

We have come to accept certain fundamentals as necessary for the preservation and extension of liberty: 

freedom of speech; freedom of assembly; freedom of the press and it seems to be that these basic rights 

cannot be reiterated too often. Freedom of speech may sometimes be improperly used. Things may be 

said that would be better left unsaid; but the fact that some people sometimes make improper use of the 

freedom of speech is not a good enough argument for its being taken away. It is also true that the press 

may at times, under certain circumstances, forget their responsibility to the people they serve. It may be 

true that the influence of the press is not always the best possible influence, but nevertheless it is just as 

necessary that men may be free to write as it is that they be free to speak, or free to think. The exercise 

of the principle of free discussion will enable us to separate the true from the false, the wheat from the 

chaff. 

 

Freedom is, first of all, Sir, an individual matter. Our religion teaches us that man is a free agent; that he 

is able and expected to choose the right and turn down the evil. That is not even peculiar to our religion; 

it has been a fundamental philosophy in the great philosophies of the human race. 

 

Now, in our development of civilization, it has been found often that true liberty can be best, or can only 

be found by collective action and so we have seen the development of the tribes, the monarchies and the 

various forms of government up to our democratic machinery of government. These various systems 

have contributed to the history of the race, to the cultural inheritance of the ancients, in worthwhile 

things, very largely in accordance with the contribution that they have made to the cause of freedom. 

 

We people of the British race have just cause for pride in the contribution that has been made by our 

people in the finding of a workable plan of self-government. No man should be a slave; no man has the 

right or the wisdom to arrogate to himself the right to be another’s master. Lincoln said: “As I would not 

be a slave, so I would not be a master.” Self-discipline is the highest form of right behavior. Better that 

the individual act with fairness and justice towards his neighbor because it is the right thing to do, than 

do it because it is in accordance with a law that might be passed by this or any other Legislature. 

Democracy is the idea or ideal of self-discipline brought into the sphere of government or of national 

organization. We have developed in the British countries a parliamentary system of government as a 

machine to give effect to the people’s will. I know that parliaments and legislatures are not perfect. They 

could scarcely be expected to be perfect. It is nevertheless the best method that has yet been discovered 

to safeguard the rights of the individual and to make possible the expression of his best though in the 

matters of government. And, Mr. Speaker, ordinary members should remember that on us rests, in no 

small degree, the responsibility for the maintenance of the dignity and the usefulness of parliamentary 

procedure. The world has been cursed through all the ages by people, both in responsible positions and 

in their individual capacity, who, without sufficient examination, follow demagogues, or ‘blind’ leaders, 

to their 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1059 

own injury and the injury of the race. Members of Parliament, legislators, in a country such as ours, with 

its long history and wide experience, with its numerous examples of the seriousness of any cessation of 

vigilance, should be every-mindful of our responsibility. Government by Order-in-Council, Mr. Speaker, 

must never be permitted to take the place of Government by legislation. The most serious mistakes that 

have taken place in Canada have been the result of ill-conceived Order-in-Council, not parliamentary 

action. For example, our treatment of the Canadian-born Japanese people was done by Order-in-Council, 

not by parliamentary enactment. This is not to say that the men who passed these executive orders were 

not men of good will, were not anxious to do what was best and right; but it is merely to say that laws 

are best when passed in open Parliament with free discussion, with decisions openly arrived at. Mistakes 

even then can happen. They happen under any system; but experience shows that the Parliamentary 

method is the best yet devised. 

 

There are possibilities of danger to the rights of minorities even in a democracy. People sometimes 

become tremendously enthused about some possibly worthwhile thing and the majority may find 

themselves, or think themselves thwarted, or slowed down by what seems to be an obnoxious minority; 

but minorities often turn out to be right. It is not unknown even in Canada, for a statue to be erected to a 

man who was tried for treason in his Legislature and afterwards a statue was erected to his name in the 

grounds of the same Legislature in which he was tried. 

 

I said before that we cannot too often reiterate the fundamentals referred to in this Bill, because the 

meaning and application that we give to democracy will decide our survival and decide the survival of 

liberty. I would like to quote the definition of democracy, which is given in Life Magazine, of February 

17
th

: 

 

Democracy means freedom. All men should participate actively in selecting leaders, in shaping laws, 

in discharging the responsibilities of government. Every man should be free to think, to act, to speak, 

to write, to create, to approve and to criticize, to assemble and organize, to choose an occupation, to 

move from place to place, to improve his conditions, to worship God if he chooses, to pursue in his 

own way truth and happiness. Freedom is the ancient, eternal and implacable foe of totalitarianism and 

every form of tyranny over the bodies and minds of men. 

 

It is to safeguard fundamental rights like these, so far as that is possible by legislation, that this Bill is 

proposed and for this reason I support it. 

 

The Act before us provides that citizens shall have the right to join professional societies, trade 

associations, occupational groups, without regard to their religious or racial characteristics. We have in 

Saskatchewan one common grouping of society in which this has always been written into their very 

articles of association. I refer to the co-operative movement. It is a matter of great pride to me as a firm 

believe in co-operative development that the co-operative movement has never recognized any 

difference on racial or religious lines and it has thereby in my opinion, evidenced the true appreciation 

of real Christian principles. Unfortunately, churches have not nearly so good a record in this respect. 

Many are the crimes that have been 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1060 

committed in the name of religion. Much of the intolerance of the world has been the result of the 

fanaticism of sincere but misguided people, who, because of a profound faith in their own doctrines, 

were not willing to tolerate differences of opinion. Politicians sometimes also have been so convinced of 

the rightness of the cause they espouse that they have been willing to stifle their consciences with the 

argument that the end would justify the means. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a proper pride in the achievements of the race to which we happen to belong can be a 

good thing. Inspiration to be derived from the better traditions of our race may help us to better things. 

Carried to excess, it can develop a smug superiority which will only lead to friction and unhappiness. 

The Anglo-Saxons have much to be thankful for, have much to be proud of; but they have too often not 

given to the world the best that might have been expected from a people so richly blessed. 

 

It is good to realize and express the conviction that there is no real difference in the essentials that can be 

traced to racial or religious difference entirely. Although many the wars that have been fought and much 

the suffering that has been caused by intolerance of one man, or another’s religion, or the intolerance of 

one man for the color of another man’s skin. Children of different colors could play together as happily 

as chickens in a brooder house, if they were not conditioned by the prejudices taught to them by their 

elders. 

 

We, of the English-speaking race, have, in this day, in the words of a great man, “truly a rendezvous 

with destiny”. Our youth have fought and won a terrible war, but their victory will turn to ashes unless 

people like us rise above ourselves and so legislate that peace and freedom can really be secured. Each 

and every generation will, of course, have to guard its liberty, because it would see, Mr. Speaker, that 

anything worth having must be worked for. There is no ‘royal road’ to liberty, and the danger will 

always be present because the greatest danger lies in taking things for granted, in failing to appreciate 

our greatest gifts. 

 

We, Mr. Speaker, in this Legislature, might even look at ourselves. We represent the parliamentary 

system in this province and we should surely be jealous of the dignity of this House. Surely our debates 

could be carried on on a somewhat higher plane. Good manners and courtesy, not to mention tolerance, 

might make us recognize that the other fellow is entitled to his opinion, however wrong that opinion 

might be; that he might even be sincere in his opinions, and that, when he displays a lack of the finer 

instincts, we should be sorry rather than answer jibe with jibe, because, Mr. Speaker, when the tone of 

debate in this Chamber becomes lowered to that of the street brawl, we here are doing more harm to the 

institution of parliamentary government by democratic processes than the enemies of freedom could 

themselves do. 

 

I would like, Mr. Speaker, to direct a few words to the Members of my own Party – not that I presume to 

be a preacher capable of preaching sermons to anyone; but because we have a peculiar responsibility. I 

have said before in this House that I was attracted to the CCF by the democratic nature of its 

organization more than anything else. It seemed to me that we were in the process of building a really 

democratic organization 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1061 

through which ordinary men and women might really take possession of our democratic government and 

use it to make for a more abundant life. Where, instead of an exasperated sense of frustration with the 

institution of voting and a sense of personal insignificance, that we felt, we could by intelligent interest 

make this CCF org an instrument to give effect to the will of the people for a better condition of society. 

A condition of more real freedom: freedom of work, to plan, freedom from grinding poverty, freedom to 

think, freedom to worship, freedom to really exercise our initiative and to make our greatest possible 

contribution to the times in which we live. We were not organizing just another political party. Whether 

we hold office or not is in itself not important, but that we remain true to the ideals of liberty that sent us 

here is of first consequence; that we stand for the principles of brotherhood rather than the law of the 

jungle. If we are to accept the responsibility of leadership we will make mistakes, and a definite program 

requires to establish the right to live, to produce and to distribute the results of prod. 

 

As I have said before, it is not to free enterprise but to ‘economic cannibalism’ that I am opposed. Mr. 

Speaker, in one of the speeches we listened to, this afternoon, the speaker appeared very much 

frightened or concerned that this CCF party was ceasing to be democratic, or was not or never had been 

democratic. Surely a party formed as ours was can claim to be democratic. In its genesis that was correct 

because it was born in the hearts and minds of the people and it drew and it still draws its sustenance 

from the freedom-loving farmers of Saskatchewan. Why anyone should be alarmed that an organization 

of that kind could ever become really a menace to the liberties of man, frankly, to me, Mr. Speaker, is 

somewhat amusing. We may be, if we are wise enough, be the leaders in the cause of liberty and 

democracy; but we must constantly remind ourselves that we are the servants, not the masters, of this 

society, and that he who serves best is best qualified to lead. 

 

Democratic government requires an acceptance or a willingness on the part of the people. A free people 

may accept leadership, but they cannot be driven and remain a free people. Theories of economics are 

not nearly as important as the fundamentals of liberty. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, may I be so bold as to say a few words to our friends of the Opposition. Liberalism 

should be a fine doctrine and those who genuinely hold to its principles can claim to be champions of 

democracy and liberty. I hasten to assure them that I do not claim for myself or for my present associates 

any monopoly of the love of liberty. That Liberalism is desecrated when those who claim to be its 

spokesmen permit themselves to become the party of special privileges, or when, having been long in 

office, they get into the frame of mind that they are God’s chosen people, the custodians of the right of 

government; that others who may advance different ideas for the welfare of the State are upstarts or 

worse, who ought to be stamped upon by ridicule and abuse. They must remember that Liberalism’s 

only claim to greatness lies in the fact that its early leaders were reformers who blazed new trails, and 

that when it ceases to be a reform party, it ceases to be Liberal. 

 

We are passing this ‘Bill of Rights’, Mr. Speaker, here in the Saskatchewan Legislature and are as it 

were using it as a means to rededicate ourselves to the principles of right and 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1062 

brotherhood as against wrong and exploitation. Of love being better than hate, co-operation better than 

strife, and that we intend as a people in this province, to weld together the people of all races and creeds 

into a community of free men retaining, if possible, the best in the traditions of all their races. To build 

from the experience and the wide expansion of liberty bequeathed to us by our fathers, a nobler 

Canadian citizenship of which we may in very truth be proud. That will make the children of men who 

are yet unborn say that these men in the Saskatchewan Legislature were builders in their day and 

generation. If we are doing this, Mr. Speaker, we are doing well; if we are doing something else we are 

just plain hypocrites. 

 

Let us pass this Bill of Rights and hope that, in its passing, we are helping forward the great cause of 

liberty to which we are all dedicated and that we, the people of Saskatchewan, shall so govern our hearts 

and actions that we will bring closer the day envisaged by Robbie burns, when he said: 

 

Then let us pray, as come it may – 

As come it will for a’ that – 

May bear the gree and a’ that, 

For a’ that and a’ that, 

It’s coming yet for a’ that, 

That mankind the warld o’er, 

Shall brothers be for a’ that. 

 

Mr. D.M. Lazorko (Redberry):  Mr. Speaker, in rising to take my part in this debate, I realize that the 

subject has been covered very well by all the speakers who have taken pat in it up to the present time, 

but there are a few points I would like to touch on before this Bill is passed. 

 

The Hon. Leader of the Opposition, speaking to this Bill the other day, said that we should look at the 

history and background of the matter involved under this Bill. I have been fortunate, or unfortunate, to 

have lived and experienced a lot of things involved in this Bill. From my childhood I have seen people 

of their own will, or otherwise, coming from different parts of the world, because of one discrimination 

or another: the Englishman, the Scotsman, the Irishman predominantly because of economic 

discrimination. People of Central European origin because of economic, religious and national 

discriminations, all looking for a new land where they could build up a new life and build up something 

better than what they have known in past history. That is how we have seen all these peoples thrown 

together on our western prairies from 40 years back and who, during that time, began to build a new 

country, a new life, and a better life than what their ancestors had known. 

 

I have seen discrimination which possibly had been the worst kind of discrimination possible in this part 

of the country. I have seen young men and women who had gone through University, who could not 

obtain employment just because their names ended with a –chk or a –ski, or something else. I have seen 

school teachers who could not find jobs because of the same reason. I have seen other people who could 

not find other employment just because of the same reason. I have seen many other types of 

discrimination in years gone by. During the last number of years, under pressure of the world conflict, a 

lot of this has been done away with, but at the same time today we again are 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1063 

beginning to see this same type of discrimination or that same inclination to build up that certain type of 

discrimination being revived, where people because of national origin or racial origin, or their beliefs, 

are again being singled out, especially by vested interest and the people who are sponsoring them and 

who are the willing tools of vested interest are again beginning to revive, or are trying to revive this 

same discrimination. 

 

It was mentioned by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition that the British people have had these rights for a 

long time. I would say that predominantly the English people had these rights for a long time. We need 

only to look back into the pages of the Irish and Scottish history to see a lot of discrimination that had 

gone on in those countries, where Irishmen could not hold their own land because they were Irish in 

their own country. There are a few black pages in English history but at the same time British history is 

a history of a people who have been in the forefront of developing democracy, of extending rights to a 

much wider section of their peoples than in any other country on the face of the earth. From the Magna 

Carta down to the Atlantic Charter, each one of the rights as they were fought for by the common people 

of that country and accepted, were finally put on the statute books as part and parcel of their every day 

lives and not just as window dressing as some p have referred to this Act. I believe that English and all 

the others who have, during centuries of struggle, for the rights of the people in their countries when 

they have attained, and putting it on the Statute Books is acknowledgement that this is a right of all the 

people within that country. 

 

We have heard, a good many times in the past, reference of an idea or an accepted rule which has been 

carried out by vested interests or by people in control in countries or nations where the idea was to 

divide the common people among themselves and whereby, through that division, those vested interests 

or people in control at that time could rule and control that country that much easier. From what was 

said by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition in debating this Bill the other day, it seems to me that he is 

not interested so much in the rights of the common man as in the rights of the privileged classes of this 

country. He is not interested to see the different people of different national origin who have been 

thrown together in this country, of seeing these people fused together into one people, into a Canadian 

people. That does not seem to be his interest, but his interest seems to be, as stated by himself, rather the 

protection of the capitalists privileges within this country. I believe myself, that by any Act of this 

Legislature we can advance the fusion of the people in this country, we can advance the co-operative 

idea and work of the people, who will work together for the common good that we have advanced 

democracy that much further. The statement so often repeated by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, the 

other day, that he is not opposed to this Bill, leads me to believe that he is opposed. From past 

experiences, as far as I have been able to ascertain, anything that has been repeated as often as this 

statement was repeated the other day, shows in the final analysis that a statement so often repeated is 

diametrically opposed, or the opposite of the belief or stand that they will take and do take at all times. I 

may say they will not oppose this Bill when it is voted upon, because they dare not oppose it. The 

interests of this country and the interests of the people here demand that we all become one and one 

only, one nation and one people undivided by anything that may be brought up at any time. 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1064 

with the Canadian Citizenship Bill passed in Ottawa, for the first time in Canadian history bringing into 

being by law a Canadian nation and bringing into being by law a Canadian citizenship. I think that this 

Act which will be passed by this Legislature is very timely to further develop and help the development 

of a sound Canadian citizenship. We speak so much nowadays of equality of nations. We are trying to 

do that through a United Nations organization. I think we can do a lot towards making the United 

Nations a success by beginning to do some of these things here at home. As I said, before, the 

cosmopolitan population that has been thrown together here can be and will be fused into one solid 

nation; a nation that will be awake to its own needs and at the same time to the needs of other peoples of 

the world. As in the past British peoples have given, through the development of democracy and 

democratic form of government within their own country. I think we can, and that we will, through the 

further development of democracy in this country, further extend all the rights which should be held by 

everyone, and we can do our share in the progress of mankind across the face of this earth. 

 

Mr. P.J. Hodge (Rosthern):  Mr. Speaker, the matter under discussion is one which is particularly 

dear to my heart, belonging to what is sometimes described as a minority group and it is for that reason 

that I just wish to make a few remarks in this connection. I may say at the outset I am fully in accord 

with the principles enunciated in this Bill and my chief concern is only in connection with the 

interpretation of this Act and of its application. 

 

I think the summary of this Bill could be stated to be that the right of every person should be to life, 

liberty and the pursuit of happiness. I think that probably embraces the whole of this Bill, Now those of 

us who were born in this country regard this as being an inalienable right, but as the Leader of the 

Opposition pointed out, when he so ably discussed this Bill, this right to life, liberty and the pursuit of 

happiness has been gained through a painful struggle of political evolution. It is not a matter of right that 

we are enjoying these privileges but has been attained by a great deal of struggle and we should be 

therefore very, very careful not to let any of these liberties go by. 

 

In the constituency of Rosthern, the majority of the citizens are either of Dutch descent or Ukrainian 

descent, and we also have some French and some other nationalities, but the majority of the residents of 

that district belong to either of those two groups, frequently referred to as minority groups. Now both of 

these groups, at least many of them who are now there, and the forefathers of others, came from the 

same country, namely the Ukraine in Russia. In this country so far as I know they did not have this right 

to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness to nearly the same extent that they are enjoying here. They 

came to this country principally in order to have those privileges, and I sometimes think they probably, 

on that account, appreciate this right more so than even a native Canadian, because we have never 

known any other right, but they know that there are many countries in this world where these rights do 

not exist and for that reason they appreciate them probably even more so than native born Canadians. 

Even though my people came from Russia, their forefathers came from the Netherlands. In that country 

they have dykes to keep out the waters of the ocean and they sometimes have seen a break in these 

dykes and know the 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1065 

devastation that follows. For that reason they very carefully watch any little deterioration in the dykes, 

and, politically speaking, they regard these rights that we have been discussing in this Bill as political 

dykes and anything which they think is a deterioration of these rights is watched with a great deal of 

concern. 

 

Now there are one or two matters which they consider to be in this category. For instance in sections two 

and three of the Act, we are told that we have the right to freedom of conscience and the right to 

freedom of expression. But, after listening to the radio address of the Attorney General, where he 

intimated that people who did not have the same political philosophy as himself; and so on, that there 

should be a court established for them, they should be tried if they doubted the sincerity of those 

statements. Now then, section four says that every person shall enjoy the right to assembly peacefully 

with others and form with others association of any character under the law. Now I do not know whether 

school districts come under that category, but it is an association of a kind and prior to 1944 the people 

had the right to form districts as they wished and to govern them, but now that right has been taken 

away. Under section six, we are supposed to have an election every five years, but as I stated many of 

the people in the Rosthern district come from Russia, and they have a constitution there also, but they 

also know that the elections are not being held. I have here a book called Political Handbook of the 

World – 1946, and in it, referring to the Supreme Council of Russia, it mentions this: 

 

The Presidium shall act as an executive and direct the cause between the session of the Supreme 

Council, elections to the Supreme Soviet that have been held annually in December were postponed 

since 1941. The powers of the present party have been extended until 1946 by presidential decree. 

 

and then it mentions also: 

 

Another high organ of the Party is the All Union Party Congress, which according to the Party Statute, 

is supposed to meet at least once every three years, but actually has only met twice in the last fourteen 

years. 

 

Now I am not saying that the present Government will not hold elections according to this Act but I 

merely say that many people in the Rosthern constituency have come from a country where they had a 

constitution guaranteeing elections at certain times, but these elections were not held. 

 

Now then, section seven guarantees the right to employment; but we have The Trade Union Act which 

provides that unless you join a union within a certain length of time, you cannot get employment. 

 

According to section eight, we have the right to engage in occupations, but this is disappearing as well. 

We had many insurance agents in this province, we have the Mennonite Mutual Fire Insurance 

Company and at all times, prior to 1944, they were permitted to engage freely in business. But now, 

under The Company Insurance Act, many of these agents cannot engage in certain lines of insurance; 

and this company cannot insure school houses the way they did before. The same thing applies 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1066 

to the Automobile Accident Insurance which can only attend certain types which can only be written 

now by the Government Insurance office. Crown corporations take away employment from certain 

individuals and engage in very unfair competition with others. 

 

Then, we are supposed to have the right to own property, but according to the provisions of The Trade 

Union Act, the property can be effectively confiscated. We also have another instance of confiscation of 

property and that is under The Mineral Rights Act. Unless you now pay tax on mineral rights they are 

confiscated by the Crown. We are supposed to have the right to membership for veteran society. Well 

we still have that, but this enquiry which was held here not so long ago made some of us rather 

suspicious as to the intensity of the Government in that respect. We have also heard a good deal, by the 

Attorney General and others, regarding the matter of tolerance and equality and this sort of thing. But I 

must associate myself with the remarks of the Member for the Mediterranean. I thought the Minister’s 

remarks concerning the members of the Assiniboia Club did not contain just as much tolerance as could 

have been expected on an occasion of this kind and also his attack on combines, cartels and so on. There 

has been a great deal said in this House at various times about these vested interests and so on, of 

combines and so on. I think it is up to a large extent imaginary. When we go to any one of these cities, 

towns, or villages in Saskatchewan where are these vested interests that we speak about It is true enough 

that we buy most of our goods from some large concern, or some other place, but so far as 

Saskatchewan itself is concerned, I fail to see where these vested interests are. We are all for the small 

businessman and I think we should confine ourself to this province and not talk about vested interests 

that exist somewhere else. 

 

Then, that tolerance is certainly not shown in The Trade Union Act, where, I think, was pointed out 

when the Bill was passed that the employers rights have certainly not been very highly regarded, 

because whenever an employee is dismissed, the employer must show that he is guilty of labor 

infractions when it should be the other way around. 

 

I think intolerance has also been shown by this Government in disregard of courts in connection with the 

Insurance Act and with Automobile Insurance Act, Trade unions Act, even in connection with a recent 

Bill which was passed in regard to assessment where the judge was eliminated and someone else put in 

place. Also city Acts, the judge used to be on the police commission and now some member of the 

council takes his place. 

 

A matter of ecology has also been stressed, but this is not apparent in some of the legislation in the past 

year. For instance, take the matter of seed grain. Those who have already paid cannot get any refund. 

Surely that is a glaring instance of inequality. 

 

Now I do not wish to bore this House with a repetition of its errors, but I just want to mention a few of 

these points that show that, although this Statute is being opposed, it will no doubt be enacted. The 

record of this Government certainly is not in accordance with the spirit and intent of this Act and it is 

needed in view of the record of this Government in those instances that I have already mentioned, and 

others which could 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1067 

be shown. The Bill is actually more or less just a repetition of platitude, and it reminds me more or less 

of safe insight description for his own purpose. Now, there are actual, in my opinion, although I am 

quite in accord of what it said in the Bill, objections to the passing of a Bill of this description. I agree 

with the Member for the Mediterranean when he said that once you codify a law that is supposed to 

represent the law, and anything not contained in the law is excluded therefrom. Now here you enumerate 

certain rights, but there are other rights that should be included, as was pointed out by the Leader of the 

Opposition. I think for that reason it would be much better not to codify the law at all. We have been 

getting along fairly well without a Statute of this nature and I think it would, in order to effectively 

protect our rights, probably be better not to codify it for fear we might leave out some rights which we 

now possess. I think, as it has been stated here, that these rights should be every once in awhile 

re-affirmed and re-stated, certainly I agree with that; particularly this Government I think should have 

these rights in very large letters on each desk to remind each one of them of it, but at the same time I do 

not think it should be necessary to put them in the form of statute just on this account. 

 

Mr. Valleau:  Would he then suggest that such documents as Magna Carta, Bill of Rights, 

Declaration of Independence, should not have been written because they did not include everything? 

 

Mr. Hooge:  As pointed out by the Leader of the Opposition before, these documents that the Hon. 

Member refers to were not Statutes. For instance that one, Magna Carta, that was an agreement that was 

reached between the King and certain of his nobles. 

 

Now, in connection with the matter of discrimination, I am certainly in agreement that these 

discriminations should be abolished if they exist. My people have very often been referred to as 

foreigners and for that reason possibly have been subjected to a certain amount of discrimination. Now, 

being the son of the so-called foreigner, I have on certain occasions possibly been subjected to a certain 

amount of discrimination, but I cannot complain too much. I must say that I have really been very fairly 

treated in this province, in the Province of Manitoba and in any province where I have ever been, so that 

the matter of discrimination mentioned by the Member for Redberry on the count of nationality does not 

seem to me to apparent. But, I think that the fact that this is in the Statute is going to cause a certain 

amount of embarrassment and it could be made the instrument of oppression. Supposing you advertise 

for labor, and half a dozen or so apply, and you probably only want one. Well, you have got to exercise 

your judgment and select one out of that bunch. Well, someone may be a Hungarian, one may be 

Ukrainian, one may be Dutch, and another may be Irish, and so forth. Well, he may select the Irishman, 

then the others would say: “He took the Irishman because we were Dutch, or we were Hungarian, or 

Ukrainian.” Where are you going to draw the line? It seems to me that that is rather dangerous (although 

I am fully in accord with it, that there should be no discrimination), but once you enact it and then have 

a fine when you do not comply with it, it seems to me that you are putting your very powerful 

instrument into the hands of certain people for oppression. After all, the idea of exercising tolerance and 

so on is a matter more or less of virtue. It should not be a matter of Statute. 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1068 

You cannot legislate virtue into the minds of people and I do not think that (although as I say, I am in 

favor of the intention of the Act) once you put it in the form of a Statute, then you are confronted with 

realistic conditions, where you have to exercise judgment and choose between one or another, well, it 

seems to me on every one of those occasions, some action could be brought against you because you did 

not happen to choose that person. 

 

Now as to the Bill itself (although I have no objection to it) I agree with the Leader of the Opposition 

that if the Bill is enacted and no doubt it will be it should be extended. It should contain further power 

and one thing, in any event, it should contain, is the definition of the word ‘freedom’ which is mentioned 

here a number of times. The conception of this Government regarding freedom seems to be quite 

different to the conception that some of us hold and no doubt in Russia and in other Socialistic countries, 

they also use the word freedom, but their conception seems to be quite different and I think, therefore, it 

would be very essential that the definition of freedom should be contained in this Act. 

 

I just want to refer briefly to a few remarks that were made by some of the other speakers. The Minister 

of Municipal Affairs referred to his experience in talking to certain people in a certain cons who were 

afraid to talk to him, after the election they said they had been afraid to vote CCF. Now, before the 

election they apparently were afraid to talk to him, well I think it probably would have been better for 

the people of this province had more of them been afraid to talk to the CCF canvassers. 

 

The Minister of Education said that we should be reminded of the duties and responsibilities, referring to 

this Act, I quite agree with that and I think that particularly this Government should be reminded of this 

daily. He, apparently, referred to the Socialism which has been introduced in Great Britain as a political 

evolution. Well the progress which that Government has made up to date certainly does not seem to be 

very impressive and I do not think that that shows any degree of evolution at all, in fact I think it shows 

retrogression, if anything. He also seemed to refer to the two world wars as being the fruits of free 

enterprise, but I never knew that the world wars, which started by nations, particularly emphasized free 

enterprise, and I think, therefore, that argument does not apply at all. The Member for Yorkton, I believe 

it was, blamed discrimination on free enterprise. I cannot see anything in this argument at all. This is a 

matter of individual taste or judgment, I expect that a CCF, a Tory, or a Liberal is faced with a choice of 

employment, choice of vocation and this sort of thing many times, and whether he belongs to one party 

or the other, he has to exercise this judgment. That is what the Member for Yorkton probably calls 

discrimination, but probably it should be called choice. Now this Miss Kenny’s theory apparently, the 

non-acceptance of that for a while, was also blamed on free enterprise. The medical profession must 

necessarily be very jealous of certain innovations, very many new remedies and quack remedies of one 

thing or another, would otherwise be forced on the public. In fact too many are now and I think a careful 

and exhaustive examination should be given any new theory, particularly one treating such an important 

disease as the one that was treated by Miss Kenny. Once it is found that the treatment is effective, no 

doubt it will be accepted by the medical profession. I have a very high regard for the medical profession 

here and in other countries. 



 

March 21, 1947 

 

1069 

I think that they are one of the most democratic societies that we have. In industry very often we find 

that if somebody invents a certain new process of some kind, they immediately patent it and try to make 

money from it. But in the medical profession I have never known them to try and make money out of a 

new discovery. They will test it until they find its real efficacious, then they will print it in the Journal 

and make it available to all the other doctors and to the world. I think the doctors are really and truly 

endeavouring to protect the public, to protect us, by very carefully scrutinizing any new theory of 

treatment that is being advocated publicly. 

 

I am fully in accord with the remarks of the Member for Wolseley, and I hope that the Members of this 

Government will take all that he said fully to heart. With regard to the remarks of the Member for 

Redberry, I did not think that, although he spoke of tolerance, his remarks pertaining to the Leader of the 

Opposition, certainly did not show that degree of tolerance which he apparently wanted to advocate. 

 

The debate was adjourned on the motion of Mr. Benson. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:00 o’clock p.m. 


