



















































Hansard: March 25, 1948


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Fifth Session — Tenth Legislature 

 

 

Thursday, March 25, 1948. 

 

The House met at 11 o’clock a.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor (Hon. J.M. Uhrich, Ph.C., M.D.) entered the Chamber at one 

o’clock p.m. 

 

Royal Assent to Bills passed during the Session was announced by the Clerk of the Legislative 

Assembly, as follows: 

 

Clerk: — In His Majesty’s name, His Honour the Lieutenant Governor doth assent to these Bills. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, This Legislative Assembly has voted the Supplies 

required to enable the Government to defray the expenses of the Public Service. In the name of the 

Assembly I present to Your Honour the following Bill: “An Act for granting to His Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service of the Fiscal Years ending, respectively, the Thirty-first day of 

March, 1948, and the Thirty-first day of March, 1949,” to which Bill I respectfully request Your 

Honour’s Assent. 

 

Royal Assent to this Bill was announced by the Clerk, as follows: 

 

Clerk: — In His Majesty’s name, His Honour the Lieutenant Governor doth thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accepts their benevolence and assents to this Bill. 

 

PROROGATION SPEECH 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor: — Mr. Speaker, and members of the Legislative Assembly: It 

is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the Legislative Assembly, and, in doing so, I wish to 

thank you, and congratulate you, on the work you have done; and to express my confidence that the 

results of your labour will be of benefit to the people of the province. 

 

I desire to express the deepest regret on the occasion of the death, in the course of this Session, of His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor, Reginald J.M. Parker, a former member of this Assembly, and one 

time Minister of the Crown. To Mrs. Parker my Government extends its sincere condolences. 

 

Many important matters have come before you for discussion and decision. Included amongst them are: 

extension of more generous pension benefits to aged persons; expansion of the protective features of the 

Automobile Accident Insurance Plan; the implementation of your recommendations concerning the 

government of professional societies; the improvement of Workmen’s Compensation benefits; 

amendments to The Saskatchewan Election Act; enabling 



 

March 25, 1948 

 

 

2 

legislation granting municipalities the right to tax railways; and complementary legislation assuring the 

Dominion Government, and the people of Saskatchewan, of My Government’s intention to facilitate the 

marketing of coarse grains through the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

I thank you for the provision you have made to meet the further requirements of Public Service, and 

assure you that the sum of money voted will be used economically, prudently and in the public interest. 

 

In taking leave of you I desire to thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies to 

the activities of the Session; and to wish you the full blessing of providence as you return again to your 

respective homes. 

 

Hon. O.W. Valleau (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker and members of the Legislative Assembly: 

It is the will and pleasure of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 

prorogued until it pleases His Honour to summon the same for the dispatch of business, and the 

Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 


