



















































Hansard: March 23, 1948


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Fifth Session — Tenth Legislature 

 

 

The House met at three o’clock p.m. Tuesday, March 23, 1948. 

 

 

Death of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all hon. members, and, indeed, all the people of 

Saskatchewan, were profoundly shocked this morning to receive the sad news of the passing of His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor of this province. 

 

His Honour had not been enjoying the best of health for some time, and a week or ten days ago entered 

the hospital for a check-up, but during the last week his health seemed to be improved and we had every 

reason to think he was well on the way to recovery. Last night he went out to visit with some of his 

friends, had supper, came home and retired, apparently in good health, and passed away during the 

night. 

 

I am sure there is no need for me to recite to the members of this Legislature the long association which 

His Honour, the Hon. R.J.M. Parker, has had with the public life of this province; his activities and 

interest in municipal affairs, his membership in this House representing the constituency of Pelly, his 

holding the office of Minister of Municipal Affairs for a good period of years — a position which he 

occupied with distinction. He was one of the most popular Ministers, I believe, ever to hold that office. 

He was highly regarded and highly respected throughout the province. 

 

Upon being appointed as Lieutenant Governor of the province, those of us who are members of the 

Government naturally had an opportunity to know him better, and I speak on behalf of my colleagues 

and myself when I say that no one could have had more courteous or more cordial relations with anyone 

than we had with His Honour. We found his counsel wise, his advice sound at all times, we found him 

ever courteous and approachable, and we were saddened when we learned of his ill-health a week or two 

ago, and encouraged when we found that his health was improving within the last few days. When, this 

morning, we learned that he had passed away, we were profoundly shocked, feeling that we had 

sustained a personal loss — not only the loss of the King’s Representative in the province, but the loss 

of one who has been a friend and a counsellor to each and every one of us. 

 

I would therefore like to move, seconded by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Patterson: “That this 

Assembly, deeply shocked at word of the sudden and unexpected death this morning, of His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor, the Honourable Reginald John Marsden Parker, records its keen sense of the loss 

suffered by this Province and its people in the passing of a truly great and noble public servant, 

expresses its consciousness of personal bereavement touching all its members, and conveys its most 

sincere sympathies and condolences to those most intimate relatives who mourn a dear husband, a kind 

and generous father. 



 

March 23, 1948 

 

 

2 

“A successful farmer and long active in municipal affairs, His Honour first entered the Saskatchewan 

Legislature, in 1929, as member for the Constituency of Pelly. In 1934, he was appointed Minister of 

Municipal Affairs, the earlier part of his administration coinciding with the most severe period of the 

drought and depression which then afflicted the Province. As Minister of a Department directly 

concerned with relief and allied problems, he bore a tremendous administrative burden which severely 

taxed his physical resources, and left an indelible mark upon him. 

 

“As Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan since 1945, His Honour’s jovial personality and charm of 

manner endeared him to all privileged to have associations with him. His death removes a kindly 

presence, an exemplary citizen and public servant, who adorned the high office to which, in later life, he 

was called, and in which he died. 

 

“This Assembly deeply regrets that His Honour was not spared longer to represent His Majesty in this 

Province, and shall remember him, in his ways and in his works, as the embodiment of all the splendid 

attributes summed up in the phrase, “A fine English Gentleman.”“ 

 

Mr. W.J. Patterson (Leader of Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, it is always difficult for one to express 

his sentiments when a very, very close and intimate personal friend has passed away. It was my 

privilege, over a period of twenty or twenty-five years, to be not only an associate but a personal friend 

of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

His characteristics and his personalities were well-known to most of us, but if there was one thing about 

which he was particularly interested, about which he was particularly keen, that was the matter of 

municipal government; and the municipal government of Saskatchewan and the municipal officials of 

the province of Saskatchewan will never fully appreciate to what extent His Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor had contributed to the continuance of municipal government in this province. 

 

I join with the Premier in all that he has said with respect to the personal character and attributes of our 

late friend. There were very few men, indeed, who occupied the serious and responsible position which 

he did over those difficult years, who was so well able to maintain his cheery personality, his bright 

attitude. No matter how dark the clouds, or how difficult the situation, he was able to approach the 

problems of the day from a commonsense and a practical point of view. Not only was he the Lieutenant 

Governor of this Province, and the Representative of His Majesty, the King, but he was one of our finest 

and best citizens, and we can ill-afford to lose men of each type and of such character. 

 

I am sure that the members of the House in general, and the people of the Province, will join in the 

expressions of sympathy extended to the members of his family, and to the loss sustained by the 

Province of Saskatchewan generally. Only last night, Sir, he attended a party at the home of the former 

Deputy-Minister of his Department, who, like himself, was intensely interested in our municipal 

administration, and I think perhaps that if he could have chosen his time for passing, he would have 

selected this time, following a 



 

March 23, 1948 

 

 

3 

meeting of those who, like himself, were so whole-heartedly concerned and interested in the welfare of 

our local governments in this province. 

 

Mr. D.S. Valleau (A.S.V.R.): — Mr. Speaker, there is not much that I can add to what has been said, 

but I should just like to associate myself and the members of this group with the sentiment that has been 

expressed in support of this motion. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, in addition to being the Representative of the Crown, was a man 

whom we all regarded as a personal friend, and we mourn his passing as we would that of a personal 

friend. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this 

opportunity to say a few words about the man that His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was, in this 

province. 

 

Those of us who have had occasion to know more about his work are conversant with his story, but I am 

sure there are some members of the Legislature who will be interested in knowing more of this man. He 

was born in 1881, and came to Canada in 1898, when he was seventeen years old. He got a job at 

Russell, Manitoba, as a farmhand at five dollars a month. He homesteaded in 1900, sixty miles from 

town, and, like many other early settlers who came to Saskatchewan, he was a bachelor at that time; and 

for four years after he took up his homestead, he was a bachelor-homesteader. 

 

This man, Mr. Speaker, has given years of almost continuous service in government of municipalities or 

of this Province. There are not many people in the province of Saskatchewan with as great a record. He 

was the first Councillor in the Local Improvement District in 1904, and held office as Councillor until 

1910, when the Rural Municipality of Cote was formed. He became its first Reeve, and continued to be 

Reeve of that Municipality until 1930 — twenty years of continuous service as Reeve of the same 

Municipality. As has already been mentioned, he was elected to this Legislature in 1929, became 

Minister of Municipal Affairs in 1934 and held that office for ten years; and in 1945 became Lieutenant 

Governor. 

 

During his term of office as Minister of Municipal Affairs, he faced problem which none of us ever 

expect to face, and hope we will not have to face — problems of the years of drought and depression 

from 1934 to 1939. At times during that period, the staff of his Department was over 300, more than 

double the normal staff. 

 

During the war years, he was for a long period Acting Minister of Agriculture, which also added to his 

work. While he was in office, he extended the L.I.D. administration to all of the unorganized parts of the 

province and established the country offices, which system is still being carried on. Under his direction, 

the new assessment, of which we have often spoken, was commenced and was carried on from 1939 

until 1944. During his period of office there was much new legislation which he piloted through this 

House. 



 

March 23, 1948 

 

 

4 

That is the story, in very brief words, of a life of service of a great citizen in a democracy. 

 

But, besides that, there is something else. Besides having a record for length of service, I think probably 

he also has a record in that more people of the province have referred to him by his first name than many 

other people with a similar record. To thousands of people throughout this province, he was “Reg. 

Parker”. He was a kindly and jovial man, a man who served. 

 

I want to add my words of sympathy to Mrs. Parker and the family, but I think we can remember that his 

family and many, many people in the province of Saskatchewan who had the pleasure of his 

acquaintance, are richer because of the memories of his life. 

 

Mr. D.Z. Daniels (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to associate myself with all the remarks of the former 

speakers, on the passing of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

Mr. Parker was my predecessor as member of the Pelly Constituency in this House from the years 1929 

to 1944. As the hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs has already mentioned, he was one of the earlier 

settlers of that area known as Pelly Constituency, having come there at the turn of the century. He served 

as Reeve, as has already been noted, for a period of twenty years, and during that period he certainly had 

his share of worries. I am also told by some of the oldtimers of that Constituency that he served as 

Homestead Inspector, and during his inspection of many of the homesteads in that territory he came to 

know many people and won a great many friends. 

 

His work in the municipal field was very such appreciated, and his long term of office showed, more 

than anything else, what high esteem the people had for him. This work in the municipal field for twenty 

years fitted his admirably for his work as member of this Legislature, and later as Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

His elevation to the high position of Lieutenant Governor was acclaimed by all who knew him. His 

friendly and jovial nature did not change with the appointment, and every member of this House will 

agree that he held, with true dignity and friendliness, that office until his death. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend my deepest sympathy to Mrs. Parker and the family in their sad 

bereavement. 

 

Premier: — Mr. Speaker, before putting the next motion I would like to say, first, that no definite 

arrangements yet are made with reference to the funeral. The matter is being left until Mr. Parker’s sons 

reach the city, but when the family have been able to give the matter further consideration, arrangements 

will be made and an announcement will be made so that hon. members who are here will be able to 

attend the funeral service. 



 

March 23, 1948 

 

 

5 

I should like to say, also, that this morning I received a telegram from the Right Honourable the Prime 

Minister of Canada, expressing to the members of the Government, the members of this Legislature, and 

the people of Saskatchewan, his deep sympathy at the great loss which this province has sustained. I 

should like to express to the House and to the people of the Province, through you, Sir, that message of 

sympathy which the Prime Minister of Canada was graciously pleased to forward to us. 

 

I should like now to move, seconded by Mr. Patterson: “That the Resolution of condolence on the death 

of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, the Honourable Reginald John Marsden Parker, be 

communicated to Mrs. Parker and to members of His Honour’s family, on behalf of this Assembly, by 

Mr. Speaker.” 

 

The motion was agreed to unanimously. 

 

Premier: — I should like to move, seconded by Mr. Patterson: “That out of respect for His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor, the Honourable Reginald John Marsden Parker, all proceedings of this Assembly 

be suspended until 8 o’clock p.m. to-day.” 

 

The motion was agreed to unanimously. 

 

The House resumed at 8 o’clock p.m. 

 

ON ORDERS OF THE DAY: 

 

Premier: — I am in receipt of a telegram from the Right Honourable W.L. Mackenzie King, Prime 

Minister of Canada, in which he informs the Government that His Excellency the Governor General has 

approved the appointment of Dr. J.M. Uhrich as Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. King asked me to make it known to the members of this Legislature and to the people of 

Saskatchewan that Dr. Uhrich, out of respect for the late Lieutenant Governor Parker, would have 

preferred to have his acceptance of office deferred for two or three days, but upon Mr. King making 

representation to Dr. Uhrich that by accepting the appointment now it would facilitate the business of 

the province, he agreed to accept the appointment immediately, and arrangements are being made to 

have Dr. Uhrich sworn in. 

 

I thought this information ought to be given to the House at the earliest possible date. 

 

Mr. P.J. Hooge (Rosthern): — I would just like to say, with reference to the passing away of the late 

Lieutenant-Governor, that I feel the people of the Constituency of Rosthern have been singularly 

honoured by the appointment of Dr. Uhrich as his successor, as he so ably represented that Constituency 

for so many years. 



 

March 23, 1948 

 

 

6 

EXCHANGE CONSERVATION MEASURES 

 

The House resumed, from Thursday, March 18, 1948, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

Mr. D.S. Valleau (A.S.V.R.) expressing concern that Federal emergency exchange conservation 

measures have placed restrictions on imports from Britain and other countries of the Sterling area. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — In rising to speak to this motion, I can assure you that I am not 

going to ask for very much time of the House on this occasion. 

 

This motion is one of many that have been introduced during the present Session, criticizing and taking 

issue with things that have or have not been done by the Federal Government. As we all know, a certain 

condition has arisen in Canada so far as commercial relations are concerned between the different 

countries with which Canada is doing business. 

 

The issue has been particularly prominent in regard to this matter between the United States and Canada. 

Canada finds herself, after going through six years of war, and extending her credit to the utmost in 

order to assist, not only Great Britain but many other countries in Europe, in the position of having to 

import a large amount of raw material and many finished products from the United States. As a matter 

of fact, the United States is the only nation which has been able to supply these necessities which 

Canada has had to have during the last few years. For that reason, and in connection with this, Mr. 

Speaker, our exports to Great Britain have been paid for by credit raised in Canada, provided by Canada 

to Great Britain to pay for these exports. As a result, the balance — the situation that was in existence 

previous to the war — has been entirely upset. 

 

As a matter of fact, Canada’s difficulty in regard to currency and exchange between the United States 

and Canada is not due so such to our trade relations directly with the United States, as it is to the fact 

that Great Britain has passed out of the picture so far as being able to pay for her goods in the dollar area 

is concerned; and for that reason, of course, certain action had to be taken by the Federal Government in 

order to rectify and endeavour to adjust the unfavourable balance of exchange between this country and 

the United States. 

 

At the same time that this condition was developing, a large number of nations — I believe 23 in all — 

had been gradually working towards an agreement, so far as economic relations are concerned. This is a 

condition, Mr. Speaker, that we had been praying for, for many years. Just about the time this situation 

became acute, we had a meeting in Geneva, Switzerland, of 23 nations, trying to iron out their 

difficulties and trying to come to some agreement by a policy and by a method of give-and-take so that 

goods and services could flow freely from one nation to another. 

 

We farmers in western Canada have been praying and hoping for the time when bilateral agreements 

would be done away with, and when multilateral 



 

March 23, 1948 

 

 

7 

trade relations and agreements could be entered into which would enable us, as exporters of primary 

products, to send our foodstuffs and the produce from our western farms all over — not only to Great 

Britain but to the United States which, heretofore, has maintained, in many cases, prohibitive tariffs — 

but also to France, Germany, Holland, and many other nations of the world. Now, that condition has 

been arrived at by the trade negotiations which took place between these nations and Canada, the United 

States and Great Britain in Geneva. 

 

One principle is inherent in these agreements, Mr. Speaker, and that is, that there should be no 

discrimination between one nation and another in relation to the passing of goods and the tariffs 

(whatever is left of the tariffs) that are imposed between one country and another. Now, I can bring this 

point to the House very clearly by just reading a few lines here from a statement made by Mr. Abbott to 

the Canadian Export Association about November 30: 

 

“My remarks to you tonight have all been predicated on one fundamental proposition of international 

economic policy. In solving our present problem, and in laying the basis for avoiding similar difficulties 

in the future, the measures advanced have been consistent with the principles of expansionist 

multilateral trade. Of this there can be no dispute. I am convinced that the ultimate solution of present 

difficulties, not only for Canada but for the whole world, must be an expanding world trade, in lowering 

and eliminating artificial barriers, restrictions and discriminatory practices. This is the only road toward 

prosperity and rising standards of living. Although this proposition is universally true, it has greater 

significance for Canada than perhaps for any other nation, because Canada has been and will remain 

more dependent on the high level of foreign trade than perhaps any other great trading nation. 

 

“We should bear in mind, too, that nothing we may do now to overcome our present temporary 

difficulties, must be permitted to place a serious obstacle in the way of progress over a multilateral 

trading world.” 

 

Now that, Mr. Speaker, embodies the principles which are inherent in, and which are back of, the 

Geneva Agreement. It was well known, when these agreements were signed between the different 

nations, that Canada and Great Britain were facing certain temporary difficulties which must be taken 

care of by restrictions. The United States knew it, and Great Britain knew it. There was no difficulty in 

agreement between these three nations which were principally affected, in regard to this matter. They 

knew that temporary restrictions had to be imposed in order to redress the balance of exchange which 

was all in favour of the United States and was running very, very heavily against Great Britain and 

Canada. 

 

Therefore, the Dominion Government has been compelled to take certain actions, and in doing so these 

same measures or these same restrictions have been imposed against trade in Great Britain; but, Mr. 

Speaker, 



 

March 23, 1948 

 

 

8 

there are certain modifying principles in these restrictions, and they are provided for under certain 

schedules. There is a quota system which permits certain things to be done whenever it is found 

necessary that they should be done. 

 

The Mover of this resolution, Mr. Speaker, tried (I think that was his main argument) to prove, and to 

leave the impression, that by certain actions taken by Canada, some great harm or injury has been done 

to the trade between Canada and Great Britain. Now I do not think that is so. As a matter of fact I think 

when I get finished here, Mr. Speaker, no one will be able to say that this is so. But, before I go that far, 

I want to point out that Canada has perhaps gained more advantage from these trade treaties than any 

other nation in the world. We now have almost reached the point towards which we have worked and 

wished for many years, where we are on an exporting basis to the United States with all our farm 

products, and many others. 

 

Not only have we had the duty on wheat cut to 21 cents a bushel from 42, but on oats to 4 cents a bushel 

from 8 cents a bushel; on rye, to 6 cents a bushel from 12 cents; wheat flour by the barrel has been cut to 

52 cents, from $1.04, and it is the same with everything. 

 

When we get down to our cattle shipments to the United States, we see that we have doubled our 

shipments. So far as wheat is concerned, we were limited under the old tariff regulation, to a certain 

amount, and that was very small; but all the restrictions have been lifted now, and the day has come 

when we can ship our wheat, our cattle, our oats, our barley and our flax, and many other things, to the 

United States. The tariff has been reduced to such an extent that there is no hindrance or obstacle to 

getting rid of our surplus products in that market. 

 

I said that the action taken by Canada through the restrictive features of the measure that has been put 

through the House of Commons in the last few weeks, has not injured Great Britain in any respect. In 

many cases it has really benefited Great Britain, for we find here that so far as Schedule (1) is concerned 

— I think the hon. member who introduced this resolution mentioned a certain number of articles which 

were on the prohibited list, and that is true; but when we read some of these articles and see what they 

are, the importance of that list is very much reduced. Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to read just a few lines 

from Hansard. Mr. Reid, a member in the House of Commons, said this: 

 

“You wanted this bill to deal directly with the United States and not to bring the United Kingdom within 

the provisions of the schedules. There might be something to that argument if we did not have the 

schedules before us. I would just ask the committee to look at the bill. There are three schedules. The 

first is the prohibitory schedule; the second sets out the item which may be imported under quota, and 

the third covers those coming under permits. So it can be reasonably assumed that under schedules II 

and III certain 



 

March 23, 1948 

 

 

9 

goods will be allowed to come from Great Britain and the United States, under quotas and permits. But 

look at schedule I and see what it deals with. You will see that we are prohibiting the importation of 

such articles as tea, coffee, oysters, turtles, which were mentioned by the hon. member for Fraser 

Valley; maple syrup, grapes, melons, fruits. Then you get on to tarred paper, sandpaper, roofing 

shingles. Then you go along to candles, perfumery, licorice. If you look over the schedule you will see 

that very few of the articles enumerated in schedule I come from Great Britain. I doubt if the trade 

between Great Britain and Canada in any of these prohibited articles would amount to very much. Look 

at the items. They include planks and boards and plywood; fruits of all kinds; grapes; frozen vegetables, 

and so on.” 

 

Now, these articles are not imported from Great Britain to Canada. As a matter of fact, we export most 

of these items from Canada to Great Britain. 

 

I am just going to mention, now, some of the benefits from this treaty that Great Britain is enjoying, 

advantages that they did not have before. Mr. Abbott, in reply to Mr. Jackman, said this: 

 

“The second main criticism made of the government’s program by hon. members both of the official 

opposition and of the C.C.F., and I think of the Social Credit group, was that we should have adopted the 

discriminatory principle, and that, in adopting the non-discriminatory basis, we were jeopardizing the 

position of Great Britain with respect to sending us exports. 

 

“I, for one, attach great importance to the principle of non-discrimination. I believe it is a sound 

principle for any country to follow, and I think the government was right in adhering to that principle. I 

am sorry to say; no, I am not sorry to say, but in actual practice of course our policy is not nearly so non-

discriminatory in fact as it is in form, because in selecting the articles to be prohibited, and the articles to 

be placed on quota, we have paid particular attention to those which come to us from sterling area 

countries. 

 

“May I say that explains why some articles, seemingly luxury articles, are included in the quota list, 

where in the majority of cases the source of supply is in non-dollar countries. 

 

“I asked for the figure this afternoon, and I am told that the prohibited list now covers only about two 

and a quarter-million dollars of United Kingdom imports. That is less than 1 percent of the total imports 

from that country to Canada. 

 

“I make this assertion, and every hon. member will see in due course that it is borne out by the facts, that 

this program, instead of hindering imports from the United Kingdom, will stimulate them, because of the 

quota basis. Let us take textiles, as an outstanding example. Imports from the United States will be cut 

down to about one-third of last year’s exports to Canada; whereas Great Britain can export 200 percent 

of her last year’s exports to this country. And that will apply, hon. members will find, in the case of a 

great many commodities.” 



 

March 23, 1948 

 

 

10 

Now that is one instance where Great Britain is benefiting tremendously by this agreement. In regard to 

certain articles, Mr. Abbott says this: 

 

“In the first place, I direct the attention of the committee to the statistics which have now become 

available for December, 1947,” (By the way, these restrictions, so-called, which should not be called 

restrictions against Great Britain, were effective last December) “that is, the first full month during 

which the program was in effect. In December, 1947, the total Canadian imports from the United 

Kingdom were valued at $20,254,000, as compared with $11,664,000 the preceding December.” (1946). 

“The increase was about 73 percent. I might add that the December, 1947, figure is higher than that for 

any previous month in the year and, I am informed, in no other post-war month have commercial 

imports, exclusive of Canadian war materials returned from the United Kingdom, been so large.” 

 

That goes to prove conclusively that these restrictions in force against the United States are not, by any 

means, hindering or interfering with imports from Great Britain. I have many more things here which I 

could quote to you. The hon. member who introduced this resolution said something about motorcars. I 

have tried to make some inquiries, in view of the fact that there are some certain Co-operative 

organizations intending, or that have discussed the possibility of importing motorcars from Great 

Britain, and I see here, that the matter was brought up in the House of Commons. Mr. Abbott said this, 

the quota restriction or the quota on the schedule was very liberal and there was always the possibility, if 

the necessity arose — the quota is not a definite or a fixed or a stationary thing — it is something that 

can be adapted by certain actions of the Minister in charge of that particular department, or by the 

Government, of course; so here, no one wishing to import motor cars from Great Britain to Canada need 

fear that he is going to suffer in any respect from these restrictions which have been imposed against the 

United States. 

 

A man could talk for two or three hours on this subject, but I do not want to take up too much time. I do 

want to say that there is no reason for anyone to stand on the floor of this House or any place else and 

try to make us believe, or the people of the province of Saskatchewan believe, that there are restrictions 

against the United Kingdom now so far as trade is concerned, which is hindering importation, of goods 

that Great Britain has to sell to us. There is no such thing. Under the quota schedules there are certain 

things set out which are supposed to be the limit, but they are so liberal, and in many respects they are 

far more generous than they have ever been before. 

 

Another thing, there were some 56 items that come into Canada from the United Kingdom, that are 

under preference. Now they are free entirely. They are lower than they were under preference, because 

preference, of course, implies a certain amount of tariff or customs duty still left against the importation 

of such articles or goods. But there are, in all, 56 items which have been removed entirely from 

preference and made free coming in to Canada. 



 

March 23, 1948 

 

 

11 

I repeat, no one can stand up and say that these are reasons for condemning the situation or the action 

which has been forced on the Government of Canada by certain international complications or 

restrictions of trade which are unavoidable. Is a matter of fact, I think the strongest critic of the Federal 

Government, early last fall, if I remember correctly, on the radio and everywhere else, was Mr. 

Coldwell. He was demanding a special session of the House immediately in order to take action to 

rectify the exchange situation; and now, when these things have been done, of course he does not like it; 

so I do not know what you are going to do. But, after all, a man cannot altogether avoid taking notice of 

a certain line of talk, a certain argument which has been running through all these discussions, not only 

in this Session, but last year, and it seems to be laid on the line. There is an attempt being made to build 

up into wrongs against the United States, a certain ill will, a certain jealousy, a certain suspicion against 

the United States of America. 

 

I think perhaps the hon. gentleman should, if he looks at the situation in the world to-day (at least I 

would, according to my lights), thank God that we have the United States and Great Britain to-day, 

working together and standing together to see that the fate that has befallen many nations in the world 

will not be our lot in the future. 

 

For that reason I am going to vote against the motion, because it has no foundation; there is no reason 

for it, and the implication that is in the resolution is wrong and not according to the facts. 

 

Mr. P.J. Hooge (Rosthern): — I had really not intended to speak on this resolution, as I am not unduly 

impressed with the importance of it, but I expect that after this Session of the Legislature is closed I will 

pass out of the political arena, and thought this might be my last opportunity to say a few words to the 

members of this House. I do not entirely address myself to the subject matter of this resolution, and 

therefore hope that you will not be too critical. I promise you, in return, that I shall be as brief as 

possible. 

 

At the risk of offending the hon. member for Swift Current, I would just like to quote two lines from 

Gray’s “Elegy” — 

 

“Full many a flower is born to blush unseen, 

And waste its sweetness on the desert air.” 

 

I understand that the member for Swift Current is not unduly impressed with poetic quotations. In fact, I 

understand that he suggested, some time ago that I might more usefully quote from that fable, “Robinson 

Crusoe.” I would like to oblige the hon. gentleman, but I am not sufficiently acquainted with this 

particular story to be able to do so. I can quite understand, though, his predilection for this kind of 

literature, because the deference which he exhibits to his Premier is comparable to the relationship 

which existed between Robinson Crusoe and his man Friday. 



 

March 23, 1948 

 

 

12 

Coming back to this quotation, I certainly do not wish to leave the impression with the hon. members 

that I am comparing myself with a flower. I think that would be a slander on the flower. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I am prepared to give the hon. member a great deal of latitude, but I cannot see 

how his remarks can be connected up with this resolution that is before the House. 

 

Mr. Hooge: — I shall come to that presently. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If the hon. member wants to make a valedictory address, and if the Chamber consents, 

it will be all right; but I cannot permit him to go so far away from the resolution. 

 

Mr. Hooge: — This my seem irrelevant, but I do not think it is any more so than a lot of the subjects 

that we have been dealing with in this House, and I am leading up to that, if you will bear with me for 

just a moment. With your permission, I was about to say that any resemblance between a flower and 

myself is merely coincidental, and what I wished to emphasize was the word “sweetness” in this 

quotation. Hon. members will remember that when I had the privilege of entering this House in the fall 

of 1944, I think I was the personification of good will and friendship towards all. At the present time I 

think I am not incorrect in saying that I am merely an animated effigy exemplifying a complete state of 

disillusionment and frustration. 

 

The cause is this, that we on this side of the House have been subjected to a great deal of the Socialistic 

views which are so repugnant to the democratic views we entertain, and secondly to this interminable 

discussion of resolutions regarding matters which are entirely extraneous. It has not only affected me in 

a deleterious manner. Look at the member for Moosomin, see how it has affected him. Even the gallant 

member for the Mediterranean, who, throughout the war, was able to maintain his mental poise, seemed 

able to maintain it, but during the last couple of sessions he seems to have lost command of that and 

every once in a while gives vent to righteous and wrathful expressions of disapprobation. 

 

In connection with the resolution that has been introduced to-day, and resolutions of a similar character, 

in my opinion they are so futile, because there is nothing we can do in connection with the matters being 

discussed, and I feel it is a sort of slur on the CCF members at Ottawa. Surely if the CCF ideology and 

their view is in connection with federal matters is to be presented, they certainly have a very adequate 

representation and should be quite able to present those views in the House without any aid from us. I 

think it is unfair, also, to the electors of this province. Surely we were not elected here to discuss federal 

affairs. The people who elected us expected us to deal with provincial matters, I think with provincial 

matters entirely, and while I do not know exactly how much time has been wasted in connection with 

federal matters, but I dare say that a third of the time of this House has certainly been taken up in dealing 

with matters entirely 



 

March 23, 1948 

 

 

13 

extraneous to the competence of this House. I think, therefore, that the members should very seriously 

consider amending the rules of this House, ruling discussions of this kind entirely out of order. 

 

As far as the present resolution is concerned, former resolutions dealing with matters beyond the 

jurisdiction of this House at least had reference to national affairs, but this is even more objectionable 

because it deals with foreign matters altogether, something entirely out of Canada. I do not blame the 

mover of the resolution, particularly, because there have been many in this House who have been guilty 

of similar practices. I very seldom take part in these discussions, one reason being that I feel I am not 

competent to deal with these matters, and secondly because I think they are entirely futile. As far as the 

mover is concerned, I personally have a great admiration for him. 

 

Looking at the Order Paper, and seeing these resolutions, I naturally have given some thought to the 

subject matter, and I feel that I know so little about them, I get lost in a morass of doubt, indecision and 

lack of understanding, and flounder and pass them up; but the hon. member seems to have a versatility 

of mind and such a grasp, an all-embracing knowledge of everything, in fact he is almost omniscient, 

and he deals with these matters — such unrelated matters as immigration and irrigation and Old Age 

pensions, coarse grains, foreign exchange — all with equal facility. It is really astounding how he can 

discuss all these matters the way he does. Not only that, but I have frequently noticed when hon. 

members of this House seem to get into some difficult position he will invariably assist them very 

expeditiously and nicely by offering some constructive suggestion. I understand the hon. member does 

not intend to seek re-election. I think this is most unfortunate. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must ask the hon. member to stay with the resolution. 

 

Mr. Hooge: — As far as the merits of this resolution are concerned, they have already been dealt with 

quite effectively by the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) . . . 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines: — Is the hon. gentleman trying to waste the time of this House? To-day I have been 

placed in a most embarrassing position. He, along with two of the other members of his group, want 

their cheques so that they may go home tonight. Now I think those of us who are left behind to do the 

work, want to get on with it. I do not think it is right that we should have our time wasted in this way. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The point of order is very well taken, on the necessity of the member to stay with the 

resolution. 

 

Mr. Hooge: — I was just at the point where I was discussing its merits, and I think if the hon. member 

wanted to register an objection he could have done so before. 



 

March 23, 1948 

 

 

14 

I was getting on to the merits of this resolution, saying that the hon. member who introduced the 

resolution had shown a most extraordinary degree of intelligence, but he is not infallible and in this 

particular instance, at least, he is wrong in his idea, in that the restrictions imposed by the Government 

of Canada will injure Great Britain, in any way. 

 

I entertain exactly the same views as the hon. member for Arm River, that this is merely one incident in 

a very much larger plan for world recovery. Surely trade is the very essence of the life of this country; 

and particularly Saskatchewan, and anything that is done by the Dominion Government towards 

expanding and promoting and fostering trade and commerce should be welcomed by us. If there is some 

little restriction, only of a temporary nature, which has to be borne, surely we should not object to that. 

 

I think the Geneva Agreement which has been discussed by the member for Arm River, and the 

substitution of the multilateral agreement for the bilateral agreement, is certainly a step in the right 

direction, and I am quite sure that ultimately not only Canada but all the nations of the world that are 

parties to this Agreement will greatly benefit by it, and that there will be a marked expansion of trade. 

Not only that, it will be an effective barrier against further resumption of war. I am sure that Great 

Britain is not as concerned over these slight restrictions. In fact, I think Great Britain appreciates what 

Canada has done for her by way of gifts, by way of selling her food, and in every other way. If there is 

any concern that we should have, it should not be over these little restrictions which are meant in this 

resolution, but it should be over the restrictions which are being imposed by Russia in taking one 

country after another. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I must again ask the hon. member to stay with the resolution. There is nothing 

about Russia in the resolution. 

 

Mr. Hooge: — I shall of course submit to your ruling, although I thought I would show where the 

concern really came in. I think that to pass this resolution would exhibit on our part, lack of 

understanding of world affairs, and a lack of appreciation for what is being done for us by the 

government of this country. I think it would be presumptuous for us to pass such a resolution, criticizing 

one of the small incidents of this much larger plan, and I think it is an affront to the government for us to 

do so. 

 

I really am, and I think quite a few other members, are satiated almost to the point of extinction by these 

long discussions concerning matters extraneous to this House, and I think that, in discussing this 

particular resolution dealing with foreign affairs, we have reached an all-time low and a saturation point 

in futile discussion. It reminds me of a windmill which, being disconnected from a cylinder pump, turns 

on its axis but all the time is simply churning the air. For these reasons, I shall not support the motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It is my duty to inform the House that the mover of the resolution has the opportunity 

to close the debate. Anyone wishing to speak must do so now. 



 

March 23, 1948 

 

 

15 

Mr. D.S. Valleau (A.S.V.R.): — (Closing) I shall just refer briefly to the remarks of the hon. member 

for Arm River (Mr. Danielson), I do not think there are any other arguments to answer. 

 

The member for Arm River said that this did not interfere with Great Britain in any way, the present 

policy of the Federal Government. In his restricted point of view that might be correct. The point that I 

tried to make, when I moved this motion, was that it would prevent trade from growing, by trying to put 

trade into a straitjacket and maintain the status quo that existed before; that we are up against an entirely 

new situation, in which the balance of trade is forever destroyed and we must take new methods of 

promoting trade with the Sterling area rather than merely maintaining the status quo. 

 

The following appeared in the Vancouver Sun, Tuesday, March 16, with an Ottawa dateline: 

 

“New Zealand can buy one-third more here. Finance Minister Walter Nash of New Zealand said here, 

his country could boost its Canadian imports by 33 percent if it were not for British dollar difficulties.” 

 

He went on to say: “We would buy more from Canada if we had more dollars to buy with, but to the 

extent that we buy from Canada we retard the ability of the United Kingdom to buy, because we are 

using their dollars to buy.” 

 

My point is that if we adopted a positive policy we could vastly increase our trade with the Sterling area 

above what it was under the old status quo. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It is moved by Mr. D.S. Valleau (A.S.V.R.), seconded by Mr. Brown: 

 

That this Assembly views with grave concern the various steps taken by the Government of Canada 

under emergency exchange conservation measures which have led to certain restrictions being placed on 

imports from Britain and other countries of the Sterling area. 

 

The motion was then agreed to. 

 

The House adjourned, without question put, at eleven o’clock p.m. 


