



















































Hansard: March 11, 1948


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

FIFTH SESSION – TENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

The House met at 3 o’clock p.m. Thursday, March 11, 1948. 

 

 

ON THE ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Premier Douglas: — Before the Orders of the Day are called, I would like to draw the attention of the 

members of the House to something many of them may already know, and that is, that, yesterday, we 

had the sad news of the passing of Mr. Daniel McDermid Rankin, known by almost all of the people of 

Saskatchewan as “Dan” Rankin, who passed away yesterday at one o’clock. Mr. Rankin, as most 

members will know, suffered a heart attack a couple of weeks ago, last week was well on the way to 

recovery, but last Saturday suffered a relapse and passed away yesterday. 

 

Mr. Rankin was a man who, during his entire life, had been closely connected with far and co-operative 

movements. The service which has him a bulwark of the farm movement in this province. All who have 

had any connection with the Co-operative Movement and the various organizations in the province that 

have made for the better conditions of the farming population are, I am sure, familiar with the work of 

“Dan” Rankin, and I feel that it is appropriate at this time to say a just a few words in tribute to him at 

the time of his passing. 

 

One of the great things about the Farm Movement in this province is that it has revealed such steady and 

reliable and magnificent leadership. It used to be said, some years ago, that when farmers went into 

business, they could not run a business; that it would be necessary for them to get high-priced executives 

to run it for them. In the last twenty years the Farm Movement has demonstrated sufficiently to convince 

any person that they have been able to produce leadership from their own ranks, which has enabled them 

to run their business efficiently and well; and one of the men who has been a tower of strength to the 

Co-operative and Farm Movements in these last twenty years has been Mr. “Dan” Rankin. 

 

Last night, I had the privilege of addressing the Canadian Congress of Co-operatives’ meeting in 

Saskatoon, and there the expression of regret was widespread. They had come to count upon his wise 

counsel, upon his good judgment, and upon his stability of character; and the Co-operative Movement 

and the Farm Movement, and the people of his community generally, will be the poorer for his passing. I 

feel that when men like him pass away they have not really gone – that they have left behind them a 

work and an ideal and a vision that will long continue to haunt the minds and hearts of men, and that the 

work they have done will live after them. 

 

I would like to express, on behalf of the Government, and of myself personally, our deep sense of loss at 

his passing, and pay a tribute to his very excellent memory. 

 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

2 

Hon. L. F. McIntosh (Minister of Co-operation): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to associate myself 

with the remarks made by our Hon. Premier, in paying tribute to one who, through the years, has built, 

within his own community, that kind and type of community life that goes toward establishing the sound 

principles of democracy. 

 

In the field of co-operative endeavour, the late Mr. Rankin was among those who took a very active part 

in bringing into existence the first Co-operative Oil Refinery in the world. He played a very prominent 

part in organizing and launching the Sherwood Co-operative Association, which is one of the largest 

co-operative associations of its kind in the Dominion of Canada. He held an office in that Association up 

to the time of his death; and because of his very wide knowledge, and his understanding of the 

philosophy of the Co-operative Movement, he was elected by his fellow co-operators to the Board of the 

Saskatchewan Section of the Co-operative Youth. He was elected to the Board, and later appointed First 

Vice-President of the Federated Co-operative wholesale society – a position which he held up to the 

time of his death; and in recognition of his sound judgment and his deep and sincere co-operative 

philosophy, he was elected to the Board of Directors of the National Co-operative Union of Canada. 

 

In every field and in every sphere of community and co-operative endeavour, his sound advice was 

sought by those who were building co-operatives in this province and in Canada; and I would like to 

express, on behalf of the co-operators of our province, our deep and sincere loss in the passing of one 

who, down through the years, has made a very substantial contribution. I feel that, some day, historians 

will sit down to write the history of great men, and when they do, they will not overlook the 

contributions made by such men as the late Mr. Daniel McDermid Rankin. 

 

Mr. W. S. Thair (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my testimony, along with that of 

Premier Douglas and the Minster of Co-operation. The late Mr. Rankin was a neighbour of mine, a very 

close friend and associate, and for many years resided in my own constituency. His passing has been a 

very distinct loss to our community, and to our whole province. I pay tribute to his sterling character and 

his great integrity. His great contribution for a better society will not be forgotten. The whole province 

mourns his passing. 

 

RE: MOTION (FOR RETURN) NO. 1 

 

Hon. J. H. Brockelbank (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — There is no objection raised to giving the 

information requested, but there will be about 100 or more paysheets to be prepared, when they are 

prepared with a sufficient number of copies. In connection with the second part of the Motion, about 

claims for fire loss or damage, we cannot see to get any information or have 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

3 

no idea of what is wanted there. If the hon. Leader of the Opposition, or any other member, for that 

matter, would like to go to the L.I.D. office to examine these payrolls and to make any notes from them 

which he wishes, that will be quite in order; but for the second part I would like some explanation. If the 

member wishes to leave the Motion, and the Assembly wishes to pass the Motion, we will get the 

information with all possible speed; but if he (the member) wants to get the information more rapidly, he 

could do so by seeing these payrolls at any time. 

 

Mr. W. J. Patterson: — It would appear strange to me that there would be 100 payrolls in connection 

with the road work adjacent to three Sections. There might be, but that seems to be rather an 

exaggeration; or, if there are no claims for fire loss in connection with this activity, then of course the 

return will not produce anything. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — We can take it as if the hon. Leader of the Opposition were asking me a 

question there. There will be several payrolls, because the payrolls are made out for two-week periods, 

and this work may go into two or three two-week periods – there may have been two or three pages, and 

then when you multiply that by the number of copies to be produced, you are going to have a large 

amount to produce; but we will get it if it is wanted. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the House to adopt the Motion? 

 

The Motion was agreed to. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed, from Wednesday, March 10, 1948, the adjourned Debate on the proposed Motion 

of Hon. C. M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair (the House to go 

into Committee for Supply). 

 

Mr. H. E. Houze (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, first I want to join with my hon. colleagues and other 

members, in congratulating the Hon. Provincial Treasurer on the fine presentation of the Budget, the 

other night. While probably this is one of the largest budgets that we have had in the province of 

Saskatchewan, I think, in spite of this, the actual debt of our province has been reduced to a considerable 

extent. 

 

Farmers’ debts have been reduced to the extent, since this government took over, of about 

$230,000,000; our provincial debt has been reduced by about $70,000,000; municipal debts have been 

reduced, since 1944, by approximately $30,000,000. In this province, farmers never did hoard very 

much money. In good times they used their earnings to bolster up their farm equipment, keep it 

up-to-date, and, in many instances, built good homes which now, in many cases, are vacant owing to the 

influx of the people into the villages and larger farm units. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

4 

Automobiles, in many cases, were bought, which were needed, but we spent a lot of money on luxuries. 

In 1905, when this Province was inaugurated, people did not pay much attention to budgets. We had 

only about two or three things that concerned us very much – among them, schools and highways. In 

fact, up until the fall of 1905, we did not have a mental hospital in this province, and we didn’t need one. 

At the present time we have two large institutions, both of which are pretty well overcrowded. Schools 

were mostly a local affair, and the highways appropriation was administered by Highway men; and it 

was not unusual to see a lot of highways built just prior to election date. 

 

During this Session, I have listened with much interest to speeches dealing with a great number of things 

in this province; hogs came in for an important debate, as did fish, lumber, furs and grain. Very little 

was said regarding other livestock such as horses and cattle, which form an important part of the 

economy of this province; in fact, these things amount to about one-third of our entire income from 

agriculture in this province. Hogs have been on the agenda, and reasons have been advanced as to why 

farmers have quit raising them. I believe there is just as much money in raising hogs, to-day, in spite of 

the high price of grain, as there ever was before; but who is going to feed the hogs? 

 

First: our people are not going to stay out on the farms during these bad winters, shut up for months at a 

time, feeding hogs over a long period, only find, when the hogs are ready to be shipped, that the gain 

they made over the price of the grain is taken from income tax. 

 

Secondly: our rural population is diminishing, to a considerable extent, in spite of all we can do. People 

are moving in to more central points, and one reason is so that they can get their children to school. 

Schools, in lots of areas, haven’t enough children there in order to keep them open, and people are at a 

loss to know how to get their children to and from school, because there are no horses left in many of 

those districts. 

 

Thirdly: our farms are largely mechanized. You know yourself, Mr. Speaker, that farmers are, to-day, 

breaking their land with high-speed tractors; they move into town and practically live there all summer, 

and it is not unusual in the morning to see quite a flock of tractors heading out to do the day’s work. 

They can ravel 25 or 30 miles per hour, do a day’s work, and get back to town every night. 

 

Fourth: we are at a loss regarding a long range agricultural policy. That is one of the important factors in 

connection with any industry that we go into – we must have some stabilization of prices and some 

security in connection with it. Why would any person attempt to feed hogs, when he can take a truckload 

of grain in to town and get a cheque for a thousand dollars, as many were doing, last fall, in connection 

with rye? Not many years ago, we were paying a bonus not to raise wheat, and at the same time 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

5 

we were sending out grasshopper poison to kill the grasshoppers off that were doing their best to help us 

in our policy. 

 

The Federal Minister of Agriculture must have known, last fall, about the grain, prior to August 1st. As 

you know, after August 1st, farmers were selling their coarse grain, and all at once the controls were 

taken off and these people lost a large amount of money – in fact, I believe the figure runs into about 

$23,000,000. Surely, the Federal Minister of Agriculture should have had more foresight than to disturb 

the entire economic system at that time by these decontrols. 

 

You will notice that, to-day, on the Winnipeg market, flax for May delivery is $3.88 per bushel; for 

October deliver it is $1.78, making a difference of over $2.00 on every bushel of flax. I happened to be 

in Ontario, last fall, when this decontrol came into effect, and one firm there alone had seventy carloads 

of feed grain. They had a demurrage account with the railroad company of $1,600.00 and, after that, 

figured they had still made in the neighbourhood of $35,000 on the transaction. 

 

Farmers, to-day, are demanding more stability of prices. It is quite unfair that hogs marketed last 

December should have a difference in price of $8.50 apiece, as compared with those marketed in 

January. People who marketed their hogs at that time, I think, should be reimbursed, the same as we are 

advocating reimbursement of the grain farmer. 

 

I want to touch briefly on some of the things that affect our cattle industry. We have, to-day, 

approximately one and three-quarter million cattle in this province. The average income from livestock 

and livestock products amounts to about one-third of our annual income, as I have said before. From 

Moose Jaw west, is where the bulk of our cattle is located. The land is not particularly suited to grain 

growing, in many cases, and it is more or less of semi-ranching country, with both small and large 

ranches. In spite of this, most of the best cattle in the province comes out of this district. 

 

I would just like to refer to what happened, last fall, in connection with the Moose Jaw Feeder Show, 

and it was this: The first prize carload of calves came from the district of Mankota. They weighed 450 

pounds apiece, and brought $17 a hundredweight, or an average of $78 each, and the mothers of those 

calves were never in a barn. They ran out, even last winter, down between Mankota and Val Marie. The 

first prize carload of yearling steers was also shipped from Mankota, and they averaged $98 a head. The 

first prize load of two-year-old steers was also shipped from Mankota, on the same train, and they 

averaged $125 apiece. It is felt by livestock associations that a great service could be rendered by 

looking after the health of our animals, and I am pleased to tell you that our Minister of Agriculture 

(Hon. I. C. Nollet) has been awake to this situation. Since 1945 we have put in the Statutes of this 

province The Veterinary Services Act, 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

6 

whereby three or four municipalities can join together, and, with the assistance given from the 

government, employ the services of a duly qualified veterinary surgeon. 

 

We have also given scholarships in order to increase our veterinary surgeons in this province. I believe 

that at the present time there are only about 44 actually in practice in this province, so we have offered 

scholarships to our young men, to go to Ontario and take up this veterinary science; and I am pleased to 

tell you that it is meeting with good success. To-day, there are more and more veterinary service districts 

being established, and more farmers are able to have the services of a duly qualified veterinary surgeon. 

After all, unless we have a healthy livestock population we cannot have healthy people. 

 

Here, I would like to say something about some of the diseases which commonly affect our cattle 

population in this province, and also our poultry. We have at the present time set up a pretty 

representative group of young people, mostly graduates of colleges, and they can do a great deal to assist 

in the combatting of disease among swine and poultry, which are quite closely intermingled. A disease 

among our cattle, about which we hear quite a lot, is tuberculosis. In this province, tuberculosis is not of 

very great consequence. It is not since to have animals with tuberculosis; but our province is probably 

more free of tuberculosis than any other in Canada – in fact, according to the official record of tests, just 

a small fraction of one percent of our cattle go down, in the tests. We cannot say that in connection with 

Bang’s Disease, which is a much more serious thing. This disease, particularly, affects human beings. I 

do not think we should become alarmed about this, however, because after all, only a small percentage 

of people actually contact undulant fever, and sometimes there is a little doubt about that; but where we 

do have it – and we are having quite an outbreak of that disease at the present time in Saskatchewan – is 

with the milk supplied to the children of the province. As you know it sets up all sorts of things, in the 

way of tonsillitis, sore throat, and many other ailments of children, which could be very well avoided if 

we had milk from those healthy cows. 

 

Now, just a few words about the methods we should use to eradicate Bang’s Disease. As you know, it 

requires the services of a qualified veterinary surgeon to take tests for tuberculosis and also in order to 

get the samples of blood taken from cattle; when we send it to the University, it cannot be tested there 

without being taken by duly qualified veterinary surgeons. I agree that there is not much to taking blood 

samples from your cattle if you think there is some danger of them being contaminated with this disease. 

In the first place, it does not matter very much how you take this blood sample. For instance, as long as 

you are thoroughly convinced as to what you are doing, have your container thoroughly sterilized, and 

then have any instruments sterilized, you can very well cut a little piece off an animal’s ear, put a few 

drops of blood in the little 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

7 

container, seal it up, number it and send it off to the University to be tested; but they will not test it at the 

University unless it is taken by a duly qualified veterinary surgeon, and the sample and the animal must 

be properly tagged. Now, I am not trying to create the impression that I want to do away with the 

services of veterinary surgeons in connection with this, but I think there is a lot of red tape in connection 

with ridding our province of this disease; besides, it causes tremendous financial loss to cattle owners. 

Now, this disease can be controlled by what they call calfhood vaccination, which consists of having a 

duly qualified veterinary surgeon go and inoculate this calf between the age of eight and twelve months. 

Veterinary surgeons are very scarce, as I have mentioned before, and the farmers cannot do this 

themselves. Now, you say, ‘why can’t the ordinary layman administer this serum to the calf, just the 

same as he can take blackleg serum and give it to an animal?’ 

 

Well, two things enter into it. In the first place, this blackleg bacterium contains dead germs; in the other 

case, the serum that is administered to these calves contains a living virus, and if you should happen to 

have a cut on your finger, or happen to touch your eye with your finger while doing this job, you would 

contract the disease yourself. You might not get it as bad as you would through other sources, but you 

would have it, nevertheless. Thus you can see the risk people would be taking, or the drug firms, or the 

government, by sending out this highly potent stuff to laymen of the province to administer themselves. 

 

In connection with poultry we have another situation – our poultry is very badly infested at the present 

time with tuberculosis. No one knows how much it is, but from reliable sources of information I have 

learned that the biggest single menace to our poultry population is tuberculosis. The same could be said 

of hogs, although this disease in hogs has jumped by leaps and bounds, and from 1910 to 1948 the 

percentage of hogs in slaughterhouses show 25 to 30 percent of tuberculosis germs in one connection or 

another. With hogs, you can be in the hog business one year and out of it the next; but in connection 

with cattle, it takes years to get into a good heard of cattle, but it does not take long to get out of them, as 

we well know. 

 

I would just like to read a little article that I saw in the paper the other day, in connection with stability 

of the cattle industry, and this is what it says: 

 

“During the last 45 years I have watched many livestock men” – (and by the way this was written, 

not by a livestock producer, but by one of the managers of one of our packing plants in western 

Canada) – “crumple up and pass out of the picture. They successfully fought the winter storms, and 

the droughts, but they could not fight the lack of market and security. I am not unmindful of the 

present major problems facing our federal ministers, and I have a profound respect for the sincerity 

and good faith of these men who have before them, at all times, the tragic picture of a sorely 

stricken Britain. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

8 

Taking a long range view, and looking to the future of this country, I ask you in all seriousness, 

must we have a war every twenty years to save agriculture in western Canada? Without a 

prosperous livestock industry this country cannot survive, and without an outlet for her surplus 

production, coupled with a stable and reasonable price, agriculture cannot survive on the prairies. 

The livestock men of Canada are making a monetary contribution to the world’s welfare to an 

extent unequalled in Canada’s history, and they are doing it at a heavy financial sacrifice. What will 

be the reward? Will this find contribution gradually be forgotten, and will their efforts sink into 

permanent oblivion, or will a grateful government say that you men are entitled to a guarantee of a 

reasonable floor price for your production in the years to come? If no such assurances are 

forthcoming, the present structure which you have so laboriously built will crack and crumble as it 

has in the past.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, our policy in getting into outlets has been one of encouragement to the livestock men of 

this province in general. In 1945 we cancelled some leases, and we are coming out with a much better 

policy – longer leases and more permanency than there ever was before. The cattlemen, I believe, should 

know where we stand, and this government assume a little responsibility, as well as the Ottawa 

authorities, in connection with this. 

 

During this time, we have inaugurated a number of Calf Clubs in this province. We have continued 

giving assistance to them, as was done when the Liberal Government was in – we have continued with 

that assistance. Here is a little article concerning Calf Clubs, taken from an Australian farm paper called 

“The Land”: 

 

“Show me the boy or girl who has a calf, a sheep, a pen of poultry or a pig to exhibit at a show, and I 

will show you one who is far too busy ever to be found facing a Judge in the Juvenile Court.” 

 

We are trying to get our boys and girls interested in agriculture, and there is no better way of doing it 

than by encouraging the livestock industry and the Calf Clubs in this province. 

 

Now, I would be remiss if I did not make some comment on our Horse Packing Plant at Swift Current. 

This plant, first of all, was started up with a view to getting rid of a surplus of horses in this province, 

both ranchers and stock owners were more or less concerned as to the solution, to get rid of that surplus 

of ‘no-account’ horses. At that time we had approximately 850,000 horses on our prairies in 

Saskatchewan. Associations were busy trying to find a market – they called a meeting of ranchers at Val 

Marie, under the chairmanship of George Newton, who was the first man to get the idea that we should 

start a horse 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

9 

processing plant somewhere and get rid of those surplus horses. I am sorry to say he died a couple of 

years ago, but before he died he rendered a great service to the horse industry of this country. Well, this 

meeting was called, and shares were sold, but there was only a limited amount, and we had no capital. 

So the Horse Breeders, at their Annual Meeting in January, 1945, appointed two men to go to Ottawa 

and contact the Hon. J. G. Gardiner with a view to getting some assistance for the horse packing plant or 

whatever we might do. 

 

At that time there was not much market for horses. We could not afford to ship them over, and it was 

generally felt that some kind of a processing plant should be started. The answer given to the two 

delegates form the Horse Breeders’ Association, at Ottawa, was, “I wouldn’t touch it at all. I wash my 

hands completely clear.” The delegates came back, held another meeting in Swift Current, and it was 

decided to send a delegation to Regina to see if we could not get a little help, in some way, to get this 

plant started. This Government at once said, “If you sell shares to the extent of $1.00, we will advance 

you credit for $2.00 more and that will give you $3.00.” We immediately went out and sold a lot of 

shares, enough so that this Government guaranteed an advance for this Horse Co-operative Marketing 

Association of $150,000, and I am glad to tell you that this commitment has been entirely met, and 

to-day the Horse Co-operative Plant in Swift Current does not owe this Government one dollar. 

 

That was only the start. We had to have more money, and at that time Belgium became interested in our 

affairs. They sent a delegation over called the Belgian Economic Commission, and they said, “We will 

advance you $150,000 credit out of the funds that are coming form the C.C.C. or UNRA” – I am not 

sure which – but at any rate we got a guarantee that we would get $150,000 from them, and that gave us 

$300,000. In fact, we had a little more, because people came and loaned us some more money, and this 

Government, for every dollar we got that way, guaranteed us two dollars more. The outcome was that 

we bought Plant at Edmonton for about $40,000 and started to repair it. At that time we did not have the 

Plant in Swift Current. 

 

The Belgian people got a little panicky. They came over here and wanted to see what was going on after 

they had guaranteed us $150,000; so we took them to Alberta. They said, “Well, that is all right, your 

Plant is in operation here, but what about shipping us this meat?” We had to have the Plant inspected, to 

pass Government inspection, as far as human consumption of meat was concerned; we went to the 

Social Credit government in Alberta and said, “Will you guarantee this Belgian Economic Commission 

that we will supply $150,000 worth of meat to them in return for this money they have given us?” They 

said, “Absolutely not! We are washing our hands of that!” 

 

Well, we had to come back again to the Saskatchewan Government, and what did they do? They 

immediately said, “Yes, we’ll give you a guarantee for $150,000,” and we got the money right away, 

and started our Plant. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

10 

Now, I would just like to give you a little report on what happened in that connection. At the present 

time, the Horse Co-operative Marketing Association continues to record marked progress in attaining its 

objective. You will remember the condition that existed a few years ago, at the inception of our 

organization, when the unwanted horse was only bringing one-half cent a pound. 

 

The Directors of this organization hoped that we would be able to pay three cents a pound for these 

horses, and this hope has now become a reality. Up to the end of 1947, it had removed over 110,000 

horses from pasturelands in western Canada, thus making available feed reserves. Horses handled by the 

Association for the last three months of 1945, when operations commenced, and for the whole of 1946, 

have brought a net return to horse owners, of interim and final payments, amount to $2.85 per 

hundredweight, which is very close to the hoped-for price of three cents; while horses delivered in 1947 

have exceeded it by almost three-quarters of a cent, and they were bringing the man who delivered them 

that year $3.70 per hundredweight, with initial and further payments afterwards. Initial payments for 

1948 are the highest yet recorded – two and three-quarter cents for top-grade horses, with freight paid. 

 

Since the management started operations, to the end of 1947, $2,500,000 has been paid to the horse 

owners of this province, and an additional $275,000 has been paid in freight. There still remains 

$1,500,000 which has been allotted to members, but has not yet been distributed in the form of interim 

and final payments. The payments will be made as soon as our financial position permits, and already 

payments of $100,000 have been made covering all horses shipped to the end of May, 1946. 

 

As an indication of the growth of this Company, the production sales have amounted to $1,577,000, and 

the wheat shipped was pickled meat, canned meat and frozen hind quarters, giving employment to 400 

men and women, and having paid $1,170,000 out in wages. As previously stated, the Association has 

paid $2,590,861; for the horses; members’ equity amounts to $1,697,240, and we have a net working 

capital at the present time of $700,000 in the bank. 

 

We have been forced, of late, to get out a Dominion Charter for this Plant, which is costing us some 

money; but in order to do business in the three provinces we had to take a Dominion Charter. At present 

the Plant is not shut down, but we are more or less restricting our operations, and are killing 100 horses a 

day, and canning another million pounds of meat. 

 

At the present time, Belgium wants our products, as it is the best and cheapest food in the world, and the 

frozen meat shipments from here are thawed out and sold at a high price, as fresh meat. At present we 

have 3,000,000 tins on hand, not sold; but we are hoping that, with 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

11 

the Marshall Plan going over, we will get rid of this surplus in a very short time. We have already 

shipped a considerable amount of frozen meat, and it is being well received in Belgium. The only 

difficulty we are experiencing with this, is in obtaining credit from other countries. In Europe we have, 

to-day, 25,000,000 kiddies, who are in concentration camps – orphaned children, most of whom are in 

the British Occupied Zone of Germany, but they are also scattered all over those countries. They have to 

have one good, substantial mean each day, and horse meat contains more food calories than the cheapest 

of any other product in the world. At the present time Belgium is the only country in the position to deal 

with us, and owing to the large purchases they made, last year, of cattle in Ireland, meat from the 

Argentine, and our products, they had to put a ban on the shipments, because all cold storage space in 

Belgium was filled to the roof, and the same way in England; and they had orders to get their meat back 

out of England, and have no space for it in Belgium. 

 

Also, we have keen competition from the United States in connection with this market, and the Quaker 

Oats people are the largest processers of horse meat in the world. Belgium had to put a ban on imports 

of meat on account of the amount they had on hand, but we hope that this ban will shortly be removed. 

There you have a case of lots of meat, lots of money, people starting – all on account of the exchange of 

credit. England has no horses left for slaughter; they have slaughtered 60,000 horses around London 

alone, and they are badly depleted. Farmers over there have lots of money; labourers have money in the 

bank; but they cannot eat money, and they cannot get the United States’ dollars. At the present time, the 

only people there who can get meat are the ones who have the money to buy it, and they are now eating 

a lot of whale meat. 

 

I should not conclude my remarks without mentioning some of the accomplishments of this 

Government. Since we took over the reins of office, we have increased the services, with no particular 

increase in taxes – I mean land taxes. Last fall, I went to the trouble of going to several municipalities, 

and picking out different farms of an average size, to see how the taxes compared in 1929, with the taxes 

in 1947; I found in many instances that the taxes in 1947 were lower on this land than they were in 1929. 

We have built more miles of highway than did the last administration during their entire term of office, 

and our social services in connection with Old Age pensions, Widows’ Allowances, Children’s 

Allowances; Hospitalization of all Old Age pensioners and the Blind, Education, free Cancer Clinic 

treatment, surgical, diagnostic and X-rays, free medical treatment for the mentally ill, transportation, 

seed grain reductions, and all these other things have been extended. 

 

I would just like to mention, for a moment, the difference in our policy in connection with seed grain as 

compared with years gone by. As you know, down in my country, in 1917, they had to supply seed 

grain. This was supplied by the Dominion Government because there were not many 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

12 

people who, at that time, had the patent for their homestead, and this seed was supplied at a good big 

price, and that seed is still on the title of that land, from 1917. If you have occasion, to-day, to go and 

ask to have this Seed Grain Lien removed from your land, you get a bill back and it just amounts to three 

times as much as the original debt amounted to, and in no case that I know of have they done better than 

cut the interest in two. 

 

For example: one man had $125 of a seed grain lien on when he homesteaded. He tried to get the title 

last year, and it amounted to $350. After a lot of dickering back and forth through his Bank, he finally 

succeeded in having the Dominion Government release the title for $250.00 

 

Our automobile insurance and fire insurance has been a decided success, and our Veterans’ Land policy 

is much better, compared with what the veterans got before. I do not think any veteran need worry very 

much if he hasn’t a few little things in his contract which my hon. friends to my left have been 

emphasizing. I do not think the Liberal Party will get very far with their bogey-man of insecurity that 

they are parading in this country. People have got over the scare that they got a few years ago, that we 

were going to take their land away and socialize it. The Premier has given this House the assurance that 

there is going to be no socialization of land; and if I though there was, I would not be standing over here. 

I am sure that everyone will agree with me that, when the Premier makes a promise, that promise stays – 

because he has fulfilled the promises that were made in 1944 to the fullest extent, where human 

possible. 

 

Now, I have heard a lot of titles passed around this House. I have heard the hon. member over here 

calling the Meadow Lake member the ‘Pablum Boy’ and I have heard the ‘Fertilizer Kid’, and a lot of 

other titles. We have also seen a display of the two old parties uniting together in perfect wedlock. The 

hon. Leader of the Opposition has joined in with the hon. member for the Mediterranean and they have 

been most sincere in their courtship this winter. It reminds me of a story I heard about a John Deere 

collector, who went out into the country to collect an old debt on a tractor. One of the things that he was 

always mindful of was that he must not go away, leaving his debtor in a bad mood; so this day, when he 

drove in to the yard, the lady of the house came out, and they shook hands, and he says, ”That is a 

wonderful pair of pups you are raising, lady. What breed are they?” She says, “Well, that one is a 

Liberal pup, and this one is a Tory pup, but there isn’t a bit of difference – they both suck eggs.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to support the Budget. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

13 

Mr. C. D. Cuming (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker: In rising to say a few words on this debate, I 

wish to join with other speakers who have preceded me, in congratulating the Hon. Provincial Treasurer 

for the fine budget presented and the very able manner in which he did so. 

 

The Opposition, of course, have done everything in their power to discredit this budget, which, of 

course, is their privilege and duty in this House; but it has been very noticeable, all the way through the 

debate, that in their criticism of the increased cost, they are thinking all the while in terms of the 

‘thirties. It seems they had such an experience in those days, they just cannot get it out of their heads. I 

want them to know that we are living, to-day, not in the ‘thirties, under a Liberal administration, but in 

1948 under a C.C.F. Government. 

 

Many members, in speaking on this debate, have made specific mention of their own home 

constituencies, and much has been said with regard to the northwestern part of the province. The hon. 

members for Battleford, and Meadow Lake, would have us believe that it is a very fine part of the 

province. Now, I do not doubt that such is the case; furthermore, I think it is a very good thing that we 

should discuss some of the local conditions in our constituencies, as effected by this fine government 

program. I find it of interest to listen to some of the stories or explanations of the conditions in other 

parts of the province. I think for a few minutes I will do likewise, and endeavour to give you a picture of 

how my constituency and my particular part of the province, the extreme southeast, is affected by the 

government program that has been put into effect. 

 

We have an area in the southeast part of the province that is, of course, mainly agricultural. We have 

open plains areas, principally grain growing, from Weyburn east to the extreme part of the east end of 

my constituency of Souris-Estevan where we have park-belt country and a livestock country. We have 

the Souris River flowing down through that territory, with about 10,000 acres of very fertile soil, 

capable of being irrigated whenever we can get some action form the P.F.R.A. 

 

In addition to this agricultural territory, we have, of course, the great deposits of lignite coal and the clay 

deposits. In brief, I would suggest that perhaps the result of the policies applied to industry have put the 

people of that particular part of the province in, perhaps, the most prosperous circumstances that they 

have ever been. In the last year, we have taken out about 1,500,000 tons of coal valued at about 

$2,750,000. The much-discussed government Brick Plant has produced $128,500 worth of clay products 

in the nine months ending December 31. We have there, as you are all aware, great potential power 

possibilities. With the present plan under construction completed, there will be a power 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

14 

unit there capable of generating 10,000 kilowatts. This, as you know, will be used to supply power to all 

the southern and eastern portions of the province. 

 

I wish to speak for a few moments, particularly of the development of the government clay industry at 

Estevan. I think this experiment has demonstrated that government ownership and control and operation 

in the interests of the people, can succeed, and has succeeded. As I say, we have had developments in 

that part of the province just when it suited private enterprise, in the past – when it suited their purpose 

to earn profits; because it was not sufficiently profitable to operate the Clay Plant, it lay idle until this 

Government decided to purchase it and put it into operation. Of course, stories have circulated as to the 

failure it has been. I have heard it said that there was not much clay there – and they can only tell that to 

those who have not been there; I have heard the story of how poor the products were, and so on; but I 

think the record speaks for itself at the present time. 

 

During the last period of operation, we have had 80 to 90 men employed in that area on that particular 

operation. That has meant a payroll of a total of $87,600 in wages and salaries. There has been a profit, 

in addition to providing employment for these people, during the last period, of $14,000. My idea of the 

thing is that even had there been no profit, the project was a worthy one. It gave employment to 80 or 90 

men, and the resulting payroll, in a town the size of Estevan, has really meant something to that town. 

As a matter of fact, when we look up recent statistics, we see where the town of Estevan has grown, 

since 1941, more than any other town in the province with the exception of Nipawin; and I would 

suggest that industry such as this is responsible for the growth of the town of Estevan. Besides that, the 

supplying of the product has been a great factor. We have had numerous brick buildings erected within 

the last two years, replacing the old frame buildings. On one side of one block in one street alone, eight 

brick buildings have been erected in the town of Estevan; so I think that record speaks well for itself. 

Right here, I want to commend the workers and the management of that Plant for their success. These 

people realize that, if they are to have steady employment a decent standard of living, they must be 

prepared to co-orate with the management in making it a success; and that has been made possible under 

government ownership, which was not the case previously, under private ownership. 

 

I have a copy of a recent agreement signed between the Union and the management of that Plant, in 

which you might be interested, and from which I would just like to read a short paragraph: 

 

“Recognizing the community of interest existing between Management and Employees in the efficient 

and harmonious operation of the Plant, and recognizing that this can best be achieved through 

co-operative effort, the Company and the Union agree to establish and operate a Joint Production 

Committee, to be known as the Labour-Management Production Committee.” 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

15 

I think, Mr. Speaker, for that reason alone, within the last twelve months, this little industry has proved 

successful. 

 

That principle could be greatly extended in that particular area of the province. I am thinking, in 

particular, of the processing of our coal. You see, we take out this lignite coal, which is very low in 

B.T.U.’s, and as such, cannot be shipped any great length to compete with the Alberta coal; but by 

processing the coal into briquettes we have a product that we can ship along distances and put on a 

competitive market. We have a briquette plant, of course, in the coal fields, operated by private 

enterprise. Private enterprise, as usual, has gone just as far as is necessary for it to make profits, and has 

let it go at that. The demand for briquettes greatly exceeds supply; by keeping the supply short, the price 

can be kept up on the product, thereby earning greater profits, and that is the policy of private enterprise. 

I think it is the general feeling, in that part of the province, that the rank and file of the people would like 

to see the briquette plant in the coal fields operated similarly to what is being done with the Clay Plant at 

Estevan; and, by the way, this is the briquette plant that was once the property of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, and was turned over to private enterprise for one dollar. I think it should again be back in 

the hands of the Government. 

 

I would like to say a few words about the most important industry that we have in our corner of the 

province – about the working class people, whether they are working on the farms or in the mines or in 

any of the industries. In reviewing a speech made at Oxbow last November 14, reported in the Estevan 

‘Mercury’ of November 20, I notices these statements made by Mr. E. M. Culliton, who was addressing 

the Liberal Nominating Convention at that time: 

 

“Labour can look forward to continued advancement in their rights under Liberal governments, rights 

which will be completely and utterly destroyed in a Socialist state.” 

 

I would like to assure Mr. Culliton that he might be able to get away with making statements of that kind 

at the distance of Oxbow, but if he made those statements in the coal fields, they would certainly be 

challenged. I would ask him to consult with any of the leaders of the Labour Movement in that area, and 

see what answer he would get regarding that matter. If he is not prepared to do that, I would ask him to 

just watch the results at the next election. 

 

Furthermore, I have noticed statements made from time to time by the hon. Leader of the Opposition 

regarding the situation in the coal fields concerning labour, commending previous administrations for 

their efforts in settling strike conditions. He mentioned, in one of this speeches that the strikes were 

handled successfully in 1939. I would just submit, Mr. Speaker, that those strikes were handled 

successfully – for the operators – but not for labour. These people have worked along with farmers in an 

effort to alleviate the conditions under which they have to 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

16 

live, and by so doing have been instrumental in forming the government that is in power at the present 

time. They prefer encouragement, and security of protective labour legislation, to Mounted Police 

persuasion to accept the dictates of the operators, which was the case previously. 

 

I just want to briefly give you something of the history of the Labour Movement in that particular coal 

field. I think it is something that everyone in this province should be familiar with. It has extended over 

a period of forty years, with these people struggling for security against the oppression of operators and 

governments unsympathetic to their cause. There has been a serious of unsuccessful attempts to secure 

their rights, and to secure collective bargaining. On numerous occasions they have run into difficulties – 

operators have been unwilling to sit down and co-operate with them in setting up wage scales and better 

working conditions. As a result of men taking a stand, many have lost their jobs; on one occasion, union 

leaders were taken over the Line by thugs and threatened; on another occasion three men were shot 

down by the Mounted Police in the town of Estevan. That was in the strike of 1931. A lot could be said 

about the events which led up to these moves, but time does not permit. However, sheer union strength 

and war urgency were the mediums by which an unwilling government was willing to sit down around a 

table with the employees and the employers, as stated by the hon. Leader of the Opposition. These 

people did not sit down around a table until this Union, through forty years’ struggle, had grown to such 

proportions that they were forced to do so, to appease these people. This is Mr. Culliton’s “continued 

advancement in their rights under Liberal administration.” 

 

To-day, conditions are different. These people have been encouraged, because of the labour legislation 

brought down by this government, and are enjoying the highest standard of living in the history of the 

coal fields. They have their forty-hour week; they have their union established, and the union bargains 

for them. As a result of that bargaining, they have been able to increase wages from the one-time 17½ 

cents an hour to 94 cents an hour at the present time for underground workers. They have the benefit of 

holidays with pay, an improved Compensation Act, and all the other protection features given under this 

administration. Needless to say, Mr. Speaker, these people appreciate what has been done, and the most 

recent news that I have from that part is that already three or four unions are getting together to form a 

political action committee. 

 

I have considerable concern for the plight that some of our Returned Men have found themselves in 

upon reaching home; and I want to commend the Ministers of Reconstruction for the very fine work that 

has been done, affecting my particular constituency, in an effort to aid these returned men. We all know 

how they went overseas and fought to protect what democracy we had here, in the hope that we could 

extend that democracy, and how they came back, only to find that there was not sufficient land for them 

when they wanted to settle on the land; business opportunities had been snapped up; jobs were taken up; 

and, perhaps worst of all, no houses for them. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

17 

I think that the provincial government Land Settlement scheme, the Veteran Land Settlement scheme, 

has been responsible for placing veterans on the land, who never would have had that opportunity if it 

had not existed. With regard to housing, it was only when our Department of Reconstruction was able to 

purchase the Airforce equipment and the buildings of No. 38 Training School at Estevan, that we were 

able to at that situation. To-day, we have 44 of these veterans and their families, housed at Estevan, in 

the housing that has been established there. 

 

In addition to that, a very fine 50-bed hospital (which was not in use until our Department was able to 

secure it) is to-day being used by the St. Joseph’s Hospital Association at Estevan. Even prior to our 

getting it, this hospital had been stripped of all its equipment, equipment that might have been, and 

should have been, left right there for the use of the local people; and that equipment all had to be 

replaced when we took it over. So, all in all, I want to commend the Government for the opportunities 

that they have provided for Returned Men – I think that has been a very fine act indeed. 

 

Yes, we are told of regimentation; we are told about the government going into business, and all that sort 

of thing; but I have not seen any of that in my part of the province, nor have I heard of it elsewhere. It 

certainly does not exist in the Souris-Estevan area. True, the government has taken over the Brick Plant, 

and started up an industry that private enterprise did not see fit to operate; but in the town of Estevan, 

business enterprise has increased by leaps and bounds. We know that by my statements previously made 

with regard to the increase in population in the town of Estevan. So, as far as regimentation is 

concerned, or interference with business is concerned, it certainly does not exist. 

 

Then we hear about all these terrible highways we have to travel on, as a result of this Government’s 

activities; but when I leave Estevan to come in to Regina, I travel over 54 miles of blacktop highway, 

and about 60 miles of newly graded and gravelled roads, to get to Regina. When I do down to the 

Manitoba border, I travel over 25 miles of brand new grade. North from Estevan, there is 40 miles of 

new gravel. If I travel north or south from Weyburn I see new gravel. I do not know what conditions are 

elsewhere in the province, but if the hon. Leader of the Opposition would come down to the 

southeastern part of the province he would see that the highways are not so terrible. I think, Mr. Speaker, 

he is thinking again in terms of Liberal roads, and we still have some Liberal roads left. He has probably 

been travelling on all these Liberal roads! Given time, however, we will turn them into C.C.F. roads. 

 

Here, I would like to pay tribute to the people who work on the roads. I have received wonderful 

co-operation from the District Engineer and the men employed by him. He has had an absolutely free 

hand in my 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

18 

corner of the constituency, to employ whoever could get the work done, and that policy has produced 

results. I was surprised, last Spring, when the snow melted from the roads, to see how well they drained, 

due to the policies that are being practiced; and with a proper crown being left on the road, that the 

highways dried up without any particular deterioration last Spring. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, as time goes on, the electors are coming to appreciate this program more and 

more. I would like to refer to various phases of the program, but time does not permit; but I do want to 

mention the hospital scheme, which I believe is going over in a very big way, and I also want to mention 

the psychiatric training course that is being supplied to the attendants of the Saskatchewan hospitals. A 

friend of mine put it this way. He said, “If we are physically ill, or if any of our friends is ill, we would 

think it terrible if we had to depend upon someone to nurse them who had no training whatsoever, but 

that is what we have been expecting of those who nurse our mentally ill. We have been asking people 

who have not been trained, to take care of them.” 

 

That reminds me of a word of commendation of the work being done with regard to the Mental 

Hospitals, that should be noted. I found this in “The People’s Weekly” of February 7, 1948, in a 

statement made by Mr. D. M. Lebourdais: 

 

“Perhaps the greatest overcrowding in any Canadian Mental Hospital existed in the Weyburn 

Mental Hospital in Saskatchewan up to one year ago, the culmination of twenty years of neglect. At 

that time the Hospital contained 600 children who should never have been there at all, and against 

whose presence social workers and others had been complaining for years. The Douglas 

Government, however, has taken hold of the situation in a determined manner. Its first step was to 

make Mental Hospitals free to all patients; then the children were evacuated from Weyburn to a 

place especially prepared for them, and a new Hospital is planned for Saskatoon.” 

 

Now, that is a comment from someone outside the province, from a man who has made a special study 

of our Mental Institutions, and I think we should be very happy about such comment as that. 

 

As I say, I believe the people are appreciating our program more as times goes on, and that, as we 

institute our social welfare measures, our labour legislation, our educational program, industrial 

development and all the rest of our program, we are building a solid structure, just as if we were 

building a structure of Estevan bricks. Right here I am reminded of a statement made by a friend of mine 

who went to the Coast, last fall, He was rather discouraged with conditions in British Columbia, after 

having left this C.C.F. province, and was wishing himself back. Here 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

19 

is one of his statements. He said, “Were we there now, we would be listening to Jack Sturdy and Dan 

Daniels holding forth on the Housing Program, etc. Make ‘em out of brick, boys! Then the Liberal boys 

can’t huff and puff and blow them down.” 

 

In closing, I would submit that we are doing just that. Each phase of our program is building a structure 

that – no matter how the Liberals or the Conservatives or the Social Creditors, or what have you, huff or 

puff – will never be blown down. Mr. Speaker, I shall support the Budget. 

 

Mr. A. P. Swallow (Yorkton): — I notice there are not many of the Opposition in the House this 

afternoon, so possibly I should not say much regarding them. We know that it is the duty of the 

Opposition to criticize the government’s power; we notice that this Opposition does that. The thing that 

struck the younger members of this House the most was the lack of anything constructive. While it is 

their duty to criticize, I think it is also their duty to give us an alternative to what the government is 

doing. We fail to see that in the five Sessions during which I have sat here. 

 

When the C.C.F. were the official Opposition in this House, we know they criticized, all right; but we do 

know that all through the Session they kept bringing in, by Resolution and other means, the C.C.F. 

policy, and tried to get the government of that day to adopt the C.C.F. policy. If they had done so, 

possibly they would have been in power to-day. 

 

The same thing is going on at Ottawa. The C.C.F. group there are bringing before the House of 

Commons, all the time, what they think is the policy for Canadians. We are told – I think it was two 

years ago, at the convention in Saskatoon, when a new Leader was elected – that they had adopted a new 

policy; but as far as this House is concerned, we have not heard anything of it. I think it is their duty, as 

Opposition, to bring that policy to this House and try to get this government to adopt it, if they sincerely 

believe it is in the best interests of Saskatchewan. That is one thing about the C.C.F. – they have never 

been ashamed of their policy! 

 

It is hard for us here to understand the change in the attitude of the hon. member for the Mediterranean 

Area. I think we all remember when he came into this House, he indicated that he could support the 

C.C.F. in what they were doing. We know he voted with us; but there has been a great change in the 

hon. member since. He indicated at that time that the C.C.F. policy was much in line with the program 

which he outlined to the troops at the time of the election; and in all probability that is the reason he was 

elected. Now, the needs of the Veterans and the policy of the C.C.F., have not changed, but we do know 

that the attitude of the hon. member has changed. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

20 

He forgets that there are quite a number of veterans in this House, and I believe they are just as 

interested in the welfare of the veterans as he is. I believe that every member of this House is very much 

interested in the welfare of the veterans. When we support the C.C.F. policy we are bringing in 

legislation that is good for the veterans and all of the people; and when the hon. member votes against 

the policy, in this House, as he has done – if he votes against this budget, he is voting against bringing 

hospitalization to the veterans; he is voting against bringing better educational facilities to the children 

of the veteran; he is voting against automobile insurance, which also protects the veteran. I think we 

want to remember that one of the first beneficiaries under The Automobile Insurance Act was a veteran, 

who received $1,000. I believe, for the loss of an eye, and who received hospitalization besides. This 

protects the veteran as much as it does any other citizen. He would also be voting against the work of the 

Department of Reconstruction, which is considered by all fair-minded people to have done more for the 

veterans under that Department, than has any province in Canada. 

 

Now, I do not know what kind of veteran the hon. member is representing. The veterans I have met do 

not want to be considered as a privileged class. I think they want a square deal; but they want also their 

families to enjoy the same privileges that they well enjoy. I think that is what they fought for. I believe, 

they fought against special privilege classes, and I believe that, in doing what we are, we are doing it for 

the veterans as well as all people of the province. 

 

We hear a lot about propaganda. All literature that the government sends out is considered propaganda; 

but it seems to me that if the Press were doing their duty, we would not have to spend so much money in 

the Bureau of Publications, to tell the people what this Government is doing, or any other government. I 

think it is their duty to inform the people of this province what a government is doing, regardless of what 

government it is. We spend a lot of money on newspapers, each year, but we do not get this information. 

This Government believes that the people should know their program. They should know what services 

they can expect. That is why the “Saskatchewan News”, which has been condemned by the Opposition, 

is telling the people what it is doing. It has explained the Health Units; has produced maps to show how 

the province will be divided into Health Units. It has explained the expansion of the Power Commission; 

the people to-day know where they can expect to get the power – the south, from Estevan; the northwest, 

from the natural gases, they hope; they have a map before them and know now it has been expanded. 

The hospitalization plan has been explained to them thoroughly – it was a new thing and had to be 

explained. This was not done through the Press, Mr. Speaker, it had to be done through these 

Government agencies. The Larger School Unit has been 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

21 

explained. To give you an illustration: I read in our paper, or rather, in the nearest paper that we have, 

where we have a local column, where a young woman of our district had been speaking to The 

Homemakers, and she had given a talk on the Health Regions. The next month I noticed she had given a 

talk on the Larger School Unit, and I wondered where she was getting this information, and upon asking 

her, was advised that she was receiving ‘The Saskatchewan News’. That is the way the program of this 

Government is being spread through the country. We know that the former Liberal Government passed a 

Union Hospital Act, but we did not know much about it; they passed a Larger School Unit Act, but they 

did not tell us much about that. 

 

I can remember how, a few years ago that ‘The Homemakers’ went through the country, speaking on the 

Larger School Units. They did not hear about it from the Government at all. I think that is one reason, 

Mr. Speaker, why, when this government was elected, we had only 26 union hospitals in this province. 

To-day we have 68 union hospitals. It is because the people have been told what they can expect from 

the government, and what assistance they can expect, that they have gone ahead in this connection. I am 

going to give you some definite results from this information that has gone out to the people. At 

Theodore, where I live, we have never had a hospital. We are between Yorkton and Foam Lake, a 

distance of 80 miles, and some of the people had to drive 50 miles to the nearest hospital. 

 

Through the information given to the people of that area, they learned that the Government would assist 

them; they assisted themselves; they got busy and decided to organize a union hospital. The 

responsibility or the initiative was not taken from the local people. They were told what assistance they 

could expect from the government if they did their part. They decided on the area themselves, the area 

that would be logically drawn to that centre. They elected a Board. Then, when the area was decided on, 

and a map sent to the Government, the Local Government Board advised them what they thought they 

could afford to raise themselves, by debenture and other means. We are not a wealthy part of the 

province and we could not build a hospital alone. The Government, through the Planning Commission, 

told this area what grant they would allow; and after they got all this information they went out to the 

people, through meetings, and told them how much it would increase their taxes and what they would 

have to pay. 

 

Now, we had opposition to this – very little – but nevertheless we had opposition very much like that 

which we have in this House. We had reasons. I think we have the same attitude in this House from our 

Opposition, as demonstrated in the remark the other day from a member of the Opposition, that he 

hoped this government would “have their noses rubbed in relief again.” That shows the attitude of the 

Opposition! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! May I correct the hon. member. That was not the statement. 

 

Mr. Swallow: — Then I withdraw the statement. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It was so reported in the Press. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

22 

Mr. Swallow: — Well, the record will show. This Opposition did not have much effect – as it does not 

have much effect on the people of Saskatchewan from this House. When the final vote was taken, 85 per 

cent of those who voted, voted in favour of the hospital. Great credit is due to those local people. The 

ratepayers were willing to pay their share to the Board who worked hard; great credit is due to all the 

organizations who supported it by raising funds to furnish the wards; and the Planning Commission 

supplied us with free plans and gave every encouragement. Material was scarce, but we received two 

carloads of timber from the Timber Board, a carload of brick from the Estevan Brick Plant – these things 

made it possible to build that Hospital. We are told this Government is centralizing the control in 

Regina. That is not true. The Board of the Union Hospital, in my part, has complete control and 

complete ownership of that Hospital. I want to give credit to the people who organized that Hospital, but 

that could not have been done if it had not been for the co-operation between the people and the 

Government. I think it is a true example of co-operation. Today, we have a good doctor – we could not 

get a doctor until we had a hospital; and you will be interested to know, Mr. Speaker, that that Hospital 

is serving a part of your constituency. We have a good staff, and the Hospital today is practically full. 

 

In addition to all the services indicated in the Budget, there is an item in that Budget for $300,000, 

which will help other districts, as we were helped, to build a hospital – to help them in 1948. I think that 

is the true principle of Socialism that we hear condemned so much – to help those who cannot procure 

those services themselves. 

 

I have pleasure in supporting the Budget. 

 

Hon. C. M. Fines: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Is the House ready for the question? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I am ready to go ahead, only I received an explanatory note from the 

Whip giving the order of the speakers – first, Mr. Cuming, then Mr. Swallow, then myself. Has that 

gentleman (Mr. Cuming) spoken? 

 

Hon. C. M. Fines: — Yes, he has. 

 

Mr. G. H. Danielson (Arm River): — In rising to take part in this debate, which I hope is nearing its 

end, I, in common with the other members of this House, wish to associate myself in extending to the 

Provincial Treasurer congratulations. He did an excellent job in presenting his Budget, and he is adapt at 

quoting figures and placing them in the right position in order to convey a very, very favourable picture. 

However, I am unable to congratulate him on the amount of money involved, and where he is going to 

get it, and I am certainly not in a position to congratulate the individual taxpayers of Saskatchewan, who 

will have to pay the amount required. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

23 

Before I continue with some of the things that I wish to say, I want to touch on a few things that have 

been said in this debate. I understood that on this debate no member could refer to anything that had 

been said before in this House. If that is the rule, it certainly has not been lived up to during the past few 

weeks, and if I should transgress that rule, Mr. Speaker, I claim the same indulgence from you that the 

other members of this House have received. I have no objection to the matter at all – I only want to point 

out that I think I should have the same liberty. 

 

The Minister of Municipal Affairs made the statement, when he spoke in this House, in regard to certain 

road grants that had been given in my constituency during a number of years. I am not going to go into 

that particular part of it, because it is incorrect, but I just want to point out to him that, when he quoted 

me as having said that I had eleven municipalities in my constituency, that statement is far from being 

true. 

 

As a matter of fact, there is one municipality quoted as being in my district, that has only half a section 

of that municipality in my district, and that is in a community pasture. Another municipality that is 

quoted as being in my district has just about two townships in my constituency; another municipality, 

only two-thirds of it is in my district; another, one-half. There are two municipalities that are entirely in 

my district; there is another, as I have mentioned, with only two townships in my district; there is 

another with two-thirds of the municipality in my district; and still another with two-thirds of the 

municipality in my district; and another with only one-third. In all, as far as I can estimate it, on the 

basis of nine townships to a municipality, I have about seven and three-quarter municipalities in my 

constituency. 

 

Now, I do not know what the system of road grant is at the present time, because my constituency has 

hardly got anything, except last summer, when they were handed out on a basis which was anything but 

fair to the individual municipality; but before, when half of one municipality was in my constituency, 

half of the road grant for that municipality was allotted to me, and the other went to the other 

constituency, where a different representative was concerned. That was the system. Whether it is 

followed now, I am not going to say; but I just want to prove that the statement made by the hon. 

Minsters is absolutely incorrect, and there is not even a half-truth in it. 

 

The Minister of Highways, of course, is telling the old, old story he started three years after he came into 

office – that the roads were all worn out when he came into office. Well, if they were, then he certainly 

has not done anything to improve them so far, in my part of the province. I can assure you that never in 

the history of this province have the highways in my district been as bad as they have been during the 

last two years, and particularly in 1947; and there is no reason why they should be that way. 

 

There is nothing wrong with No. 11 Highway – it is a good highway, it is gravelled – it only lacks 

someone to maintain it; that is all. The best highway in my district during the last season was No. 19, 

which was 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

24 

maintained by horse patrol, not by motor patrol – the best highway there was during the entire season. 

That goes to show there is anything but fairness, in regard to the freedom of everybody to do as they 

like, without any political interference. I have had some experience with these things – not personally – 

but people who were interested in it, and the public who are interested, have seen some of it. I remember 

in 1945, the District Engineer hired a certain individual who was appointed back in 1930 by Mr. Carl 

Stewart, the then Minister of Highways. He was retained continuously until he took sick, another man 

was put in his place for a short time, and then the Engineer wanted to put this man back on again. He 

even came down here to Regina and went to the Minister’s office, and got permission to place this man, 

who was a firstclass man, back on the road. When the time came, he phoned him to go up to Saskatoon 

and get his maintainer – his road patrol. That was on a Friday. He came down on the Saturday afternoon 

and did a half-day’s work, and on Monday morning he was fired. Why was he fired? Through political 

interference. 

 

In 1944, another good man was taken off No. 2 Highway. He had the courage to come down here and go 

right to the Minister’s Office and insist on finding out the reason he had been discharged. He was told to 

his face that it was because he was supposed to be a Liberal. Now, that is the political aspect of the 

Highways Department to-day. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I can prove that. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You cannot make charges of that kind, as you know very well. You must withdraw it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, I am just quoting what I know to be a fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You cannot make charges of that character. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That there are power politics in the Highways Department? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You have made a specific charge against the Minister of Highways which I must ask 

you to withdraw. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I quoted what he told the gentleman when he insisted on knowing the reason for his 

dismissal. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You made a specific charge, and you must withdraw it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — All right, if that is your ruling, I withdraw, but I know that was the case. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

25 

Mr. Danielson: — It is small wonder that we do not have more money spent on roads up in my part of 

the country than in many other constituencies; when we find that in two constituencies, in the 1947 

season, there was $811,067 spent. In the constituency where the Premier sits there was $537,181 spent 

on new construction. No wonder that some of us who sit in the Opposition do not get anything, if it all 

goes to the man who has the power to get the money for his own particular Seat. And the records show 

that, absolutely. If the Minister of Highways were here, we could go back and quote the figures for 

1946, and that would make it all the worse. 

 

Hon. Mr. Valleau: — Were you opposed to hard surfacing in 1939? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You had better keep quiet. 

 

Many things have been said in regard to the Power Commission. I think that is an excellent institution. It 

was started a long time ago by the Liberal Government. I was carried on, free from politics – that is why 

it met with success – it carried its own costs, it provided for extensions, took care of its capital 

investments, and all those things which a business organization should do – not like your Crown 

corporations, your tannery, your boot factory, your brick plant, and all those things that are not supposed 

to pay interest on the capital invested. 

 

But what has been done in this House? Practically every one of you has tried to create the impression 

among the people of Saskatchewan that this government, by new construction and extension, has 

provided serviced for 45,087 retail subscribers in the province of Saskatchewan. Now, what are the 

facts? We asked the question here the other day, and we were given the figures: the total number of 

retail subscribers in the province of Saskatchewan is 45,087. In the companies which were taken over by 

the Government in the last three years, there were 22,489 retail subscribers who were getting service 

from these private companies – getting exactly the same service from them as they are getting from the 

Government now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — For more money. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I’m not so sure about that. If you go out and see the taxes in the rural towns and 

villages in the province, you will find that they are not receiving these services any cheaper. I know this, 

because I pay my monthly account, and when I add the percentage now levied by the town, and when 

they pay five percent for collecting that tax, I question whether the charges are any less than they were 

before. After all, out of the 45,087 retail subscribers, 22,489 were receiving these services before the 

present government took over. That is all! They just took some of the public’s money and purchased this 

corporation. I am not criticizing them for doing so – I am criticizing them 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

26 

for trying to create the impression among the people of the province that this government is going on, by 

its own efforts, both in new construction and so on, spreading out the network, even to people who did 

not have it before – more services, to the extent of 22,489 subscribers – just because fifty percent of the 

subscribers in Saskatchewan to-day have these services exactly as they had before this government took 

them over. Now, that is another balloon busted. That is truth – not fiction! 

 

The Minister of Natural Resources spoke here some time ago and made this statement as reported in the 

Press. I have tried to get a reproduction of his speech, but it is not available – to me, at least – and he 

said this: 

 

“From 1939 until 1947 the government in power had provided $457,000 for depreciation. Mr. 

Phelps said that had the Liberal Government set aside funds for depreciation from 1929 to 1939, the 

depreciation fund would have been built up to $866,000 instead of being short now by about 

$300,000.” 

 

Well, let us keep the record straight again, Mr. Speaker. We are not trying to gloss over anything. If 

there is anything wrong, you have the record; but these sweeping statements do not go down here. They 

might get by out in the schoolhouse, but they are not going to go on the floor of this House, so long as I 

am able to talk. 

 

The Power Commission started in 1930. The first full year of operation, 1930, they paid all the interest 

and established a reserve of $600,000. Ten years after that, the total capital invested in the Power 

Commission was 8.3 million dollars. There was a $440,000 depreciation reserve set up. 

 

 

 

 

 

(continued on Page 27.) 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

27 

There was a sinking fund of $1,746,000, or a total of $2,200,000 nearly 15 per cent on the capital 

investment. In December 1944, the capital invested was 9.4 million dollars – reserve depreciation was 

$1,050,000; the sinking fund depreciation was $2,270,000, making a total of $3,320,000, or nearly 34 

per cent of the capital invested. Then we come to December 31, 1947 (to bring it right up to date) and 

we have an investment of 21.5 million dollars and a reserve of $5,750,000, or 27 per cent of the capital 

invested. In 1944, Mr. Speaker, the percentage was 34 per cent of the capital invested – that is a fact, 

and I want to keep the record straight. There was nothing wrong, so why all this camouflage, and all this 

bragging, trying to convey to the people that this Government did something they never did? They never 

did anything but take over the power company and carry it on like any other business concern. The 

‘brains’, of the men running the Power Commission, are the same men who where with the Power 

Commission for many years. They are good men, my remarks are not intended to cast any reflection on 

them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — May I ask the hon. gentleman a question? What has the 

sinking fund to do with depreciation reserves? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — For the hon. gentleman’s information, I quoted the Minister of Natural Resources – 

there is nothing there he can put his finger on. 

 

We have heard on the radio, in this House, and on the public platforms, the wonderful contribution, the 

wonderful performance, of the Provincial Treasurer we have today. Well, I am willing to admit that he is 

a clever fellow – he is a good man, but he is not ‘superman’; he is not a bit better than you and I, Mr. 

Speaker. When you and I were on the farm and we couldn’t pay a debt we sometimes got a little 

reduction; but we didn’t advertise it at all – we just went home and quietly said nothing about it. This 

Government, on the other hand, when they are in the fortunate position of getting big write-offs, through 

the generosity of the Federal Government, they advertise it to the four corners of the earth, and try to 

make the people believe it is their work – that is what I take exception to. They try to give the 

impression to the people that they have paid this off; but they didn’t do any such thing, Mr. Speaker. Let 

us take a look at it. They said they reduced the Public Debt by $70,000,000. On June 30, 1944, the 

Public Debt, including (mark the word ‘including’) contingent liabilities, was $209,000,000. It is in the 

Journals of the House for 1946, page 162, if anyone wants to check it. 

 

On December 31, 1947, Public Debt, including contingent liability, was $146,240,000, a gross reduction 

from June 30, 1944, to December 31, 1947, of $62,760,000, not $70,000,000. 

 

How was this effected? How was it reduced? As I said, it has been a custom with us for many years, 

when a man is unable to pay a debt to go to his creditor and suggest he cannot pay and propose a 

reduction. As a rule that is done, particularly in the bad crop districts; and that has been done to the 

extent of hundred of millions of dollars in this province, between individuals and corporations. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

28 

How was that reduction of $62,760,000 in the Provincial Public Debt brought about? 

 

Well, there were the relief debts owing to Ottawa that were covered by Treasury Bills of this province. 

These were cancelled, and in that case cancellation means that the Federal Government just tore up these 

Treasury Bills and said ‘they are paid’. The amount involved in that cancellation was $36,340,000. 

 

Then there was the Natural Resources’ Settlement, which passed through the House, a few days ago, and 

which had been left as an open question for the past fifteen years. There was a credit accruing there to 

this Government of $8,031,000 which, added to the $25,340,000 write-off of Treasury Bills, makes a 

total of $44,371,000, automatically applied to this debt reduction. How much then is left of the total 

reduction of the Public Debt of $62,760,000? The answer, Mr. Speaker, is that there is $18,389,000 left. 

 

How was this $18,389,000 paid, and where did the money come from? Well, let us look at the record. 

There is no mystery about this to anyone who follows up the Journals of the House and the Public 

Accounts. 

 

The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, a group farmer organization that never bilked on its commitments, paid 

into this over the years 1944-45, 1945-46 and 1946-47, a total of $2,416,000. The Saskatchewan Farm 

Loan Board (which is not doing business any more; they are only closing out their business), in those 

same years paid in, in principal (here again I am not quoting interest), $6,625,000. The Telephone 

Department which, as I said when I started this talk, has always been able to take care of their 

commitments, take care of their capitalization, make up their sinking fund and have a fund for 

replacements, paid in during those years $1,035,000. The Saskatchewan Co-operative Creameries paid 

in $250,000. In addition to these, every year, payments are made to the Sinking Fund Account out of 

revenue. For the years in question, $1,100,000 was paid into sinking fund. These items, Mr. Speaker, 

make up a total of $11,426,000. 

 

How much then remains to be paid out of this $18,389,000? Just exactly $6,963,000. 

 

Now, in addition to these definite and specific payments the Provincial Treasurer had available for debt 

reduction, the Liquor Profits. His total Liquor Profits for three years, 1944-45, 1945-46 and 1946-47, 

amounted to $18,480,000. Of this amount he took $9,250,000 into revenue to balance his high 

expenditures, but even at that he had over $9,000,000 left for debt reduction. 

 

That is how the public debt was reduced by $62,670,000, Mr. Speaker. No Provincial Treasurer or 

auditor could have done anything else under the circumstances, and there is not one iota of credit 

coming to him or to any member of this House for that reduction. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

29 

(The next following recording was inaudible, due to mechanical difficulties. Approximately two pages 

of text missing.) 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

30 

(The next following recording was inaudible, due to mechanical difficulties. Approximately two pages 

of text missing.) 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

31 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the hon. member must take the hon. member’s word. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — All right, Mr. Speaker, I will take that statement back. 

 

He is reported in the daily press as saying: “those who oppose the necessary administrative changes 

which will bring greater educational advantages to the boys and girls, can well be classed as 

scoundrels.” That was his statement in reply to the criticisms from this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, no! That was not replying to anyone in this House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — On a point of privilege, unless they class themselves as 

those ‘with a political advantage’. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There is no question what was said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A day or two ago the Premier made a statement on the floor of this House – I think it was only two days 

ago – and he said: “We, on this side of the House, were playing ‘stooge’ to those ‘born with a silver 

spoon in their mouths’.” That was his statement – I wonder if that is ‘smearing.!’ What right has he to 

classify me as a stooge for any imaginary ‘monster’ organization, or anything like that? He did it! 

 

I went out and listened to his speech a little while ago, and they have criticized the press; and their 

friends in Ottawa are not a bit better. The member for Regina is quoted as having said, in Bowmanville, 

Ontario, that the Prime Minister was a truly dishonest man – that is Mr. Mackenzie King! Scandalous 

and improper! Then he linked Mr. King with Premier Drew and Duplessis and all the rest; and he said 

this: “Some day Mackenzie King will be judged truly dishonest in the light of broken promises.” That is 

what the Bowmanville paper is reported to have said. From the platform he said, when describing the 

critics of the C.C.F., including the subsidized press, as a ‘bunch of rascals, curs and scoundrels.’ After 

all, that word ‘scoundrel’ comes in in many places, and quote often, Mr. Speaker. That is the Member of 

Parliament for the city of Regina and that is something that I do not think any member on this side of the 

House has ever stooped to – the low-down level of doing anything of that kind. 

 

Last year the Minister of Education, when he got up to speak, in criticizing the Leader of the Opposition, 

here it what he said, according to the press: “It is no more than once could expect from a political 

charlatan of the ninth degree.” Well now, the Minister of Education is so well versed in these 

applications that he does not need to look them up in the dictionary; but I would ask him – maybe he has 

forgotten – when he gets home from his office to look up the dictionary and look up the definition of the 

word ‘charlatan’, and then he will be proud that he applied that definition to the Leader of the 

Opposition, Mr. Speaker. And it is a good example for the children of the province who he is supposed 

to lead. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

32 

Mr. Lloyd: — On a point of privilege. Has the hon. gentleman my complete statement there, that he 

might like to read to the House, for the record? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — These things are on record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It has been said in this House, three or four times during the Session, and on the radio, in trying to cover 

up their own record in this province, there is a concerted effort being made by the Government and the 

supporters of this Government, to attack the Liberal Government in Ottawa. For the Liberal Government 

I do not hold any particular grief because I do not need to; they are well able to take care of themselves. 

 

And statements have been made with regard to the tremendous amount of money taken out of this 

province which goes to Ottawa. Well, Mr. Speaker, as usual they are, absolutely without reason, so 

tremendously exaggerated that they are not worth paying any attention to. I have here some of the things 

that the Federal Government takes out of Saskatchewan, and some amounts that they put back into 

Saskatchewan. For one thing, they say that $30,000,000 in customs duties are taken out of this province. 

If you take the last year’s Budget you will find the estimate for the customs duties in the whole 

Dominion of Canada was $237,000,000: the population of Saskatchewan is one-fifteenth of the total 

population of Canada, and if you estimate the customs duties on the basis of population, you will find, 

by a simple exercise, that the customs duties paid by this province amount to about $15,000,000, not 

$30,000,000. I want to point out that the customs duties in the province of Saskatchewan today, do not 

amount, by any means, to what they did ten or fifteen years ago when we paid duty on agricultural 

implements. There is no duty on agricultural implements today, and for that reason the customs duties 

collected in the province of Saskatchewan are only about half of what they were a few years ago. That is 

one of the reasons. But, the figure that was given out in these statements was approximately double of 

what the actual figures is. And the Dominion Government has paid into Saskatchewan hundreds of 

millions of dollars. $231,120,000 is paid out, each year, in family allowances; $21,500,000 of that 

comes to Saskatchewan. The P.F.A.A., is bringing into Saskatchewan, in some years, as high as 

$14,000,000 to $16,000,000. The grants for education grants to the returned men and all the other things 

that come into Saskatchewan, bring into Saskatchewan far more money than what is taken out, so far as 

the Federal Government is concerned. As a matter of fact, outside of Prince Edward Island . . . yes, I am 

sure, I know what I am talking about . . . they are the only province in the Dominion of Canada which 

gets more money from the Dominion Government than what they collect, and that statement is 

absolutely correct. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Oh, oh! 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

33 

Mr. Danielson: — If you would take a little time you might study this thing and then you wouldn’t say 

‘oh, oh!’ You ought to know what you are talking about. 

 

Every speaker who has spoken in this Debate has told us how far wrong we are, and how ill-informed 

we are, and what an injustice we are doing when we mention, in this House, the very grave danger that 

faces Saskatchewan from the infiltration of Socialism in the province. Socialism, Mr. Speaker, is the 

same wherever it is, and there is only one type of Socialism in this world and that is the Marxian 

Socialism. As a matter of fact, I would suggest to my friends over here, who admire Mr. Marx so much, 

that this is the 100th anniversary of the Marx Manifesto, and it would only be fitting if something, in this 

Socialist province of Saskatchewan as the beach-head of Socialism in this Dominion of Canada, could 

be arranged in the way of commensuration or celebration, in honour of this great man, Karl Marx, who 

has given to the world an ideology – a Communistic ideology – which has been put into effect, where 

the ‘iron curtain’ has descended on every country in the world where it is in complete control. 

 

All the leading authorities on Socialism, Mr. Speaker, Laski – you all know who Laski is, he has been 

the chairman of the British Labour Party for many years and is a very highly educated man – Cole, and 

Shaw and all these men say that they are all agreed that Democratic Socialism (of course that word 

‘democratic’ is a prostitution of the word, as there is no such thing as Democratic Socialism – there 

cannot be) cannot be achieved under our present democratic system. They are honest about it – every 

one of them. They say that any pretense that that can be done is just a sham. And we have plenty of 

examples of this in the world today. There is a great hue and cry from the Government benches when 

any member on this side of the House suggests that the core of the present C.C.F. party in Saskatchewan 

are not ‘milk and water’ Socialists, but are real Socialists – the Russian type, which are the only kind in 

this world today. 

 

Let us go back, Mr. Speaker, and I think I can prove it to you, that in this Socialist party in Canada, and 

in Saskatchewan, they have that, and they are growing by leaps and bounds. When the war commenced 

in 1939, there were certain actions taken by the political parties to define their attitude toward that great 

conflict. We know what the C.C.F., the Socialistic party in Canada did; and I am not going to go into 

that at all – that was a matter for them to decide, and I am not going to even criticize it: but, Mrs. Grace 

MacInnis, who is the wife of the M.P. for British Columbia in the Dominion House, went over to New 

Zealand, and in the issue of the January 11 ‘Standard’, the New Zealand Labour movement’s 

organization, writes an article explaining the difference in the problems that face the Socialistic party in 

Canada – to compare their views and come to some unified decision on what attitude they were going to 

take to that great conflict. She said: “Most of this group could hardly be termed ‘pacifist’; some were 

isolationists, holding that Canada is a part of the American continent and should remain aloof from 

European conflicts; others opposed partaking in capitalistic wars and waiting the chance to share in the 

revolutionary 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

34 

struggle to follow. Pacifists, isolationists and revolutionaries are on common ground in their 

determination to protest against Canada’s entry into the war.” That is not my statement, Mr. Speaker, 

that is the statement of Mrs. Grace MacInnis – Woodsworth’s daughter – and that is a true statement. 

 

During the years there has been built, up through the records of the Socialist party in Canada, year by 

year, the fact that the party is derived from another party and that they are determined to do one thing, 

and that is to eradicate capitalism from this province of Saskatchewan, and from Canada as a whole. 

There can be no dispute about that statement, Mr. Speaker. I am not criticizing, I am merely mentioning 

it. When they have eradicated capitalism from Canada, Mr. Speaker, what is it going to be replaced 

with? Why, with Socialism! 

 

Mr. Drew said this – and we all know who Mr. Drew is – “In every capitalistic country there is a 

relatively small group responsible to nobody but themselves. If you get power you must be prepared to 

use it quickly and ruthlessly to prevent the people from ‘gumming up the works’. There is nothing more 

dangerous to a social democratic party than to secure the power and then not put the policies into 

effect.” 

 

In another place – in the Regina Manifesto – it sates: “The C.C.F. is a federation of organizations whose 

purpose is to establish in Canada a co-operative commonwealth in which the principles regulating 

production, distribution and exchange will be supplying human needs and not the making of profits.” 

 

Mr. Cole, the mentor of Mr. Coldwell – he is the man he suggests on Page 10, of the ‘Handbook for 

Speakers’, that he would like to see appointed as heading the Planning Board, in the province of 

Saskatchewan, whenever the C.C.F. get into power. And he said this: “We cannot put limits to the pace 

at which we will have to proceed once we set our feet along the way, nor can we put limits on the degree 

of dictatorial power which under stress of emergency of socialistic government we may have to assume 

– it will be best, as soon as Parliament has conferred on the government the necessary emergency 

powers for its parliament to meet as seldom as possible, leaving the Socialists to carry on.” That is Mr. 

Cole! This explanation of Socialistic doctrine is used through all the Handbooks for Speakers, and every 

place else. 

 

Mr. Weaver, one of the outstanding Socialists in British Columbia, in 1943, said: “We ought to 

remember that the constitution of the British North American Act was not made to bind the C.C.F. We 

are not concerned with the capitalistic constitutions and the sooner we can wreck them the better.” 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

35 

In 1935, J. S. Woodsworth spoke in the city of Winnipeg and he said, “The doctrine of the C.C.F. was 

the doctrines of the United Front, or communist, and all that keeps us apart is the difference of tactics 

and the suspicion of insincerity.” 

 

We will come closer to home, Mr. Speaker. We have in ‘The Commonwealth’, published in the city of 

Regina, in the November 1 issue of 1944, headed “Political Science Corner”, and here we have the 

president of the C.C.F. in the province of Saskatchewan, Dr. Carlyle King said: “When the Bolshevik 

group seized power in Russia in 1917, that he suggested calling the party Communists and his 

suggestion was adopted. This difficult history points to the chief difference between the Communist 

party and the Social-Democrat party of Europe and America. It is a matter of the best methods to be 

used in achieving Socialism – the objective of the Communist is the same as the socialist.” That was 

Carlyle King, the professor at the University of Saskatchewan, and today the president of the 

organization that produced this socialistic government in the Province of Saskatchewan! 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the fundamental paragraphs in the Regina Manifesto says that the C.C.F. 

Government (this is Mr. Coldwell) ‘will not rest until it has eradicated capitalism, and established a 

complete program of socialistic planning.’ Again, Mr. Speaker, I ask, what have you got when you have 

done that? Socialism! The purest, ‘Stalin’ or ‘Marxian’ – there is only one, and that is what they aim to 

establish in the province of Saskatchewan and the Dominion of Canada. 

 

I have another one here. All these stories are not going to be questioned by my friends on the other side 

of the House. Mr. Speaker, I think some of the members, and probably some of the ministers, were in 

Ottawa to meet Mr. Strachy when he came over in June, 1946. The question arose and a correspondent 

quoted a passage from a book written by Mr. Strachy around 1932 under the title “The Common 

Struggle for Power”, which predicted the fall of capitalism and the rise of Communism all over the 

world. The passage reads: “Communist theory and Communist methods are the only ones which apply 

to the social conditions of nine-tenths of the inhabited globe. If this is the case, we may be assured that 

in a very short time this will apply to all countries such as us in Great Britain.” People asked if he were 

of the same opinion today, and he said he had, in part, lost faith in the Russian Communist Party. Then 

they asked him whether he thought the Russian government was a real Communistic government: (I 

want the House to get these words because I think they are significant) Mr. Strachy insisted on 

answering, but some of his advisors would have interrupted him, and he said: “The Russian government 

is not a Communistic government – I have no doubt that the Russians would say that themselves. It is a 

movement that has not progressed to Communism but is practicing Socialism.” 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

36 

That was Mr. Strachy, a Minister in the British Government! And you say you are just the same as they 

are. 

 

I have here a quotation by Sam Carr – I do not know whether my friends know who he is or not but he 

wrote this when he was the editor of a magazine called ‘National Affairs’. On page 172, September 

1994 issue, he said: “Thousands of Canadians, who in the past 25 years have devoted their lives to the 

creation in our country of a strong Marxist party – the Labour-Progressive party – born in the midst of a 

great war, was established by the founders of the Socialist doctrine. All the experience of its founders, 

many of them participants in hundreds of battled to ‘get’ capitalistic exploitation, pointed to the fact that 

only the eventual Socialist transformation of Canadian economy, and the abolition of all exploitation by 

man, can bring about a truly great and independent Canada. Without equivocation or nebulousness the 

first convention written in the L.P.P. program (get this): “The aim of the political movement of the 

working class is the establishment of a Socialist Canada, created as a class by the capitalist system itself; 

the most significant product of a capitalist society . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! It has been the custom of this House, and I have followed it, to allow a great 

deal of reading of extracts, but I think the hon. member will admit that he is, more or less, transgressing 

beyond the acknowledge conduct of the House. 

 

Mr. W. J. Patterson (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, what is the objection to the member 

reading an extract if he quotes his authority and the date? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I am not objecting to the hon. member reading extracts but to the voluminous extracts, 

without any speech at all. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — Is there any rule as to the extent that extracts may be read, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I can’t quote the rule, but it is the accepted procedure in any House that the reading of 

extracts shall not be carried to extremes. 

 

Mr. A. T. Procter (Moosomin): — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, I would point out to you that I sat 

in this House when Mr. Stork read extracts for nearly two hours and it was ruled admissible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Look what happened to him! 

 

Mr. Procter: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, he read, learned, and left the Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — As I say, I cannot quote any particular point of order but I think it would be conducive 

to better conduct in this House if we did confine it somewhat. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

37 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I have been sitting here for the last 10 days and listened to this Debate 

(speaking to the point of order), and I know that I have not transgressed the rule here, this afternoon, any 

more than have the other members. I am sure I talk a good deal more than I read. I haven’t very many, 

but with your indulgence, Mr. Speaker, I want to finish up in just a few minutes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I seems a long time. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I know you don’t like it, but I can’t help that. 

 

I have here something by John Strohm, who travelled through Russia for 4,000 miles. This article is 

copyrighted and this is what it said: “This brings us to Communism which those Soviet officials say 

flatly that they don’t have.” Yudin, one of the master-minds of political theory says it is this way: “The 

Soviet Union has Socialism, whose slogan is ‘to each according to his ability; to each according to his 

work.” In other words, you get paid for what you do, that is why an unskilled worker gets $24 a month 

while a socialist gets $700 a month plus a car and a house. We are just working this the direction of 

Communism,” said Yudin. “Under communism the slogan will be ‘each according to his ability;’ each 

according to his needs.” And he points out: “It will require a vast stockpile of goods, enough cars, 

beefsteak, and refrigerators for everyone. There is only one country in the world, today, with enough 

goods and productive capacity to become communistic over night, and that is the United States.” 

 

Now, that shows again that there is only one Socialism; and I think the clearest example of what this 

comes to is the fact that, in every country where Socialism has started, when the right time comes there 

is a hard core of ‘extreme’ incorporated into the Socialist party. In every place in Europe it has been 

proven. In Czechoslovakia, or any of those other countries, there was no majority there, but what 

happened? They got into power by getting Cabinet positions and control of the police; and who 

supported them? It was the Socialist party, Mr. Speaker; half of them went over to them, and that has 

been the history in every nation in Europe where this ideology was imposed. Law, order and the courts 

have been replaced with the concentration camps and the firing squad. Here is a list of the nations: 

Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, East Prussia, Poland, Albania, Hungary, Rumania, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria 

Czechoslovakia – and Finland is on the list, and many others. That is the pattern; and I say to you that 

the time is coming now when the people of Saskatchewan should awaken, because we have had a clear 

indication that there are members in this Government who are willing to take the attitude of supporting 

these things, which are not for the good of Canada. 

 

We have Ministers of this Government criticizing the actions of the United States and every other nation 

who has set themselves to keep out and push back the wave of socialism which is overrunning the 

countries of the old world. The Minister of Natural Resources spoke in British Columbia, on June 6, 

1945 . . . 

 

At this point the House took recess until 8 o’clock. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

38 

AFTER RECESS 

 

When I concluded my remarks at six o’clock I had endeavoured to show that Democracy and Socialism 

could not operate and work successfully together. I had also clearly established – in my mind, at least – 

that Socialism is the same thing whether it is in Russia, in Germany, in Great Britain, in Canada, or in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Does he seriously believe that the Socialism in Great Britain is the same as 

National Socialism in Germany? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, in one sense, Mr. Speaker. In the sense that it indicates in its demands, if it is 

going to work successfully, dictatorship is implied and the state itself becomes the master of every 

individual and his business and his life. There is no question about that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1946 in the House of Commons, Sir Stafford Cripps said: “No country in the world, so 

far as I know, has yet succeeded in carrying through a planned economy without compulsion of labour. 

Our objective is to try to carry through a planned economy without compulsion of labour.” 

 

Today – not ten years ago – 750,000 British subjects in Great Britain are subject to compulsory labour 

laws: and that is carried out today. Sir Stafford Cripps saw that back in 1944. They called it ’planned 

economy.’ What is ‘planned economy?’ Well, that is Socialism and it has never been done without 

compulsion. We have it in Saskatchewan today! We have it in Northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker! I 

heard, during the last day or two, from a man who is very vitally interested in the little remnant of what 

is left of ‘free enterprise’ in Northern Saskatchewan and that is the only solution to the fishing mess up 

there, today, is to eliminate the only free enterpriser in Northern Saskatchewan today, and that is the 

Waite Fisheries – that will be the next step. That is what faces you! There is no half-way to stop 

Socialism, it has to go all the way, there is no question in the world. 

 

Let us look at Saskatchewan at the present time. The people of the North who are fully socialized, and if 

there is anything left they will be in the near future, what are they going to do? Are they going to sit 

there and watch the Central part of Saskatchewan operate under a free capitalistic economy? Oh, no! 

they will say that you people down there helped us to get the ‘yoke’ on our necks, and you are not going 

to escape, we are going to see that you ‘take the medicine’ too. That is what the result will be; and you 

know it is going to be that way. 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

39 

The Federal member for Assiniboia made a speech on October 17, 1946, and he said: “It is becoming 

necessary to use more and more dictatorial measures in order to maintain the advance of our system by 

which we can build an order which will exist in complete harmony with Russia.” 

 

Hon. T. C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. The member for Assiniboia has 

officially denied ever having made such a statement. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He has not . . . 

 

Premier: — Mr. Speaker, I have the floor, I rise on a question of privilege . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He has no right to get up on a point of order and take exception to anything I have 

said. He is absolutely out of order on this point. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member rose to a point of privilege. Will you speak to your point please. 

 

Premier: — Mr. Speaker, the point of privilege was that my hon. friend has just quoted a statement 

which he has attributed to a member of Parliament from this province, said statement having been 

officially and categorically denied by said member; he having pointed out that at no time did he ever 

make such a statement, and claims to have been misquoted. My hon. friend ought to know that, if he 

doesn’t. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is not point of order at all. He has no right – he is out of order, Mr. Speaker. 

The fact remains that Mr. MacCullough has not denied this statement, and you know it. 

 

Premier: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. My hon. friend says ‘he has not denied it, and I know 

it.’ I know the opposite, I know that he has denied it because I was present when he officially made the 

denial in his own constituency. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat that he has never denied it; he has tried to place a different 

interpretation on it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member is out of order. By implication he is saying that the Premier is telling 

an untruth. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, I didn’t say so. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — But you did. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He expressed an opinion, and I am just as entitled to my opinion, Mr. Speaker, as he 

is. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

40 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Premier did not express an opinion; he took it on his own authority to make a 

statement. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order. On what authority did you permit a member of 

this House to take upon himself to make a statement for a member outside of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Premier rose on a point of privilege and takes the responsibility on his own 

shoulders. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, that does not nullify my statement. After all, I have no right to get up in this 

House and speak for anyone who is not in this House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has been doing nothing, all afternoon, except 

speaking for other people. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — This statement stands, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to quote the Premier, and he can deny this if he likes. He said on April 3, 1946, in the debate on 

The Automobile Insurance Bill: “We are into a fight with capitalism in which we will give no quarter 

and accept no quarter – we will not rest until capitalism is finally eradicated in this province, or until we 

are defeated.” 

 

Voice: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — My friends over there say ‘hear, hear!’. There are many people in the province who 

will be interested to know that, Mr. Speaker. They are admitting that this Government has a mission, and 

that is to drive all vestige of the present economic system out of this province. What is it going to be 

replaced with? Why, with Russian Socialism! The same as you have in Saskatchewan today. You can 

laugh all you like – I know you do not like to hear these things – but that is what you are going to 

replace it with. 

 

It is very interesting to follow the line, Mr. Speaker. We have a statement coming from Tim Buck; then 

it goes into the Manitoba legislature; then it comes into the Saskatchewan legislature, and then it goes 

some place else. And in a few days, the Labour-Progressive Party has a convention in this province (it 

all happens within 30 or 35 days), and they passed a resolution. The play was then taken by 

Reconstruction Minister J. H. Sturdy and Agricultural Minister I. C. Nollet in condemning the 

imperialistic trusts growing out of United States’ foreign policy. Where does it come from? Well, there 

is no need to ask that question; it is plain where it comes from. These fellows who associate with Tim 

Buck and his friends are ready with all these words of praise and glorification when they get someone 

inside what they call the Democratic Socialist Party. 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

41 

What a misnomer, Mr. Speaker! There is no such thing as a Democratic Socialist Party. There can’t be. 

It has been proven conclusively that there can’t be. All we have to do is see what is going on over in 

Czechoslovakia, in other nations of Europe, fourteen or fifteen of them, which are behind the ‘iron 

curtain’, where the concentration camp and the firing squad have replaced the courts of justice and the 

rights of democracy. The same thing follows every place – someday, the ‘iron curtain’ is gong to drop 

over this province of Saskatchewan. You bet it’s coming. 

 

What do we find in the province, insofar as the creeping paralysis of Socialism is concerned? We say 

that the northern part is socialized now. What is happening on the prairies? Well, Mr. Speaker, we have 

the old use-lease system in the province of Saskatchewan now, which was offered to the people in 1934. 

No one need ask any questions after listening to the Minister of Agriculture, a few days ago. He told us 

that all the troubles, all the sufferings, of the farming population in this province were due to one thing: 

to the fact that, in years gone by, farmers had title and equity in their own farms, and they could 

mortgage their land. Had they not been able to mortgage that land, they would have not had any 

mortgage to pay, and everything would have been lovely. That is one of the things that is very clear, 

today, and that, could with the fact that the Government is refusing to sell land and give title to land 

today, is a clear indication of what the trend is in Saskatchewan. 

 

Another thing, today in Saskatchewan, as I said, you have something which shows in which direction we 

are travelling. In Russia, after the first Great War, all the large estates were seized and they were divided 

up, and the returned man was placed in colonies, or in groups, here and there all over the Soviet Union, 

on collective farms, exactly the same as you have in Saskatchewan today. You really haven’t a 

co-operative farm set up any place by this Government; and the best proof you haven’t is the fact that no 

co-operative organization in the province (and I think if anyone should be an authority on this subject it 

is the largest co-operative organization in the province); they will tell you, quite frankly, that this is a 

collective farm. That is what they did in Soviet Russia; they placed these fellows in small groups here 

and there and, by 1941 or 1942, the whole nation was collectivized, as far as the farming industry of the 

country was concerned. They went one step at a time, and finally the step was taken which finished the 

plan and, as I said, ‘the yoke was on the peoples’ neck’ – they were divested of all ownership of the land 

and were fully collectivized, or socialized as we call it in Saskatchewan. We use a nicer word in order to 

fool the people, and the farmers, into giving their support. 

 

I have here the whole description of what took place in Russia – it is identical to the one followed in 

Saskatchewan. We have a collective farm at Matador, one at Carrot River, and here and there all over 

the province. They told the returned men that they were co-operative farms (which is not right, of 

course) and if they wanted to go into farming they would have to accept that particular type, or system, 

of farming – they had no other choice. You might say it is not compulsory, but, nevertheless, this 

direction of agriculture will continue for a few years if this Government should stay in power, which I 

am absolutely sure they won’t. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

42 

They may deny this, Mr. Speaker, but as early as 1944, maybe earlier than that, they had a school in the 

city of Saskatoon, with Mr. Colin Cameron of British Columbia as teacher, to teach the candidates and 

workers for the C.C.F. for the 1944 election. In the ‘C.C.F. News’ of Vancouver, January 27, 1944, he 

said this: “The first impression gained of our Saskatoon comrades, and one which was reinforced 

throughout the school, was their willingness to discuss any proposition objectively and quite without 

prejudice; with some trepidation on the criticism of the C.C.F. official position with regard to the place 

of the family farm, and suggested that such a position was an illogical one for Socialists to take and 

carry, and that, in actual practice, we should sooner or later have to accept the idea of collectivism in 

agriculture, and in other lines of production. The discussion that followed gave evidence of a great deal 

of thought on this matter among C.C.F. farmers in Saskatchewan, and the good humor and courtesy 

displayed between those of opposing views was an outstanding example of democracy in action. When a 

little opposition was voiced” (now don’t forge this, Mr. Speaker) “to the principle of collectivism, 

several members pointed out, quite rightly, the difficulty of presenting the idea acceptable to the 

majority of the farming population, and also the social and administrative problems involved.” 

 

You have the thing right there. As I said, it is in accord with the ‘Regina Manifesto’ – there is no 

question about that. The C.C.F. news of Vancouver also said this: “If socialism is to be the society 

tomorrow, the family farm will fail to meet the demands of society, and the farmer himself will realize 

that he is perpetuating an anti-social factor, accepting the benefits of social production and co-operation 

and every other part of the economy.” There you have it again – these are the official words of the man 

who formed the policy of this party; and it is denied, today, that they have any such ideas. 

 

There is one who was ever franker than the others (Mr. Bowerman) and he said in the House of 

Commons, Hansard, February 21, 1948, “We are driven to this conclusion” (this was during the Throne 

Speech Debate); “the only thing which will solve our present social and economic problems is absolute 

Christian socialization of the means of production and distribution of all the necessities of life.” Mr. 

Gordon Graydon, progressive-conservative, asked if that would include the farmer, and Bowerman 

replied that it would include everybody. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these things are not accidental. They show that there is a predominating sense and 

understanding, and a foundation laid for that. 

 

The Premier was speaking in Yorkton, I think it was, when he had that famous debate with the leader of 

the Liberal Party and he asked him about this, and the Premier said that the C.C.F. convention had not 

asked for nationalization of the land. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

43 

Premier: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. My hon. friend has taken in hand to quote me and 

quote me most inaccurately, he hasn’t even quoted from the press. I do not know whether he is carrying 

this in his head, but the only statement made by me on the nationalization of the land was: The C.C.F. 

policy was made by constituency, provincial and national conventions, and at those conventions the 

C.C.F. policy laid down was that that policy was opposed to the socialization, or nationalization, of land. 

That is the statement I made. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I do no know what the Premier said, but the press report has simply 

this plain statement: When Mr. Tucker asked him he said the C.C.F. convention had not yet asked for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will the hon. member read the quotation please? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I will accept his statement. If he says he didn’t say it, that is all right with me. But, 

nevertheless, there is no question in my mind, Mr. Speaker, hidden as it may be and held in the 

background to not worry anybody or rouse anything on the part of the people of this province, but in my 

opinion, (and I have a right to my opinion), the policy of nationalization of the farmlands of this 

province is in their minds and plans – the socialization of everything in the province of Saskatchewan; 

there is no question about that. When you have eradicated capitalism, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing left 

but another economy system which will not tolerate private ownership and private control of any 

property – that is the position. So I would say to you that the farmers of Saskatchewan should be very 

very careful. Now is the time for them to take stock of the situation and see what this thing is leading to, 

and I am sure that when the time of the election comes around they will act accordingly, and it will be 

the end of the C.C.F. land policy in this province. 

 

Well, I am not going to keep the House very much longer, but I just want to say a few words more in 

regard to the Budget, and the tax that this fourth Budget, presented by this Government, has had on the 

farmer of Saskatchewan. There is not a farmer today (regardless of what the Premier or the Provincial 

Treasurer says; if you listen to them, it is remarkable; there must be some mysterious method not known 

to anybody else except this Government), who is not paying more taxes. The Premier said – when he 

spoke in the House, two or three days ago – that the taxes paid on gasoline were less than they were 

before he came into power. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Gasoline Tax in this province has been increased 43 

per cent: it was seven cents, it is ten now. A boy with a motorcycle used to spend $6 a year (paid to the 

Government), but today he pays $21 – I wonder if he thinks he isn’t paying any more tax. 

 

What about the compulsory Automobile Insurance? There are thousands and thousands of farmers in 

this province who are compelled to pay that tax. It gives him no benefit and he would never take it out 

otherwise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — You are compelled to make your P.F.A.A. payments too, aren’t you? 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

44 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, but we get the benefit. There is a difference there, and I want to point it out. 

This is a Government where you pay in and get nothing back – just like the fishermen; one got one cent 

and another got nothing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — They seem to like it in Long Lake, anyway. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — So far as the taxes are concerned, what about the farmer who drove his truck for 10 

per year and today is paying $45 and $50 per year? Doesn’t he pay any more taxes? What about the 

farmer – thousands of them – who have notices from the Minister of Natural Resources telling them that 

if they do no pay up a certain amount of money, on April 31, they will lose all their mineral rights to the 

Crown. Isn’t that taxes? What about the man who pays three times as much school tax? The most part of 

it (not altogether, I am going to be fair in this) is used directly for the policies of the Government. 

Doesn’t he pay any more taxes? These clever men with figures cannot make a farmer believe something 

when he has to dig down in his pockets and give the money to the Government – he knows he is paying 

more taxes. All the smoothness of talk is not going to help this Government when the time comes. 

 

I could stand here for an hour and mention that there isn’t a solitary thing – not a licence, or fee, or 

permit necessary in Saskatchewan today, that hasn’t been doubled and trebled, to what they were before. 

And they have the audacity to sit here and tell the farmers, and the members of this House, that a man 

who pays ten cents a gallon today, and paid seven cents four years ago, isn’t paying any more taxes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — What about the Ottawa Government? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am glad you mentioned that. When the Ottawa Government placed three cents on 

farm gas, they came through with a subsidy on crude oil, which meant six cents to us on the refined 

product. The farmers of Western Manitoba, all of Saskatchewan, and Alberta, all benefited three cents a 

gallon more than he paid in taxes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Why did they take it off then? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It was taken off when the war was over. Then you weren’t satisfied; you were greedy 

enough to slip in there and take it up, and soak it out of the farmer. You did it, not the Dominion 

Government, and the hon. gentleman knows that what I am telling him is the truth. The Premier stands 

there and tells us they do not pay any more. Well, it is a remarkable system of striking a balance this 

Government has. I am afraid it is exactly the same as the Provincial Treasurer’s reduction of debt which 

we dealt with this afternoon. So far as taxes are concerned, the farmers, every man and woman in 

Saskatchewan, and individual in Canada, has reached that decision regarding this socialistic 

Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not think I need to say to you that I am going to oppose this Motion. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

45 

Mr. A. W. Embury (Area 2, Mediterranean): — Mr. Speaker, the rule in this House seems to be quite 

hard and fast in this Debate that a member should start off by congratulating somebody on their speech, 

and it is a very nice thing to be able to do. As the hon. Premier has said in his speech on this Debate, 

everybody, so far, on his side of the House anyway, and even some on this side of the House too, have 

congratulated the Provincial Treasurer on his Budget Speech; and that remark of the Premier is one of 

the few accurate statements that the hon. Premier made during the course of his observations. I may say, 

Sir, that I agree with because I take it that it includes the Provincial Treasurer who did nothing if he did 

not congratulate himself. 

 

A humble solider, Sir, coming into this House, to see and hear . . . 

 

Government Members: — Humble! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! 

 

Mr. Embury: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I was wondering when your honour was going to call for some 

order. During the speech which my hon. friend from Arm River made a short while ago, when so many 

of the hon. gentlemen yonder were interrupting him – out of order – and persisted in doing so for 

something like an hour before dinner, and after dinner, this evening, it is interesting indeed to see your 

honour take the part of the speaker for the time being. 

 

As I was saying, a humble solider coming into this House to see and hear all this political ammunition 

being expended and fired off in all directions, can consider himself very lucky indeed, so far, to have not 

been hit by some of them; and, in this Debate, apart from what the hon. member for Swift Current was 

inspired to say, yesterday, I have, so far, escaped unscathed, I believe. That is only by reason of the fact, 

I suspect, that I have not spoken yet. Any citric of the Government immediately becomes the target for 

some of the more bitter and aggressive Socialist agitators who swarm on the benches yonder. I have said 

that the people on that side of the House have ventured to suggest that the people on this side of the 

House have some personal motive, or some political motive, for their criticisms, and I think it is also fair 

to say that the people on this side have accused the people on the other side of the same thing. It has all 

been very enjoyable to us, who have not been in the direct line of fire, so far, to see this conflict go on. 

But recently, the debates in this House have made it appear that it has become rather a ‘tough league’ to 

serve in, in the last couple of days; and I may say that my first impression of that came from the hon. 

Premier, when he was speaking in the House, on Tuesday of this week, on this Budget Debate. 

 

Like the hon. member for Moosomin (Mr. A. T. Procter), Sir, I do not want to repeat any of the technical 

criticisms of the Budget, that the hon. Leader of the Opposition has so ably made, and presented to the 

House on the Monday after the Budget was brought down by the Provincial Treasurer. Certainly there is 

nothing that I could add to the technical criticisms of that speech which would add to the knowledge of 

the House, but I do wish to say that I associate myself with the hon. Leader of the Opposition in his 

criticisms of this Budget, and I do congratulate him upon his effort to bring to the knowledge of the 

House, and to all those 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

46 

within the sound of his voice, something of the issues which are involved in the Budget before us. 

 

Premier: — ‘Barkis is willing!’ 

 

Mr. Embury: — I see the hon. gentlemen are going out of order again, Sir, and I must say that I have 

every sympathy with you in your endeavour to keep order in this House, when the members act as they 

do when a critic of the Government is attempting to give voice to such things as he may have, however 

honestly, felt. I think that there was a good example, Sir, of the difficulty which you must have by the 

interruptions and lack of order which the hon. member for Arm River has had to put up with during his 

talk today. However, these hon. champions to the rights of free speech yonder, may pride themselves, I 

hope, in having effectively disrupted the more effective parts of his criticisms so as to negative them as 

much as possible. 

 

I was interested very much in the hon. Premier’s reply to the criticisms made by the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition – a very diverting reply it was. He still seems to be under the impression, in spite of all 

anybody can try and do to tell him otherwise, that the criticisms of the Budget could be summed up in 

the title of the song, ‘You can’t have her, I don’t want her, she’s too fat for me.’ That is the way he takes 

it, and that is diverting enough. As a matter of fact, a budget of this size, brought down by any 

government, which was not dedicated to the task of eradicating capitalism from Saskatchewan, would 

not cause very much anxiety because, for the time being at least, the revenues are there; but when a 

Socialist government, which had dislocated so much of our industry in Saskatchewan, brings down so 

large a Budget, and on top of that proposes to administer the expenditure of millions more, outside the 

Budget, at the whim of a group of ‘back-room boys’, and experts under the Government Finance 

Corporation – I think they call it – the problem is not so much one of size but becomes a question of 

intention. I think, Sir, that a better song title would be ‘Don’t fence me in,’ because that expresses the 

fervent prayer of all the free and enterprising people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It was that fear, or anxiety, that impelled me to take a stand against this Government, last year. I may 

say, quite frankly to the House, that had there been no substantial grounds to believe that such was the 

Government’s intention, I would have been supporting the Government to this day, as I did for two 

years after I came home from overseas. Make no mistake about it, Sir – I know that the hon. gentlemen 

like to interfere, and make interjecting remarks, to try and take the speaker from the train of his 

thoughts, and for the purpose of interfering with what he has to say, but I say this, and I know it to be 

true, that I know veterans and soldiers much better than most of the members in this House, particularly 

insofar as World War II is concerned. Very few indeed of the members of this House were overseas in 

World War II – most of them, like the hon. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

47 

Premier and the hon. Provincial Treasurer, and others, were back home in Saskatchewan plotting the 

campaign for Socialist triumph while their betters were fighting abroad for the security and safety of this 

House. And I say this to the hon. gentleman, that I do not feel I have to take second place to him in 

expressing what I know to be the views of the men, when I say that when the men were overseas (and 

you can take this for what it is worth – it is an entire and frank statement) they held no brief for the 

Liberal Party, they hold no brief for the Tory Party – as a matter of fact, they held no brief for any 

political party. It is equally true, Sir, that if the opinion, on a political question, of the men were taken 

when they were overseas in 1945 upon any political party, I would say that the hon. Premier’s party, and 

the party in office in this province at the moment, would have had the support of the men to the tune of 

two out of three votes. I think that is true – when they were overseas; and, furthermore, I was one of 

them. I do not say I would have voted for them, but I had every sympathy for them. I did not realize, and 

neither did they, from where we sat abroad in foreign lands (which most of you don’t know anything 

about), that this Government was dominated by a group of implacable and uncompromising Socialists. 

They were a group who have demonstrated quite clearly that they are determined to organize and 

establish, and control, all our established institutions, and all of our resources, so that they could be 

controlled under the dictatorship of a totalitarian political philosophy of Socialism. That is a very serious 

matter – it may not seem so to you people who laugh and think that this matter is not one which the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan should consider very closely, and the implications which it 

holds for us in the future, with the examples we have before us in foreign countries of all kinds. 

 

I do not suggest lack of good faith among the gentlemen opposite, but I do suggest lack of 

understanding. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Oh! 

 

Mr. Embury: — Well, I know, my friend the hon. Minister of Agriculture, who has made his 

pro-Russian speeches in the House before now, likes to guffaw and interject; but I say, of all the 

members on the benches yonder, he is the typical example of them all, who has done more to expose the 

intentions of this Government than any man in the Cabinet. The wonder is that his colleagues are 

prepared to sit with him. I would suggest that a great many members of this House do not realize yet the 

full extent of what this Government is planning. 

 

I am going to attempt – and I realize it is rather a hopeless task, as several speakers on this side of the 

House have tried to do so – to try and tell you how I reached that conclusion, having come here with an 

absolutely open mind on the subject, and prepared to string along with these people if it was possible to 

do so; and the House knows it – I sat here for two years listening to them. I am going to try and tell you 

how I reached that conclusion and, in doing so, I do not want you to think that any one point that I am 

going 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

48 

to make to you tonight, by itself, persuaded me; but taken collectively and progressively, over the years, 

it is not possible for any reasonable man to come to any other conclusion. Believe me – and when I say 

this I know that I speak with a wider knowledge of the veterans than any one of the caucus-bound 

utensils of the Socialist plan in this House – know my veterans far better than they do, because I had an 

opportunity to serve with them, and further . . . Oh yes, the hon. champions of the right of free speech 

over there would like to interrupt . . . insofar as the Socialist Party in this province obtained the support 

of the armed services vote in the last election (they were called the Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation – there was nothing Socialist in the title; we were a long way from home and didn’t realize 

what they were up to), they got it under false pretenses. Like most of the men in this province, in the bad 

years of the depression, in my twenties, I did not give much thought to the rise of Socialism in 

Saskatchewan. Very few of us who served in the armed forces realized that our Socialists had been 

launched upon an instrument so dear to the hearts of Socialists all over the world, upon a document 

called ‘a manifesto’ (nobody but a Socialist would use the thing). Very few of us realized that our 

socialists carry on their politics in a manner so dear to the heart of the Socialists in Russia, and all over 

the world, on a ‘party card’ system – you don’t find people in democratic politics worrying about a 

‘party card’ in Canada, until the Socialists arrived, copying their friends who love Karl Marx. 

 

Very few of us realized what the implications of that plan was and, to be quite frank with you, I didn’t at 

all; but when I came home and took an opportunity to read this so-called ‘Manifesto’, this formidable 

document put out by Cominforms and Comintens and CCFers, and Socialists, wherever you find them 

all over the world, and I started to consider the implications of a ‘party card’ system of politics. I must 

confess that I felt a few early misgivings about our Socialists although I did not think of them as being 

Communists at that time, because they hadn’t started to republish Communistic literature at the public 

expenses when I first came home. They hadn’t been here long enough – they did that later. I did think 

that one should watch out and see the possible ramifications involved in the legislation that they brought 

down. The first bitterly contested Bill, or Amendment, that I heard in this House was brought down in 

the Second Session of 1944, but there were some Amendments brought down to it in 1945, which was 

my first Session in the House and I listened to the debates and took no part in it. The principal objection 

made by the gentlemen to my right was that the Minister, under that Bill (I think they were referring to 

the Bill passed in the Special Session of 1944), had the power to compel any number of School Boards 

to come under the Act, whether the people in the area wanted to come under it or not. 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

49 

That is a fair way of expressing the objections which were made to that Bill. Furthermore, I heard my 

hon. friend for Moosomin (Mr. A. T. Procter), who objected very much to Sec. 77 (1) of the Bill, under 

which the Minister could appoint a supervisor under the Act and give him any duties which he saw fit. 

Using that Act the Minister could pretty well dominate the schools in the province. 

 

Hon. W. S. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Would the hon. gentleman permit a question? Would he 

repeat what he said about the powers given to the Minister under Sec. 77. I think he is speaking without 

knowledge whereof he speaks as there is no such section. 

 

Mr. Embury: — I have read the Act and I daresay the Minister has also, and he knows that he could 

appoint a supervisor or superintendent. I will read Sec. 77 (1) Using that Act . . . I haven’t the Act before 

me but I have read it . . . 

 

Inaudible interruption . . . 

 

Premier: — You’d better get the fellow who wrote the speech. 

 

Mr. Embury: — These champions of free speech do not like to have a point made against them – they 

hate it! I assure you that nothing gives me more pleasure than to show them up, and to bring out, point 

by point, the Socialist plan whereby they hope to gain control of education in the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Will the hon. gentleman permit a question? 

 

Mr. Embury: — No. I would like to tell the Minister of Education that when I have finished saying 

what I have to say he can ask me a question. 

 

Mr. H. O. Hansen (Wilkie): — I wish you were on the air. 

 

Mr. Embury: — Well, we are not on the air so we will be all right, won’t we? 

 

The criticisms made by my hon. friends of the Liberal Party in this House were – and I think the hon. 

Minister will have to agree that they were – right, in using that Act the Minister pretty well dominated 

the schools in the province, and the teachers too. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

50 

I quite agree that the Minister of Education, before that time, had a very considerable measure of 

control. I think there was an extension of his power over the schools and also that it was more 

widespread and direct; and that the planning for the schools was done at a higher level than previously. I 

think that is a fair statement of the criticisms which were made, and a fairminded critic reading the 

legislation, at that time, would agree with me. 

 

As I have said, when I was interrupted by the gentleman trying to ask me a question about something or 

other . . . 

 

Premier: — Which you would not answer. 

 

Mr. Embury: — I will answer it. You will get a chance to ask it all right, but I do not propose to be 

interrupted. 

 

. . . he could compel the rural populations to accept larger schools and, generally, could plan from 

Regina. 

 

People who worry about Socialism, as I do, and a great many honest critics of this Government do, (I 

know you are most intolerant to critics who are quite as honest and sincere as any of you), they find that 

when a Socialist interests himself in high-level planning of education that it is a matter for some 

concern. I suggest to you that it was a significant thing, and I am going to tell you why. The hon. 

Minister of Education at that time, I remember quite well, justified the measure by a lot of talk about the 

teachers’ low salaries, and poor school facilities, and the fact that the teachers and the children were 

suffering – that they were not getting the attention they wanted which, of course, the House, on both 

sides, desired that they should have. But all of the improvements which the Minster of educations said 

he was designing, by legislation, could have been simply met by increasing the grants to the schools 

they started, and by assisting the school boards to pay larger salaries – there was no reason for a Larger 

School Unit to effect any of the improvements which the hon. Minster said he was endeavouring to 

make. As a matter of fact, if this Government had put as much money into the schools, and into the 

improvement of the schools, and the increasing of the teachers’ salaries, and the provision of libraries 

and all the rest of it, that it has put into wool factories and shoe factories and bus lines, and heaven alone 

knows from one day to the next what else, then we would have been getting better value for our money. 

 

Furthermore, if this Government had done that they would have been doing something which was this 

Government’s business, and they would not have been doing what was none of this Government’s 

business at all. 

 

We have heard a lot from the Socialists about their altruistic ambitions with respect to improving the lot 

of the school children, and the teachers. Everybody recognizes the problem which this country, with its 

enormous spaces and sparsely-settled population and rigorous climate, has had to face with regard to 

providing adequate facilities for school children in the rural areas. But the people who live out there 

know more about it than the hon. Minster who sits here in Regina. Give them some money and they will 

manage all right; but do not waste the money. That is the point. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

51 

Today, Sir, as a result of the Government’s policy in this regard, I have heard it said very widely, and I 

am sure that the hon. Minster has too, that municipal school taxes have risen tremendously. (I do not 

hear any of them rise to quarrel with that statement.) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — I will, if the hon. gentlemen will permit me. 

 

Mr. Embury: — Do you deny that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — I deny it as a general statement. There are many areas in which municipal taxes 

have gone down considerably. 

 

Mr. Embury: — I wonder where they are: perhaps he will tell me some day. 

 

I say this to you, and I am quite sure, that if the hon. Minister insists to the public of Saskatchewan today 

that the school taxes have not gone up there would be very few people who would agree with him. I give 

you that as my opinion whether it is yours or not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, may I make my position clear on a point of privilege? 

 

Mr. Embury: — Has he a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Premier: — The Speaker will determine that, not you. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — State your point of privilege. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — My statement, which I made in reply to the hon. member’s challenge was: that 

there are many areas in the province in which school taxes are not increased, and there are others in 

which, though they are increased, they are not increased because of the Larger Unit. 

 

Mr. Embury: — A very interesting point of privilege. I suppose he is going to be allowed throughout 

my remarks to get up and make a speech in the middle of mine under the guise that it is a point of 

privilege. But that was not a point of privilege, I suggest to you, Sir. However, in reply to it may I say 

this, if I am allowed to proceed further without the champions of free speech yonder . . . 

 

Premier: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. My hon. friend has frequently complained about 

people interrupting him. He challenged the Minister of Education, and said ‘no one opposite has 

objected to that’, and challenged him to reply. 

 

Mr. Embury: — Did I use the word ‘challenge’. 

 

Premier: — And he said no one opposite . . . 

 

Mr. Embury: — Order, Sir. Has he a point of privilege? 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

52 

Premier: — Mr. Speaker, I am pointing out to your honour that if my hon. friend is being interrupted it 

is because he invited interruption, and because he took silence as meaning general consent, and it left the 

Minister, or some other member of the House, no alternative but to rise. My hon. friend should not keep 

crying then, like a little boy running home and complaining. 

 

Mr. Embury: — Well, let me know when I can go on. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If the hon. member will leave the conduct of this Chamber to me I will try to do it. 

 

Mr. Embury: — Well, I hope you will . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Without your instructions. 

 

Mr. Embury: — Well, I do hope you will, Sir, because, if I may suggest it, it is very difficult for critics 

of the Government to get their fair criticisms spoken in this Chamber. As an example, as the hon. 

Premier said a moment ago, he was supposed to have a point of privilege, but he had no point of 

privilege; he just wanted to get up and make a speech. 

 

Premier: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly have a point of privilege now. My hon. friend is imputing motives. 

I had a point of privilege. I objected to an hon. member casting reflections on the other members of this 

House. I objected, as leader of the Government . . . 

 

Mr. Embury: — That is not a point. 

 

Premier: — My hon. friend does not know the first thing about parliamentary procedure – he probably 

learned most of it in a law school, and they teach no parliamentary procedure at all. 

 

As the leader of the Government I am charged with defending the personal rights and privileges of the 

members of this House, and drawing . . . 

 

Mr. Embury: — Has he a point of privilege, Sir. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes. 

 

Premier: — I am seeking to point out, Sir, that no honourable member can cast aspersions on members 

for interrupting him when he himself has invited them to interrupt him if they do not agree with him. 

 

Mr. W. J. Patterson (Cannington): — Do you rule, Sir, that that is a point of privilege? 

 

Premier: — It is not a point of personal privilege, it is a point of general privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member did invite the question. The hon. member directed a question to the 

hon. Minister of Education. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

53 

Mr. Embury: — No, I did not, Sir. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Then I did not understand it. 

 

Mr. Embury: — May I go on now? I do hope you will be able to keep order. I suggest that any lack of 

order in this place is through no fault of mine. As a matter of fact, you know they always throw sticks at 

the fellow who is making criticism of them. One always finds if you are making any sort of a criticism 

that is ‘getting home’, they all start throwing sticks at you. But the best apples are found under the tree 

with the most sticks under it, and I am quite sure that I do not mind in the least being interrupted, 

because when I do manage to get that reaction from them I know I am starting to get somewhere. 

 

Well, here we go again! There’s the ‘orderly’ man over there – the man who loves order; the man with 

the loud laugh. 

 

Now, Sir, if I may return to the general tenor of my remarks before I was interrupted by at least two 

Cabinet Ministers, including the Premier, – I am quite flattered to have them jumping up and down like 

that and trying to stop me from what I am trying to say – but the point I was trying to make, Sir, was 

this: it was not necessary to impose a Larger School Unit to do the things for education that the 

Socialists say they were trying to do. It was not necessary to do that. We all wanted these matters 

improved, and by reason of our more buoyant revenue’s we are in a position to do something about it. 

All you have to do is pay. I suggest, in bringing that in, and I must say I agree with the hon. Leader of 

the Opposition and his colleagues, that they did not really want to help education when they did that; 

what they really wanted to do was control the situation. 

 

Stemming from that, in the very early days of 1945, this high-level planning, we soon heard, was 

replaced by the text-books being used, and an attempt being made to convert the adolescent mind to 

Socialism and discontent. You all recall the criticism of the Government that were made at that time 

and, in particular, they criticized the texts being used, ‘The World of Today’. That came under 

discussion, and it was alleged (and I may say that I agree with the allegations) that that text was 

calculated to achieve the end of warping the adolescent mind in the schools; and it is exactly what you 

would expect persons who were bent on the imposition of totalitarian Socialism upon any population to 

try and do. 

 

It was in 1945 and 1946 that we found the Minister of Education circulating his pro forma to obtain 

information about the children, and about their homes, so that the Minister could help them – so he said. 

And I put this to you, Sir, in all fairness – I am the parent of two children myself, and there are quite a 

few like me – that the Minister is a Socialist, and Socialists in other lands have done far too much to 

warp the minds of the children for me to view any activities of any Socialist in this country with any sort 

of equanimity – and I object to it, and with me are vast sections of the public. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

54 

In 1944, Sir, they brought down the first Trade Union Act, and, since then . . . the hon. gentlemen say 

‘here, hear’. The hon. gentleman for North Battleford (Mr. A. D. Connon) gave me some fatherly advice 

the other day – very poor fatherly advice it was too – he likes to repeat telephone conversations of 

people who ‘phone him up’. I wish I could tell you some of the conversations I have had although they 

haven’t mentioned you. 

 

However, there was a great fanfare of Socialist agitation, along with the introduction of the Bill, and 

some of the Amendments, which the House will remember, about the brutality of the police in Regina, 

and the Regina and Estevan riots and something in Saskatoon. The hon. Minister of Labour really 

excelled himself one night the way he talked about the brutal, vicious, illegal murder of a man called 

McNair. 

 

Hon. C. C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — I did not . . . 

 

Mr. Embury: — Oh, didn’t you? Well, the gentleman not only did it, Sir, but he rose in the House 

shortly after to say he did not. We had an hon. gentleman, that night, who first of all did it – and we all 

heard him – and then goes on to say he didn’t, and now I suppose he expects the public to have 

confidence in him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. This is a question of ‘threshing straw’ 

which is a year old. The manager of this particular railroad, Mr. McNair . . . 

 

Mr. Embury: — Sir, has he a point of privilege? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — . . . by his own gangsters, I might say. And I would like to say further . . . 

 

Mr. Embury: — I object. Order! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Embury: — Are we all right now, Sir? I hope we are because, you know, like most Socialist 

agitators they always jump up in the middle of another fellow’s speech, and you can’t stop them. They 

just make a noise; that is all they have to do. 

 

However, I am talking about the amendments to the first Trade Union Act, and the amendments which 

were introduced afterwards. We had this wonderful Socialist agitation accompanying it from the 

Minister – he talked about the murder of McNair, and I think his actual words were that not many 

laboring men would be sorry that that happened. If you will recall, those were his exact words – I 

remember writing them down when he said them, and I accused him of condoning a wicked murder at 

the time. He got up and said he didn’t, at that time. Well, your honour was good enough to rule that I 

had to withdraw the word ‘applaud’ so I do not use it tonight; but I did not have to withdraw the word 

‘condone’. But, anyway, he said he didn’t; but the whole House heard him. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

55 

We had a Minister who not only condoned it but then got up and said he didn’t, when the whole House 

heard him, and how anyone could have any confidence in him I do not know. 

 

But couched in the first Trade Union Act was a first attempt to give a provincial board, appointed by this 

Legislature, the powers, indeed, of a Court of King’s Bench, to decide matters – contentious matters and 

almost litigious matters, between subject and subject. It was not a matter of administration, Sir. It was a 

matter of deciding contentious issues which is very different indeed, and, as a matter of fact, if any of 

you are interested you could read the learned judgment of the Chief Justice of this province in defining 

responsibilities of government boards in that behalf. But this set of Socialists tried to give powers to a 

provincially-appointed board to decide contentious matters, and then to give their decision, and to give 

their personnel, or chairman, the power of a court of the land. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — They have done a good job of it too. 

 

Mr. Embury: — Yes? Oh, well, that is a matter of opinion. It might look all right to the hon. Minster, 

but it does not look all right to anyone who has to come before them, and I will tell you why, Sir. 

 

It was never the intention of this Legislature, I am quite sure, that the administration of that Board 

should be biased. It was the intention of the hon. members, when they debated this Bill, that the Board 

would function within the four corners of its statutes, impartially. I am sure we all intended that. But this 

Board went forward into its duties, and in the Speers’ case, which anyone can read if they want to, were 

found to be biased in their administration. They were not only found to be biased in their administration 

by the courts – the courts were entirely right – but they were found to be biased by a great many other 

people who had the misfortune to appear before them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — Can you prove that? 

 

Mr. Embury: — Yes. I can produce you the judgment in the Speers’ case, and which you should have 

read if you were on your job, which I do not suppose you were. In any event, right in that judgment was 

the finding that that gentleman’s board was biased, and it was not only found to be biased by the courts, 

it was found to be biased by a great many other people who had the misfortune to appear before it – and 

I do not overstate the case when I say that. But that is not all. Counsel for that same board came before 

our courts, in the fullness of time, and pleaded for them to be biased! I suggest to you, Sir, that when it 

comes to deciding the issues which must be decided between subject and subject throughout this 

country, no matter who its rulers are, that a bias should be farthest from the mind of any 

judicially-minded person. The hon. Minister is not a judicially-minded person, I suggest to you – he 

does not know what fairness is, and he does not know how wicked a bias can be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — On a point of privilege. The hon. member said I do not know what fairness is. I 

take exception to that, and I would ask him to withdraw it. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

56 

Mr. Embury: — I will withdraw it. But, in any event, his board was found to be biased by the courts – 

it was still composed of the same people, still had the same notorious complexion, there was no change; 

but then nobody but a Socialist would dream of such a thing. That is the essence of Socialism with a 

vengeance. 

 

These so-called Democratic Socialists first turned their attention to The Election Act in 1945 – it has 

been quite interesting what they have done to that. They reduced the voting age to 18 years, and I, 

personally, and others with me, considered that in the light of what we knew, and suspected, of their 

reported attempts to bring politics into the schools, particularly the high-schools, and that text, which I 

have mentioned. Talk about education; you know the adults were not left alone either. We had the Adult 

Education, which had previously been administered under the University, in a much lesser degree than 

the Socialists started in on it, but they brought I under the administration of the Minister of Education, I 

think, in 1945. Under the heading of ‘Adult Education’, they retained a man who is quite widely known 

as a Communist, a man by the name of Watson Thompson – they had to let him go a little while later 

because he got too hot for them – and they employed that man to put out a sheet called ‘The Living 

Newspaper’ – they put it out every two weeks or so, and I used to read it – and it is my opinion that it 

contained the straight Communist ‘party line’, which is just what one would expect from a man like 

Watson Thompson. 

 

At about the same time, Sir, a Mr. Dyson Carter . . . I am telling you why I would not have anything to 

do with this Government; I am telling you why you forced me, and every man like me, away from you 

in this province . . . but Mr. Dyson Carter (oh, yes, the hon. gentlemen think this is worth while, but that 

man is an acknowledge Communist). What pride can you take in your Government, spending your 

money, publishing the literature of an acknowledged Communist in the Dominion of Canada, the 

Province of Saskatchewan, or anywhere else, as a public venture? Do you think that is funny? Do you 

think that is worthwhile? You do, eh? 

 

Premier: — Mr. Speaker, Is it not customary to address the Chair? 

 

Mr. Embury: — If you do, for my part, let me say that there are very few people who go with you 

along those lines. Very, very few people will endorse you when you did that, and you have yet to give 

an explanation of it. 

 

Premier: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I suppose. The hon. gentleman does not like me to pursue 

this. He has been accused of it about four times across the floor of this House – he has spoken for hours, 

and most divertingly, but he has never once tried to justify, or explain to us, or any of the public, why it 

was that he, under his Minister of Education, should undertake the task of publishing Communist 

literature at public expense, and mailing it out, and we paid the postage. 

 

Premier: — I could give you the explanation, but I could not give you the power to understand it. 

 

Mr. Embury: — I do not suppose you could. I would like to give the hon. Premier a little power of 

understanding because . . . 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

57 

Premier: — Don’t bother, you cannot spare any. 

 

Mr. Embury: — Mr. Speaker, you were supposed to keep order in this place. If the hon. Premier will be 

patient, and silent, I will try to do my best for him and tell him how much I, and the public, resent a 

Government activity of that sort. He thinks it is funny – it is not funny, it is a very serious matter indeed. 

It may be funny to him, Sir, but it is not funny to anyone else. 

 

Premier: — Do not speak for the public. 

 

Mr. Embury: — This is what they did: they took this man, and paid him, and printed his stuff and put it 

out. That was not all; that is only part of it, and people should study it. In 1945, the Government brought 

down The Crown Corporations Act, which we criticized on all sides. It enabled a designated member of 

the Executive Council to buy shares in any company, and the Lieutenant Governor in Council, to go into 

any business that the Lieutenant Governor in Council thought proper. I think, although I am not sure, 

that their commercial activities are so complex and so numerous was the Bill under which they went into 

a number of industries, including the Fish Board, and one thing and another. That may not be the one, 

but I am sure they were into some industries before they had any statutory authority at all, but I think 

that is the one they attempt to justify it under. Actually, I doubt if there are very many men in the House 

who know just which Statue it is under which the Government is carrying on these very widespread 

industries now – I doubt whether the hon. Minister does – I know one Minister carrying on activities 

who didn’t seem to know what he was doing. We will come to that next maybe; but I would love to have 

a debate about it. 

 

Under this Bill the various industries were set up, and I can assure you that it was a matter for study for 

any person trying to keep an open mind in their view of what this Government was doing. The hon. 

gentlemen here do not realize that it took some time for the people to get wise to this Government. It 

certainly took me a little while, anyway. 

 

I think the next highlight of their efforts was the Bill to attack the insurance business. It was quite clear 

from that Bill to anyone who read it and knew the insurance business, that the Government intended to 

dislocate that whole trade, and having decimated it to take most of it over by compulsory measures, or 

otherwise. They have, indeed, by 1948 gone a great distance to accomplish that very thing. It was on the 

debate arising from that Bill – I think it took place on April 3, 1946, that the hon. Premier made his now 

famous declaration ‘we will not rest until capitalism has been eradicated from Saskatchewan’, and he 

could not have made it against a better background than the proposals contained in that Bill. Of course, 

he was only quoting from his ‘manifesto’ that he loves so much, when he made that statement. 

 

During the year 1946, Sir, we had the spectacle of the notorious Shumiatcher – who is holding up the 

wall over there – a present occupant of the Lieutenant-Governor’s office and premises, in this very 

building, appearing before the People’s Forum in Regina, in December, and advocating Article 12, 

sub-paragraph (20) of the Constitution of the United States of Soviet Russia for the edification of his 

audience on that occasion. I think he used the word ‘need’ for local consumption, but broadly, and 

generally, the principle was just the same. 

 



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

58 

This fellow is on the Government payroll, Sir, and I must say that it was an interesting thing for the 

people to see the Premier’s neighbour from the Legislative Buildings go down and interest himself in 

persuading members of the Regina public to embrace these extreme and extraordinary views. You 

people may like that sort of thing, but I tell you that if you do you are in the minority. 

 

Voice: — We like it. 

 

Mr. Embury: — Up in Morse they may like it – or whoever it was made that interjection over there. 

They may like it up there, but they do not like it here, and they never will. They will like it less if it is 

ever foisted on them. 

 

In the consolidation of The Rural Municipalities Act of 1946, they were discovered (although I do not 

recall any debate having been directed toward it prior to that time, whether it was the Minister’s fault or 

what, I do not know) to have included Section 198, which was designed to encourage the contribution 

and membership of all ratepayer farmers in the rural districts, in the United Farmers of Canada. And you 

will recall that during 1945, 1946, 1947, that organization attempted to organize strikes at the harvest 

time. That provision in Section 198 was very highly criticized, I think you will agree, and the purpose of 

it was that any 25 ratepayers, as I understand it . . . 

 

Hon. J. H. Brockelbank (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — That is not correct. 

 

Mr. Embury: — As it stood in 1946 I believe it is correct. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No. 

 

Mr. Embury: — Well, I stand corrected; but it seems to me – I do not want to be unfair and misquote 

the thing – that Section 198, as it stood in 1946, as consolidated, provided that any 25 ratepayers could 

bring it in by a petition signed by 25 of them, and then all of the rest of the ratepayers would become 

members of the United Farmers of Canada, if the council made the payment provided for in the Section 

– $200. It is not compulsory there; but if they did, then the ratepayers would become members. But the 

intriguing thing about it, Sir, is that a petition of 25 members could put this thing in, if the council paid 

the $200, then all the ratepayers became members of the United Farmers of Canada; but the point I am 

seeking to make is this (and I suppose the hon. gentleman will say I am wrong again, although I just read 

the Section – if I am wrong I will be happy to be corrected) that it took 40 per cent of all the ratepayers 

to get out again. That was the difference. That is where the people complained. The point is that they 

weighted the thing in favour of an organization of all the ratepayer farmers out in the country. 

 

Now, while all these things were going forward the Government was observed, widely observed, that 

they were absolutely tireless in their efforts to Socialize the co-operatives and the trade-unions, and they 

did this by heaving Government expenditures for propaganda purposes. They bought a printing press. 

They even tried to get into radio, so I am told, although that time they didn’t make it. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

59 

It was during the Session of 1946 that the Socialists amended The City Act, and they thereby changed 

the constitution of the Board of Police Commissioners so that the District Court Judge is the only 

independent, member of the Board of Police Commissioners – the other ones were the Magistrate and 

Mayor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Will you permit a question? 

 

Mr. Embury: — No, I won’t. I will when I am finished. Don’t worry, I know they do not like this. 

Every time they get a point that is going to hurt them, they begin to shudder. 

 

Premier: — Brave man! 

 

Mr. Embury: — You always get the reaction when it starts to hurt; they start to make a noise. That is 

Socialist style order. 

 

Premier: — We have enough nerve to answer questions. 

 

Mr. Embury: — He will get his question in – I will answer it when I am finished. But just listen to my 

point, Sir; you won’t like it – you probably helped to plan it, or if you did not you are a mere spokesman 

for those who did. Here is what they did: prior to that time the District Court Judge was the only 

independent member of the Police Commission in the city; with him sat the Mayor and the Magistrate 

neither of whom where independent, one was an elected member and the other was an appointed 

member. Now, there was no public outcry back of the thing at all; there was no public pressure or abuse 

which anybody noticed except the Socialists. 

 

Here is what they did: they amended The City Act so that the District Court Judge no longer sat on the 

Police Commission – and, mind you, the Police Commission controls the policy of the city; make no 

mistake about that. They changed the District Court Judge – these clever socialists; these noisy people 

over here – and they replaced him by an alderman who was elected. Shades of Czechoslovakia! You see 

what happened! They were at the whim of an election – that was the plot, I suggest to you. Later, we 

saw the Socialists doing all they could to have the Socialists elected in the city municipal election. 

Again, our notorious Shumiatcher was caught red-handed on election day, in Regina, in 1947, working 

for the cause, (during office hours, too, by the way. However, I don’t suppose he would do as much 

harm to the cause down town as he does up here); but had he been successful, with the aid of the hon. 

Minister of Reconstruction and Rehabilitation, in their efforts to influence the municipal election, and to 

elect Socialists and their Socialist friends, did it ever strike you, Sir, that they would have completely 

controlled the police in this city? Did you ever think of that? Who, then, Sir – we talk about the brutality 

of the police and all the rest of it – is going to protect the public from the ravages of a socialist-inspired 

and agitated riot? Talk about Czechoslovakia! You don’t have to go outside Saskatchewan to see what 

these people are trying to do. That is what they did! 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

60 

Now, I say to you in all fairness (if I can make myself heard over the voice of the hon. Premier, who 

does not want me to be heard – or Hansen over there, the gentleman from Wilkie who was called a 

Communist, the other day, and it took him twenty-four hours to get in here and deny it) . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member knows that he cannot address another member by his given 

name. 

 

Mr. Embury: — Yes. Well, the hon. member for Wilkie was called a Communist, the other day, and it 

took him twenty-four hours to come down here with a prepared, written statement, hidden behind 

newspapers, to deny it. 

 

But I know these Socialist agitators so well. We have heard them so often, during the last three Sessions, 

and the bits of this one that have gone by. They always like to interfere when it starts to hurt – that’s the 

point. Now, that hon. gentleman from Wilkie, who was called a Communist, the other day, and who 

took twenty-four hours to come in and deny it, is a man who does not like to hear us say these things; 

but he knows, and I know, that there was no public outcry for any such change or amendment to The 

City Act. None of us realized that there was any harm being done because the District Court Judge sat 

on the Police Commission – he was a safeguard against unruly characters – he was a very useful and 

helpful one in the sane administration of the Police. Nobody heard it suggested that that should be done, 

and yet, without any pressure from the public at all, up popped our Socialists and put that amendment 

through. What for? 

 

Hon. I. C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — According to plan. 

 

Mr. Embury: — According to plan? That is what I suggest to you. Yes, the hon. Minister of 

Agriculture says it is an ‘embryo’ plan, but I can tell you that is what they did, and we solemnly debated 

it in this House. Nobody in this House has got up and made a pro-Russian speech quite the equal of the 

hon. Minister of Agriculture. Nobody has! As a matter of fact, from one end of this country to the other, 

that will be known before you go back to the country. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — We’ll be glad to take it back to the country. 

 

Mr. Embury: — We are more indebted to the hon. Minister of Agriculture than we are to any member 

of this House for disclosing the true intent and purpose and colour of himself and, of course, the 

colleagues who sit with him in the Cabinet of this province. If they like that sort of colleague they are all 

tarred with the same brush – and a most unfortunate brush it is, at a time like this. The hon. gentlemen 

cannot tell me anything about himself, after that speech of his, last year. 

 

Premier: — He cannot tell you anything, period! 

 

Mr. Embury: — I don’t think that gentleman can tell me anything, anyway. Certainly the hon. 

gentleman will have to talk more sense than he has so far for me to listen . . . 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

61 

Premier: — Or to understand. 

 

Mr. Embury: — But that is a point worth making – that there was no public outcry for it, nobody 

recognized a public abuse; but up popped our brave little Socialist planners and put that amendment on 

the books. I suggest to you, it was so that the framework or the background would be there when the 

time came. That is my suggestion. 

 

Now, to go on to another point, Sir: early in the Session of 1947 the Socialists brought down a new 

Public Service Act, and under Section (54) – which was negatively worded – the effect of it was to 

remove an existing restriction and to bring the whole of the Public Service into politics. That is my 

suggestion. Anyone who wants to read Section (54) may do so. I read it yesterday, and it states in effect 

that civil servants were now allowed public authority, allowing certain restrictions which I suggest to 

you, in practical application, would have no actual effect at all insofar as restrict them from acting 

during office hours or after hours was concerned. We have an example of it in the case of Shumiatcher 

who was downtown in the middle of the day on Municipal Election Day, working his head off. 

 

So I say to you that Section (54) of the new Public Service Act of 1947 simply has the effect of bringing 

the whole of the Public Service into politics. Again there was no public outcry; there was no pressure 

that anybody could observe; there was no demand for it, or abuse, that anybody recognized, asking for 

that; yet up popped our little Socialist planners again, and in went that Section bringing the whole of the 

Civil Service into politics. I think that was a most unfortunate thing, if not a wicked thing. To-day, even 

in the city of Regina, you will find the wives of some of these unfortunate civil servants, going around 

canvassing for the CCF, probably in the hope that their husbands will not lose their jobs. That is an 

iniquitous thing. That is Socialism at its very wickedest – to bring the public service into politics like 

that is to put that man in a position where he feels, rightly or wrongly, that he must go into politics or to 

assist in politics, and his wife must help in politics, in aid of the government. They think they are 

bettering themselves – they are protected. I say that is wrong, and that is not all of it, Sir, because during 

those very years and up to to-day, they have increased the numbers of the civil service enormously. 

Can’t you see how this Socialist plan can be put across? Can’t you see that, with all these plans, this 

thing is going to work for total Socialism? If you cannot see that, no matter how many times you have 

been told – oh, I know the hon. Minister of Agriculture believes in it in a pro-Russian way – but the rest 

of us do not, and these are most important matters, for they make their steady encroachment upon the 

safety and integrity and freedom of our people. 

 

Voice: — You are speaking for a lot of people! 

 

Mr. Embury: — Well, you will be surprised at the next election, I hope, as to just how many people! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — It is you who will be surprised. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

62 

Mr. Embury: — Well, I do not know whether I will or not, but time will tell. Certainly we will have to 

do better than this sort of thing. 

 

Premier: — Try it! We invite you to try it! 

 

Mr. Embury: — Now, I do not want to go on, although I could go on . . . 

 

Premier: — Please do! 

 

Mr. Embury: — Well, of course, if you would like to hear me repeat it – but you have heard a great 

many more arguments than these, to try and bring to light the plans which this Government has, and 

which its ‘backroom boys’ apparently seem to embrace. They are objectionable to free men, Sir, and I 

do not say that in a political way at all. I say it with absolute sincerity, that I regard it with very grave 

alarm. 

 

I know they have brought the agricultural industry under the ‘commissar’ of agriculture over there. They 

use the veteran as a Socialist ‘guinea pig’ and so on. I will not repeat again, what you will hear so often, 

about the pro-Russian speech which the gentleman made. I want to be fair, but the hon. gentlemen who 

sit over there get very few marks for fairness, when they are criticizing anyone on this side of the House; 

but I would say that anybody who had as narrow wand warped a view of fairness as they have, certainly 

should not be listened to when it comes to judging that sort of thing. I will grant to any man that this 

Government has hidden its Socialist plans beneath a layer of benevolent, helpful and progressive 

legislation – there is no doubting that. A great deal of your legislation has been well worthwhile; but it is 

the bitter, unpromising process of the Socialist plan that I object to. There have been many worthwhile 

things done by this Government, and I have no quarrel with it at all. I tell you this, that if you had just 

restricted your plans to that kind of government, and left Socialism alone, you could have endured 

forever; but it seems you have missed your chance to be of real service to this country, and you have 

done it by allowing yourselves to be led astray by a set of Socialistic extremists. It is no wonder that 

men like the hon. member for Moosomin speak of the Socialists as he does; and I agree with him, when 

he describes you Socialists, entirely. I do not mean to associate myself with this recent unpleasantness, 

but I am referring to his very able address to the House the other day. 

 

I say to you that when we have to watch the bitter, uncompromising progress towards control of 

essential institutions in this country, I think the hon. member for Moosomin is quite right in taking the 

firm stand with you that he did. I do not suppose it would be possible for any man to speak with the 

voice that he did, or with the understanding that he did, when he was addressing the House upon this 

debate, and I must say that I associate myself with him in his remarks, entirely. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

63 

Before I sit down, I would like to say a few words about the speech of the hon. Premier, the other day. I 

have not bothered to trace all the developments in this House, but, knowing as I do some of the hon. 

gentleman who sit in the CCF caucus, it has been downright surprising to me, and to a great many other 

people, to see that you would allow this plan to go as far as it has without trying to put a stop to it. That 

is the surprising thing. 

 

It was for trying to point out these very things that the hon. member for Moosomin had his honour and 

his integrity attacked so viciously, if I may say so, by the Premier on Tuesday of this week. A more 

bitter and vicious thing I have never heard. Many of the hon. members have been taken in by speeches 

of the hon. Premier’s like that, and I suggest to you it is not fair. The real Socialist plan which I have 

attempted to describe is well-hidden by men like that. He is a very, very talented Socialist speaker 

indeed. I have heard Socialists talking in Hyde Park, only they do not time their breathing and their 

phraseology in quite such a clever way as he does. He has the same general line of talk, of course; but in 

England they keep them in Hyde Park – they don’t let them into the Parliament Buildings. In all, a few 

jokes and a little evasive content, and then a fighting peroration – that sort of characterizes every speech 

I have ever heard him make. 

 

Premier: — At least I don’t get someone to type it out. 

 

Mr. Embury: — I have become quite accustomed to it, and I suppose the hon. members of the House 

have, too. Speakers in Hyde Park are more sincere than the hon. Premier, if I may say so. They do not 

seem to have practised their technique so much. I often wonder what school of Socialist agitation he 

must have studied, or how he learned it, or how he must have practiced it up. I notice he went down to 

California, last year, for a couple of months, and I rather fancied he was down there on a refresher 

course. Anyway, California is the hottest place for Communism in the United States; it is the sort of 

place you would expect him to go for a refresher course for a couple of months. 

 

Now, we have listened to the hon. Premier defending his Government in that kind of a speech on 

Tuesday. Of course, he did not say anything about the Socialist plan – they never do, these clever 

Socialists – especially around election time. We listened to him, and, first of all we had the usual 

treatment of tête-a- tête and an easy chat to put everybody at their ease, and so on; then we had the usual 

misleading comments about the Budget, with a lot of statistics on other provincial budgets (net budgets, 

too). He did not help us much about the criticism that the hon. Leader of the Opposition had made – that 

the Government Finance Office was controlling many millions of dollars of this Province’s assets 

outside the budget entirely – he did not say very much about that, but he did say that in Ottawa, during 

the war, they formed Crown corporations even within departments. In reply to that, I ask you to 

remember that that was done during the war. 

 

Premier: — And is still done! 

 

Mr. Embury: — Well, it was done during the war. We are in an economic crisis, perhaps, now; but I do 

not know of any that is still being done. The ones he 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

64 

was referring to were during the war, I suggest. Furthermore, since that time they have means by which 

they can make a very thorough inquiry into their affairs, and they have done so. That was during a time 

when the Premier ought to know more about what was going on than I could, because he was sitting 

back here in Canada, planning this Socialist victory in Saskatchewan while the rest of us were overseas 

doing our job. Anyway, he does not try to explain this business of Dyson Carter; that is, he just goes on, 

not really answering the criticism made at all. 

 

There was one other point which the hon. Premier made, and that was something to do with the 

Communists being in support of the CCF in this election. I do not think that is a matter of importance, 

one way or the other. I do not think any of us object at all to the communist who admits he is a 

communist, so long as we can recognize him. That is no worry to anybody. But the public of this 

country has driven the Communist underground, and that is where he does his best work to-day. I repeat, 

it is not the man who admits he is a Communist that we are worrying about, at all. It is the Communist 

who bores into public life and spreads Communists propaganda wherever he goes, and denies that he is a 

Communist the whole time he is about it – that is the man we want to get hold of. 

 

The hon. Premier can read Communist advertisements to this House until he is black in the face, but it 

will not change the essential problem, as far as the safety and integrity of Canada is concerned, for the 

future. Everybody knows that the Communists supported the Liberals the last time, and I have sympathy 

with the honest CCF’er who is tangled up with the gang this time – they have no use for Communists; 

but it is the people within the CCF who are doing the very harm that we suggest should be cleaned out, 

if the public is to have any faith in that movement. The Premier, as I say, can read Communist 

advertisements to this House all he likes, but he will never remove the public doubts arising as a direct 

result of your own Party’s activities. 

 

Premier: — You read that sentence before. 

 

Mr. Embury: — After the hon. Premier had finished reading us the Communist advertisements, and 

generally skirted around, not answering any criticism at all, we were treated to his attempted 

justification of his Socialist intervention into the fish business in the north. The hon. member for 

Athabaska (Mr. L. M. Marion) had gone to the trouble of explaining to the House that he himself was a 

northern trader, but that he was lucky enough to reside just outside a zone in which trading with what he 

lovingly called “Uncle Joe” (referring to the hon. Minister of Natural Resources) was not compulsory. A 

very fortunate thing, apparently, it was that he was not in that zone. The hon. member for Athabaska 

said that he did not mind a Marketing Board, provided it was not in the business on a compulsory basis, 

with the purpose of making a profit for the Government. That was the point he made, and I think he 

made a very good point indeed. The hon. member for Athabaska also said, “the difference between, say, 

the Canadian Wheat Board and a Socialist board was that the Canadian Wheat Board passed all of its 

profits back to the farmer.” 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

65 

Premier: — Are you sure of that? 

 

Mr. Embury: — Well, I am quoting the hon. member for Athabaska, and I may say that I have far more 

faith in him then I have in the hon. Premier. 

 

Premier: — I have no doubt. 

 

Mr. Embury: — I don’t know why anybody would not. In any event, he said that the Fish Board, on the 

other hand, paid four cents per pound for Grade “A” frozen whitefish to the fisherman, and then sold it 

at thirty cents a pound or whatever it is in Chicago, and put the difference in its pocket, less 

administrative expenses. That was his point, and a very good point, too. 

 

The hon. Premier, applauded all around by friends of the Socialist Party, though he could answer that by 

leaning well across his desk and saying: “The hon. member for Athabaska does not dare say he is not in 

favour of a Marketing Board.” But I say to you – that is not an answer to the criticism, but it is the 

typical sort of evasive answer you may expect to get from the hon. Premier; a pretty fair sample of 

Socialist persuasion. 

 

Another most ridiculous explanation offered to the House by the hon. Premier on Tuesday, was when he 

started to tell us about the butcher with the gravel contract. I do not know much about it, but I made a 

few inquiries, and it might interest the House to learn what I found out. I am informed, Sir, and I believe 

it to be true, that this good man is a full-time employee of the Army & Navy Super Market as a butcher 

– that is what he does for a living. He is not a contractor, and knows nothing about the contracting 

business. I do not think he even owns a wheelbarrow, unless he has a garden. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — He’s not the only one! 

 

Mr. Embury: — Oh, I know you are not going to like this, but just be patient, just be silent, and I will 

get my side of it off my chest and then you can have a go at it when I have finished. I repeat – he is not a 

contractor and he does not know the first thing about the business. He does not own any gravelling 

equipment of any sort or description. 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — Are you making that statement? 

 

Mr. Embury: — Yes, I am. This gentleman did not even have a $100 company, like Mr. Deis is 

supposed to have had. The hon. Premier said that he was one of a number of men who got into a 

Co-operative to build roads. That is what he said, and I must say, if this be true, that the contract was not 

apparently made with a Co-operator, because the answer to the question on the Order Paper indicates the 

contract was made with Mr. Schan; but the hon. Premier led us to believe that this good Mr. Schan had 

joined together with some other public-spirited men to co-operate, to fix the roads in this province by 

getting a contract to gravel bits and pieces of it around and about Moose Jaw, Waseca, Minton, Holdfast, 

Chamberlain, Aylesbury, Vonda – about 65 or 70 miles of roads, I think, is roughly what he got – this 

public-spirited co-operator. Well, I will say this much – it was a very laudable ambition for these 

gentlemen to try and improve the roads, considering the state they are in, but I must say that, insofar as 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

66 

the hon. Premier would have us believe that this honest Mr. Schan was doing it without any profit – 

simply for the purpose of improving the roads, or some much benevolent motive – he is stretching it a 

bit, and it is rather difficult for the House to follow him in that. 

 

Premier: — Difficult for you. 

 

Mr. Embury: — Well, I know – but most people do not do that sort of thing, especially if they are 

employed butchers. However, that is not all. I am told that, in addition to this good Mr. Schan’s high 

talents for co-operation on all these lines, and his qualifications as an unequipped, road-gravelling 

contractor engaged as a butcher, that this Mr. Schan also had the perspicacity to be the President of the 

East End CCF Association in Regina. Of course that is a remarkable coincidence; but then, people like 

that are always co-operators with a high motive, especially when the hon. Premier is talking of them. 

 

If Mr. Schan was a co-operator, and if he got any man together at all, to gravel the roads, then certainly 

some of them who were engaged in it did not even know that Mr. Schan was in the deal at all; and if 

what I heard is correct, and I suggest that it is more correct than what the hon. Premier told us, this 

amiable Mr. Schan was co-operating all right – but he was co-operating with his banker, and with his 

elders and wisers in the CCF Party; and if there was any co-operating done by him apart from that, it 

was only after somebody threated to sue him. That may be your type of co-operation; but I say this to 

the hon. Premier: when I noticed a motion on the Order Paper – yesterday, I think it was – asking for the 

return of certain correspondence relating to this good, co-operating Mr. Schan, the best way for the hon. 

Premier to let the House have the full information would be for him to table that correspondence so we 

may all have a look at it. 

 

Mr. J. T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — It will all be tabled. 

 

Mr. Embury: — If it is not tabled until next Session, as happened to one Return that was asked for over 

a year ago – if that Return does not come down, you can take it, Sir, that at least some of us will believe 

that you have something to hide. We will put it that way. Now, that is all I am going to say about Mr. 

Schan. 

 

We were entertained next by the hon. Premier, before he sat down, with a most strenuous attack upon 

the integrity of the hon. member for Moosomin. Oh, I know he said he was not going to do it, but he 

went ahead and did it anyway. Apparently that hon. member for Moosomin resents it very warmly, and I 

do not blame him at all. As the hon. Premier did when he attacked the integrity of the judges, of course 

he said he was not going to attack the integrity of the judges; and he said the same thing about the hon. 

member for Moosomin. He said: “Oh, I would not suggest that the hon. member knew anything about it 

– Oh, no!” Then he went onto say this – that “the public’s money was being taken into the Liberal 

campaign funds to the tune of nearly $70,000” – and he said, “either the hon. member for Moosomin 

was very inept or incompetent or the hon. member for Moosomin knew of it and made no complaints.” 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

67 

Throughout his speech the hon. Premier had clearly indicated, what the whole House knows so well – 

that the hon. member for Moosomin is neither inept nor incompetent, nor is he dishonest, as the hon. 

Premier knows even better than I do. But that is what he said, and that was after the preface, “Oh, I 

would not want to implicate him with it,” and following it up with that sort of thing is clever Socialism. 

That is the clever argument of a clever Socialist. 

 

Premier: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. My hon. friend is apparently quoting me, either 

from his rather poor memory or from a press report. The record is in my hand – the transcript from the 

dictaphone record. My hon. friend claimed the privilege of reading, but he is quoting inaccurately and 

erroneously. 

 

Mr. Embury: — He certainly did say that. 

 

Premier: — Well, what I said is recorded here on the disc which is taken off the dictaphone. That is 

why we have a record here, in order to correct people like my hon. friend. I am quoted as saying this: 

 

“My hon. friend, yesterday, talked about a butcher getting a gravel contract, and I want to say to him 

that while this thing started under the Provincial Secretary in 1940, when the Provincial Secretary 

went into the Service; the Tax Commission was transferred to the Department of Highways over 

which my hon. friend presided.” 

 

Then I said this, and this is the part my hon. friend is quoting: 

 

“My hon. friend either did not know this was going on, in which case he was either inept an 

incompetent, or he did know, in which case he was a party to depriving the Saskatchewan Treasury of 

money which went either into the Liberal Party or into someone’s pocket. Now I want to say, in all 

kindness to my hon. friend, that most of this went on in 1940, 1941 and 1942, and I can quite believe 

that he knew nothing about it.” 

 

That is the transcript, but the press left that sentence out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Embury: — That is the point exactly, – that the hon. Premier did again what he does so cleverly as 

a Socialist – as he did in the case of the judges, when he said he wouldn’t dream of attacking their 

integrity, but went right on to do it. So, in the case of the hon. member for Moosomin, he said he was 

either inept or incompetent or else he knew about it, and then he went on. Everybody knows the hon. 

member is neither of those things. As a matter of fact, the hon. Premier spent certain portions of his 

speech complimenting him on his ability; so that everybody knew that he was not inept or incompetent – 

so the inference is left, quite clearly. Of course, the hon. Premier does not consider that a smear! He 

does not consider that to be a clever, effective destruction of a man’s character, to be resented by any 

honest man. I think it was one of the 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

68 

wickedest things I have heard said by any man; and I must say, as I have said before, that I do not blame 

the hon. member for Moosomin for being very much annoyed about it, either. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You are not saying much for the honesty of Deis. 

 

Mr. Embury: — I know – you may endorse that sort of thing, you may embrace it, you may sit with it. 

God bless you! You are welcome to do it – nobody else wants it. 

 

Premier: — May I ask the hon. member a question? 

 

Mr. Embury: — When I am finished, yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Valleau: — It will be too late then. 

 

Mr. Embury: — The hon. gentleman, during the last ten minutes, has spent more time on his feet than I 

have. He does not like this, I know. You can always tell when it begins to hurt with a Socialist; he starts 

to jump up and down and try to interfere and close off those arguments if he can. That is very small 

credit to them, indeed. 

 

I may say this about the Acme Dye and Chemical Works – while I know nothing about it, and care less 

(it has nothing to do with me) – I did hear the hon. gentleman suggesting that I do have anything to do 

with the Acme Dye Works. In any event it is the truth that I know nothing about this Company and care 

less, whether those who love to smear their critics would say otherwise or not. But I did hear the hon. 

Premier’s statement in respect to it yesterday, and I suggest to you that there was a great deal the matter 

with that statement as told to the House, and I am going on nothing else, for I know nothing more about 

it. Here is what he said – and a very peculiar thing too. The hon. Premier came in here yesterday, or 

rather day before yesterday, 1948, presumably having available to him this information ever since 1944. 

Since 1944 up to now, posing as a champion of public morality and all the rest of it, he did not do one 

single, solitary thing about this dreadful piece of information – not solitary thing – until Tuesday of this 

week, 1948, when the CCF (if I may suggest it) were found to pretty well clogged up with Communists. 

He brings it up then, trying to get public attention away from himself. 

 

The hon. Premier said a number of peculiar things on Tuesday last, in connection with this contract. He 

said this Company got away with $69,160, (I am quoting the figures for the newspaper, so correct me if 

I am wrong), they got away with that much public money and, he said, the Government were paying 

$5.80 per pound for the dye to which he refers. He also said: “if you add up all the figures I think that 

we bought 28,981 pounds.” He did not tell us how much the Acme Dye Company was paying, though, 

during 1942. He knows what he is paying now; but he is accusing the Acme Dye Company or somebody 

of being improper in their relations with the Government. From the figures the Premier gave us, and 

dividing one into the other – and I am not very good at arithmetic, I am afraid – it seems to me that he 

reckons they were making $2.34 per pound at the time of the sales he referred to, between 1940 and 

1942, by way of profit 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

69 

on each pound of this dye, in order to make up the total of about $70,000. Now, Sir, if it should happen 

that the Acme Dye Company were making much less than that per pound (I do not know what they were 

making, but if it were any less than that) then the hon. Premier is quite wrong when he said that 

approximately $70,000 of public money went into the Liberal campaign funds or into somebody’s 

pocket, to the hon. member for Moosomin’s knowledge. Quite wrong. I do not know what their 

overhead was, I do not know what they paid the wholesaler – the hon. Premier did not tell the House, 

and I doubt whether he knows, but he said it anyway. 

 

Another thing I find very difficult to believe about this statement, Sir, is this: Why on earth did this 

iniquitous company, with all this on its conscience, come back to the Socialists in 1944 and make bids to 

them at $5.00 a pound? If they had all this on their conscience, do you suppose they would draw 

attention to themselves, and invite the scrutiny that the hon. Premier has given to it, Mr. Speaker? I 

doubt it. 

 

There are several more things, and most unfair things, took, that he said, and most peculiar things. The 

Premier said (and I suggest it is typical of him, too) that they bought 17,000 pounds in 1942. Then he 

said: “They must have been expecting something to happen.” The implication was that they were going 

to be defeated in the election – but the election was two years away! I suggest this to you, that 17,000 

pounds in 1942 does not mean at all what the hon. Premier intended the House to believe, or in fact 

intended everybody within sound of his voice – while speaking on the radio – to believe. 

 

I suggest that in 1942, when the Americans had come into the war – even if the hon. Premier had not – 

that the prospects for a shortage of materials and supplies was very, very acute indeed. Furthermore, I 

suggest that if this Company had been trying to wring the last dollar out of the deal, if they had been 

trying to take the public money unreasonably, they would have sold more dye closer to election time 

than they did. But two years elapsed, during which time the hon. Premier does not tell us what they 

bought at all. I am taking it, from his statement, that the 17,000 pounds’ order in 1942 was the last order 

made, and that two years went by during which none was sold at all. And the hon. Premier invited the 

House to believe that there was something mysterious in that! 

 

Now then, let me suggest his to you: that in 1942, the prospect for wartime shortages – true, that is a 

matter of levity for some of the hon. gentlemen yonder – but as a matter of fact, most people who had 

any sense of responsibility at all knew that there was a very likely prospect of a lack of aniline dye, or 

whatever it is, at about that period, and it might easily be a very sensible thing for the Government to do. 

I wonder, for example, what this Government has ordered through its purchasing agency to-day, for this 

same sort of dye? I think it is conclusive that if you had seen a number of heavy sales of this commodity 

to the Government within two years prior, or right close to the election, that there might be something in 

it; because it would prove, first of all that the supply was available, and then possibly would quite 

clearly imply that they were trying to sell a large bill of goods to the Government, his arguments and his 

evidence and his figures to the contrary, absolutely. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

70 

Now, as I have told the House, I do not know anything more than what the Premier told us, and I care 

less, but I say this: I hesitate to take the statement of the Premier, given to the House yesterday, on this 

question, and I have told you I have two or three reasons why I have some doubts in respect to it. Until I 

can find out exactly what did happen in that matter, I suggest to you that the statement we have had so 

far is not particularly reliable. 

 

I will give you a sample of reliability, Socialist style. Here in my hand I have a hospital admission 

discharge record. This is rather difficult to demonstrate to the House without your being able to look at 

this form also. It comes in four pieces, between three levels of which you will see carbons, fixed in 

there. That document is signed, right where you see my finger, through these carbon copies, by every 

patient leaving a hospital. This is administration, Socialist style! Up where my thumb is, in very small 

type, you will see this: “Mark an “x” in all boxes.” That refers to these various portions of statistics 

which you can probably see. “You are making four copies so press firmly, using about a 2H pencil on a 

hard surface. Be sure to answer all questions. Have patients sign both original and quadruplicate (white 

and pink) copies.” Now, that is the only hint you get – so that the unsuspecting patient signs there; and 

what he can see, when he signs there, is simply a number of statistics with which he would no doubt 

agree. Yes! This set of instructions indicates that the other three colored copies are ‘copies’. They 

referred to them as quadruplicates, white and pink. 

 

Now, the first copy, the original, states that it is to go to The Director, Saskatchewan Hospital Services 

Plan, Regina, so away it goes; the next copy (so-called copy), the duplicate, to the Director, 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, so away it goes; the next so-called copy is the patient’s case 

record, and things start to get a little interesting at this point, because it is not a copy at all, for this 

so-called copy number 3 is something that you see for the very first time. This is the Socialist way of 

doing things. Mind you, if anybody else tried to do business this way they would be in cells – in jail – 

and rightly so. Down here, unbeknownst to the victim, it says this: “I hereby agree to assume 

responsibility for the payment of hospital charges not covered by The Saskatchewan Hospitalization 

Service Plan or any other agency.” That is the copy of the agreement – not on copy one, or on copy two 

– the hon. Premier ought to have a look at that, I believe it comes under his administration. That is the 

sort of thing you bump into when you start dealing with Socialists; and I say this to you, I don’t stand 

here . . . Oh, he thinks that funny – that is the sort of thing that would amuse the hon. Premier, but it 

does not amuse any other person with whom he has to deal . . . 

 

Premier: — No, I do not think that is funny – I think you are funny. 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

71 

Mr. Embury: — That is a great joke to him . . . 

 

Premier: — No, no! You are the joke. The argument is pathetic. 

 

Mr. Embury: — I know it is always very funny when it hurts, with you. I have seen you laugh – the 

more telling it is, the harder the Premier laughs because he hopes that his caucus-bound friends will be 

relieved by that; but I can assure you, that sort of thing is no laughing matter to other people who are not 

as interested in the welfare of the Socialists in this province as he is. 

 

I do not stand here, on any o f these issues, to please forgiveness at all for any Liberal in the province 

. . . 

Voices: — Oh, no! 

 

Mr. Embury: — It has nothing to do with me, but what I do say is this: None of these straws, or red 

herrings, that the hon. Premier wishes to draw across the trail of the issues of to-day are going to be 

effective. The people of the province should understand, and understand quite clearly here and now, that 

no government, be it Dominion or Provincial, can bring upon its people, to whom it is supposed to 

administer, the misery which this Government can bring upon its people if it is allowed to carry out its 

announced plans. 

 

I will not support the motion. 

 

(Debate continued, next page) 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

72 

Hon. J. H. Brockelbank (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — I want first of all to pay my compliments 

to the Provincial Treasurer for the Budget and the manner in which he presented it to this House. I want 

also to say to the House that, though this is the largest Budget in the history of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, it is but a measure of the service that is being given to the people of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I remember, Mr. Speaker, in about 1935, Dr. Uhrich, who was then the Minister of Public Health in the 

Province of Saskatchewan, at the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities’ Convention – my 

hon. friend from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) will probably remember this – stated to those people at the 

convention – the councilors at Saskatchewan – “What Saskatchewan needs is state health, and this 

government will bring state health.” In 1935, what did they do? But more than that, in 1942, at the 

Liberal Convention in Saskatoon – no it was the Liberal Council at the Bessborough Hotel – we get this 

headline in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix: “Dr. Uhrich Tells of Health Record.” Maybe that has something 

to do with why they lost the election. You cannot give health services for nothing; you cannot give 

grants to municipalities to help them to give health services; you cannot give free treatment to old age 

pensioners, to mothers’ allowances cases for nothing. My hon. friends opposite seem to think that you 

can. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am very sorry that the hon. member for the Mediterranean Area decided to beat a 

strategic retreat just at this moment. He was going to answer some questions . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You did not ask them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — But they were like Dr. Uhrich’s promises of 1935, and, you know, one good 

thing about those promises the Liberals used to make to us, they could use them over and over again; 

they never used them up; they were always good as long as the people would believe them. But I do 

want to make a few comments with regard to the hon. member’s statement – the hon. and gallant 

member from the Mediterranean Area. He referred to what he said was the not very reliable statement of 

the Premier – I am not surprised at him saying that . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You should not be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . The part that I was surprised at was that he said: “I do not care, I care 

less about this thing.” I am surprised to hear any member in this House say that they do not care whether 

some big company got away with $70,000 or not; I am surprised at that. 

 

He tried to do some figuring, rather unsuccessfully, that this company got the dye shipped direct from 

Chicago to Regina. That company should have been able to buy it from the manufacturers in Chicago at 

the same price that we could buy it. Whether they did nor not, I do not know; but they should have been 

able to buy it at the same price or cheaper, and, if they did so, they should have made a profit of $70,000 

or thereabouts. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

73 

There have been a lot of things blamed on the war; but in 1942 the Liberal Party in this province was on 

pretty shaky ground. They knew that they should have an election, and they were scared to jump in. 

They were afraid the water was pretty cold – it was cold, too. In 1942, 17,000 pounds would have made 

about $50,000 profit (not bad), with the possibility of an election coming in 1942, which was four years 

after the previous election. They did not get up their courage. My hon. friends sitting over here, in 1943 

voted in this House to extend the life of the Legislature to six years. They finally had to go. 

 

I do want to make a comment with regard to Section 198 of The R.M. Act. My hon. friend said that any 

25 local rate-payers could bring a municipality into the U.F.C. if the council made the grant. Any 25 

rate-payers could not do any such thing. It had to be, and still has to be, 25 rate-payers who are 

bone-fide paid-up members of the U.F.C. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is still worse. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That is a different thing altogether. 

 

Then they may petition the council and then after that the council may make that donation to the U.F.C. 

and have the people enrolled. After they are enrolled, then not even 50 per cent of the people do not 

want to be in it, but if 40 per cent signify their intention – less than a majority – that they do not want to 

be enrolled, then the council must not make any further contribution on the strength of that decision. 

 

The trouble is, Mr. Speaker, that my hon. friends who sit on your left, have absolutely no faith in 

democracy. They do not believe in giving any power or responsibility to the elected representatives of 

the people. They would like to leave, in the hands of the judges, or someplace like that, all of the 

responsibilities. That is quite evident in the next subject which the hon. member dealt with. But compare 

this Section 198 with what is in The City and Town Acts in regard to the Cambers of Commerce! My 

hon. friends sit there, and they never say a word about that; but the City Council of Regina, Moose Jaw 

or Saskatoon, or the Council of any town in the Province of Saskatchewan, without any petition from 

their rate-payers can make a contribution to the Chamber of Commerce or the Board of Trade, and 

everyone knows that, today, the Chamber of Commerce is fighting tooth and nail on the side of reaction; 

that the Chamber of Commerce in Canada is in politics head over heels. Everyone knows it, and there is 

no provision for a petition to stop the Council from making that contribution. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Can you not do it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — If my hon. friend thinks that Section 198 is wrong, I think he first should 

move an amendment to The City and Town Acts with regard to the Chamber of Commerce. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is your business. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

74 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, I want him to do that. If he believes Section 198 is wrong, let him 

first deal with these other things which there is no control of at all, or else put them on the same basis 

where there will be some control. “What is sauce for the goose is not sauce for the gander,” especially if 

it happens to be my friend’s gander. 

 

Now, with regard to the Board of Police Commissioners in the city, the old situation was that the Board 

of Police Commissioners consisted of the Mayor, the Magistrate and the District Court Judge, in those 

cities where they had a Board of Police Commissioners – they did not have a Board in all cities. Some 

places, in small cities, the police were directly under the Council, and, according to my hon. friend, that 

is terrible. He wanted a judge, not responsible to the people of the city at all, to have control of the 

administration of justice and the police forces of that city. We believe that the people themselves should 

have control. That is why the Act provided now that the majority of the police commissioners are 

elected by the people, so that the people, if they want to have justice properly administered, have the 

power to do something about it. Under the old setup they could not do anything, about it. They had no 

voice in it because they had only one representative on the police commission. I suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that to leave the control of such an important service in the hands of people who are not 

responsible to the citizens, is definitely a Fascist trend. We want to keep control of these things in the 

hands of the people. 

 

My hon. friend also objected, as did the member for Moosomin (Mr. Procter), to the East End buter 

getting a contract, but apparently it was all right for a West End lawyer to be in the dye business. 

 

I would like also to say a few words about this Communist question. You know, Mr. Speaker, the 

Communists have done so much dancing around, during recent years, that they have been every place 

except the Tory Party. That is one thing they cannot go for. 

 

Mr. A. W. Embury (Mediterranean Area): — We do not mind the ones that admit it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — They have found their proper home now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I hold in my hand a copy of the Canadian Tribune – this is the Communist 

paper in Canada – Saturday, May 5, 1945. There is an article here entitled “Who Are the Splitters”? by 

Leslie Morris. This is what Leslie Morris says: 

 

“It is not a bit of use simply blaming the Liberals, as some do, for this disunity. The CCF has made it a 

thousand times more difficult to compel electoral agreements with the Liberals, and to force the 

Liberals into liberalizing their policy, than need have been the case. Every time Ted Jolliffe or 

Coldwell say there is no difference between the Liberals than the Tories, they further divide the 

progressive movement and make infinitely harder the job of forging a new set of political relations to 

correspond with the actual relations arising out of the war.” 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

75 

That was in 1945, when the Communists were with the Liberals. The Communists were violently 

opposed to the Liberals in the middle of the war, then at the end of the war they were all with Mackenzie 

King and his great war effort; and they have now made these statements about their going to support the 

CCF. But there is this one difference: that neither the Social Credit Party nor the Liberal Party has ever 

made clear their stand when the Communists were making love to them. None of them disowned the 

Communists. They were working right along in the elections with them – appeared on platforms, and all 

the rest of it. 

 

You see the people have been divided on politics, purpose by divided. Big Business and the people that 

control Big Business and get the favours, they do not care what political party is in power, so long as it 

is one of the old political parties that they can control. That is not a new thing. Away back in 1911 there 

was a lumber company up at Crooked River; there were two brothers, the McDonald Brothers, in that 

lumber company. They were a pair of great old Liberals, but, in 1911, the Liberal Government in 

Canada was defeated. The government at Ottawa controlled the timber at that time. Here is a letter from 

Hector to his brother D. N. McDonald, dated September 26, 1911. He mentions that the Liberals were 

swept out of office, and then a little postscript is added, “If anything, we are Conservatives now.” There 

is no difference between them, Mr. Speaker, that is quite true. 

 

Some words have been said about political patronage. Well, if there is anybody that should keep quite 

about political patronage, it is my hon. friends that sit opposite here, because they are certainly experts at 

it, and have been experts at it in the past. You know if anyone got a contract from them, that contractor 

was not even free to hire the people that he wanted to hire. He had to hire the people that the M.L.A. or 

the M.P. (Liberal) told him to hire. Here is a letter written by the contractor, to a man who was asking 

for a job, and the contractor says: “I am in receipt of a letter from J. A. MacMillan, M. P. for Wadena, in 

which he requests that I put you to work in the North Battleford Mental Hospital.” This was in 1938. He 

says: “It is impossible for me to do so at the present time as my contract calls for all local help being 

employed, and Mr. Gregory is checking me very close on this same thing.” Mr. Gregory was not going 

to let Mr. MacMillan get away with any of his patronage. 

 

Then we come to another question that has been raised, about the civil service. I want to remind this 

House again about some of the things that I found when I took over in my Department, and here are two 

letters written by G. J. Matte, the Commissioner of the Northern Areas Branch, to an L.I.D. Inspector; 

one of the letters telling him that Doug Munro – Anyone know who Doug Munro in Regina is? I think 

he is a pal of Archie McCallum’s . . . 

 

Mr. Patterson: — Schan! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, he is not a pal of Schan’s. 

 

The letter states that Mr. Matte wanted the inspector to come in, and charge his expenses in the usual 

way, to see Doug Munro the Liberal organizer. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

76 

Here is another one in which Mr. Matte writes, and he says: “C. R. MacIntosh of North Battleford 

(M.P.) was in my office a few days ago and asked me to endeavour to obtain some information for him 

as regard to the polls in L.I.D. No. 525.” Then he goes on and asks this fellow to kindly send in the 

information. He says: “You should have no difficulty in obtaining this by getting in touch with our local 

friends.” 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What’s wrong with that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — What’s wrong with that my hon. friend says; this man was getting $3,750 a 

year and expenses. 

 

A Voice: — What for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — For political purposes is what he was getting it for, chiefly. He was head of 

the Northern Areas Branch and here are some of the excerpts from letters of one of his inspectors – 

Oscar J. LeFrancois, who is still up in the Shellbrook constituency. This was written from Meadow 

Lake, addressed to Mr. Matte, and he says – this was in 1943, there might have been an election in that 

year, you know – “If there are no prospects of an election, I would recommend that relief be practically 

discontinued although I am sure that relief will be needed the last two months of the summer, at least.” 

 

Here is another one he writes, and who does he write this one to? He writes this one to the Hon. Hubert 

Staines, Minister of Education . . . 

 

Premier: — Is that “cesspool” Staines? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . July 13, 2942, and he says to Mr. Staines: “While you are visiting your 

constituency in the month of June, in the company of Mr. Matte, I promise you a periodic report on the 

political report therein, as well as to give you the reaction of Mr. Boucher’s visit which coincided with 

yours.” Signed Oscar J. LeFrancois. 

 

There is another very good one here. This is also from LeFrancois to Matte, 1942: “I spent three days in 

and around Meadow Lake this week, and owing to the fact that several of our Athabasca constituents 

were there and I wanted to do a little ground or I should say underground work, which I will report a 

little later on when I have obtained more information from another source.” 

 

My hon. friend over here, from the Mediterranean Area, is worrying about dictatorships . . . 

 

A Voice: — Fifth Columnists. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . The people that he supports politically, the people that he will probably 

be a candidate for in the coming election, are the people 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

77 

who had the gestapo all over the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Embury: — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows very well, I have 

said, I do not know how many times in the House, I do not support anybody politically. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member thinks it is dishonourable for him to 

support the Liberal Party or the Conservative Party, I will withdraw the remark. 

 

Mr. Embury: — On a point of order, I think, this time, of calling me dishonourable. He misquotes the 

facts, deliberately too, and I do not think he should be allowed to do it, on a point of privilege. He knows 

that. He does not have to take my word for it; they are always trying to break through. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member does not support anybody. 

 

Mr. Embury: — That is better. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Except himself. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask a question? Is this correspondence that the hon. gentleman is 

quoting, correspondence that he obtained from the files of the former Commissioner of Northern Areas, 

that he obtained by going through his records one night prior to the dismissal of the former 

Commissioner? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, that is not correct; but my hon. friend knows too much about this. 

There are not many people who know about this. I got them the evening following the day he was 

dismissed, and after Mr. Matte had gone through his office and had picked up all his personal stuff; not 

the night before. Mr. Matte sent some people back to the office, that evening, to get some more things 

that he did not pick up, that he missed; but he was too late. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — When there was a call on the telephone to that office, the night before he was 

dismissed, the hon. gentleman answered it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I did not hear the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Would the hon. member repeat his statement. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — There was a telephone call to the Commissioner’s office the night before he was 

dismissed, and the Minister answered it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — How in the world does my hon. friend know that? I do not know that there 

was, I was not there the night before, and it is entirely incorrect. I will tell you how it is, Mr. Speaker. I 

was out  

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

78 

in the country I picked up these two letters. I did not have a key to the Northern Area Office, not until I 

dispensed with Mr. Matte and took his keys. I got in here that morning; at eleven o’clock I had Mr. 

Matte in my office and dismissed him – at eleven o’clock in the morning. I had been out of the city for a 

week, and if somebody has been telling the Leader of the Opposition, or if he has been making it up, it is 

all wrong. 

 

Premier: — Has the Minister not the right to know what is going on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Anyway, if I want to be in the office of any of the staff of my Department, 

at any time, I will be there; but I was not there at that time. 

 

Premier: — Probably if the Leader of the Opposition had not taken his files, he would probably have 

had a lot more. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, this is another letter written by the famous Mr. LeFrancois, 

addressed again to Mr. Matte, There is a very interesting paragraph here, he says: “You are no doubt 

aware of the fact, as well as Mr. Staines, that the political situation in this constituency is apt to change 

owing to the recent removal by the Canadian Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company, of their 

employees from Gold Fields, Kimberley. At Gold Fields, the government had a large number of 

supporters on which to depend, and now there only remains the half-breeds to the south, in which group 

we have plenty of work to do. Marcien Marion was quick to grasp the situation, mentioning that the 

half-breeds have now controls, and in view of the potential wealth in the north it would be well to have 

the constituency represented by one capable of development.” 

 

Earlier in this letter, Mr. LeFrancois says: “On my return I stopped at Ile a la Crosse, where I had a 

personal chat with Marcien Marion and Father Rossignol in the present of one another.” Then later in 

this letter this is what he has to say: “They were not even square with each other.” Mr. Speaker, I shall 

support the motion. 

 

Mr. D. S. Valleau (A.S.V.R.): — Mr. Speaker, we have heard some very interesting things in the course 

of which I have managed to pile up numbers of notes, numbers of books and numbers of newspaper 

clippings, until I have begun almost to feel like the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson), and 

suddenly realizing the awful predicament I was in, I began to feel a little guilty. However, I can assure 

the House that I do not intend to read every word here, and I will try to make my remarks as brief as 

possible. 

 

There are in this House a number of members who occupy positions similar to mine, and that is that, 

other things being equal and unforeseen events not happening unexpectedly, we may find that if this 

often predicted and anticipated election should occur, this summer, if it should we might not be 

members here next year, and for that reason it is a good idea, I think, for us to try to go down as nobly as 

possibly; for us to try to make our last speeches in the House something that we can remember, 

something to be 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

79 

carved on our epitaph. When people ask me what I intend to do after my term in this Legislature is 

finished, I would like to be able to reply that I am going to retire and write my memoirs. However, that 

depends upon fate; but I do hope that such speeches as I make in this House will be in the tenor of the 

speech made by the hon. member for Canora (Mr. Feeley) when he began the Debate in this House, this 

Session, a speech which I will be able to read in later years without being ashamed of it. 

 

There has been a number of peculiar things happen during my term in this Legislature, and possibly 

many things which could not have been anticipated. The hon. member who is my seat-mate, stated that, 

during the time that the armed forces were overseas, they probably supported the CCF two out of three. 

Now, unfortunately, I was not stationed with the Canadian Army. I was with the R.C.A.F. and often I 

was broken up into small units stationed with the R.A.F. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — Ho did you get together again? 

 

Mr. Valleau: — Well, it was quite easy. 

 

It was often my privilege to travel among my English brothers in the R.A.F. and to talk with them on 

many occasions; and while my hon. seat-mate said that he has heard Socialists speaking in Hyde Park, it 

has been my privilege to hear Socialists speaking very eloquently in the Halls of Westminster. I have 

heard Attlee, Bevin and Morrison, and have met these gentlemen personally; I was very much impressed 

with them. I have also found it my very good fortune to hear a great many Socialists – the people that 

my hon. friend referred to as ‘the men’ – I heard a great many of them speaking in the barracks on the 

various stations where I was stationed. I could have told anyone in Canada, and probably I could have 

told some of the members of the Labour Party in England, as I did, that Labour was bound to win the 

election in England if the R.A.F. was any cross-section of English public opinion, because it was there 

that I first noticed the strong tendency toward what has been called in this House Socialism or Social 

Democracy. It grieves, me, Sir, to find that, on my return, there are still people in Canada who use the 

term ‘Socialist agitator’ in a derisive sense, harking back to 1933, 1934 and 1935 days, to the days when 

R. B. Bennet was trying to apply what he called the ‘iron heel of ruthlessness’. Such a term as ‘Socialist 

agitator’ went out about 12 or 15 years ago, and it certainly was not part of the vocabulary of any of the 

R.A.F. boys that I worked with, and I do not think it was part of the vocabulary of the Canadian Army 

which, my hon. friend stated, supported the CCF two out of three. 

 

However, when I was elected I made no pretence of trying to stand as an independent, because 

everywhere I went, in discussing the election, I found that the first question asked by the various 

Canadian units, was “What Party do you stand for?” “How do we know whether we should vote for 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

80 

you unless we know the platform you are running on?” To satisfy that question I got out two circulars 

and I circulated these to all of the Canadian units that I could, with the permission of the Commanding 

Officers of these units, and I found that the Commanding Officers believed in free speech and were very 

democratic. When I requested them to, they almost invariably posted my notices up on the notice boards 

of the various units. 

 

That is just part of the answer to the question of my hon. friend, the Leader of the Opposition, as to how 

we got together. It was very interesting, very educational, and I enjoyed it tremendously, and I am 

confident that when the various members of the Canadian Army, Air Force and the Navy, voted for me, 

that they knew what they were voting for. That is why I have had no compulsion or hesitation whatever 

in standing up in this House and saying that I sill support the platform I was elected on, and I still 

support the principles which two out of three of the Servicemen believed in at the time. I am not sure – it 

is always a debatable point, and we will not know for some time yet – whether these Servicemen, on 

returning home, have changed their minds as quickly as some of the other representatives of the 

Veterans or the Servicemen or the various groups, have changed their minds. It may be that they have 

viewed and had had their eyes open and are now horrified; but they have not told me so if they are. 

 

But referring to that statement ‘the men’ and what they think, and how we are to determine what they 

think, I find it is a difficult thing for a Veteran returning from overseas, particularly if he has changes in 

fortune – if he finds that instead of washing dishes in the kitchen and scrubbing the floors of the canteen, 

that he is sitting as a member of the Legislature – it is difficult for him to maintain the point of view of 

the Veteran, and of the ordinary Servicemen, of which I was one. 

 

Possibly that has been brought home to me more than anything else, by a book I read the other day. It is 

entitled “Back Home”, by Bill Mauldin, one of the American Servicemen overseas who drew up the 

cartoons that appeared in the ‘Stars and Stripes’. In the previous speech in which I referred to Marion 

Hargrove and Bill Mauldin, I did not quote from Mauldin; but in this book he tells of the remarkable 

change in his fortune, which he found on returning home. While overseas, he had been a common G.I. – 

a private – he had been bossed around and pushed around and he felt that he could draw cartoons that 

pictured the ordinary feeling of the ordinary Serviceman. When he returned home, he found that he was 

drawing cartoons for a large syndicate, and he felt he had to be very careful or his point of view would 

be changed. The point of view of a man with lots of money is not the same as the point of view of a 

Veteran returning home and struggling to make his living; and this book tells how he had to constantly 

fight against the tendency, which always exists, for a man to adopt the point of view of the class in 

which he finds himself. I think that Mauldin has done a very creditable job of trying to keep the point of 

view of the Veteran. But he does point out the danger of those of us who tell ourselves, he does point out 

the danger of us becoming what might be called ‘professional Veterans’. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

81 

Referring to criticism that has been voiced about General Bradley and of his Veteran administration in 

the United States – General Bradley has been called the “G.I. General” – Mauldin refers to a speech 

which Bradley made in addressing the convention of the American Legion. He says that Bradley sat 

quietly at the speaker’s table while the usual convention paunches shook before the ‘mike’ and emitted 

the usual platitudes; Bradley did not bother wrapping himself in a flag, he was already warm enough. He 

said: “There are among the ranks of the high-salaried professional Veterans, those who forget that the 

Veteran has paid and is paying for all that he gets. More dangerous than the German Army is the 

demagoguery that deceives the Veteran today by promising him something for nothing.” Mauldin points 

out the danger of Veterans thinking too exclusively as a class of Veterans against the rest of the 

community, and emphasizes what I have endeavoured, in my very small way, to say on previous 

occasions, that our job as Veterans should e to get back as quickly as we can into the flow of the civilian 

community, and that the chief function of Veterans’ organizations – both in Canada and in our 

neighbour to the south – the chief function of these organizations is to assist us, through group action, to 

get back into the civilian stream and become citizens again. 

 

Mauldin, I believe, when he came back, probably had something of the same outlook that I had, and that 

two-thirds of the Veterans had, and in this book he has done quite a bit of studying. I do not believe that 

he has changed his ideas greatly; I would not go so far as to say that he is a politician – he is not a 

politician – I believe, he is not even a Socialist; but he does have some hard things to say about the 

so-called free enterprise system. He says – referring to Hollywood and the west coast, which has been 

referred to as possibly the hot-bed of Communism or Socialism – that among the movie people there are 

a number who have not forgotten the days of ten cent lunches, and who still bear the scars inflicted by 

springs that burst through worn mattresses in 50-cent hotel rooms, and who realize that for every success 

at the top, there are twenty equally talented and equally hard working people at the bottom, who have 

not been blessed with the breaks. Some of them sleep better at night because their politics are on the side 

of the people at the bottom. 

 

Then, in a later paragraph, he says – referring to the typical free enterpriser – he says: “Such characters 

sometimes remind me of a guy I knew when I grew up in the West. He was a successful farmer and one 

of the worst “Scrooges” the world ever saw; he was one of the ‘big business’ farmers, rather than the 

family farm that we hope to see established in Saskatchewan. H was not above tripping his neighbours, 

and he specialized in dropping around when they were in financial trouble, with the result that he soon 

owned a lot of farms. By some standards he was a booming success as a 100 per cent American free 

enterprise, but by my standards he was a horse’s tail.” I guess I should not go on, Mr. Speaker, because 

in referring to free enterprise, Bill Mauldin says many things that would hardly be parliamentary, and I 

do not wish to make un-parliamentary statements in this Assembly. 

 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

82 

Now, as has been pointed out in this House, many things happened, while we were overseas, that we did 

not have a chance to know much about, some of them tied up with free enterprise. I found, the other day, 

an advertisement that appeared in the Saskatoon ‘Star-Phoenix’ during a by-election in Saskatoon. I 

guess this was before I went overseas; it is dated December 16, 1939, just at the time when war contracts 

were beginning to boom. This advertisement reproduces pictures of newspaper headlines: “Australian 

Defence to Spend $178,000,000 on an Air-Training Scheme”: “Canadian War Orders Climb to 

$54,000,000”. It is a great big advertisement; covers half of the ‘Star-Phoenix’ page, and in a little box it 

says: “To the citizens of Saskatoon”: 

 

“Do not give Saskatoon a black eye all over Canada. Do not tell all the rest of Canada and Great 

Britain that Saskatoon is not prepared to co-operate with the government in its efforts to win the 

war. Keep Saskatoon on the map; vote for the government and get war industries built in your city.” 

 

If I may say so, Mr. Speaker, this is typical of what was called the profitable patriotism of certain classes 

of Canadian enterprise, and even on occasion, newspapers can adapt their editorials to suit the changing 

political situation. Saskatoon ‘Star-Phoenix’ is usually very good in its editorials, very unbiased; but on 

this particular occasion it quoted, and I am quoting from the editorial of that date: 

 

“On Monday the voters will give their decision. First is the viewpoint of the practical working 

politician who reduces the by-election to a question of whether or not Saskatoon is going to 

co-operate with the Federal authority in its vast air effort. It requires mutual co-operation. It is 

therefore, in view of the challenge to the government, implicit in the contesting of this Seat, it is up 

to Saskatoon to show that it is going to co-operate to the limit in whatever war activity Ottawa may 

assign it.” 

 

The implication is that, by working for the government, they are liable to get specific war contracts. 

There has been in this House, and I regret it, Sir, much argument that, through these progressive plans of 

the Government of Saskatchewan, there runs an undercurrent of conspiracy; some deep and unrevealed 

plan. Well, behind the administration of capitalistic governments, there is always the unrevealed plan; 

the plan such as I have outlined in that advertisement, that free enterprise and ‘big business’ is going to 

get just about what it likes, and sometimes even the implication that this establishment and consolidation 

of free enterprise will be linked up with elections and with appeals to people to vote in certain manners. 

 

While I was overseas I was under the impression that it was such things we were struggling against, that 

they had been carried to their zenith, and they had reached the ultimate perfection in the German Fascist 

state; that there enterprise went to the community that supported Hitler, and if it did not support him, it 

lost not only the business and the enterprise, but quite a few other things as well. As a matter of fact, the 

  



 

March 11, 1948 

 

 

 

83 

A.V.C.A. discussion groups, British and Canadian Armies, often had discussions on what constitutes 

Fascism. I have before me an appendix “23” to a book entitled “One Thousand Americans”, by George 

Seldes. It is army talk of Orientation Fact Sheet No. 64, from the War Department of Washington, D.C., 

dated 24th of March, 1945. The title of it is “Fascism” and it gives notes for this week’s discussion. I 

just want to let the House have a few lines from it. The time is getting on, but I shall conclude with this 

quotation, Sir. I do not want to let the House think that this my particular opinion, because I think, in 

cases such as this, I can give more weight to my opinion by quoting the source, although I substantially 

share many of the sentiments expressed in this particular talk. It states: 

 

“Fascism cannot tolerate such religious and ethical concepts as the brotherhood of man. Fascists 

deny the need for International co-operation. These ideas contradict the Fascist theory of the master 

race. Right now in our nation, Fascists are spreading anti-British, anti-Soviet, anti-French and 

anti-United Nations propaganda.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall support the Motion. 

 

The debate was adjourned by Mr. D. M. Lazorko (Redberry). 

 

The House then adjourned, without question put, at 11 o’clock p.m. 

 


