



















































Hansard: March 02, 1948


 

 

1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session - Tenth Legislature 

 

Tuesday, March 2, 1948 

 

The House resumed at 3 o'clock 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed, from Monday, March 1, the adjourned debate on the Motion of Hon. C.M. Fines 

(Provincial Treasurer) that Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair (the House to go into Committee of 

Supply). 

 

Mr. P.A. Howe (Kelvington): — In rising to speak in this debate on the Budget, I wish to compliment 

our Provincial Treasurer, the hon. member for Regina, for the splendid Budget Address and the manner 

in which it was delivered in this House, last Thursday evening. I think it was one of his most outstanding 

contributions since this Government took office in 1944, and I am convinced that the hon. member will 

deliver many more budget addresses in this House through the years that lie ahead. 

 

The Opposition has been quite critical of our Budgets in the past in that we are spending too much 

money and that taxation should be reduced. I do not think that any member in this House is in favour of 

spending huge sums of money just for the sake of spending, but having lived up to our election pledges, 

which is more than previous Governments usually did, I have no apologies to make. I am proud of what 

has been accomplished in the last two or three years. One thing is certain that a government cannot 

increase Social Services on the one hand and eliminate revenues on the other. This has always been the 

criticism and inconsistency of the Opposition. 

 

We have, however, paid up a lot of Liberal debts since we came into office; we have paid off some 

$70,000,000 of the net debt of this province in the last three and a half years. In other words we have 

reduced the debt burden on the people of Saskatchewan equal to $79 per man, woman and child in the 

province, which again is not too bad. In addition to that, the Government has increased various Social 

Services in many ways since we took over. 

 

I want to say here that, during the past three and a half years, the present Government has removed the 

Education Tax on foodstuffs, second-hand goods, drugs and a few other commodities thus removing the 

most regressive features of the tax which was put on the Statute Books of the Province by the Liberal 

Government in 1937. Few if any can be found, who would try to justify a tax on food-stuffs such as the 

Liberal Government in Ottawa has extracted from the people of Canada in the last seven years. Any tax 

on food bears most heavily on 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

2 

large families, whereas a tax on clothing, automobiles and luxury goods depends largely on ability to 

pay. Let us take clothing for an example; a low income worker may buy a $35 suit every second year. I 

can remember the time when I used to wear the same suit for four or five years, whereas the well paid 

worker may buy a $90 suit every six months. In the former case we would collect $3.60. Clearly this is 

based on ability to pay. Anyone who can pay $4,000 for a new Packard or some other high priced 

automobile can well afford to pay the government the 2 per cent Education Tax which would amount to 

some $80, while the person whose income is not so high or high enough to buy a car, it would not 

require them to pay anything. Nor does the person who buys a second-hand car any longer have to pay 

this tax. Yes, the regressive features have been removed to a very large extent. 

 

During the past two or three years, Mr. Tucker has spent a lot of time in the Province of Saskatchewan, 

and during that time I have never heard him protesting the new 25 per cent Excise Tax which has 

recently been placed on automobiles, electric refrigerators, washing machines, ironing machines and 

many other items. This is done when already, this year, the surplus of the Dominion government is over 

$500,000,000. Nor have I heard his voice raised in Ottawa against the 8 per cent Sales Tax on 

everything we buy, or against the 25 per cent Luxury Tax which is on many things that can hardly be 

called luxuries, such as watches and crockery. Nor has he done anything to get the Dominion 

Government to remove the Amusement Tax which they entered during the War, and which would 

greatly assist our municipalities if the Dominion Government would withdraw. Nor have we hard him 

protesting against the heavy Income Tax levied against workers with low incomes, and he has had little 

or nothing to say about the Decontrol Policy of the Federal government which also resulted in greatly 

increased living costs for all of us. 

 

Instead, we find this picking on our little 2 per cent Education Tax which yields this government 

something like four or five million dollars a year. At the same time the people of Saskatchewan, last 

year in 1947, paid twenty-three and a half million dollars in Income Tax to the Government at Ottawa 

besides seven and a half million dollars in Corporation Tax. What the people of Saskatchewan have paid 

in Sales Tax and Excise Tax for the present year is not known, but, in 1945, Saskatchewan residents 

paid in Sales Tax $26,069,000 and in Excise Tax $31,804,000, and I am confident that, for the year 

1947, their figures would possibly be 30-percent greater than in the year 1945. I would, therefore, 

assume that the people of Saskatchewan would pay about $75,000,000 in Sales Tax, and Excise Tax to 

the Dominion Government in 1947, or a grand total of $106,000,000 including Income 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

3 

Taxes. In addition to this, the people of Saskatchewan have paid enormous amounts for tariffs and 

customs duties which would ably reach $30,000,000 in one year. Has anyone heard the Liberal Leader 

for this Province, Mr. Tucker; or any other prominent Liberal in this Province, ever protest against the 

people of this Province having to pay the Federal Government over $136,000,000 in one year's taxation? 

Mr. Tucker, being an influential member in the House of Commons, if he is sincere, Mr. Speaker, in his 

desire to lower the burden of taxation on the people of this province, I would suggest that he get busy 

immediately because he has a wonderful opportunity to get to work on this particular job while he is a 

member in the House of Commons. 

 

During the last three or four years, so many farmers have been able to say for the first time in their lives, 

"At least I have the mortgage paid off, and we can at least call this farm our own." Yes, l have heard 

them say, "it is about time we built a new house, we have lived in this old shack for so long. Our 

children, who have worked so hard to help us provide what we now have are entitled to a certain amount 

of comfort or they too may lose interest in farm life which is so important to the Province of 

Saskatchewan and the welfare of Canada." 

 

My only regret is that it required a major war to make these things possible. 

 

Last summer, in one section of my constituency the farmers and towns people got together and decided 

to gravel a main market road going into the town. Individual farmers put up one hundred dollars each, 

and the municipal council put up $100, and, as a result, these people gravelled some 22 miles of main 

market roads leading into the town of Kelvington. I mention this because people are willing to pay for 

those things which add to their needs and happiness, if they are given an opportunity. I also find that 

people today are building memorial curling and skating rinks to provide recreation and pastime for 

young people and old. For example, in the town of Kelvington, a huge memorial rink is being built; the 

committee in charge drove up to Prince Albert this summer, and made a satisfactory deal with the 

Saskatchewan Timber Board for all the materials required, and I can assure my listeners and all 

members in this House, that they are very happy about it all. 

 

The Timber Board of Saskatchewan means something to those people, and while there is considerable 

lumbering in the northern part of my constituency the Saskatchewan Timber Board, like so many other 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

4 

undertakings of our Government, is going to assist in electing a C.C.F. Government in the next election. 

 

I have also noticed two new schools in my constituency in isolated areas where there never was a school 

before or any educational facilities available for those children in the years gone by. Driving past the 

school several times, last summer, I could not help but feel, when I saw those children playing in the 

schoolyard, here are some 20 children for the first time who have been given the opportunity to have a 

qualified teacher to instruct them in what Democracy means and the responsibility of Canadian 

citizenship. This was made possible under our Larger School Unit of Administration. 

 

Through the equalization of taxation in the Larger School Unit Areas, it has been made possible to 

provide these services. This is approach to equality of educational opportunity together with many other 

advantages available, which would otherwise be impossible. 

 

I also see many hospitals being built. In 1944 when this Government took over there were some 3.9 

hospital beds per 1,000 people, which is very inadequate. In order to make our health program effective, 

more hospitals were necessary. For the first time in the history of this province, building grants have 

been made available for the construction of hospitals and these grants are based on necessity and the 

ability of any given community to carry the load on its own, and I am happy to say that, as a result of 

this program, we have at the present time some 6 beds per thousand people in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like now, Sir, to address a few remarks to the Chambers of the Opposition and particularly the 

hon. member from the Mediterranean Area. I want to say to them the people of Saskatchewan are not 

going to be stampeded into any fears attempted by some members of this House, that the policies and 

the program of this government are threatening the freedom and liberties of our people. I refer, now, to 

the hon. and gallant member from the Mediterranean Area and I ask you, Mr. Speaker, for permission to 

read a letter I received from one of my constituents just the other day: 

 

"I am writing to you as a member of the Legislature for Kelvington in which I reside believing the 

following may interest you. I have been listening to the radio broadcasts and proceedings in the 

Legislative Assembly and heard the address made by Mr. Embury a few days ago, Armed Forces' 

Representative, and never have I heard or read a political speech so lacking in Parliamentary courtesy 

and so full of sly insinuations and name-calling in his remark asking 'all decent people 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

5 

in Saskatchewan to oust the CCF Government". I took this as a personal insult, taking the meaning out 

of it that I, believing in a Government of the People and not a Government of the capital controlled 

political party, am not a decent citizen. 

 

"The result of his speech has been that today I applied for membership for Mrs. Schiller and myself in 

the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation. 

 

"If you wish to use this letter you have my permission in that it would give as a great deal of pleasure 

if Mr. Embury was made aware of the fact that he is instrumental in gaining two new members in the 

Co-operative Commonwealth Federation and Humanitarian Movement." 

 

Now this sort of criticism helped win the Election in 1944, and it will help again in the next election. 

 

I went to say further to the hon. member and all the members opposite that the CCF has its roots deep in 

the soil of the Province of Saskatchewan, yes, deep in the hearts of men and women . . . 

 

Mr. Procter: — They are suffering from root rot though. 

 

Mr. P.A. Howe: — . . . who in the last 25 years have given of their sons in two major wars to serve on 

the battlefields in so many parts of the world to preserve Democracy. Our memories are not so short but 

we remember the days when the Liberal party had complete control in Saskatchewan and at one time — 

if I remember correctly — the only opposition was the late Dr. J.T.M. Anderson and the CCF unheard of 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Later, in 1933, when wheat went down to 23 cents a bushel, because of a supposed surplus and millions 

in the world were suffering with hunger and starvation, schools in Saskatchewan were closed because 

farmers could not pay their taxes; farmers were threatened with insecurity; teachers' salaries were 

unpaid, with some 600,000 of our Canadian youth unemployed and the refuge for these young people 

were the soup kitchens, later only to join the army and become the heroes of our nation. What a tragedy, 

Mr. Speaker! 

 

Those were the days when members opposite were content 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

6 

to say nothing about our people losing their rights, privileges and dignity that they had worked so hard 

to get and had a right to enjoy. I want to say to you, Sir, and members in the Opposition, that freedom of 

the individual ends where it interferes with the liberties of the many. The kind of propaganda and fear 

attempted by the members of the Opposition do not lead themselves to strengthen our Democracy; rather 

the opposite. 

 

Again I want to quote from the December issue of Maclean's entitled "Backstage at Ottawa", by the 

'Man with a Notebook': 

 

"Duplessis will call anyone a Communist whom he does not like; any aggressive Labour Union leader, 

not only in the International Unions but in the Catholic Syndicates, too, is likely to be branded 

publicly as a Red. Privately, the Communist smear has even been swabbed upon some members of the 

Catholic Clergy. 

 

This indiscriminate name-calling has had an unexpected result. It has bracketed with the Communists 

to their undeserved credit, practically everybody in Quebec's Labour movement who is active enough 

to attract attention. More and more French-Canadian workers are saying, 'If that's what Communism 

is, then I'm all for it.'" 

 

Mr. A.T. Procter: — Pretty good is it not? 

 

Mr. P.A. Howe: — Mr. Speaker, I know of no other way to forestall my form of dictatorship than to 

make our Democratic way of life workable at home. This can only be made possible through the 

People's Movement in which people generally assume responsibility. In our C.C.F. Movement, the 

people themselves are formulating the policies and program of this government. This is done at 

constituency and provincial conventions which are held every year and thereby placing responsibility on 

the people. In other words "Government of the people, by the people and for the people" is the only road 

to the attainment of a real political and economic Democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall support the Motion. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

7 

Hon. J.L. Phelps (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this 

Budget Debate, first I would say that I have not taken part in the two previous Budget debates, nor in the 

Debate on the Speech from the Throne at this Session. At one time I had thought that, possibly, I could 

convey to this House information in regard to the Department, and in regard to other expenditures, on 

other occasions that are afforded in this House. 

 

However, after certain statements were made, yesterday in particular, I felt called upon to say 

something, and before I do I would like to add my word of appreciation to the Provincial Treasurer who 

submitted this Budget to the House. I think he had good material to work on but he did it in a splendid 

manner. He did credit to himself, to the Government of which he is a member as a representative of his 

constituency and the Province as a whole. 

 

The Budget provides a good deal of scope for the discussion of the various problems and programs of 

the Province and of the Government; I think it affords one of the best opportunities during the various 

Sessions to review the work of departments and to discuss a future policy. 

 

Before we go into that I would like to say a few words about the constituency I represent. I want to say 

that there are many parts of the province this past year which have experienced crop failure. However, 

so far as Saltcoats is concerned, we have been blessed with a very good crop. Like some other parts of 

the province we have had almost too such moisture, and in the eastern section there are some areas there 

that will require some drainage, and I want to say that serious steps have been taken to remedy that 

condition if it becomes more aggravated. To say that during the past year, as a result of that, some of the 

road work that was planned was impossible to carry out and discussing the matter with the Minister of 

Highways, we went down and checked over the situation before those programs had to be abandoned for 

last year, and it was agreed that this coming year, if the conditions permitted and the water levels had 

receded to some extent, the program would be resumed and completed this year; and there is part of it 

that has been arranged for, and I have taken the Minister at his word knowing he will carry it through. I 

want to say if it is not carried through, he will hear something from Saltcoats. 

 

I had hoped the Leader of the Opposition would be in his place, and I hope he will be able to be back in 

the House. However, to say something in reference to some of the statements he made, yesterday, I want 

to say on behalf of the Members on this side of the House that we are anxious at all time to give what 

information 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

8 

is available on the various workings of our departments. There is an opportunity in the estimates when 

they are going through the House; there was opportunities when the Public Accounts Committee are 

examining the Public Accounts, and there are various opportunities during any session to present these 

various matters and I am sure all hon. members will be pleased to avail themselves of the opportunity of 

acquiring that information. However, in listening to the speech that was delivered yesterday in this 

House by the Leader of the Opposition, I want to say that, so far as I am concerned — and I think many 

other members on this side of the House — we had more or less decided to treat the Leader of the 

Opposition rather kindly up until that point — so far as I am concerned at least. After all, be gave us 

quite a "swan song' a year ago, and we took him at his word. In the interim either he changed his mind 

or somebody else changed it for him, so the position to some extent is changed, and I want to say in 

regard to this changed position it might be that the Liberal party is looking, again for another Leader — 

and Heaven knows they need one! — maybe they have their eye on the Leader of the Opposition; maybe 

that is why he still has his hat in the ring. 

 

I want to say that I am sorry the absentee Leader of the Liberal party is not in the House, and am sorry 

he did not avail himself of the opportunity and the invitation of our Premier to be present, here in the 

House and answer for some of the irresponsible statements he had made out in the country. He made 

those statements knowing full well he would not have to be here to answer for them. 

 

Hon. O.W. Valleau: — And never will. 

 

Hon. J.L. Phelps: — And, as my friend says, never will, which is quite possible. I went to say, also, that 

I have heard many supporters of my hon. friend's party over there make this statement, that Mr. Tucker 

last fall did just the same thing our hon. friend, Mr. Embury has done just recently, and that it made 

more supporters and voters for the C.C.F. than he did for any other party due to statements he has made. 

 

I notice that the Leader of the Opposition ordinarily is much more cautious than is the Leader of the 

Liberal party in the statements he makes, with one notable exception, and that is the speech he made 

yesterday. I have mentioned before in this House that I have had a great deal of respect and admiration 

for the Leader of the Opposition on occasions when I used to sit over there and he sat over here, 

particularly on those occasions when 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

9 

he presented the Annual Budget to this House. I used to think, considering the material he had to work 

on, he did a remarkably good job of it. But it seems to me he has not been able to accustom himself to 

being on that side of the House and to perform his duty as the Leader of an opposition, nor does he seem 

to be able to adjust himself to that new role. That may be a matter of opinion, but it is my observation. 

The exhibition we had yesterday did not do a great deal of credit to this House, not that the criticism he 

levelled was out of place but the speech he delivered — and I think he will be struck with it himself 

when he sits down and reads it over — it is nothing but a bunch of clap-trap half-truths and most of it 

pure tripe. I never listened, in this House, to such a bunch of bits and pieces as I did, yesterday, in the 

speech he delivered on that occasion. 

 

Mr. Procter: — You have never heard yourself. 

 

Hon. J.L. Phelps: — His usual restraint was missing, and as has been said before in this House that the 

criticism of the Government's policy so far by the Opposition has been picayune — somebody says 

'peanuts.' Well, relatively speaking, yesterday it could not have been even peanuts; it could be nothing 

short of Timothy seed, something you need a magnifying glass to find. If this proves to be the 'swan-

song' of my hon. friend, that is his last major effort in replying to the Budget Speech presented to this 

House, it is regrettable that he chose to go out on such a low note. He is helping neither himself or his 

party by making a contribution of that kind. 

 

I am going to leave to the leader some further comments I had to make regarding specific statements he 

made on that occasion. We have waited for his presentation and though we have not had a chance to 

analyze in detail all the things he said — and it will not be possible until the speech is transcribed — I 

did note some of the remarks he made. So far as I am concerned, I am proud to be a member of a 

Government who had the courage and the determination to present to this House the budget of the type 

and nature that was presented by the Provincial Treasurer a few days ago. In other words, rather than 

being afraid of bigger and better budgets, I welcome bigger and better, and I hope that next year this 

Government will be able to bring to this House, and be able to substantiate it, a bigger and better budget 

than ever. Why do I say that? Because it seems that some people are overlooking something. My friends 

over there will be the first ones to suggest certain things the Government should undertake. Every one 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

10 

of these undertakings invariably needs additional expenditure. Members of this House well know the 

economic consequences when all governments, all municipal bodies, all public bodies — whether they 

are municipal, provincial or federal — start to retrench and retract and curtail, not only their 

expenditures but their development part of their programs. After all, it seems to me the purpose of a 

government is to govern, to give leadership to its people; and just as soon as a government starts to 

retrench, it ought to be a signal to everyone else to do the same, and this House well knows the 

economic results of a program being applied at that time. If we have no depression when it starts, we 

will certainly have one before it gets very far. There is one thing that will give stability to this province 

and to the Dominion of Canada and to any other country, and that is the matter of continued confidence 

and expansion. 

 

I noticed an editorial in the paper here a few days ago, just after the Budget was introduced, cautioning 

about the matter of curtailing expenditures in provincial programs. I think people would be well advised 

to examine some of those statements very closely, and that whole approach to this problem. I do not 

believe that anyone, including the government, can borrow himself out of debt. I am not advocating or 

suggesting, in fact, I would oppose a program of that kind. On the other hand, if you check this 

Government's record, you will find that not only are we at the same time working ourselves out of the 

provincial debt that was mentioned by my hon. friend the member for Kelvington, but this Government 

has been one of the first to start to pay off the provincial debt. Former governments — the Liberal 

government of this province — simply added to the debt almost every year, with a few exceptions, but 

the exceptions were very few. All you have to do is go over the Public Accounts here. You will see their 

record for yourselves; and so I say that this is the first provincial government that has ever gone about it 

in a. serious manner, paying off some of our provincial debts, not by borrowing new money to pay them, 

but actually liquidating them and paying them off. At the rate we have gone for the past four years, if we 

can keep that rate up so far as our debt is concerned, possibly in twenty or twenty-five years it will be 

possible to have Saskatchewan on a cash basis. And why would that not be a good thing? Get away from 

paying so much interest, with the heavy drain that it has been, over the past years when my friends in the 

Opposition were the government. These debts are not our creation — they have been created principally 

by my friends sitting on the Opposition, when they were over here. 

 

I want to emphasize again, the Leader of the Opposition tried to represent to this House, although I do 

not believe he even convinced himself, that the taxes had been raised substantially. Now, if he refers to 

taxes so far as the taxes collected by the Provincial Government are concerned, then I say he is either 

trying to kid somebody else or trying to kid himself. I am not talking about the taxes that are levied by 

the local authorities — that is quite a different matter, and is not the matter to which he referred — but it 

is the taxes that are paid by the people of this province to the Provincial Treasurer of Saskatchewan. I 

have here, taken 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

11 

from the Public Accounts of this province, the amounts of moneys that have been paid over the years, 

the various types of taxes, to the provincial government. We find, for instance, in 1944 — a year quite 

often referred to as a landmark — the amount of money that was paid by the people of this province in 

taxes, in licences, and in fees. Those, as my hon. friends know, are the main and principal items to 

which the people of the province contribute. In 1944 we find that they paid in — in those three 

categories — $15,913,934. In 1947 they paid in $16,185,000 — a total increase in those two years, 

comparing one year with another — of only $271,066. That is a very small increase, and no amount of 

arguing that my friend over there can produce, now or at any time in the future, can refute those 

statements. That is the sum total of taxation increase by this provincial government, not only in taxes, 

but he is talking about licences being increased and all the rest of it — but that is the sum total of the 

whole thing. In addition to that, when we have only raised taxes $271,000, we have provided several 

billions of dollars of additional moneys for social services of various kinds. 

 

I repeat again that we have paid off a very substantial amount of the provincial debt of the province of 

Saskatchewan. We have carried on an expanding program in every department of the Government, and I 

hope that expansion will continue — not in a mushroom fashion — but in a steady development 

program for the province. Some governments think that the time of prosperity is the time to economize 

and save, and I want to repeat again that it is ideas such as these that encourage depressions. I am just 

'Scotch' enough, Sir, to want to be assured that money that is voted in is not just spent in the ordinary 

sense — I am one of those who is most anxious, as other members of this government are, in seeing that 

this money is invested rather than spent, and that it is invested in such a manner that it will provide a 

foundation for the future economy of our province that will serve its purpose in expanding economy. 

The Opposition say 'Reduce.' I noticed, yesterday, the Leader of the Opposition said — 'stupid!' trying to 

give the people the jitters! — but he did not offer one constructive suggestion as to where or what item 

of that whole list he would suggest should be reduced. When he or his colleagues rise to speak on this 

debate, if they get up and say that this budget is too big, it is their responsibility to go over that budget 

item by item, department by department, and show us where appreciable savings or reductions should be 

made. 

 

Mr. Procter: — In the Fish Board! 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — My friend says the Fish Board. Have a little patience, you will hear something of 

that yet. I am not denying that mistakes have been made, but I do not think any of a serious nature have 

been made. Naturally as long as we have governments that are run by human beings, there will be errors 

in judgment; but I hope this Government continues to be big enough to admit it, any time there is an 

error in judgement. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

12 

I want to tell my friends in the Opposition that there is one mistake this Government has not made, and 

that is, not continuing our expanding program; in other words, this is not a 'do nothing' government, as 

my hon. friends used to be when they were over here — we get things done, even if we do make the odd 

mistake — and I would rather be among those who err in getting things done, rather than be like my 

friends over there, a 'do nothing' group. 

 

I believe the people of the province of Saskatchewan have been getting better value for their tax dollar, 

in the program of expansion that this government has initiated, than from previous governments in this 

province. Speaking for my own Department, possibly I or someone else can go over that Department 

and point out places where money could have been saved — where expenditures were made that, had we 

been able to foresee them, would not have been made. It is very easy to look back on things and say 

what should have been done; but I will say that in the main, the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

are getting good value for the money that has been expended. It is easy enough to criticize. Naturally, 

that is one of the duties of an Opposition; but I recall when we were over on that side of the House, we 

operated under two different Leaders during the time I sat over there, and both of those Leaders 

impressed upon us from time to time that our job was not only to offer criticism, but to offer 

constructive criticism, and we always undertook to do that. That is one thing that is noticeable by its 

absence in my friend's group over there. 

 

In answer to my friend's criticism that this Budget is too large, I wonder if he and the members of his 

group are aware of the fact that there is a small group of companies operating in the province of 

Saskatchewan that have invested as much in certain years in Saskatchewan — in one year, in their own 

programs — as we are doing. I would like to think of the people of Saskatchewan as a whole, being 

bigger than any other group within that society, and I would like, to think of them as having sufficient 

confidence in their own welfare and their own future to invest substantial sums in the development of 

our province; and that is the view I take of the government presenting any budget to any provincial 

legislature. If it is good business for business institutions to invest money in Saskatchewan, then why is 

it not good business for the Government itself? The C.C.F. Government believe that Saskatchewan is a 

good place to invest our money, and that is one of the main reasons we are looking forward, year by 

year, to bigger and better budgets. We believe it will pay good dividends to adopt an attitude of that 

kind. You can never build up a farm or any other kind of business unless you are prepared to invest 

some money into it, and invest some hard work. Those are two very necessary ingredients to the 

development of any business, and it is equally true as applied to the Province of Saskatchewan. If we 

ever expect this province to get anywhere we must look forward, although our friends over there would 

like us to keep our eyes on our toes — but the C.C.F. looks forward with confidence to the future 

development of our province. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

13 

My hon. friends talk about the budget they brought down — I think more or less apologetically now, 

when they look back. In 1944, the last budget they brought down (and I hope it will be the last that they 

bring down) on a per capita basis amounted to $35.25. The one this Government introduced a few days 

ago to this House amounts to $62.02 per capita. 

 

I know my hon. friend the Leader of the Opposition tries to frighten the people of the province by using 

big figures, and tries to confuse them by juggling figures sometimes; but when you work it out, on a per 

capita basis, that $62.02 per capita for the people of the province of Saskatchewan is not something that 

will frighten them very much. What they want is development. They do not want to go back into another 

depression and hard times, as was the case when my hon. friends sat on this side of the House. I am not 

suggesting for one moment that Saskatchewan will be able to build a fence around our province, if 

economic conditions in the world start rocking the boat; but I do say this — if all provincial 

governments take a forward-looking attitude it will be possible, to a large extent, to at least soften the 

shock, and it will go a long way toward providing their old people with the necessities and some of the 

good things of life. 

 

The hon. member for Kelvington mentioned that this Government had been responsible for taking care 

of an amount of interest. That interest payment per capita, when the Leader of the Opposition was the 

Leader of the Government, was $8.91 per capita. Today, as a result of lowering interest rates and paying 

off some of our provincial debts, the interest now per capita is down to $6.88. I think that is a very 

substantial reduction in a very short space of time. Many of the predictions made by the Opposition did 

not come true, as usual. They said, last year, that we would end up at the end of this year in financial 

difficulties. The financial statement that has been presented to this House is the healthiest one that has 

been presented to this Legislature to date, and I hope that I have sufficient confidence in the future of 

Saskatchewan to believe that we can carry through next year in the same way. 

 

There have been some statements made in the House to the effect that the main conflict today is between 

a new social order and free enterprise. The Opposition say that Socialism is on trial. I am going to 

submit that Socialism is not on trial, and predict that before very long — my friends of the Opposition 

have a new word for capitalism now; it is all dressed up as "free enterprise", but they can sugar that pill 

as much as they like and it is still capitalism with all its evils — it will be capitalism that is on trial, not 

Socialism. 

 

The Minister of Labour, last night, at Ottawa announced that 200,000 people in the Dominion of Canada 

are unemployed. If you add to that figure their dependants, you have a very substantial number of people 

who are out of work today. What is wrong with your capitalistic system? What is wrong with your price 

set-up today, that the rank and file of the common people are asking for price control, that system that 

you maintain that does not need any governor, that operates itself by some hocus-pocus means? They 

are going 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

14 

to find out that they are going to have to give some serious attention to this economic machinery that 

they are defending — and it is going to take some defending. Here is something that one of their own 

people has stated quite recently. This is not a socialist I am quoting now, but Richard G. Lewis, Editor 

of 'The Canadian Broadcaster', in a speech made to the Junior Chamber of Commerce at Chatham, 

Ontario, on January 19th. As I understand it, Mr. Lewis is not a Socialist — he is a believer in the 

capitalist system, and here he is warning the people to whom he was speaking as to what they are up 

against. Rather than dealing with abstracts and shadows, he was telling them to deal with realities. Here 

is what he says: 

 

"The Dominion Government controls finance through its Bank of Canada. It has its tentacles wound 

around the business of transportation, through its Canadian National Railways, its Trans-Canada Air 

Lines, and even road transport is affected by the government-owned Polymer Corporation which, long 

after the war, is still the only concern making synthetic rubber required in the manufacture of tires, and 

so constitutes another government monopoly in a vital industry. These are the supply lines through 

which government can control industry without having to go through the motions of nationalizing your 

business or mine. These controls are implemented by the government-operated Canadian National 

Express and Telegraphs. Then, of course, as media of propaganda, Ottawa has its Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation, regulating private radio with its complete control of all the promoting, and 

at the same time competing with private stations in the field of radio advertising. It has its National 

Film Board, with its talons sunk well into this other potent medium of information. So far, thank God, 

the press has escaped its claws. Other less important fields into which governments, federal and 

provincial, have trespassed, are insurance, electric power, telephones and even through the Federal 

War Assets Corporation, the junk business. There is the handwriting on the wall!" 

 

These are some of the things that are maintained by my friends on the other side of the House. They 

stand up here and criticize Crown Corporations. They centre their attack on this Government on the fact 

that we have stepped out and carried out our program upon which the people elected us, in organizing 

Crown Corporations to carry on some of the business of the economy of our province. Still, at the same 

time — I don't know how they do it; they must do it with tongue in cheek — they support a Federal 

Government that has (I have here a list of Public Accounts of this year for the Dominion House) over 41 

Crown Corporations that are operating and have been operating. Some of them have been disbanded 

since termination of the war. 

 

There is no use of them playing "Pollyanna" — they must be Rip van Winkles — they must have gone 

to sleep; but they are going to wake up one of these days, to find that their own Party has gone a long 

way in socializing certain branches of the economy of the Dominion of Canada. They say they do not 

like it; why do they not tell their own representatives so? Why are they not consistent? We are simply 

branching out into new lines — the very things that my hon. friends have supported their Party in doing 

in the federal field. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

15 

Yesterday, the hon. Leader of the Opposition made certain statements about other phases of our 

provincial economy. It seems to me they are like jackals, repeating — "Socialism and Regimentation vs. 

Free Enterprise" — and while they are doing that the caravan passes; things are going on. It may not be 

of much avail, Mr. Speaker, to lecture to this House, trying to got my hon. friends to see the light of day. 

Someone once said, "There's none so blind as they that won't see"; and so I do not expect to convert 

them; but I would like to put on the record of this House the fact that, while they stand in their places 

and criticize this Government tor carrying out a forward-looking program, they at the same time support 

their federal group that is doing exactly the same thing. I shall refer to that further in a few moments. 

 

They say that social ownership will result in dictatorship. I submit, Sir, that we have two choices: either 

social ownership, in which the people as a whole will play a part and have and maintain control, or it is 

capitalism that my hon. friends seek to perpetuate that surely will result in dictatorship. We have it 

rearing its ugly head right here in Canada today. 

 

The government of which my hon. friend was the Leader, did some socializing themselves. He 

mentioned, yesterday, about them starting the Telephones and he took some credit for having done so. 

He mentioned the Power Commission, and I am going to refer to that a little later on — and to their 

record of public ownership. Yes, they made certain starts; with their tongues in their cheeks. I want to 

say that this is not new in principle; it is something that has been going on for some considerable time. 

Social ownership is democracy in action. The people must control our own economy, or the economy 

will control us. That is what has been going on as far as the workers are concerned with the interlocking 

of directorates of big business which largely controls the business of the Dominion of Canada. 

 

I was rather amused, just a couple of days ago, to hear of a lady in this City who, in speaking to a group 

in this city, said that she did not want to be classed as a shareholder of these Crow Corporations of the 

C.C.F. She did not want any part of them. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

16 

Well, Mr. Speaker, she and all the rest like her had better find a Robinson Crusoe island of some kind 

and buzz off to it pretty quick, because whether she likes it or not, she is a shareholder in something 

around 41 Crown Corporations that the Federal Government — that she is out supporting — has 

organized and maintained. 

 

Talking about people like ostriches who 'put their head in the sand'; but, Mr. Speaker, they must have 

got a lot of sand in their ears too, otherwise they could have read and seen and heard what was going on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it appears to me that the term free-enterprise is a misnomer, and I think to prove that all 

that we would need to do is to check up on what is happening, in the investigation that is going on in the 

United States today, into the combines and the monopolies that we have contended right along exist, and 

which my hon. friends have all besought to deny. I wonder what position they take, today. I notice that 

he very cautiously avoided any reference to it yesterday. Yes, he skates around that one pretty quick, 

Mr. Speaker. It is kind of thin ice; because he knows full well that these investigations are going on at 

the present time, and they are bringing to the surface a condition that many have known to exist for a 

long time. Right here in our own Dominion of Canada, the Federal Government, which my hon. friends 

support, have at last bestirred themselves to the extent that they are now starting an investigation 

themselves; things have gotten into such a shameful condition. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the profits of these companies during the past immediate few years can 

be seen by studying the financial statements of them and you will see what is happening to our 

economy. Again I say, they must be Rip Van Winkles, surely. 

 

And to bring another point to this House, something that has happened. I was asked, a few weeks ago, to 

speak to the Junior Chamber of Commerce of this city. About ten days or two weeks ago, I was asked to 

go up to the University at Saskatoon and speak there to the class of engineers, part of which will 

graduate this year — a group of some five or six hundred in the latter group — and in both of these 

cases they were all young men, with one or two exceptions. They were young men equipping themselves 

to start out in the world. The majority of them were Saskatchewan boys; and I asked the Chairman in 

both cases — I was curious to know one thing — I said to the Chairman of the Junior Chamber of 

Commerce: "What percentage of these young fellows who are in the business world in this area, expect 

or can reasonably hope to go into a business for themselves?" He looked over the room backwards and 

forwards for a few moments, and he turned to me and said, "l would estimate about seven per cent that 

will go into business for themselves," and he said, "of those seven percent, a very small percentage will 

own their own store." This man, I think, is not a rabid socialist, 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

17 

Mr. Speaker, that I was speaking to. I was curious to find out where our business friends are leading us, 

and some of the conditions that are created by my friends who talk so much about free enterprise. Just 

how free is this thing, and how enterprising, Mr. Speaker? I did the same with the engineers, and to my 

surprise, the president of that Student Council, after looking over the whole body up and down the tables 

— some were apparently new to him; he took a few moments to run over them, and I was surprised to 

hear him say, when I asked him the same question 'How many of these students can expect to go into 

business for themselves". Do you know what he said? Between eight and ten per cent" was his estimate. 

So, Mr. Speaker, it brings home to us, those young men that are being trained largely at public expense, 

we are supplying them with the education that will be paid for out of public funds, and when they have 

obtained that education, they will go into the service of some of the big Corporation that are seeking to 

control the economy of this country. 

 

Now, they will faithfully say they will pay good wages; sure they will give them their hay and oats. I am 

going to say, Mr. Speaker, that some of the best brains of this country will be utilized in making more 

profit for the shareholders of those gigantic Corporations, and I say that it is too bad for Saskatchewan if 

we allow this kind of thing to continue, the siphoning off, shall I say, of the best brains of our country. 

Why can we not provide these boys whom we have trained and made a public investment in, in taking 

their place in the economy of our province and help to build it up on a social basis. 

 

I ought to say, Mr. Speaker, that these youths will have three choices as I see it. It is a choice of what 

group they are going to work with. They can go with the group, the Corporations. Very few of them will 

be able to operate a business individually, so they have the choice of going to work for one of the large 

Corporations. They will have a choice of working with the Co-operative movement; fitting themselves 

into that field. Or they will have the choice of going in to serve society as a whole, on a social basis. 

Those are the three choices they have, and the first choice is narrowing down and getting less and less 

every year, the opportunities in that field becoming more and more restrictive. You know I sometimes 

think that my Liberal friends are like frogs. They stand up (the frogs) on their hind legs, and due to the 

way they are made, there is only way they can see, and that is straight backwards. Well, I hope that they 

would begin to take a little different attitude, and, if they stand up on their hind legs because they are 

built that way, that they at least turn around once and see what is going on around them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say this, the common people are on the march, and they do not have any patience, 

a large number of them, with the 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

18 

viewpoints that are expressed by my hon. friends on the other side of the House. The industrial worker 

and the farmer are joining hands, not as special groups in all cases, maybe in a few; but there is getting 

to be a wider and a broader understanding. They are joining hands as citizens of our country, uniting 

their efforts and expanding and improving our economy, recognizing that they have everything to gain 

and nothing to lose. 

 

With regard to some of the criticism that has come from the other side of the House, the hon. member 

from the Mediterranean was criticizing the Co-operative farms and he disclosed to this House that he 

had never even visited one. He gets a lot of his information, apparently, by reading the newspapers or 

hearing somebody gossip on the street corners . . . 

 

Mr. Hansen: — The Leader-Post. 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — The Leader-Post, my friend says. That is not always the most reliable source of 

your information. I want to say this, some of the members on the other side of the House have sought to 

criticize our program in regard to fish, fur, and timber. While they are criticizing our fur-marketing 

service, for instance, with the exception of the hon. member for Athabasca who, I am glad to say, went 

over to visit our fur-marketing service few days ago — I have not heard him say yet what he thinks of it, 

but I hope he will express to the House what his reaction was — but with that exception, I am just 

wondering if any member of the Opposition has ever interested himself sufficiently to go over there and 

find out what goes on. No, they would prefer to stand on the outside and throw stones through the 

windows, and try to throw sand in the gears rather than doing something constructive to aid the 

economic development of this province. The people of Saskatchewan have little patience for that kind of 

thing. 

 

I venture to state that some of our hon. friends over there have been asking a lot of questions, that I am 

going to refer to in a few moments, about development in the North and operations in the North. They 

exposed their ignorance of even the geography of that country by some of the questions, which indicates 

to me that some of them, at least, have never been further north than Waskesiu, maybe not even any 

further north than Prince Albert. Prince Albert, I want to tell the House, is still in the south half of the 

province of Saskatchewan. If you want to go north, go north and see what is going on, instead of sitting 

here and criticizing. I would suggest that you know the place first and then offer your criticism and 

suggestions. As far as we are concerned on this side of the House, on that basis we would welcome it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Leader of the Opposition, yesterday, referred to the need of industrial 

development in Saskatchewan. Then he started in by telling how few claims — mining claims — had 

been staked. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

19 

He read something out of a newspaper possibly. My hon. friend should be old enough, and in this House 

long enough, to know that there are two sides to every question. Rather when he hears some bit of 

information drop he would be well-advised to get all the facts first before he fires the gun. He invited 

something when he made this crack about the number of claims that have been staked, because I found it 

necessary to make a few inquiries as to what is going on here, on a comparable basis. He says that there 

were a small number of claims staked in Saskatchewan. Here is the number of claims staked from 1936 

to 1947, taking an average for 1939. When he was sitting on this side of the House and leading the 

government, there were 190 claims staked that year. In 1939, there were 193; in 1940, there were 40; in 

1941, there were 22 claims; in 1942, there were 61; in 1943, there were 46; in 1944, there were 155 

claims. Now, look what has happened from that time on! In 1945, there were 294 claims; in 1946, there 

were 295; in 1947, there were 319. 

 

Now, I wonder what he thinks we are, a bunch of school kids in this House? He comes in here with 

figures that, I think, he would do well to examine very closely before he presents figures of that kind, 

realizing that someone else is going to have an opportunity to express some opinion and give the facts. 

 

There is something else; he was bemoaning the fact that a mine was closed down in Saskatchewan. 

Well, I want to repeat what I said yesterday; that mine was closed down while he was the Leader of this 

government, and the closing down of a mines is nothing new in the Dominion of Canada. I have here in 

my hand, a list of the mines that have been closed in the Dominion of Canada — big mines not small 

ones, major undertakings due to the unsettled condition of mining, particularly in gold mining, there are 

37 mines closed down in the Dominion of Canada, today; there are ten in Ontario, eleven in British 

Columbia, three in Quebec, two in Nova Scotia, the balance scattered over the Dominion of Canada. 

Sure we have a mine closed down. My hon. friend, instead of offering some constructive suggestions, he 

should know full well why that mine is closed down. It is not something that is new; but I want to point 

out to this House what has been the record in Saskatchewan with regard to mineral production here, as 

compared to the Dominion of Canada. I am anxious to get the whole picture, not just get it in bits and 

pieces. What have we got here in the Dominion of Canada and the Province of Saskatchewan? Take the 

year, again, of 1938; that was the year when my hon. friend was the Leader of the Government again. In 

1938, the value of the minerals developed in Saskatchewan was a little over eight million dollars. With a 

few exceptions, it has steadily increased. During the last four years that increase has been doubled and it 

is four times as great now as it was in 1938. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

20 

Now, compare what the whole Dominion of Canada has done. Their production was $529,000,000 in the 

same year, 1938-39. Today, it is $493,000,000 for the whole of the Dominion of Canada — less today 

than it was in 1939. If I had the time I would go through the entire list; but I will table these, and my 

authority is taken from the Journals of this Dominion. When the hon. member stands up in the House 

and tries to lead the people of this province to believe that mineral production is lagging in 

Saskatchewan, he is either trying to 'kid' himself, or deliberately mislead the people of the province, one 

or the other; and I suggest to him that the next time he tries it, he had better get the facts. 

 

He says that industry lags. Again, facts prove that industry and business in Saskatchewan is in a thriving 

condition, and there have been more businesses organized than in any period of our history, which has 

been covered before in this House. I ask the hon. members of that side of the House how they performed 

when they were over here, in regard to industry, and I remind them again that during the time they were 

here they did not get any industries. Not even in war time were they successful in having war industries 

established here, although other provinces did so. Certainly there is a reason why some industries do not 

come here — they are established in other provinces — they do not want industries in the West, and 

particularly some of them do not want industries under social development plans. I want to also remind 

the House that when the Opposition were over here they had some industries started . . . yes, they put a 

half-million dollars — they do a lot of hollering about a few thousand dollars of deficits in some of our 

Crown Corporations; but when they were on this side of the House they put a half-million dollars into 

one enterprise, and then they sold it for the magnificent sum of one dollar. But, of course those are some 

of the things they do not want to be reminded of. Well, it is time someone reminded them of some of 

these things when they, are criticizing the things that are happening today. 

 

They were critical of the fact that the Imperial Oil had left Saskatchewan, had ceased their development 

program. Well, I have no apologies to offer. When any corporation in this province starts to pound the 

table and put the lid down and say, "we'll only develop on such and such a basis, or else!" — if I am 

going to be Minister of Natural Resources on those terms, it will be "or else" and that's all! 

 

My hon. friend mentioned Leduc. Well, that may be a historical event in the Province of Alberta — that 

same Leduc; because we find today that the major oil company has got a stranglehold, almost a 

monopoly, on that particular oil field, and it is not only giving the government concern there, but it is 

giving the people more concern. If my hon. friend wants that sort of thing to take place in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, it will not be done with my say so. 

 

My hon. friend says, insofar as development is concerned, "no revenue from the big corporations in 

Provincial Revenue." I want him to know that, during the past year, one of the largest mining companies 

in the 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

21 

province of Saskatchewan — I refer to the Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company, so that no one 

need do any guessing — that Company's contribution to the Provincial Treasury will be approximately 

one and a quarter million dollars. What was it when my hon. friend, the last year he sat over here 

heading the Government? All he got from that Company was $186,000. If you go to Public Accounts 

you will find my statement correct. I have found that Company honourable to deal with, and their 

dealings above reproach so far as I am concerned. They have co-operated with this Government, and I 

suggest that they believe in all our policies, or are convinced that they are the right ones to follow. At 

least they say this: The President of that Company, last year, paid me what I thought the greatest 

compliment when I met him up there, in discussing this matter — he said, "Phelps, you drive a hard 

bargain, but we are not kicking, for we have learned one thing; when you say a deal is a deal, that's it. 

We know where we stand." As far as I am concerned, there can be no better word of praise than what he 

said in that regard — that my word can be taken. Of that comment I would like to say that while their 

royalty rates have been increased four or five times, they are now on a sliding scale, and the more 

money they make, the more we will make; the greater the value of that ore, the more money will come 

back to the province. Possibly next year, we will get a greater revenue. We had expected even a larger 

revenue this year; but there are reasons why that did not happen, which I shall explain later on. 

 

You say — "Why, you are bleeding them dry!" Not necessarily; they are not kicking, because if they 

had not paid that to the provincial government in royalties, they would have had to pay just that much 

more in federal taxes to the Dominion Government. While they paid a million and a quarter to the 

provincial government, they possibly paid three or four million to the federal government in excess 

taxes, income taxes, and corporation tax. 

 

Now, anyone who says to this House — "We are not getting revenue from these sources", is not giving 

the facts. The revenue to our Department, generally, has been substantially increased. Those who 

criticize the Budget and the fact that revenues have not been spread over sufficiently wide an area 

should take some of these things into consideration. A statement was made by the Leader of the 

Opposition, yesterday, that insufficient revenue was obtained from the Department of Natural 

Resources. Well, he is certainly sticking his neck out there. He said we went up and down the country 

before the election, saying that we would get revenue from the development of our Resources to finance 

our program. Here are the figures — and some of the figures are the result of his own government's 

work, so I take it that those can be depended upon, even if the more recent ones could not be. If you 

follow through, what has been the revenue from the Department of Natural Resources? Here it is. In 

1939-40, the revenue was $551,000; in 1940-41, $582,000; in 1942-43, $594,000; in the next year, 

$526,000; in the next year, $522,000; in 1943-44 (that was the year my friend wants to watch for), 

$515,000; in the next year, $601,00 (the first year we were in office); in the next year, $1,688,000; and 

last year over $1,500,000. I have a graph here showing that the revenue to 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

22 

the Department of Natural Resources for this year, and you will note that this revenue is anticipated to 

be almost $3,000,000; in fact, it is possible that before the month is over it may reach that $3,000,000. I 

maintain that is rather a healthy growth in a very short space of time. I do not suggest we have reached 

the top, by any means. I believe that the resources of this province can be looked forward to, to return 

eventually possibly four or five million dollars. They should do that, with proper management and 

proper conservation programs; and I predict that this coming year, the Department of Natural Resources, 

with the revenue from its Crown Corporations that my hon. friend is directly concerned with, can expect 

$3,750,000 returns from those particular undertakings. Now, that is not bad — it is, at least, a beginning 

— and it is a heck of a lot better then my hon. friends over on that side of the House ever could do. Let 

them trot in something better. 

 

That revenue, this year, is exclusive of revenue from provincial lands. That has been taken out, and it is 

a very substantial revenue, by the way; but that is now going into the Department of Agriculture, and is 

going to be quite substantial, as it always was; but the revenue this year is less the land revenue. In spite 

of that, the figures I have given you are ones that will apply. 

 

Now, my hon. friends criticized me for increasing the Public Service Commission. Well, in passing, I 

want to say that we have nobody now who initials them free, as they used to do when they were sitting 

over there. We pay for that service now, Mr. Speaker; they used to get it free; and we do not have 

anybody to initial their applications. 

 

He also said quite a few things about the Crown Corporations only supplying one percent of revenue in 

increasing our other funds. For Crown Corporations that have just been organized — infant 

organizations, shall we say — I think in the main they are doing a splendid job. It is true there have been 

some losses, which I am going to deal with in a moment. 

 

He also made some statements about the Power Commission. He criticized the including of profits in 

our general picture of revenue, but I submit that the Power Commission is part of the government-in-

business program. My hon. friend can say that it is not a Crown Corporation if he likes, but I repeat that 

it is definitely part of the program of government-in-business in the province of Saskatchewan, and I am 

going to have something to say about the Power Commission in a moment. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition criticized the set-up of the Crown Corporations. Again, Mr. Speaker, he 

certainly stuck his neck out there, because if you examine the Crown Corporation set-up, that operates 

under the Federal Government, he will find . . . he tried to tell this House that this House has no control 

over the Crown Corporations that are set up. I submit that the House has control, and they have the 

Crown Corporations answer to the House and to the Committee on Crown Corporations. The Crown 

Corporations Act requires that an Order in Council must be passed before they are 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

23 

set up and moneys appropriated in that way. He suggests that we should come to this House and give all 

the particulars and lay them before the Legislature. The Dominion Government, Mr. Speaker, have had a 

great deal of experience in this type of work. Look in the Public Accounts of the Dominion of Canada 

and you will find that all these Crown Corporations are set up by Order in Council in the federal 

government. I have a list of some forty of them here — I do not know how many others there are that 

are not listed — but they are set up, almost without exception, by Order in Council — and not only that, 

they are set up at the very time the House of Commons is in Session; no Committee, and no reference to 

anybody. If they want to do it like my hon. friend suggests, why does he not bring pressure to bear on 

his own group when the House of Commons is in Session? I can understand that, as a matter of 

expediency, to get things done, you do it by Order in Council, particularly between Sessions; but my 

hon. friend is supporting a group that does it while the Session is on. I am not questioning their 

procedure, Mr. Speaker, but I do question some of the things they do. 

 

When we come to the Committee on Crown Corporations, I have a lot of information which I think will 

be very useful; I have found out how you can turn a deficit into a surplus, and I am going to show this to 

the Provincial Treasurer — he should be interested in seeing this one. Here we have the Polymer 

Corporation, and just by waving a magic wand, here is what we do: Sales of imported rubber, 

$2,989,000; cost of imported rubber, $4,408,000; selling expense $147,000; loss, $1,566,000. Now that 

is in the fiscal year ending March 31, 1946. They just lost a cold $1,566,000; but that is not the last of 

the story. Now the federal government came along and gives them a subsidy of $1,593,000 and turns the 

loss into a profit of $46,244! Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot to learn from the way hon. friends operate 

their Crown Corporations, and we shall read some of these happenings with interest. We have here a 

history of the method they have set up in reporting this. My hon. friend, yesterday, gave us a lot 

criticism. He said we had not set up anything for interest. I want to suggest that the federal Crown 

Corporations do not set up anything for depreciation either, in many cases. 

 

My friend possibly had not heard that one before, but in case he had not, I will read what the Auditor 

says here, taken again from the Public Accounts: 

 

"In the case of most of the companies which are subject to the provisions of The Government 

Companies Operation Act, the Crown holds title to assets the cost of which was charged to 

parliamentary appropriations, although that statute provides that the Governor in Council may 

authorize such a company to construct, acquire, extend, expend any of the moneys administered by it. 

It would be preferable were title to all such assets vested in the companies, with value thereof 

regulated by accepted accounting practice. Such is already the situation with respect to the assets of 

Eldorado Mining and Refining Limited. The relative operating statements 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

24 

for several of the corporations do not reflect true costs because provision for depreciation has not been 

included. If the true financial position of Crown corporations is to be accurately determined, it is 

desirable that accepted corporate accounting practices be followed." 

 

Now, as I have said before, we have provided for depreciation, but my hon. friends, in their Crown 

Corporations, do not even provide for depreciation. In regard to authority, we are only pikers. Here is 

what their Act says: 

 

"The Agreements provide in general that the Minister shall, at all times, have the right to exercise such 

control over the affairs and operations of the companies as he may, in his absolute discretion, think 

fit." 

 

I do not know what would happen if we were to adopt those tactics here in this House, but they are 

following them every day, down at Ottawa, and I have not yet heard my hon. friend raise his voice in 

protest to that kind of thing going on down there. He is always out applauding them for everything they 

do, so he had better check up. 

 

Some of the answers that have been given in this House have been criticized. We have also been 

criticized for placing the Power and Telephone Companies' surplus in the Provincial Treasury. While the 

hon. Leader of the opposition was the Leader of the Government, they never had any surpluses in the 

Power Commission, so they did not have to worry about what they were going to do with them. I have a 

statement in my hand, showing the financial results annually, before this Government came into 

operation, and since the Power Commission was first inaugurated. We find out that, when this 

Government took over, we had an accumulated surplus of $231,000; but I want to tell my hon. friend, 

who was the Provincial Treasurer during much of that time, that there is something else he forgot to tell 

the people, yesterday, when he was dealing with Crown corporations and criticizing this Government 

about depreciation and interest and what have you, and that is, that according to this statement, you ever 

provided anything for depreciation here for the first ten years of operation of the Saskatchewan Power 

Commission. That is something that is not generally known, but the figures here prove it. When we 

begin to go over the books of the Saskatchewan power Commission, and the operations in the past, we 

find that by order in Council they excused the Saskatchewan Power Commission of paying anything for 

depreciation or sinking fund for that purpose. Had they done so, instead of $213,000 of accumulated 

surplus when we came into power, we would have had over half a million dollars of accumulated losses, 

due to the fact that there had been nothing provided for depreciation. When this Government took office, 

it immediately set up the proper depreciation accounts, and they are now provided here in our Balance 

Sheet; and my hon. friend is the last one to stand up in this House and criticize this Government for not 

providing for depreciation of the Crown corporations. He is the one who set the example — and not too 

good an example. He should remember some of these things as well as anyone else. If he did not know 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

25 

it was going on, then I say that as Provincial Treasurer he should have known. 

 

Now, he has criticized our method of answering questions yesterday — he said we were evasive; he said 

that we did not give the information — well, we gave the information that was asked for, and I am just 

going to run over some of the questions just to show you what is happening here. Here is one that they 

asked: "What is the Railhead Price on which prices paid to fishermen at Snake Lake are based?" The 

answer is, naturally, "any Railhead to which the fish is delivered." 

 

My hon. friend shakes his head, just like the jackal again. Well, Mr. Speaker, I suggest he get a map of 

the northern part of the province of Saskatchewan and check it over, and he will see that there are three 

main routes out of Snake Lake. If you follow one route, you go down through Lac la Ronge. You know, 

Snake Lake has no highway up there, such as my hon. friend is used to going on; you pretty well have to 

make your own roads there, in the wintertime; but the one main artery will be down through Lac la 

Ronge. If he goes out the west end of the Lake, he can either go to Big River, or, as Mr. Clarke did, go 

to Meadow Lake. It just depends on which is your terminal, and where you are operating from. If your 

base is one place, it will make very little difference in mileage — not a great deal, but it will make some, 

of course — and it will depend on what portage he should take. 

 

I see a question on the Order Paper today: "How far is it to Railhead?" Well, Mr. Speaker, they had 

better get a surveyor's chain and go up there and check it over for themselves, because it depends, again, 

upon which particular portage you take, and you can vary it anywhere from twenty to forty miles to 

railheads without any exaggeration at all. 

 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that before some of these people ask what I maintain are foolish questions, they 

should got some of the facts; and I will tell them how they can do it. If there is any information these 

members want, if they will come down to the Department of Natural Resources regarding our 

operations, or come to my office, I am prepared to sit down with them and give them the information 

they desire. 

 

Mr. H.O. Hansen: — Have they ever been there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — No, Mr. Speaker, they have not. They may have been to the office, but not to my 

office. 

 

Mr. W.J. Patterson: — On a matter of Privilege, it is not necessary for me to go to the Minister's office 

to get the information I am entitled to as a member of this House! 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — Quite right, Mr. Speaker. I am not saying that he has to come. I say if he wants the 

information. We answer the questions they put here. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson: — No you don't! 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

26 

Premier: — He goes to the Deputy Minister's office. 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — He asks again, "What price is charged", and so forth. Well, what price is charged 

to the fisherman for boxes and whatnot, and what is paid, depends entirely upon the operation. If the 

fisherman delivers his fish to railhead, our prices are f.o.b prices, and that is the kind of business we 

want to do; but unfortunately, many of these fishermen have not the means of their own transportation. 

We hope to encourage them to provide it in the future. If they haven't their own equipment, that is 

another story. Some of them may have it and some may not. There are so many varying conditions, that 

almost every one must be treated differently. It is not a matter of our choosing, but a matter of 

conditions that may prevail. 

 

The question is asked — "what is the length of haul?" Again I want to say, that entirely depends upon 

which route is used and where they are fishing on the lake. These lakes are quite extensive, and to 

answer a question of that kind, they would need to know something of their geography, otherwise they 

would not ask it in this way. Wherever we have been able to do so, we have given the basic information 

— what our prices for fish are at the railhead, for different varieties and different grades, and whether it 

is fresh or frozen. They are all filed here for the information of this House. We are quite prepared to give 

all the information we can, but we are not going to undertake to answer questions which are irrelevant. 

 

Mr. L.M. Marion: — Mr. Speaker, I will give the Minister the name of this party. It is Napoleon 

Natobagan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — Lots of tricks in this trade! One fisherman, presumably, divides up his fish, sends 

half to the Fish Board; he sends word down with the fish dealer to send the Fish Board representative up, 

because he has a bunch of fish there to sell. He had given his fresh fish to the fish dealer. The Fish 

Boards in good faith, sent a 'plane in because it was near break-up and he said he had to get them out 

right away. The pilot loaded the fish on the 'planes (they were all boxed and ready), assuming that it was 

in good condition — no reason to believe otherwise. When they got the fish to the Plant — if this is the 

case my hon. friend is referring to — it was condemned by a representative of the Fisheries Department. 

 

Mr. Marion: — I want to state now: This Napoleon Natobagan is one of our most responsible and 

respected Metis in that country. He is a gentleman of approximately seventy years of age, and I hope 

you are not referring to him when you talk like that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — I am not referring to any particular individual. I am not referring to the man that 

my hon. friend has mentioned. The name he has mentioned is not, at the moment, familiar to me. I am 

talking about one man who made this crack — that he sent one-half to the Fish Board and sold one-half 

on open-market. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

27 

Mr. Speaker, that fish was condemned because it had been caught early in the season and left out on the 

ice without any protection, freezing and thawing, and the fish had deteriorated to the point where it was 

unfit for human consumption. We will compare fish prices at any time over the entire season with any 

fish dealer in the province of Saskatchewan. As my hon. friend knows there is a tremendous variation in 

prices, and we are not organized on a day-to-day basis — we pay a flat rate over the entire season. I 

want to say, also, as far as the transportation is concerned, in the case I mentioned, he was billed with 

the transportation as there was probably other work to be done and, under our new regulations, that man 

would be liable for trying to peddle fish of that type. 

 

We have also a case where a person sent one half of his catch to the Fur Marketing Service, We have 

since established, quite definitely,, that that particular individual was engaged in the 'black' marketing of 

furs, and what he actually did was pick the damaged furs and the kits and ship them to us, and the best 

was sold on the 'black market'. Then he says he had sent so many hides to us, and sold so many and that 

is the result. We are not prepared to compare results on that basis, but will compare this shipment for 

shipment at any time of the day, or any season of the year, and any place in the North. 

 

In setting up this organization we have no doubt made mistakes. It is just like when the Wheat Pool was 

organized, you cannot do it overnight — it takes time. We need trained personnel and it takes time to 

train those people in that particular work, and to get the organization set up. The fishermen of the North 

are solidly behind the organization as is borne out by their letters. The actual fishermen, not the dealers. 

I want to make a very sharp distinction between fish dealers and fishermen or trappers and fur dealers. 

We do not expect to satisfy the fur and fish dealers; we did not organize for that purpose. The letters in 

opposition come from either fish dealers or traders, or people who have been interested in trading: and 

some of the radio broadcasts that have been made were made by the same type of people; but they have 

never been made by the actual fishermen and trappers themselves. The majority of them (I will admit 

there are exceptions) are solidly behind the conservation program. I think my hon. friend over there will 

be one of the first ones to admit that our fur conservation program in the North is already producing 

tangible results, and that the native people themselves can see the benefits of it, and that some of his 

own people are solidly behind the program that is sponsored jointly by the Provincial and Federal 

Governments. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

28 

As I said before, Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt there have been mistakes made, but so far as the 

principles of orderly marketing are concerned, they are not only sound, they have been accepted, and 

they will continue to be an important factor in the development of the economy of the Northern part of 

the province. 

 

Orderly marketing is an accepted thing, today, with the marketing of wheat. My hon. friends over there, 

who support the Federal Party, now have had an about-face, and they themselves are suggesting that the 

same principle be extended to course grains, although a year ago they would have nothing to do with it. 

The principle of orderly marketing is here to stay. Again, my friends may be 'Rip Van Winkles', but they 

had better snap out of it. They try to say that it is compulsion, that they are forced to market their timber 

through the Timber Board; but it is not a matter of compelling them to market their timber through the 

Timber Board, because it is not their timber to market. We believe that the natural resources belong to 

the people; we do not believe in selling our timber on the stump as used to be the case – today we are 

contracting for its harvest, and we are contracting for its production. That contract calls for a certain 

'upset' price, and it calls for delivery to certain points. Just the same, I wonder what they would have 

thought of my hon. friend when he was over here as Minister of Highways has he said, "why the price of 

gravelling a road is 20 cents per yard, but I will give you 40 cents per yard." 

 

Voice: — That is what he did. 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — My friend says "that is what he did"; but he will not admit it anyway. 

 

A few days after this House opened, after I heard the Leader of the Opposition made a speech in the 

Debate on the Reply to the Speech from the Throne, he painted such a dreary picture of the North, I left 

for there early the next morning, as I hadn't been up there for a few weeks and I wanted to see what was 

going on — I thought something had broken loose for sure. I want to report to this House that I spent 

that three days visiting the lumber camps, and I never found the morale better, or the attitude of the 

producers better. The timber producers of the province of Saskatchewan are co-operating with this 

government, whether they believe in our forestry program or not; and they are doing a jolly good job of 

it. I want to compliment them on it because, without that co-operation, we could not put the program 

over; and I want them to know that I appreciate that co-operation. 

 

In regard to the fishing, my hon. friend from Arm River made some remarks about the fishing at Long 

Lake. His speech was made while I was away and I obtained a transcript on my return, and these 

statements he will have to answer for to some of his own people in his own constituency. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

29 

He is old enough to know that when somebody comes to him with some "cock and bull" story, he would 

be well advised to get the other side of the picture before he comes bumbling into this House to make a 

number of statements that he cannot substantiate. 

 

So far as the fishermen of Long Lake are concerned, they tried my hon. friend's system of free 

enterprise, which he lauded so much, last year. Yes, they tried it! A group of them came to me in the 

fishing season, after making an appointment, and they said, "Mr. Phelps, for goodness' sake bring your 

Fish Board in here and take the fish business over for us". I said: "Sorry, Sir, you had your chance, last 

fall, and it is too late now for us to organize for this year — you will have to muddle through the best 

you can". They said: "For goodness' sake be prepared to come in next year". Mr. Speaker the result was, 

last year, there were times when the railroad would not accept the fish because they were not sure they 

would get enough to pay the express on it down to the market. That is free enterprise! That is 

competition! My hon. friend seeks to justify it. 

 

My hon. friend wants to support that sort of a system but the fishermen on Long Lake do not want to do 

it because I went out to a meeting there, last fall, at their invitation; and I explained to them the policy of 

the Fish Marketing Board. Before the vote was taken as to whether or not the Board would operate there 

this year, the chairman got up and said, "now look, boys, what is the duration of the contract, if you 

come in here?" I said, "We won't come in here for less than three years — likely it will be five because 

we are not going to organize anything different". He said to the fishermen. "You are going to vote on 

something, not just for this year — remember that — you have to decide you are going to vote 

yourselves in or out. Now what are you going to do?". Over three-quarters of the fishermen that were at 

that meeting voted in favour of the Fish Board coming in to market their fish. In spite of all my hon. 

friend's 'huffing' regarding the operations of the Saskatchewan Fish Board, the fishermen realize that in 

the Board they have protection, just the same as the farmers realize that they have protection in the 

Canadian Wheat Board. Although the farmers have been selling wheat below the so-called world price, 

for the sake of that protection they will forgo that price temporarily for the protection of orderly 

marketing that the Board gives them. And it is the same thing with the fishermen and the timber 

operators, Mr. Speaker, and the trappers; they use our marketing service for a similar reason. 

 

These Crown Corporations that have been set up to take care of some of the marketing of our natural 

products may not be perfect, any more than the Wheat Pool was perfect; but the farmers wouldn't 

forsake the Wheat Pool because it made a few mistakes when it was beginning. The Wheat Pool did 

make mistakes; we all admit it, as Wheat Pool members. It is easy enough to look back on these things; 

but they did it with good intentions. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

30 

Even though the Fish Board makes mistakes and I am not denying it, in fact, I say we have made 

mistakes, Mr. Speaker; but in spite of those mistakes, the fishermen, in the majority, are behind the 

principle of orderly marketing; knowing that full well, in the long run, they will win out. 

 

My hon. friend talks a lot about the fish business. It is quite true that we have had a loss in the fish 

business; it is quite true that there has been a deficit; but, in my opinion, in order to put a solid 

foundation in the fish industry of Saskatchewan that, shall we say 'subsidy' was necessary. If we had 

been like the Federal Government we would have given a million dollar subsidy and would have had a 

healthy surplus. There would have been no depreciation, and we could soon have changed our figures 

into a surplus, on the same basis on which they calculate. 

 

I believe that the organization of the marketing boards to market some of the primary products of this 

province will play, in the future of Saskatchewan, the greatest part in safe-guarding the economy of our 

province. If I had to choose between discontinuing some part of the Department, the marketing boards 

would be the last things that I would discontinue. When markets start to get into difficulty, as they may 

do, that is the time when orderly marketing is even more secure. 

 

In regard to the fur in the North; I said I would give you some of the difficulties we are experiencing and 

I believe it is my duty to report to you not only the good things, but some of the difficulties we have 

already had; and some of the things we hope to do. There are some things we are very concerned about 

and one of then is the fur situation in the North. We are now receiving monthly reports on the fur that is 

being marketed, and the prices being paid, and I want to compare the fur prices in the world with the Fur 

Marketing Service 

 

I have here the reports for the two months, November and December, we expect January's very soon 

now, I have part of it but not the complete picture — and we find that there are two types of fur that the 

private traders have paid a higher price for — two types, one just slightly above, and the other one a 

little bit more. All the rest of the items in this list of the fur marketing, the Fur Marketing Service have 

been able to pay a much higher price — some almost double. 

 

In the main, Mr. Speaker; on the fur that was handled in the North accounted for during those two 

months, on a basis of the prices they received and the prices they would have received had they come to 

the Fur Marketing Service, less the freight (air express); less the handling charges, that my friends are 

talking about (the commission), less the royalty; less all the charges; in that two months the people of 

the North were short-changed 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

31 

to the extent of $128,319. These figures were compiled co-operatively between ourselves and the 

representatives of the Federal Government, and they are a joint compilation. 

 

In the last report of the Fur Committee, of the meeting which they held just two weeks ago, they 

mention this very thing. They are concerned about the siphoning off of the new wealth of that North 

country. I want to submit that it is something we will have to give a good deal of consideration to. As I 

said, the representatives of the Federal Government are very much concerned about it as wall. But there 

are a large number of trappers who are learning the value of the Saskatchewan Fur Marketing Service: 

and I would invite you down to see the set-up which has operated so successfully on behalf of the 

trappers and fur ranchers of Saskatchewan. I say again, not that there hasn't been mistakes made, but we 

feel that something must be done to place a deeper and better foundation under the economy of the 

North. 

 

I want to read to the House of the points that is giving our Department some concern, coming from the 

Committee. This is a joint committee between us and the Dominion Government, and I want to have you 

know what the members of the Committee said: "Your committee was informed that in previous years 

no individual quotas were set in this area", (referring, particularly to Cumberland House in the North", 

"nor was there any plan for the distribution of the proceeds to trappers — no crop insurance fund has 

been set up." Mr. Speaker, that is one thing that must be done in the North, and very soon, to set up a 

crop insurance fund, because we have discovered that you can have a crop failure in fur like you have in 

anything else, and they have had it bin this area. The Committee says further: "The result has been that 

in one case a man with $4,050 income in 14 months was destitute two months afterwards and looking 

for relief." I know this particular man's name — this may be an extreme case, but the fact remains that a 

community with an income per trapper in excess of $2,000 annually is now in a destitute condition due 

to one crop failure; while other areas under planned management of fur and the cash derived from it, are 

self-sustaining on less than half that figure. It is reported that gambling and drinking accounts for the 

greater part of this dissipation of earnings at this settlement. Mr. Speaker, that is one thing that the 

Government is much concerned about — the fact that this money, revenue derived, should be provided 

in such a manner that it could play a part in their economic rehabilitation. 

 

In closing, Sir, I would like to say that there are many things in regard to the operation of the 

Department that I would have liked to report on; but there will be an opportunity in the Public Accounts 

when the estimates are before the House. There are many Branches in my Department 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

32 

that I have barely mentioned — it is a very large Department. If the time were available I would have 

liked to go into some of those Branches which are all very important, but, in the Government's opinion, 

the development of the resources of our province is part of the foundation of the province. When our 

resources become depleted Saskatchewan will be a poor country indeed. The program of this 

Government is, as far as the resources are concerned, (1) to retain and develop them in the interests of 

all the people; (2) a program of planned management; (3) a program of conservation. Those are the three 

main points and the 'kingpins' of the program of the development of the resources of our province. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I submit that the resources of the province are making, in spite of what my friend 

said yesterday, a contribution to the development of Saskatchewan, and in the future they are going to 

play an increasingly important part, if that program of management and planning and conservation is 

proceeded with, which I sincerely hope it will. If it is, then it will continue to return to Saskatchewan 

ever increasing dividends, and the people who are engaged in the pursuit of those industries will have 

economic stability, and, as a result, will be a great benefit to the province as a whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I certainly intend to support the Motion. 

 

The Debate continued, it was on the motion of Mr. Marion, adjourned. 

 

SEED GRAIN PRICES 

 

Mr. W.J. Patterson (Leader of the Opposition): —Mr. Speaker, in connection with this Motion 

regarding "contract sale and purchase of seed grain prior to removal of export restrictions", I would 

suggest, on a point of Order, that the motion contains statements (a) and (b) which should be deleted in 

accordance with your ruling of Thursday, February 9. 

 

Mr. D.S. Valleau (A.S.V.R.): — I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition hasn't made 

out any case for the striking out of those two particular clauses. I imagine that he is referring back to 

your ruling of February 9, 1948; but I would suggest, Sir, that he is misinterpreting the ruling that 

statements of fact have been made in Motions for quite some time, in this House; and you also stated, in 

your opinion, that was a practice which should be discouraged — that you did not rule that Motions 

containing statements of fact should be statements which were not likely to be open to challenge in the 

House. As I recall it, the Motion under discussion at the time was one that contained a statement of fact 

which the Provincial Treasurer, on his responsibility, stated was incorrect; and after the Provincial 

Treasurer had stated that, the question became rather involved, and to simplify matters the hon. member 

for Arm River agreed to accept the Provincial Treasurer's statement that it was incorrect and withdrew 

the statement. I have read your ruling very carefully, Sir, and I can find no 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

33 

place in that ruling where you instructed the hon. member to withdraw that statement. If find, on the 

contrary, that you had been unable to ascertain, from the examination of records, whether the statement 

was correct or not correct, I would judge from that that your purpose in suggesting the difficulties that 

arose because that statement was included, because the Provincial Treasurer denied it was correct; and 

stated, on his responsibility, that in his Budget Speech he had not made the statement upon which this 

allegedly incorrect statement was based. The question we are deciding is not whether statements of fact 

can be included in Motions in this House, it is whether incorrect statements of fact can be included. 

Even when incorrect statements are included, it is not up to the Speaker to determine whether they are 

correct or not; but if an hon. member gets up and says "on his responsibility the statements are 

incorrect"; and particularly when their correctness, or otherwise, has to be judged by the remarks the 

hon. member made at some previous time, I would suggest, Sir, that he is then speaking not so much on 

a point of order, but on a point of personal privilege. It is any member's right to deny that he made a 

statement; and if a member has made a statement in a speech and another member says that that 

statement is incorrect, the member who made the statement must withdraw it. Similarly, if a statement is 

included in a written motion, and another hon. member says on his responsibility that he did not make 

such a statement, then it is as much out of order in a Motion as it would be in a speech. It is on this basis 

that the two Motions that you ruled on — the basis that the statement of fact in them was either incorrect 

or was clearly objectionable to members of the House; that the amendment by the hon. member for Arm 

River, and the Motion by the hon. member for Kinistino, met with some objection; and, in each case, the 

objection was overcome by the members voluntarily withdrawing portions of their Motions, which other 

members of the House had found objectionable. In neither case was a ruling from yourself necessary. 

 

I suggest, Sir, in the Motion that we have before us that if the Hon. Leader of the Opposition were to get 

up and say "on his responsibility, as a member, he knows, of his own knowledge, that the statements of 

fact in my Motion are incorrect", I might then consider withdrawing them although I still think I would 

not be able to do that now the motion is the property of the House. 

 

I think, in this particular case, that you, Sir, with all due respect, nor I nor the Leader of the Opposition, 

can decide as to the correctness or otherwise, of this statement — it is up to the House to decide now. 

 

Mr. Procter (Moosomin): — On the point of order, Mr. Speaker. I understand your ruling the other 

day, and it was a very clear ruling, and one for which there is ample parliamentary authority, namely: 

statements of fact which are disputed should not be contained in Motions of this nature. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

34 

Now, Mr. Speakers the hon. member for the Area 1 (Great Britain) is quite correct in his statement that 

it is only with your permission, Sir, and the permission of the House, that where objection is when the 

Motion can be proceeded with. That is what was done in both the other Motions. The accuracy of your 

ruling was accepted by the House and, in consequence thereof, the Motion could not be proceeded with 

unless the Motion was amended. I suggest to you that the hon. member is now in a position that he must 

either accept that ruling and amend his Motion in accordance with our findings, with the consent of the 

House, or permit the Motion to drop. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I will repeat to the House what I recited on that occasion: "May I take advantage of the 

case to suggest to the House that Motions presented should be in the form of a proposition upon which 

the House may, and can, express its opinion by a simple affirmative or negative. I would refer the hon. 

members in this connection, to Beauchesne's Third Edition, page 131, second paragraph. However, the 

practice has grown up, over the years, of allowing Motions to appear on the Order Paper containing 

what purported to be statements of fact in their context. In my opinion, this is not a good practice and 

should be discouraged as much as possible. But, since it has been followed in recent years, perhaps it 

might be as well for me to suggest to the hon. numbers that any statements they incorporate in Motions 

should be statements of fact upon which all are agreed, and the accuracy of such is not open to 

challenge. May I remind the House, also, that the irregularity of a part may, and can, invalidate the 

whole, the pertinent citation in this connection being Beauchesne, Third Edition, page 134." I went on to 

say that if the House agreed the Debate could continue on the Amendment, with the disputed statement 

deleted. 

 

I am quite prepared to say that the proposition contained in this Motion is directly opposed to what I 

asked the House to refrain from doing. It is rather a delicate situation because the practice has grown up 

— I have looked it up and there is no question about it; we can find instances in many cases where 

Motions have been submitted in this order. I am not in a position to say whether the fact is correct; I 

think that will be up to the House. I will rule that the Motion may be proceeded with. 

 

Mr. D.S. Valleau (A.S.V.R.): — Thank your Mr. Speaker. To get this discussion underway I will quote 

a paragraph of the Motion, which the hon. Leader of the Opposition objected to, and since I shall base 

part of my argument on that particular portion of the Motion, it will give the House an opportunity to 

judge whether or not that particular portion is accurate. If the members of the Opposition wish to argue 

that that part of it is not accurate, I will have my argument laid out and they will be in a position to judge 

whether or not my argument is accurate and will get the inaccuracy, as they see it, of this particular 

portion of the Motion. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

35 

It states, in clause (a) "Prices of seed grains have advanced abruptly due to the removal of export quotas, 

with the result that farmers who previously have sold seed grain under contract, or otherwise, did not 

receive the benefit of the increased prices." And (b) "Much seed grain was sold under contract, or 

otherwise, before the removal of export restrictions, resulting in excessive profits being made by the 

handling companies." Then it goes on with further statements, which the House has before them, and 

which I will state later in moving the Motion. 

 

I would argue, Sir, that it is a fact well known to every member of the House that some time last fall, 

through fiscal policies, and other forces then operating, a condition became apparent — the condition of 

the pell-mell abandoning of controls and rapid decontrol, following a policy which had been started and 

apparently was forced to a logical conclusion, regardless of how many 'toes were tromped on', or who 

was hurt in the process. We have on our desks today, a little pamphlet which says: "Removal of price 

control and subsidies is leading Canada to an economic recession". In this one particular case — in 'one 

corner of the woods' under the feed grain policy followed last fall, minor recessions did occur in the 

pocketbooks of the farmers who were dealing with the private grain trade. The Resolution I am speaking 

of, I shall admit, deals with one particular corner of the province and with particular interests that my not 

be of vital concern to all farmers — all farmers do not grow registered seed grain, although, I believe, in 

general, the future of the registered seed grain industry is something that is of vital interest to all farmers 

in the province. 

 

I wish to give the House a brief history of the particular situation which developed in the registered seed 

industry, last fall. For a great many years the grower of registered seed has been a craftsman; the man 

who grew seed plots of high quality grain, or a man who grew larger fields of registered grain, which he 

protected very carefully for the purity of variety, had to work his summer fallow carefully; he has to 

maintain the prescribed isolation spaces; he had to watch his crop rotations carefully; to prevent 

mixtures of strains and varieties; he received his seed grain in sealed sacks. All the grain was imported 

in the field for the Canadian Seed Growers Association by the Plants' Products Division of the 

Dominion Department of Apiculture. The grains when harvested, must be cleaned and sacked, carefully 

maintaining isolation; and it is then sealed and sacked by the inspectors, who again inspect it for purity. I 

am quite sure that the farmer members will be aware of all of these details, and I am just reciting them, 

to give the background for other members who aren't quite so familiar with the change in the industry 

which occurred, last fall. When all the careful steps of the craftsmen have been taken, the seed is made 

available to any farmer who wishes to grow registered seed commercially, or to improve the quality of 

his own seed. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

36 

It has been the desire of the members of the Seed Grain Association to develop high quality seed, and a 

reputation for high quality seed. By so doing they will naturally increase the confidence of all the 

farmers of Western Canada in the integrity of their products and will be assured of a continuing market 

for seed grain at a premium which will repay them for any extra pains they take in growing a high 

quality product. Just as the farmer who grows wheat for feed purposes has long desired a market of 

longer term stability at a parity price, so the best interests of the seed grower are served by a long-term 

market at a parity price, or a parity premium. 

 

Throughout the years of the recent higher prices for farm products there has been a consistent tendency 

for farmers to grow higher quality seed. This is something obviously in the interest of the farming 

community as a whole; and the Canadian Seed Growers' Association has received assistance from both 

Dominion and Provincial Departments of Agriculture. 

 

Early last summer many farmers found that they had large fields of registered grain growing on their 

farms. Suddenly, about the middle of August, numbers of what I would call 'high pressure' salesmen 

from the private seed houses began to wander throughout the districts in which much of this seed was 

being grown. For example, I will deal with a district lying, roughly, from the town of Ethelton to the 

town of Carrot River, covering a large area in the North-Eastern part of Saskatchewan — this was the 

area that I knew personally, last fall. Grain in this area still stood in the fields not yet ripe, but the buyers 

were offering from $1.85 to $2 per bushel for the grain — offering to buy it uncut and unthreshed. To 

many of the farmers who had just begun to grow registered grain, $2 per bushel for wheat seemed 

fantastic — $2 in the bin with elevator dockage. For years farmers had been longing for $1 wheat — 

suddenly they had $2 wheat: the temptation was very great. The companies proposed contracts which 

would bind the farmer to sell the wheat to them at $2 per bushel, in the bin, at his farm, with elevator 

dockage. The companies' representatives used various arguments. Most farmers do not have their own 

cleaning facilities, and seed grain to be sold is usually required to be cleaned and sealed and sacked, and 

inspected into the sacks. The companies stated they were lining up grain to be cleaned in their own 

cleaning plants, and the story (we have probably heard similar stories before) was that they had just 

room for one more customer. Sometimes the companies would state they were going to sell on the 

export market; and again the story was that they had a given quote, or were trying to get a quota, and 

they had just room for one more. A third story was that in the companies' application to the Federal Seed 

Administrator, who authorized export permits, they would need to have a potentially large supply of 

farmers' grain behind them, in order to get those export permits; and they appealed to the farmer's 

humanitarian instincts to help then secure those export quotas, by contracting to sell his grain to them. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

37 

Although they were operating in a free enterprise competition, none of the companies went so far as to 

compete against each other. If one company offered $2, no other company would dream of offering 

more than the $2. The price gradually advanced throughout the fall, but each time it came up by steps, 

and all of the companies offered the increased prices at almost exactly the same time. I was going to 

suggest that possibly that procedure would be something for our busy Combines' Investigator to 

investigate, but as he has so many things to do now, that would just be one more. 

 

Undoubtedly most of the farmers felt satisfied with the prospects, both those who had signed the 

contract and those who had not. The wheat contract with Britain, at that time, was $1.55, basis Fort 

William; this meant that seed grain, purchased at $2 per bushel when sealed and sacked, would sell to 

farmers at a price of around $2.50 — a premium of about $1.25 over the market price; and most of the 

growers felt that was a reasonable — in fact, a little more than they should be charging other farmers 

who would have to be buying the seed to now in Saskatchewan. 

 

From here on, the story reads a little differently — it reads something like a detective novel, and I will 

leave it to the members to guess 'who dun it', whether it was the cook, the baler or the eccentric 

millionaire who stabbed the innocent victim. It has been stated by authorities at Ottawa that the intention 

was export permits would not be issued until normal requirements for good seed had been met. The 

interpretation of this statement meant quite a bit in the subsequent situation. The first step in the process 

which followed was the removal of equalization payments on seed grain which was exported to the 

United States. Formerly, on coarse grains, the difference between the American price and the Canadian 

price of seed was collected at the border and turned in to a fund, administered by the Canadian Wheat 

Board, which was used to help make equalization payments on coarse grains. This immediately meant 

that the effective price to the exporter of seed grain, as across the border, would jump by quite a bit — 

there is quite a difference between our price for coarse grains and the American price. 

 

The fact that the Wheat Board was no longer worrying about the export of seed grain — that is of coarse 

grade — and the equalization payments were no longer charged, meant that the export price of seed 

grain as can be exported under the permits, would jump to at least the current American price, and 

possibly even higher. This was a clue which all of the companies had, but the farmer growers did not 

keep track of it as well as they might have. Nevertheless, the farmer who knew about this felt that the 

export quotas would be strictly limited until domestic demands were satisfied. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

38 

Shortly thereafter, the new British contact of $2 wheat was announced, basis Fort Williams. It then 

looked as though the seed grower might even have been further ahead to have sold his wheat 

commercially, as ordinary commercial grain, to the Wheat Board, and receive participation certificates. 

It is reasonable to suppose that the private grain companies would have been better able to judge the 

possibility of the contract with Britain being higher than the farmers who, at that time, were too busy 

riding combines to ever read the newspapers — they didn't know anything about what was happening, 

and the negotiations being carried out with Great Britain. But they suddenly found themselves in the 

position that, if they had sold their grain as ordinary commercial grain, they would have received almost 

as much as they did by these contracts they had signed with the private seed companies. 

 

Meanwhile, the prices that the seed companies were offering was going up step after step. The Wheat 

Pool did not step into the picture, so far as I am aware, and they did not start buying wheat standing in 

the field, or in the bins; they did not use the 'high pressure' salesmanship, and indeed, many farmers who 

were life-long Pool members did not realize that the Pool was buying registered seed grain. Apparently, 

the farmers became aware that the Pool was offering $2.58 per bushel for wheat, sealed and sacked, with 

participation payments to come if more was realized. So far as I am aware, there is nothing in the 

contracts of sale with the Pool which says that participation payments must be made, but where the Pool 

makes a surplus on their offering of seed grain, it is their policy to make these participation payments; 

and actually, with a company such as the Pool, owned by its customers, there is no place that the surplus 

made can go. 

 

The directors of the Marketing Association of the Canadian Seed Growers' Association, Saskatchewan 

Branch, on September 26, set a price which their Marketing Association would be willing to pay. They 

had to set the price again on October 27, due to the rapidly expanding market. The price was then 

announced for wheat, registered first generation at $4 per bushel, and registered at $3 per bushel. Even 

this price could not keep up to the demand, and they had to raise it on November 29, wheat, registered, 

first generation at $4.85; and registered at $4.10. The reason behind all this was that in December, the 

Federal Government suddenly announced that any company which had an export permit could export on 

that permit unlimited quantities of sacked seed grain. The price now being quoted to farmers in the bin 

jumped to $3, and occasionally to $3.75 — that is for the lucky farmers who hadn't got hooked by the 

salesmen and signed contracts. Several of the farmers requested the companies to meet the new 

competitive prices due to the changed situation — that is, some of the farmers who had signed contracts 

with the companies already. The companies replied that the grain they had purchased at $2 per bushel 

had already been sold for future delivery, and that to meet their futures contract they would either have 

to receive the farmer's grain, or to buy grain at exceedingly high prices. They were, therefore, prepared 

to sue the farmers for the difference between the contract price and the current 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

39 

market price. Many of these farmers, whom I know personally, are honest, and they assured me that they 

had verbal assurances that the companies would meet competitive prices; and had understood this to 

mean a type of participation payment. However, the farmers have learned, to their sorrow, that the grain 

trade recognizes no obligations except those to which it is bound on paper; or perhaps by some of these 

mysterious policy directives we have heard of lately. By 'mysterious policy directives' I mean the 

mystery of whether companies intend to reimburse farmers who sold such things as seed grains, or 

coarse grains, and later found that, due to conditions which neither the companies nor the farmers could 

anticipate, there were suddenly rising prices which meant a gratuitous profit for the companies. If a 

policy directive such as being issued to the coarse grains companies could also be issued to the 

companies which have bought seed grain, it might be that gratuitous payments could be made to the seed 

grain farmers who sold their grain to these companies; and they might be in the position of receiving the 

same payments that the growers of coarse grains are going to receive, whatever they are. 

 

I hope, Sir, that if this Resolution passes this Assembly, it will be interpreted as a gentle hint to the 

Federal Minister of Agriculture, and will lead to another of these mysterious policy directives 

percolating down to the administrative levels of these private marketing organizations, engaged in the 

business of marketing seed grain. 

 

The farmer was outguessed in this game all the way chiefly because the companies were in a better 

position to know the facts and the marketing structure. I might even suggest, Sir, that they were able to 

guess the facts before they occurred, and to guess that decontrol would come in the middle of the 

marketing season. Meanwhile grain, at many points, had been sacked and sealed and labelled for the 

export market, via New York, for Switzerland and Italy. I have heard it said that the higher mountain 

regions of these countries grow spring wheat: the claim has been made that their spring wheat acreage 

may have been, roughly, 200,000 acres — I rather doubt if it is quite that high. In Canada, we are well 

aware that only a small percentage of the total spring wheat acreage is sowed to expensive registered 

seed. We may be sure that the same situation would apply to Switzerland and Italy; but, Sir, even if this 

entire acreage of 200,000 acres was sowed to registered seed grain, it would not begin to take up the 

total amount of grain which has been exported. 

 

One cannot help wondering if the regulation allowing the export of sealed, sacked, grain is not allowing 

a certain percentage of high quality seed grain to travel to Europe for the bread market, or if it is not 

being used as an indirect method of evading the Canadian Wheat Board — a method which, in this case, 

is reacting to the benefit of private companies but not that of the grower. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

40 

There is a possibility. that the widespread crop failure which occurred in Europe, last fall, which did 

untold damage to their fall and winter wheat, has led them to gamble quite a bit on sowing spring wheat, 

in the hope of getting at least some harvest, next fall, and it is possible that some of this seed is going in 

that manner. But, I would suggest that if the governments of Europe had been aware that they were 

going to have to sow spring wheat on land not necessarily suited to spring wheat, in a desperate gamble 

to assure themselves, at lease, of some bread, that they would have possibly got their seed grain much 

more reasonably and brought much more reasonable terms to the Canadian seed producer if, through 

their state marketing agency, they had approached either the Canadian Wheat Board or the Wheat Pools, 

or some other large-scale organization, through the Canadian Government; and had purchased their seed 

in that manner, both registered seed for their good areas and ordinary good seed, not registered, for the 

areas where they were gambling. 

 

The House took recess at six o'clock p.m. 

 

After Recess 

 

The House resumed at eight o'clock. 

 

Mr. Valleau (A.S.V.R.): — I was remarking on the situation which had occurred in the seed grain 

marketing business last fall, and telling some of the sudden increase in prices that occurred, and the 

opportunity that presented itself for private seed houses and the private grain trade to make what might 

be termed, fortuitous profits, out of a situation which arose suddenly, and in which they found 

themselves in a position to profit, and I would like to make a few more remarks along that line. 

 

The farmers had signed contracts at specific prices to deliver grain to these companies, and the 

companies subsequently found that, due to actions of the Federal Government, and the sudden policy of 

decontrol, which no one had anticipated, I hope, they were suddenly making more profit than they 

would have otherwise. Many of the farmers felt because the companies were making these profits, they 

should, in all fairness, have a moral right to pay participation certificates, even though they were not 

legally bound to do so. The companies countered by saying that they had contracted to sell the grain for 

future delivery at the time they bought it — that is, they had hedged. It now becomes obvious that these 

contracts must have been export contracts because all their grain has been sold, or most of the grain, on 

the export market; and a mystery arises. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

41 

How could the companies contract for future sales on an export market before they know they were 

going to have unlimited export permits? They could not seal for future delivery on the Winnipeg Grain 

Exchange because it was closed, and they must have sold on the American market, if they were selling 

for future delivery; and they must have sold on specific contracts to deliver grain. Yet, at the time they 

were making these contracts there were regulations which did not permit them to export that much grain. 

Therefore, I would argue that they not have known in advance that they were going to be given those 

permits; they were in a bargaining position which gave them a tremendous advantage over the farmer, 

who did not know what was going to happen in the decontrol situation. 

 

It was altogether a situation which was entirely one-sided. If we can draw an analogy, I would say that 

Truman's friends in the White House are not the only ones who have made fortunes in grain speculation 

at the present time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that the farmers who grow the grain did not wish to exploit their fellow 

farmers in the drought areas of Saskatchewan, and elsewhere, by charging exorbitant prices; they were 

quite content with their original contract price as a legitimate return and a legitimate premium on grain 

to be used as need in Canada. However, the farmers feel quite strongly that it is unfair for a private grain 

company to make a greater return on the sale of the farmer's grain than the farmer himself made by his 

entire year's a work. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

42 

I should like here to refer to a rumour that has resulted as a result of these contracts; the farmers 

approached the companies and argued that they should have some share in these fortuitous profits — I 

do not know whether that is where the rumour started, or just where it is; but I have met it in a number 

of places. The story goes that the profits have not been made by the private companies — Oh, no! — 

they are repeatedly made by mythical characters — the Jews in New York. I think this is the old 

scapegoat principle appearing again. The booklet "Who Owns Canada", from which I have already 

quoted it this House, gives a list of the fifty financial 'big shots' to Canada, and it states that not one of 

these men is of Jewish nationality. I deplore the circulation of rumours such as this, because it is from 

just such rumours that the seeds of fascism arise. 

 

The sudden export demand for sacked grain is likely to have drastic effects upon the seed grain industry, 

and the grain industry as a whole in Canada. A statement from Ottawa said it was being left to the 

individual companies to see that sufficient seed was retained in Canada for domestic purposes. I am 

certain that such organizations as the Wheat Pool and the Canadian Seed Growers Association, and their 

marketing agencies, will fulfill their duty in this report, but no one can kid me about the others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you are a farmer; if you want proof of the shortage of high quality seed grain in Canada 

already, go out tomorrow and try to buy first generation or registered seed anywhere — just try! 

 

The second ill effect of the policy has been that the export demand was for registered or certified seed, 

any grade. This has tended to lessen the respect which is due to the various grades and generations of 

registered seed. In his address to the Annual Meeting of the Saskatchewan Branch of the Seed Growers' 

Association, Mr. Howard P. Wright of Airdrie, Alberta, President of the National Association, said this: 

 

"A registration certificate under these conditions doesn't mean s thing. The C.F.G.A. is caught in this 

net. When prices for all grades of seed were the same, there was no regard for the tolerances of purity 

of various seed grades established by the Association." 

 

He went on to suggest that the name "registered" should be kept out of the export seed business, unless 

the proper price differentials between grades were paid. To quote again, he said: 

 

"How shall we bell this cat? We must find a way to reintroduce the old professional pride in the Seed 

Growing Association." 

 

I am here quoting from Mr. Wright's speech as I heard it, refreshing my memory from an article in 

'Western Producer' of January 15, 1948. I can agree, Sir, that it will be a different job to bell the cat, 

because the cat is already out of the bag; however, just as it has been argued that the growers 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

43 

of coarse grains deserve participation payments — as Mr. Tucker, who flew to Ottawa and came back, 

said they were going to be made on coarse grains from fortuitous profits (if they can be called such, 

because the ceiling was suddenly removed in the marketing season) — I would argue that the seed grain 

situation is almost an exact parallel, and the seed growers deserve a similar type of participation 

payment because of the sudden changes in the marketing picture that occurred during the middle of the 

harvest season. 

 

The securing of the contracts which the Seed Companies obtained is not the normal way in which these 

companies purchase grain. I am inclined to suggest that they had some inkling of sudden changes in the 

marketing picture which were about to take place when they began to sign up contracts in this unusual 

manner. Therefore, I think there is a moral responsibility on the federal. government. I think they should 

institute an immediate investigation into the prices paid to the grower, and into the returns which the 

companies made in selling these grains. If it is found that excessive handling charges were levied, or 

excessive profits made, steps should be taken to compensate the grower. At this late date it is almost too 

late to help the consumer. I would suggest also that there might be reason for the Combines' Investigator 

to take a close look at the whole picture. 

 

That is the situation that existed last fall. It is doubtful if anything except pressure by the federal 

government upon the private companies can secure any compensation at the present time. It is possible 

that they cannot even secure that; but if it can be secured for coarse grains, there is an equal case for 

seed grain. Looking to the future, I think the problem will be largely solved by the growers themselves. 

The old principle of marketing your own grain through your own organization is always a good one to 

follow and I am convinced that the majority of the seed growers, in the future, are going to follow that 

principle. This winter they have taken steps to consolidate and perfect a marketing organization of their 

own. The Saskatchewan Branch of the Canadian Seed Growers' Association has had a marketing 

organization for a number of years, but this year they have taken steps to reorganize that marketing 

organization and they have done this in close consultation with the various elevator companies and also 

with the Saskatchewan Pool elevators. The new organization is to be called the Saskatchewan Seed 

Growers' Co-operative Limited, and it is in the organization stage at present. When organized, it will be 

in a position to use the distributing facilities of all elevator companies, as well as private customers. It is 

fulfilling the functions of a co-operative so well that the Saskatchewan Pool Elevators have indicated by 

a Resolution of their Board, that as soon as the new Co-op is ready to do business they will discontinue 

purchase of seed from growers. The policy of the new organization will be to operate pools in various 

grains so that equalization of returns to growers will be possible, at the same time insuring ample 

supplies of quality seeds, at reasonable cost, to Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

I am convinced, Sir, that in the long run the supporting of such an organization as this is the only method 

by which the farmers of Saskatchewan 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

44 

can make sure that we will not be 'gypped' in the future as we were last fall. We must rely on ourselves 

and not upon directives from Ottawa; and we must turn our backs completely on these private trading 

organizations and market grains ourselves. However, in the meantime, if the spirit of this Resolution is 

complied with, I think it will bring quite a bit of satisfaction to the growers of seed grain. 

 

I therefore move, seconded by the hon. member for Canora (Mr. H. Feeley) that in view of the fact that 

 

(a) prices of seed grains have advanced abruptly due to the removal of export quotas, with the result 

that farmers who previously have sold seed grain under contract or otherwise did not receive the 

benefit of the increased prices, and 

 

(b) such seed grain was sold under contract or otherwise before the removal of export restrictions, 

resulting in excessive profits being made by the handling companies, 

 

this Assembly express its keen disappointment that the Dominion Government, did not safeguard the 

interests of the farmer grower, and representations be made by the Provincial Government urging the 

Dominion Government: 

 

(1) to institute an immediate investigation into the contract sale and purchase of seed grain under 

agreements entered into between growers and handling concerns of export restrictions, and 

 

(2) to rectify, by the redistribution of the excessive profits made on his seed grain by the handling 

concern, the injustice suffered by the grower. 

 

The Motion was agreed to. 

 

HOG PRODUCTION 

 

The House resumed from Tuesday, February 24, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. 

W.J. Boyle (Kinistino) for a long-term policy by the Federal Government on Hog production. 

 

Mr. G.H. (Arm River): — I can assure you I am not going to take up very much of the time of this 

House. I have a few remarks that I think are to the point, and am going to bring out a few matters that 

were not touched on, the other day, when this Resolution was under discussion. 

 

We were told, of course, about certain actions that had been taken by the Federal Government in regard 

to the decontrol of coarse grains, and that the result thereof had brought on certain very serious 

consequences, so far as the hog-producing industry in Saskatchewan was concerned, and that in view of 

that fact, the hog industry was practically finished. Well now, Mr. Speaker, 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

45 

I have been here for the last three years, and for some years prior to that, and this is the third year in 

succession that I have heard the C.C.F. members on that side of the House make the same statement and 

the same declaration — that the livestock industry and the production of hogs in Saskatchewan was at an 

end — but all, of course, for certain reasons. In spite of that, Mr. Speaker, the hog industry of this 

province continues to flourish. As a matter of fact, I say this without any fear of contradiction: that there 

is more interest in the breeding of livestock of every kind, and particularly hogs, today than there has 

been for a long time. What is the result? The result is that the industry today is on a more solid footing, 

so far as dollars and cents earnings, or profits, are concerned, than it has been at any time. I am not a hog 

producer; but I have obtained this information from people who do produce hogs, not just a few of them, 

but up in the hundreds of thousands, people who produce dairy products of every kind. 

 

The other day a gentleman who was staying at the Kitchener Hotel called me up and I went down to see 

him. He has two sons who are farming right across the road from him, and they are engaged in 

producing hogs. I asked him: "As a hog producer, what is the situation? Your feed has gone up, the price 

of hogs has gone up — what is the relationship? Would you say that you get as much profit out of your 

hogs now as you did before the increase in feed and the increase in hog prices?" He said: "A little bit 

more, because an average hog brings from $7.00 to $8.00 more than it did before." 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — When did you ask that gentleman that question? After January 2nd or after October 

21st? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That was just last Friday night; just last Friday night. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Oh, yes! What about October . . . 

  

Mr. Danielson: — We will deal with two of these other things, and maybe we may clear up some of 

these questions before we get through. We have heard this thing, not just this year, but for years past; 

and in spite of that, the hog-raising industry in Saskatchewan has not by any means perished. It is a very 

live industry today, and from a dollar and cents point of view it is on a better business footing than it 

was before. 

 

One thing the decontrol of coarse grains has done away with — which was an injustice before, and I said 

so on the floor of this House last year — it has done away with the discrimination against the farmer 

who produced his own feed grain, as against the men who purchased his feed grain. Now they are all on 

the same footing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I'll say they are. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Now, if that gentleman over there will just keep his peace for a little while — he can, 

of course, ask questions any time he likes; but I shall came to some of the statements he made when he 

was speaking on this Resolution, in a little while. The Mover of this Resolution, Mr. Speaker, prepared a 

very good presentation of the subject. I do not agree with everything he said, but he did a very nice job, 

from a business point of view and the hon. gentleman raised no political issues. I might say this: the 

gentleman 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

46 

from Humboldt (Mr. B Putnam) who followed him, handed this House (and I think very properly so) 

some very fatherly advice when he asked the members who were going to take part in this Resolution to 

stay away from politics, and discuss this thing on its merits. It is not a political issue. It touches one of 

the very great industries in the province of Saskatchewan today, but I want say to him that his advice 

was wasted entirely on the Minister of Agriculture who did nothing else but get up and deliver a 

miserable, narrow-minded partisan speech. Yes, that is what he did! He should go back and read up on 

some of his statements which he made at that very critical time last fall, and he will find they will not 

correspond with the sentiments he expressed here the other day. 

 

There are certain reasons why the hog industry is perhaps not as high in the province of Saskatchewan 

today as it was in 1944. One very good reason is this: You and I, as farmers, know that if we are going 

to produce cattle or hogs we have to have something to feed them. Someone was criticizing the Wheat 

Acreage Reduction scheme of the Federal Government. That scheme Mr. Speaker, dropped $86,000,000 

into the coffers of the farmers of western Canada — $86,000,000 cash money! It did this: after one 

year's operation of that scheme, we had more summer fallow, we produced the greatest crop of wheat 

that has ever been produced in Canada, and now probably that record will stand for many years to come. 

Another thing: it induced the farmers to produce more feed grain, and that is the foundation for any 

livestock industry, whether it is in Canada or anywhere else. That is one of the requisites we must have 

before we launch out, before we lay a foundation for a livestock herd or a hog-breeding program, we 

must be assured that we have the feed for these animals. Now, that is what the Wheat Acreage 

Reduction scheme did. It gave us a dollar an acre for every acre that we turned into coarse grain instead 

of wheat; and let us not forget, Mr. Speaker, that at that, time there were 600,000,000 bushels of wheat 

in Canada, and they were flooding every bin on the farms, flooding every elevator annex, and piling a 

lot of it in the fields. That was the situation; but after all, it laid the foundation for a livestock industry in 

western Canada, and as a result, we produced the greatest amount of livestock that any nation of an 

equal area and an equal population has ever produced. That was needed — it was badly needed. 

 

In addition to that we supplied eastern Canada — I have the figures right here — the amount of feed 

grain that we produced and shipped to eastern Canada in that time was enormous. In addition to that, 

millions and millions of bushels of grain — wheat, oats and barley — went across the line, to the United 

States. That was the situation at that time. Now, what has happened? Not only is the livestock industry 

going down, but the most important reason for that is that the amount of feed grain and the amount of 

roughage produced on our farms for feeding cattle has, in three years, been used up — three years of 

small crops, two of which resulted in a complete crop failure over a large part of this province and in 

other provinces in western Canada. What happened last summer? 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

47 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — May I ask a question? He is talking about fodder. Of course, pigs do not eat fodder 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Is the hon. gentleman prepared to permit a question? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No. I don't think I should. He can talk on this himself. He has already spoken on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — On a point of privilege, then, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — All the hon. gentleman has to do is to go back twelve months ago in this House . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The hon. member has made the statement, or implied in the statement, that there 

was not sufficient feed for our hog population, and to increase our hog population in Saskatchewan. I 

would like to put him right. We are exporting enormous amounts of feed from Saskatchewan every year. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, he's making a speech, and the hon. gentleman knows that I did not make that 

statement at all. He knows absolutely that I did not make the statement that he has credited to me; and I 

am not even going to take the trouble to explain again what I did say. 

 

The whole thing is this: the hon. gentleman need only go back one year, when we sat in this House. 

Surely his memory is not so short that he has forgotten the mess that he put the southern part of this 

province in, a year ago, so far as fodder is concerned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — What has that got to do with pigs? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It has something to do with it — that is what you took exception to! When you don't 

get fodder for your livestock you don't get grain. I don't know what kind of a farmer the hon. gentleman 

is, and I don't care; but I know this, after 44 years of farming on these prairies, Mr. Speaker — when I 

cannot produce anything for fodder I have no coarse grain for feed either. The two go together. 

 

Now that is the situation we are facing, and as I have said, today, after three years of small crops, and 

two years of failure over a large part of the province of Saskatchewan, we have reached the point where 

there is nothing else to do except reduce livestock production, including hogs and cattle — that is 

certain. There was not a bushel of coarse grain raised in that district, and there is nothing there today 

except what was carried over from 1945 and 1944. As a matter of fact, I had about 3,000 bushels on my 

own farm that I carried over from 1944. My crop last year did not amount to anything, and I think 

probably I had a little better crop, even at that, than some of them had there, because I have a low place 

on my farm which I usually 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

48 

seed to oats. 

 

That is one of the main reasons why hog production has declined. There are several others, one of course 

being that many farmers have reached the stage where they are not as healthy and as strong as they used 

to be, and they feel that perhaps they do not need to go ahead and feed cattle and hogs and work all 

winter as they have done in the past. During the war, when national necessity called for such an effort, it 

was put forth; every man, every woman, families, girls and boys on the farm, were devoting their efforts 

to try to assist production, but now we haven't the stimulus of a war effort to gear up production at this 

time. 

 

Here is another reason: there are less farmers in Saskatchewan today than at any time for many, many 

years. You have to go back a long time to find as few people on the farms as there are today; and you 

who are familiar with farming know that it is not the larger holdings that produce the hogs, but the small 

farmer, the man who remains on the farm and makes it a home, who milks maybe four or five or six 

cows and has a little herd of hogs — that is the man and the woman who devote their labour and their 

spare time to bring this production about. 

 

Here is the Minister of Education — I am going to mention this; I do not say it is an important factor, 

but I know it is a factor in the reduction of hog production — I know that in my particular constituency, 

next to the town of Davidson, five families moved in from the farm. I know they did that — and why? 

Because the schools were closed, and they had to get their children in to town. Every one of these 

families milked cows and produced hogs. The hon. Minister smiles over there — well, he does not know 

much about farming, and I am not blaming him for that — that is not his business, not his life work — 

but I know that is a contributing factor. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would like to draw the attention of the hon. member who is speaking, to the 

Resolution. I have given you quite a lot of latitude, but it is quite evident you are not speaking to the 

Resolution. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have my notes here that I took down when the other gentlemen 

spoke on this Resolution, and can assure you that I have not wandered as far astray as they did on this 

particular topic. I am only replying to what they said, and I hope you will bear with me. I have the right 

to try to reply to these arguments which they have advanced, which certainly were used by every one of 

them. I am merely replying to some of the things that they said. I am enumerating some of the reasons 

why production of livestock, including hogs, has decreased on our farms, and the last reason I 

mentioned was in regard to closing of schools all over this rural area. I can count, and I know of six of 

them in my particular constituency, and there are more farther up, and the people in many cases have 

moved in to the villages and the towns in order to bring their children to school, and their farms are 

closed up. They have taken their cows with them, so they can get milk and cream; but there are no hogs, 

and a vacant farm does not produce hogs. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

49 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I would just like to ask, Mr. Speaker: is that the explanation on why the 

schools were closed? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I did not hear the hon. gentleman's question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Is that the reason the schools are closed? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I certainly did not say that. The hon. Minister is trying to be funny, but no! He is the 

joke this time. Now, I know, Mr. Speaker, that they do not like to hear these things; but I tell you that 

there are a good many farms in our rural areas today in Saskatchewan, that are closed up because the 

farmers have to move in to town to get their children to school, and a vacant farm does not produce 

livestock. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Will the hon. member just explain why it is that there are not enough children in 

the districts so that schools may be opened? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I know of schools that closed during Christmas holidays and they have not been 

opened since. There was one school closed, and the children from another district were going to that 

school during the summer; but it was so far to drive for these children that now they have moved in to 

town, because the children could not do it in the wintertime. That is the reason, and the Minister knows 

that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Would the hon. member tell us what we ought to do about that situation? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well I have some ideas on the subject, but I am not going to tell you about them 

now. Just common, ordinary business sense would clear the matter up, there is no question about that; 

but the policy, so far as rural education in the province of Saskatchewan today is concerned, is such that 

it is aggravating the situation, not improving it. 

 

I have a letter here that I would like to read — only a part of it, Mr. Speaker — from one of the great 

livestock producers in the province of Saskatchewan. He is recognized all over the province, and outside 

of the province as well. He is one of the outstanding livestock breeders in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. P.A. Howe: — What is his name? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — His name is "Frank Richardson" of Semens, Saskatchewan. He has been president of 

the Swine Breeders Association of the province, and I think he holds office in the national organization. 

This was written to the 'Western Producer' and reprinted in the 'Letter On Canadian Livestock Products' 

from 'The Industrial and Development Council of Canadian Meat Packers' and this is what he has to say: 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

50 

―The prices we shall receive at country points in Saskatchewan for barley will be about seventy-eight 

to eighty cents." (This was written after the increases in prices, last spring, but has a bearing on what I 

am going to say.) "We consider it takes about twenty bushels of barley to produce a 200-pound hog. 

This fall a hog of that weight should sell for over $35; about forty-five percent of a hog's selling price 

should pay his feed bill. Our test stations have proved it takes about four pounds or less of barley to 

produce one pound of live gain on a hog. The real reason for farmers not raising hogs is the shortage 

of labour and that wheat growing has been more profitable . . . 

 

"Since writing the above, I have asked our elevator agent the present rise in grain prices. Barley has 

advanced 12 3/4 cents and oats three cents. On twenty bushels of barley 12 3/4 cents is $2.55, which 

would be the extra amount it will take to raise a bacon hog. The raise we received on hogs a short time 

ago, together with the September raise to come will add $5 to the price of each market pig. We 

continually hear farmers say they will not feed ninety-three cent barley to hogs. This in not a fair 

statement. The cash price of barley at this point is 77 3/4 cents. We complain that the farmer in 

Eastern Canada has had an unfair advantage over Western farmers in stock farming on account of 

receiving so much freight assistance. He will surely be at a disadvantage now. There is one thing we 

must admit, he has produced hogs and helped hold the British market while his Western neighbors 

have been making easy money out of wheat . . . 

 

"The main failures of Western farmers have been they almost always rush into a short-term policy. 

The best illustration I know of has been flax growing, when almost every farmer has had lots of flax to 

sell the year after it has been a good price. Of all the sidelines we have to choose from, hogs are the 

safest. A granary full of good dry barley is a safe feed bank, being almost imperishable. An owner of 

such has at least some time to readjust his affairs in years of drought." 

 

Now, there is a gentleman who knows what he is talking about. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — What date was that? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That was last May, 1947, and last March our friend stood on the floor of the House 

and told us exactly the same thing. Now, the price of barley has gone up, the price of oats has gone up, 

the price of a hog has gone up approximately $8.00 a head, not $5.00 a head, but $8.00 a head! 

 

I went home a week ago last Sunday, and . . . 

 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown: — Was that coming down on the train? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Will the hon. member keep quiet! While I was sitting in the station, waiting for the 

train for Regina, I was talking to two farmers. One lives fourteen miles from town, the other three miles 

from town. They were talking about raising hogs and so on, livestock in general — one of them is 

raising both cattle and hogs in considerable amounts — and I said to them, "I understand you are not 

making much profit on hogs just now," and one of them said, "Well, there is still a nice thing in hogs. I'll 

show you something." 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

51 

He pulled a bill out of his pocket, and there was a scale ticket and everything else. Last fall, he bought at 

a sale four hogs at $12.00 apiece. He had just sold them about two weeks ago, and for the two hogs that 

graded "A" he received $81.05, with a $6.00 premium — $3.00 per hog; for the other two that graded 

"B" he got $71.40, making a total of $152.45. That was his price for those four hogs. He paid $48.00 for 

them, and two weeks ago got $152.45 for them, and he said to me: "This summer I had 34 hogs that I 

raised on my farm. I bought every pound of feed to put into those 34 hogs in the City of Moose Jaw, and 

hauled it home in my own truck," (he does some trucking as well), "and I didn't charge anything for 

hauling the feed home. All I got from my farm, outside of the feed that I hauled in, was the skimmed 

milk, and I had that on my farm because I ship cream. I sold those 480 hogs about six weeks ago and got 

$1,003.00 for them." 

 

A Voice: — Quite a herd! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well I will take that man's word for anything. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member does not mean that he sold 480 hogs, I am sure 

 

Mr. Danielson: — $480 was the price of the feed. I am glad you called my attention to that, Mr. 

Speaker. He said he bought every pound of feed that went into those hogs. 

 

Mr. P.A. Howe: — Will you permit a question? What did the farmer make who sold those four hogs for 

$12.00 apiece? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, Mr. Speaker: I think the size of the hogs was a fair size. He got a pretty nice 

thing out of it, because it was an auction sale, only three miles from town. I know my son-in-law bought 

some cattle there, two cows, and I know he paid a fancy price for the cows; but I know the farmer did 

not lose any money on his hogs, besides the work. He wasn't the only one who bid on those hogs. 

 

There is another gentleman, Ernie Smith, who lives two and a half miles south of town. We shipped a 

carload of livestock through our Co-operative Association about five weeks ago, and one steer — it was 

a good one — brought $207. Now who is going to go our and tell the farmers of the province today that 

they can't raise livestock at the present prices? They would just laugh at you, because it is not true. There 

is more profit — of course my C.C.F. friends don't believe in profit, the socialist says they don't — but 

there is more actual profit in livestock today, in hogs and cattle — than ever before. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Why don't they raise 'em? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, I do not know where you come from, but I know what the situation is in my 

district. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

52 

Mr. H.L. Howell: — May I ask the member a question? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What do you want to find out; how much Pablum you want? 

 

Mr. H.L. Howell: — Would the hon. member tell us how he accounts for farmers in the northern part of 

the province selling a lot of their breeding stock in hogs this fall, at a time when they had lots of feed 

and all the schools were open? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker: I don't know anything about that myself, but I have lived on this prairie 

for many years, and you know, after all this farmers as a rule are pretty shrewd fellows, when it comes 

right down to their own private farm business; and I am going to tell my hon. friend, quite frankly, that I 

do not believe he knows what he is talking about. I am going to say that I would not believe his under 

any circumstances when livestock production have sold all their breeding stock. I do not think there is 

any such thing. Sure, they sell livestock in the thousands. When your strike last fall dammed it up for six 

or eight weeks, of course, something had to be shipped out. I know that, and you will hear something 

about that before you get through this Session. 

 

No farmer is going to come and tell me, or any member of this House — I don't care where he comes 

from — that where the farmer has feed and is not an old, broken-down man so that he has to quit 

farming — that he is going to quit under conditions as they are now — dispose of all his breeding stock. 

He will do that, of course, if he goes out of business; but that does not mean that the livestock is going 

out of the country because somebody else is always starting in, increasing, their herds and so on; so 

don't try to tell me that because I know for a fact — I have a little clipping here that I picked up 

yesterday — during the month of January, in all of Canada, 48 percent more hogs were marketed than 

for the same month, last year. That was just in January, and we are talking about last fall. These hogs 

must have been very small at that time, because you know it only takes about six months, sometimes 

more, sometimes less — I know of farmers in my district, with proper feeding methods, marketing hogs 

in five months, but it takes good care, good feeding and real attention to the business to do that; here is 

the clipping, from Woodstock, Ontario: "48 percent more hogs were marketed in January than in the 

same month last year." 

 

Mr. H.O. Hansen: — That's how they go out of business. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That does not sound as if they are going out of hogs. Oh, no, they are not doing that 

at all. The hon. Minister of Agriculture made a real, rousing, rabid political speech the other day on this 

hog Resolution, and he told you many things, but he did not tell you — he did not say one thing, except 

just the one reference to the 'debacle' that struck the livestock industry last fall through that strike. I am 

not going to say much about that right now, because I have a few remarks I want to make some other 

time; but where was the Minister of Agriculture at that 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

53 

time? He was out whopping it up for the strikers, and said that they were entitled to everything they 

could get. What did he say about the farmers? I have it right here, dated September 13: 

 

"The halting of livestock shipments to strike-bound packing plants would not seriously affect 

Saskatchewan farmers and ranchers, as far as cattle were concerned, Agriculture Minister Nollet said. 

Recent rains had provided pasturage, and cattle would gain weight until shipments were resumed. Mr. 

Nollet said that prices would remain firm, and there were indications that they might go up, which 

would work to the advantage of the farmer who had halted cattle shipments." 

 

There you are — not a word of sympathy for the farmers, when he knew millions and millions of 

dollars' worth of livestock involved. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You are not worrying me at all! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The Canadian Federation of Agriculture has something to say about this thing. They 

estimated the loss to the farmers, caused by strike action, at $75,000,000 — $75,000,000, Mr. Speaker! 

That was the loss, and debacle so that the farmers of Saskatchewan could reap the benefit of the market, 

which they were denied at that time; not a word from any of you, not only the Minister of Agriculture 

but our whole Government was in the same position. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — . . . and the Packers made nine million. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That's what you say! I don't know what the packers made, Mr. Speaker, but I want to 

say one thing, and I am absolutely sure I am right. I do not know anything about it, and I sure the 

Minister of Agriculture does not know anything more about it. He is just talking through his hat! 

 

Now than, in view of the statement that has been made — in view of the debacle that is supposed to 

have happened to the hog producers and livestock producers of the province, and in view of the fact that 

every C.C.F. speaker and everybody else who supports that party is capitalizing and trying to damn the 

Dominion Government for certain actions in removing the price control on hog grading — I say this, 

that had to be done sometime, Mr. Speaker; adjustments have to take place when controls are removed. 

When the price control was taken off, there was more money made by the farmers of Saskatchewan than 

they lost, and I will tell you why. The Minister of Agriculture probably does not know — but I know — 

that in the province of Saskatchewan this same man who produces the hogs produces the grain, and I 

know that there was quite a lot of stuff held back from the farm by the farmer who does not produce 

hogs — who receives a price for that coarse grain which he had not had before. You have never heard 

me say in this House or anywhere else, that I agreed with the price that was set by the Wheat Board or 

by the Government or whoever did it — by Donald Gordon or anyone else 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

54 

who was in authority to do it. The price of coarse grains has not been what it should have been, during 

the last years, to the farmers of this province. It has never at any time borne a fair relationship to the 

price of wheat. The farmers who produced the coarse grains have had something done to them which the 

fellows who produced the wheat and flax did not have done to them. If you are going to get coarse 

grains, there must be a fair relationship to the price of wheat. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — What about the price of hogs? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is another reason, during the last few years, that the acreage in coarse grains has 

been reduced by millions of acres, not only in this province but in other provinces. That stands to reason. 

As a matter of fact, an incident took place about ten miles from where I live . . . 

 

Mr. D.S. Valleau: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Don't you worry about a point of order. 

 

Mr. D.S. Valleau: — My point of order is this, Mr. Speaker: It is quite permissible, in the Resolution 

under discussion, to refer to the price that the hog producer pays for feed, but I would respectfully 

suggest that the hon. member, in speaking at length on the subject of coarse grain, is discussing 

Resolution No. 4 rather than Resolution No. 2. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The point of order is not well taken. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I was only proving to you, Mr. Speaker, that there is another reason why the 

production of hogs and livestock is going down in the province of Saskatchewan; the fact that there has 

been no encouragement — anybody who raised oats and barley has been under a handicap as compared 

with the person who has devoted his acreage on the farm to production of wheat. I was told of an 

incident which took place in my district, by the farmer himself. The C.C.F. nominee up in my district of 

Arm River was out this last fall — which was all right, everybody has the right to do that, so far anyhow 

— trying to get some support. He drove up to a place and the gentleman was in the house and was asked 

— "Now, what kick have you got about the Dominion Government?" "Well," he said, "they took off the 

ceilings on coarse grain," and he said, "the only thing they did in their lives that did any good to me. I 

have two granaries of oats out in my yard, and I made up my mind I would not sell them. They would 

either have to go down or else they would have to come up. That is the only money they ever made for 

me in the last few years." That is the situation. 

 

You see, after all, the farmer who has raised his hogs . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! May I again call your attention to the Resolution. Either speak for or against 

the resolution; the one clause deals with a policy based on protection against high speculative feed 

prices, and the other deals with a policy based on protection against excessive profits. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

55 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I was certainly speaking about the high price of wheat and grain 

and everything else. I certainly was talking about, the feed prices. I said this, Mr. Speaker — that there 

has not been a proper relationship between coarse grain and wheat prices and this has the result of 

reducing the production of feed grains in the province of Saskatchewan. Statistics will prove that 

conclusively, because the acreage seeded to coarse grains in the last few years has been far, far less — 

even in the millions of acres less — than it was previous to that time. When wheat was 90 cents a bushel 

or $1.25 a bushel, even, it was not so very far removed; but when wheat gets up to $1.55 with a prospect 

of reaching probably $2.00 when all the final payments are in, the difference between the two is 

absolutely out of line; and as a result we have suffered, and, as I said before, if you are going to produce 

livestock, you must have the feed to feed them. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture was saying something about the enormous profit of the packing companies. 

Well, he does not know anything about it, and neither do I — not a thing . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You mean you don't want to. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I have "Financial Report and Auditor's Statement" here, of the different packing 

house companies — I think every one of the members received one — but I am not going to say they are 

correct, although I should think they would be correct. If they are correct, there are certainly no 

exorbitant profits shown in the packing-house business; but there is a feeling in the minds of many 

people in the province of Saskatchewan — and I am sure it must be in the mind of the Minister of 

Agriculture — that there is some 'nigger in the woodpile,' — that someone is making a tremendous 

profit out of the stock industry, in the processing end of it. I would say that in order to settle this — this 

is something that you want to know, I want to know, and everybody else wants to know — 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Did you ever read the Steven's report? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — In order to settle this thing, we should take certain steps to find out, and then we can 

inform the Minister of Agriculture. It may be hard for him to accept it, but at the same time he might 

finally be convinced. I am going to move an Amendment to this Resolution, and my Amendment is this: 

 

Moved by myself, seconded by Mr. Procter, that the following be added to the Resolution: "This 

Assembly commends the Federal Government for having negotiated long-term contracts with fixed 

prices for meat and livestock products, and for having adopted a policy of lower prices, and requests that 

the Government appoint a Royal Commission to make a full and complete investigation of the packing 

plant industry in Canada." 

 

I think that is what we should have. I think it has been asked by farmers' organizations; and why should 

we not? Why should we who are in this House not ask the Government to appoint a Royal Commission? 

Let all the farmers' organizations appear before that Commission — let us go to the bottom and see if 

they are taking undue profits, if they are robbing the 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

56 

farmers or the stock-producers — let us find that out. That is what I want to do. Then, when we meet 

here again, whether it be next year — of course, I don't think many of those members will be back, Mr. 

Speaker; but I am sure I will be here. I feel more confident today than I ever did in my life. My 

amendment is to the effect that the Government of Canada should appoint a Royal Commission to 

investigate and go into all phases of the industry and find out what is wrong. Then, I think also there 

should be included there, that they should have the duty of making certain recommendations to the 

Government of Canada in regard to this matter. With that, I move this amendment, Mr. Speaker, 

seconded by Mr. Procter. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Moved by Mr. Danielson, seconded by Mr. Procter — I do not think I can accept a 

Resolution, seconded by someone who is not here. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Will you allow me to put another name on there, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Embury? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Moved by Mr. Danielson, seconded by Mr. Embury: "That this Assembly commends 

the Federal Government for having negotiated long term contracts with fixed prices for meat and 

livestock products, and for having adopted a policy of lower prices, and requests that that Government 

appoint a Royal Commission to make a full and complete investigation of the packing plant industry in 

Canada." The debate is now on the Amendment. 

 

Mr. W. Burgess (Qu'Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker: I have not seen the Amendment, and it is 

possible that I may get out of order. If I should do so, I know you will call my attention to it. It seems to 

me the Amendment and the Motion, taken together — and if we pass this Amendment I take it then we 

would have a Motion amended — that we would have a Motion which would very clearly indicate the 

condition of the farming industry, because it would be a most confusing Motion. 

 

I enjoyed the speech of my hon. friend from Arm River (Mr. Danielson). It proved to me that he, like 

myself, is an ordinary farmer — that he, like myself, finds it absolutely impossible to understand the 

agricultural policies that have been carried on in Canada in the last few years. I am sure the confusion 

that was in his mind must have been apparent to all the members, and I am satisfied that the confusion 

that is in my mind in connection with the same policies, will probably be only too apparent before I am 

finished. 

 

I do not, think we can be blamed, Mr. Speaker, if we do wander away from this 'hog' question, because 

they are so inter-related to one another — the coarse grain problem and the hog problem and the general 

livestock problem as a matter of fact, the whole problem of marketing of farm products . . . 

 

A Voice: — I thought you meant the member. 

 

Mr. Burgess: — No. I didn't. If we just let our minds go back a little way, not any further than ten or 

fifteen years — most of us here are old enough — 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

57 

we will remember that the people who tried to co-operate with the government, whether provincial or 

federal, the people who tried to follow the leads which were handed out by the agricultural departments 

of either government, almost without exception got their fingers burned. We were told, for instance, by 

the Departments of Agriculture that the thing to do was raise livestock, get a good substantial base on 

this farming industry. Then we had a crop failure, and were told that whether it was a purebred herd you 

had founded or a good grade herd, it must be sacrificed at one cent a pound. Then, when war broke out, 

the first newspaper advertisements put out by the Dominion Government, Department of Agriculture, 

were to the effect that, a great deal of pork products would be needed overseas. I remember going to a 

United Farmer Convention at Saskatoon, and we had a series of government speakers, three or four of 

them. I think the Hon. Minister of Agriculture must have made their speeches up for them, because they 

were in absolute unanimity. They told us it was our duty to go home and breed more sows and raise 

more pigs to feed the People of Europe. A great many farmers did that. The following year, in the same 

newspapers, advertisements from the same government asked the people of Canada to eat more pork and 

help get rid of the surplus. Those advertisements are on the record — I can't give you the exact dates, but 

they can certainly be found, and my hon. friend knows so well that it happened that he is not even going 

to question it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I would like him to give us the year, the year those advertisements appeared in the 

papers. 

 

Mr. Burgess: — I am not really prepared to state the year, I might quote the wrong one, but I am going 

to say this, that they are a year apart; the first one, I think, would be in 1940, the year I attended the 

United Farmer convention to which I have referenced. At the time, the Professor of Animal Husbandry 

at the university and one or two other livestock men from the Department of Agriculture, gave us the 

line-up on more hogs. If it was in 1940 that that happened, it was the following year, which would be 

1941, when we had the advertisements in almost all the papers calling on the city people to be patriotic 

and eat up some of this pork that could not be shipped overseas. 

 

The hon. member went through a discussion of the various agricultural policies with reference to wheat 

and coarse grains, and I entirely agree with him that coarse grains, for a number of years — that the 

people who co-operated with the Hon. Mr. Gardiner in growing coarse grains (he recommended it, he 

said "the Government would like you to grow more coarse grains"; he advertised in the papers even 

bribed at $1.00 an acre to do it — the hon. member is right when he said that the people who did it got 

stung. They sure did. Too often that has been the case. Now, I think that this Resolution, which we had 

here, at least offers a groundwork for an improvement in the livestock situation. I do not exactly agree 

with the exact wording of it. In the first clause it says "protection against high speculative feed prices." 

Personally, I would rather be protected against low speculative feed prices than high ones. What I would 

like to be protected against is a speculative market, and I think that the people of Saskatchewan, 

livestock producers and grain producers, are pretty well convinced that they have nothing to hope for 

from the speculative market, in any of their products. We have the situation, as pointed out by the hon. 

member, that today the livestock industry are getting fairly good prices; that is, they have gone up a 

great deal since last October; but we had a government policy which apparently has no idea, when they 

start something going, of what the result is going to be. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

58 

The first thing they do, they tell you to grow more coarse grains, then when you grow coarse grains they 

'gyp' you on the price; then when you get sick of taking a poor price for your coarse grains, and quit 

growing them, and the coarse grains begin to get scarce, they say they have to let the lid off a little bit. 

They don't take the lid off a little, they take it off altogether and let the speculators go crazy for a littler 

while and the price goes up, possibly 20 cents a bushel more than it ought to. The man with the hogs 

thinks that is sense because he can't feed hogs at those prices; and there is no use the hon. member 

saying that people didn't put their hogs on the market because everybody knows they were fighting with 

one another to get a truck to take their hogs — and it didn't matter whether there was a crop failure or 

not. It was happening in every district — unless we except Davidson; I will have to take the hon. 

member's word that they didn't do it at Davidson. Sure, we have 48 per cent more hogs being marketed, 

I do not want any better proof of the fact that the farmers are unloading their hogs, than for someone to 

tell me that 48 per cent was the increase in the marketing of hogs over last month because there certainly 

isn't 8 per cent more pigs in Saskatchewan than there was a year ago. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I did not quote Saskatchewan, it was the whole of Canada. 

 

Mr. Burgess: — That only goes to prove that they are not only killing the hog industry in Saskatchewan 

but they are killing it all over Canada. 

 

As a matter of fact, I think, it is two years ago now, in this House, speaking on a somewhat similar 

resolution, I said I did not know whether the Federal Government were consciously trying to kill the 

livestock industry in Saskatchewan but the fact remained that it was being killed. At that time I criticized 

some of the legislation that was in effect in Canada which was giving the pork producer in Ontario, 

Quebec and other places, a preference over the producer of pork products in Saskatchewan. I will agree 

with the hon. member for Last Mountain (Mr. J. Benson) that the favouritism has largely been taken 

away from it now. The pigs are now being unloaded, and I wouldn't be a bit surprised, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Benson: — You're on the wrong side of the lake! 

 

Mr. Burgess: — I beg your pardon, Sir. I didn't want to cause any hard feelings with anybody. The fact 

remains, that I wouldn't doubt the hon. member is correct when he says that livestock will be profitable 

in a little while. I wouldn't be at all surprised but that those farmers who struggled through this 

confusing (I was almost going to say crazy) agricultural policy of the moment: I wouldn't be surprised 

that they will cash in later on — that has been the history; but there is one group that are bound to cash 

in. Something happens; people have become dissatisfied with the livestock market, and unload their 

pigs; the packers buy them and the price goes up. The farmer then starts 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

59 

buying some feeding stock again and thinks, well there is a big price now and he might as well get in on 

it. The packers' price on his product now goes up, and he gets another million or two profit, and what the 

farmer makes one time he loses the other. Personally, I haven't lost anything on pigs for a long time. 

About 1932, I brought a load of pigs to Regina — nine of them — and I took home $33.50, which was 

just 50 cents less than $4 per pig. The same day I went to the Army and Navy store and bought a pair of 

rubber boots for $4.95 — there was a 'dollar day' on at the Army and Navy that day. When I got home, 

one of the neighbours said, "I suppose there were a lot of bargains in Regina." I said, "I never saw so 

many bargains in my life". He said, "Was it really good?" I said, "It is really good". He said: "How much 

did those boots cost you?" "$.95", I said: "But that wasn't so cheap". "No", I said, "I don't mean those 

bargains, it was in the stockyards that I saw the bargains. The biggest bargains I ever saw in Regina 

were those pigs at slightly less than four dollars each." That day I made a solemn declaration to myself 

that the people who ate pork, in the future could grow and feed it themselves. At the same time I have 

had a great deal of sympathy with the people who have struggled with Mr. Gardiner's pig policy, over 

the last ten years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to put a political tinge to anything I have to say. I want to deal with this 

Resolution, and I think the Resolution offers a constructive suggestion that we in this House do not need 

a Royal Commission to find out: that is, the time is long since past when a Board of Livestock 

Commissioners should have been set up in Canada to, at least, exercise some supervision over the 

livestock industry and the packing industry. I do not think it is necessary to have a Royal Commission, 

at great expense, to go around and discover whether or not somebody is stealing (as the hon. member 

suggested). I think it would be a good idea for the Dominion Government to set up the machinery to stop 

any possibility of stealing, so far as that is possible. I do not think it is necessary, as you might say to 

"look the door after the horse is stolen". I think we should have — and I think the hon. member, in his 

day, at many farm meetings has voted in favour of — a Board of Livestock Commissioners. He is far 

too progressive a farmer not to have got around to that stage, years ago. The Resolution asks for it, and 

we have been asking for it for years; and we do not need another Royal Commission to point out the 

necessity for it — we do not need a Royal Commission to point out the necessity of coarse grains being 

marketed without the speculative market. 

 

I, therefore, am going to vote against the Amendment, not that there is anything terribly bad in it, but in 

favour of the Motion. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

60 

Mr. D.S. Valleau (A.S.V.R.): — Mr. Speaker, on the Amendment, I find that I doubt that I can support 

the Amendment, although it has some very good points in it; but chiefly because it was one of these 

"statements of fact" which we have heard so much about in the last few days, and I, as a member of this 

House, am going to have judge whether or not the statement of fact is accurate — I rather doubt that it 

is. I haven't the Amendment before me, and I just took it down quickly and roughly. 

 

The Amendment does seem to me to contradict, to a certain extent, some of the implications of the 

original Motion; but that is even more drastic; I think the Amendment, if what it says is true, means that 

the policy that the hon. member wishes to commend is a policy diametrically opposed to the policy 

which the Federal Government has been following. That is, he wants to commend them for negotiating 

long-term contracts at fixed prices for meat and livestock production. I would suggest, Sir, that the 

Federal Government does not have a long-term policy of contracts at fixed prices. The reason I would 

suggest that is because the one thing, above all others, on which the corner-stone of the Liberal policy 

has been based in the last five months — in fact, we heard it in the same breath that the 'austerity' 

program, was announced — on the Geneva Agreement, of which was we have heard so much. 

 

I do not wish to speak on the Geneva Agreement in this Debate except to show why they are contrary to 

this policy — the basic premise. I would like to quote to you from an article on international trade 

practices, under the I.T.O. Charter, by a man who at one time helped to advise the United States 

Treasury on their economic activities. It was partly his advice that led to the establishment of the 

proposed Charter for an international trade organization, and his name is Mr. Raymond S. Mikesell. He 

said: "The particular rules and standards of international trade which we, in this country, would like to 

see made universal, with a few noticeable exceptions, are those consistent with the principles of free 

international trade, carried on by the unregimented activities of private enterprise." 

 

I would suggest, without elaborating to too large an extent, that these are the principles which are 

incorporated in the Geneva Agreements, that they are based on the premise that state trading is a bad 

thing and when it does exist, it should be carried on as if it were free, unregimented private enterprise 

traders. Obviously we cannot command the Federal Government for establishing long-term contracts 

which can only be done by state trading, unless we have some reason to believe that those long-term 

contracts are going to be negotiated for at least one year, or two, three or five years — I would say for 

ten years. It should be their policy to negotiate them for as long a term as possible. 

 

Under Article 17 of the Geneva Agreements which we have signed, dealing with non-discriminatory 

treatment on the part of state trading enterprises, it provides that any contract entered into with another 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

61 

nation must be entered into exactly on the same basis as a private trader would enter; and that all the 

other nations, signatory to the agreement, must have an equal opportunity to sign such contracts on 

exactly the same terms. 

 

Similarly, Article 16 deals with subsidies: subsidies cannot be offered to your own home grown industry 

in order to encourage exports in a particular field (unfair exports). That, I suggest, would prevent long- 

term price fixing and, guaranteed floor prices. While we all agree that this is a worthy objective, long-

term trade agreements and long-tem fixed floor prices, to carry it out, would be to carry out a policy 

diametrically opposed to the policy which the Federal Government has adopted under the Geneva 

Agreements. It is unfortunate, if true, that Mr. Gardiner is in opposition to all the Federal Cabinet, but in 

trying to negotiate food agreements with Britain he is, at the moment in opposition to the economic 

policy which the Government at Ottawa is trying to pursue. We are no longer a nation trying to work out 

agreements with our best customer Britain; we are today a nation trying to work out a policy that will 

please the Treasury Department of the United States of America — and that is what is going to make it 

so tough for the farmers of Western Canada, in the immediate future. 

 

While I would like to commend the Federal Government for this policy, I am afraid that I cannot 

because I do not think it is their policy. And the second part of the Amendment which suggests setting 

up a Royal Commission to investigate the packing plant industry — what premise would that Royal 

Commission start from? It would start from the statement from the Federal Minister of Agriculture, last 

fall, when the packing-house strike was on, it was the duty of the farmers to organize strike-breaking 

gangs to break the strike. It would start with the belief that the companies were right from the beginning, 

and I do not think a commission based on that promise would get very far. It is the premise that the 

farmers do not agree with and that the people who work in the industry do not agree with, and it is also a 

premise which contradicts paragraph 2 of this main Motion which we are discussing. Actually what we 

want is not an investigation but action, and that is what the main Motion calls for. So, on these two 

grounds the first part of the Amendment contradicts Canada's main trade policy and states that 

something exists which I have grave reason to doubt does exist; and the second part of it, in a sense, 

would nullify paragraph 2 of the Main Motion, so I will oppose the Amendment. 

 

Mr. John Wellbelove (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I believe I will have to oppose the 

Amendment on pretty much the same grounds, for the simple reason that in the first portion of the 

Amendment we are commending the Government of Canada for a long-term agreement — I wish we 

could be certain that it was a long-term agreement. I think the last time the delegation were over from 

Great Britain negotiating their agreement it was negotiated 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

62 

subject to revision and review. So I do not think we would be on safe ground for commending them for 

a long-term agreement which does not, to all intents and purposes, exist. If the Federal Government had 

negotiated a definite long-term agreement (a multi-lateral agreement by preference) then the spirit of 

that, I think, most of us could endorse. 

 

In regard to the second clause of the Resolution, just to draw from that to the Amendment, the second 

clause of the Resolution — speaking to the Amendment — does definitely call for action. As we think 

of the number of Royal Commissions and investigations that have been set up which have often been 

called a "delaying movement", and I think, by and large, that they are delaying movements. If ever there 

was a need to spur the Federal Government on to an investigation during the last six or eight months, we 

certainly have passed through a period, if they had any interest at all in the livestock producer, there 

should have been the incentive to start an investigation. Seeing the muddled policy we had — I do not 

want to bring politics into this any more than anybody else — emanating from Ottawa, I do not think 

there is very much sense or reason in asking for a Royal Commission to investigate, when it was very 

pertinent that there was need for a Royal Commission only a few months ago. I would oppose the 

Amendment on those grounds, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, just a few words, and they are going to be non-political 

also. I have been looking over this Amendment and it seems, to some extent, to be a little at variance 

with the purpose of the original Motion. The original Motion is asking for a policy that will have a 

stabilizing effect on the hog industry, not only in the field of production but also some assurance that 

protection will be guaranteed both to the consumer and producer of hogs. It is very obvious why some 

consideration was given to the consumer, principally due to the fact that it is quite common knowledge 

and as a result of the experience that took place last January when prices of processed commodities 

(hogs) did go to excessive heights — there is no question about that. All one needs to do is look at the 

inventories which I understand were the highest, I believe, for a long, long period, that the packers had 

available; and when one consider the tremendous increase, not only in wholesale prices but in retail 

prices, surely some consideration should be given to the consuming public. Because, for one reason, if 

for no other, we depend on the ability of the consumer to continue to buy our products. 

 

I know, too, Mr. Speaker, that this type of Resolution has been (the principle behind it) endorsed by the 

Canadian Federation of Agriculture who, unlike our hon. member for Arm Rivers and the hon. Federal 

Minister of Agriculture, believe that the price of barley and coarse grains should be related to the price 

of wheat: on the contrary, the Federation thinks, and 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

63 

we think, that the price of coarse grains should be related to the price of animal, dairy and poultry 

products, because that is how food grains are marketed. If you do not keep that price relationship, we are 

soon going to run out of a market for our feed grains. Either the prices of coarse grains will get too high 

(feed grains) or the price of animal products could go down. It is mentioned in the Amendment that we 

have long-term contracts, but other hon. members have pointed out that we haven't got long-term 

contracts at the present time, particularly for pork products — we are not sure whether it is going to last 

for three months, we do know we have it for one year, possibly, to March 31st, and it may run to the end 

of this year. The thing to remember, though, is that the quantity called for in the contract, this year, is far 

from what it ever has been; in fact it is right back to where it was in 1939, and our whole hog 

production, our prospective production, our population and marketings, are all back to what they were in 

1939. 

 

It is my thought that the Amendment really is at cross-purposes with the original Motion. I would like to 

read, for the benefit of the House, an extract from a Resolution passed by the Canadian Federation of 

Agriculture in this regard, particularly with reference to keeping price relationships between meat 

products and feed grains and thereby implementing a sound overall agricultural policy for the Dominion, 

so that we will not have, as our hon. member for Qu'Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Burgess) mentioned, one 

day in pigs and the next day out of pigs. And you have university people and the Department of 

Agriculture saying to the farmers — "go into hog raising, go into cattle raising," we know those things 

are all desirable but the economic factors come in between and because of price manipulations, one way 

or the other, they are liquidated out of good, sound, agricultural programs. The Canadian Federation of 

Agriculture has pleaded for that, and I will agree, Mr. Speaker, that at one time during the war we had a 

good, sound, agricultural program that fit in well towards giving stability to our agriculture by decent 

price relationships between all phases of production in agriculture. Since the war years we have been 

moving away from that. I say we are in a precarious position right now. While the price of meats and 

dairy products are controlled, the price of food grains are uncontrolled; and the hon. member for Arm 

River cannot tell me what the prices of barley might be next June, neither do the livestock feeders know 

— that is the enigma. Of course, he, together with the Federal Minister of Agriculture, says that the price 

of wheat is going to control the price of barley and oats; well, suppose that the price of barley does go 

up, it didn't control the price of rye, and certainly if things go 'hog wild', as they often do on the 

Winnipeg Grain Exchange, it certainly isn't going to influence the price of barley and oats. But, 

assuming that it doss hold it down to some extent to the point where the hon. member suggests that 

people will be beginning to feed wheat to livestock, all I can say then, if barley ever rises to that point, 

there won't be any livestock left to feed wheat or barley to. So we have to keep a decent price 

relationship. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

64 

The Canadian Federation of Agriculture says in their Resolution; and they were speaking, specifically, 

with reference to coarse grains being handled by the Wheat Board, and here is what they say that one of 

the functions of the Wheat Board should be: "That it be provided always that the Board's domestic 

operating and selling policy carry out the spirit and intent of a general agricultural policy, that shall 

effect a proper price relationship between grain and livestock price, as determined by the Federal 

Department of Agriculture, after consultation with the Canadian Federation of Agriculture". 

 

I think that is a sound Resolution, and the Saskatchewan Association of rural Municipalities has 

endorsed a like Resolution. I cannot, for the life of me, Mr. Speaker, see that the Amendment adds 

anything — as a matter of fact, it subtracts from the purpose of this Resolution. The Amendment is 

merely asking for something that the farmers of the province are sick and tired of: commissions to 

investigate this and that. We have had the Price Spread Investigation that gave us some indication as to 

the earnings of packing-house, and all we are asking is not an investigation; we are asking for a Board of 

Livestock Commissioners to see that the farmer is not unduly exploited, and that the consumer is not 

unduly exploited; and we are also asking that the prices of coarse grains and animal products bear some 

fair relationship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, chiefly because of the reasons enumerated, and many more that I would like to enumerate, 

and a few more things that I would like to say in reply to the hon. member for Arm River, to some of the 

statements that he made, I am going to forgo that pleasure — I might have an opportunity after he gets 

through talking on the coarse grain issue — and since I have said I am also going to keep this non-

political, Mr. Speaker, I will vote against the Amendment and vote for the original Motion. 

 

Mr. Jacob Benson (Last Mountain): — Since so many have spoken who do not produce hogs, I do not 

suppose it would do any harm if I had a few words to say, too. 

 

I think that it won't matter very much whether we pass the amendment, or turn it down; whether we pass 

the Resolution or turn it down — we have been doing this sort of thing for years and years, and I do not 

think it will make one iota of difference whether it is turned down or whether it is carried; the result will 

be the same anyway. 

 

I am going to make the suggestion — we have heard enough now, I think, to come to any understanding 

that there is something wrong with the livestock industry in this province — that the Ministers of 

Agriculture, including the Dominion Minister of Agriculture, across this country will quit sniping at one 

another, get together and have a good feed of pork, and then work out an agricultural and livestock 

policy for the Dominion of Canada. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

65 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the House ready for the question? 

 

The vote is on the Amendment which reads: That the following be added to the Motion: 

 

"This Assembly commends the Federal Government for having negotiated long-term contracts at fixed 

prices for meat and livestock products and for having adopted a policy of floor price; and requests the 

said Government to appoint a Royal Commission to make a full and complete investigation of the 

Packing Plant Industry in Canada." 

 

Is the House ready for the question? 

 

It is my duty to inform the House that the Mover of the Motion is about to rise his feet to close the 

Debate. If anyone desires to speak he should speak now. 

 

Mr. W.S. Boyle (Kinistino): — (Closing the Debate) I demand the privilege of making a reply. I do not 

want to take up very much time, but there is one thing I would like to say: the member for Arm River 

endeavoured to point out we were on the same footing all across Canada. We are not. Both the Eastern 

and the Western feeder is given a free subsidy on our coarse grains. They are endeavouring, by the 

Dominion policy to make Saskatchewan just a grain-growing province, and that if one thing we object 

to, because it is leading to what the member for Arm River mentioned, depleting our population, and we 

will hear, as I have heard on different occasions, speakers endeavouring to tell the public that it is the 

policy of the C.C.F. that is driving people out of Saskatchewan. It is the policy of the Dominion 

Government subsidizing both livestock, poultry and dairy producers in both the East and West at the 

expense of Saskatchewan. That is what has been going on for years — it is not as bad as it was when 

they had the 25-cent subsidy, but I think this is something that runs into millions of dollars every year, 

on this coarse grain subsidy, and that is one thing we do object to. We are not objecting to it much as the 

speakers getting up and pointing out that it is the C.C.F. policy that is driving then out of Saskatchewan 

when it is the Dominion Government that is doing it. 

 

I do not think I need to add anything further, we agree on quite a lot of things, but my object, as I said 

when I introduced this, was to try to get some stability in our livestock production. It never has been 

because we didn't know what the policy was from one day to another, and I am sure that anybody who 

wants to be fair at all will agree with me when I say that throwing coarse grains on the open market on 

October 21, was unpredictable and certainly something that nobody could forecast, and a great blow to 

the hog, poultry and the livestock industry in Saskatchewan: there were thousands of brood sows 

dumped on the market before the January 2 announcement that the price were going to go up. Mr. 

Speaker, I believe that is all I have to say. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

66 

Motion (for return) of Mr. Danielson respecting the Outram Agricultural School. 

 

Hon. Woodrow S. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — This Motion still presents some difficulty. I had 

rather hoped, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member introducing it would see fit to withdraw it. I take it that 

what he is interested in is the financial assistance which the Government, through the Department of 

Education gave to these school areas which were operating the Outram Agricultural School; and there is 

no reason, of course, why he should not have that information. However, the Motion for Return calls for 

return of Superintendents' Reports. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that Superintendents' Reports, being 

inter-departmental documents, are privileged documents and as such should not be tabled in the House. I 

think that the hon. members will see the difficulty and, indeed, the danger of establishing the practice of 

tabling reports in the House which our Superintendants make on teachers and schools which involve 

matters which perhaps are not of public interest; and which are not written in such a way that they may 

be tabled. 

 

With regard to that financial statement, it would be easy to give the financial statement except that it 

wouldn't mean anything once it were given. The Outram Agricultural School was operated jointly by 

two larger units: we do receive annual financial statements from each larger unit, but the financial 

statement is not broken down and has no reference to any one particular school, as such; consequently, if 

we gave the financial statement of the two units concerned there would be no mention whatever of the 

Outram Agricultural School in them, and it would be of no value to the hon. member who proposes the 

Motion. However, I am quite prepared to table such, but I would move an Amendment to the Motion, 

Mr. Speaker, to the effect that the words "and Superintendents' Reports" be struck out. 

 

Mr. Herman S. Danielson (Arm River): — I have no objection to the elimination of the 

Superintendents' Reports, Mr. Speaker, but I think I have a right to ask for the balance — that is, the 

annual financial statement and annual report, and I would like to have that if the hon. Minister sees fit to 

submit it. I would like to be informed, Mr. Speaker, if this can be amended here, or should I submit a 

new Motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — With the consent of the House I think we can agree to eliminate that portion which the 

hon. Minister considers privileged documents. 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

Members: — Agreed. 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

67 

Mr. Speaker: — Then we have an order for the Assembly to issue a Return showing all the annual 

reports and annual financial statements made in connection with the Outram Agricultural School. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the House to adopt the Motion? 

 

Members: Agreed. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 58 — An Act to amend The Fuel Petroleum Products Act, 1946. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, this Bill to amend The Fuel Petroleum 

Products Act might be named a Bill to assist in the development of industry in Saskatchewan. The 

purpose of this Bill is to grant exemption from payments of the Gasoline Tax to two groups of people, 

first of all, to those persons who use gasoline, or diesel fuel, in the services of industrial plants in 

connection with the manufacture of goods. Well, we have very few in Saskatchewan and very few that 

use gasoline for the manufacturing of goods. I am sorry that the hon. member for Moosomin is not here 

because there is a plant in his constituency where they do a very nice business of manufacturing oil cans 

and things of that sort. At the present time this man uses an engine in which he uses diesel fuel for a 

means of providing fuel. At the present time the larger industries use electricity and, of course, there is 

no tax on that except the two per cent Education Tax which would be applicable when we grant the 

exemption. The two per cent Education Tax will apply on the gasoline or diesel fuel when it has been 

used. 

 

The other is in the operation of well-drilling engines, flour mill engines, or grain elevator engines. There 

are only a few in Saskatchewan where they use gasoline, or diesel fuel, for the operation of their 

engines, or flour mills. We have a list of some 12 in the province, altogether. The rest of the larger plants 

use electricity — consequently are free from any tax. 

 

We feel that this will encourage these small industries scattered around the province, in the smaller 

places. Flour mills, at the present time have a heavy burden of tax in relation to those who have the more 

modern electricity for use, and do not pay that tax. 

 

Then, too, in connection with the well-drilling engines; up at Lloydminster we have the anomalous 

situation, for example, on the Saskatchewan side, where we charge a tax of ten cents per gallon, while 

on the Alberta side there is no tax. It is to remedy this, and to give the drillers the same opportunities in 

Saskatchewan as in Alberta. And so, this Bill is to grant exemption from the small industries. The total 

cost for the flour mills, Mr. Speaker, will be approximately $12,000 per year, which we will lose. The 

industrial plants for the manufacture of products will not be more than $5,000, and the oil-drilling will, 

of course, depend entirely on the number of operators, but with the number that were in operation, last 

year, it will be less than $5,000 — a total of approximately $20,000 that we will lose in revenue; but I 

am sure it will do a great deal to assist the development of 



 

March 2, 1948 

 

68 

industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

I, therefore, move second reading of this Bill. 

 

At 11 o'clock Mr. Speaker adjourned the Assembly without question put, pursuant to Standing Order 5a 

until tomorrow at 3 o'clock p.m. 


