




















































Hansard: March 17, 1948


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Fifth Session — Tenth Legislature 

 

 

The House resumed at 3 o’clock p.m. Wednesday, March 17, 1948 
 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

Dr. Henry E. House (Gravelbourg): — Before the Orders of the Day, I wish to bring to your attention 

an item in the Leader-Post, Tuesday, March 16, 1948, in which I was quoted by an executive of the 

Horse Co-operative at Swift Current, and they regret the statement which I made did not give due credit 

to all concerned. I wish to apologize if I did not include anyone, in that statement of mine, who should 

have a little credit coming to them. 

 

The facts, as set out by myself are entirely correct, and in this statement in the press it gives me credit 

for that. The only thing they object to is that I did not give credit to the Dominion Government for the 

help we have received. When we started this Horse Co-operative first, that was when we needed the 

help, and that was when we could not get that help from either Alberta or the Federal Government, in 

the way of a loan. It is true that we got a lot of help through them lending their help to us, in the way of 

Mr. L.V. Thompson and Mr. Shields, who have made an excellent job of helping along with the plant. 

 

In regard to the advances made to the plant, paragraph three says: “Several advances, amounting to a 

total of $250,000, interest free, were made by the Dominion Government to the Canadian Commercial 

Corporation. This enabled the association to finance the canning section of the plant”. Mr. Speaker, that 

was much later after we were in operation. I do not know who the Canadian Commercial Corporation 

was but, anyway, in January, 1946, a contract was entered into with the Canadian Commercial 

Corporation to supply 7,000 tons of canned horse-meat and gravy. This was after the plant was in 

operation. The statement I made was in connection with getting the plant under construction, and I wish 

to give all concerned credit for everything that was done, but we did not go into production in that 

canning plant until May, 1946, long after we had been shipping horse-meat. This thing was going over 

big at that time and it was quite easy to obtain credit. 

 

The executive in Swift Current is not the active part of the Co-operative. That is much the same as the 

set-up is in Ottawa — they sit up there, we do not know what they are for, but they seem to enjoy it. 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

2 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 61. An Act to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act, 1947. 

 

Hon. O.W. Valleau (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, this item (2), Bill No. 61, An Act to 

amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. Dealing with the amendments to the Act, it might not 

be out of place to deal very briefly with the Act in itself, and the steady growth which has been made in 

the Act, and the activities under that Act, since it was originally brought into the House in the Session of 

1946. 

 

At that time, Mr. Speaker, the House will recall that we brought in an Act, and this House passed that 

Act, levying certain charges upon owners of motor vehicles before they could secure their licence. The 

premiums thus paid were to be placed in an insurance fund, and out of that fund compensations were to 

be made to victims of motor vehicle accidents. The Bill, as originally passed, contained only the 

Accident Compensation features, and was in force during the twelve months following the 1st of April, 

1946. 

 

While there were a large number of accidents, with a large number of people receiving compensation 

through the Act, it did not entirely exhaust the premiums which had been placed in the fund — in fact, it 

came quite a long way from exhausting those premiums. But, during that year of 1946, more than 1,500 

persons, in the province of Saskatchewan, received compensation due to motor vehicle accidents, and 

the dependants of some 60 people who were killed in motor vehicle accidents, also received 

compensation. The entire amount paid out in premiums during that year being some $300,000. 

 

Our study of the number of accidents, and of the circumstances surrounding the accidents, tended to 

show that only about five or six per cent of those cases where an individual was killed would have any 

compensation whatever payable to the family, under what is known as ‘public liability’ insurance; and 

that only 11 to 12 per cent of those people who were injured in motor vehicle accidents would have 

secured compensation from insurance coverage, under public liability insurance, even had everyone in 

the province been earning public liability insurance. 

 

At the last Session of the House, in 1947, we increased the coverage. We had, at that time, built up a 

reserve of some $700,000, and it was felt that instead of lowering the rates it was quite possible and 

practicable to increase coverage. And so, a year ago, the coverage was increased by also insuring cars — 

motor vehicles — in the province of Saskatchewan, against damage from collision. 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

3 

In 1947, for the first nine months, from the 1st of April until the 31st of December, we had some 1,145 

people who were injured in accidents, securing compensation, and the dependants of 54 persons who 

were killed, to a total of $330,000. 

 

The collision coverage cost the fund $577,000, with benefits being paid in some 2,788 cases of collision. 

So that, since the institution of the fund, we have paid out a total of $1,200,000, and have dealt with 

some 5,547 cases. 

 

I do not proposes at this time, Mr. Speaker, to suggest that in all cases the routine procedure has been 

perfect in all respects, but I do suggest that, in view of the very large number of cases which we have 

had to deal with, our office has given reasonably satisfactory coverage, and reasonably satisfactory 

service. 

 

The office, last spring, with the institution of the collision coverage, was under the necessity of starting 

to build a staff who would be prepared to deal with every case of collision damage in the province of 

Saskatchewan, involving loss in the amount of more than $100. A good deal of the work was done in 

some of the garages owned by the Government, either by the Insurance Office, or by the Department of 

Reconstruction and Rehabilitation, but by far the greater percentage of the work was done in privately 

owned garages and body shops. 

 

In some cases, both in our own garages and in private garages, the finishing of the work was held up due 

to the inability of securing parts. A certain amount of publicity has been in effect throughout the 

province, playing upon that very item. In addition, I find that a certain amount of publicity has been 

spread in the province attempting to deal with matters coming under the jurisdiction of the Insurance 

Offices which, actually, have no basis in fact. I have here in my hand a press report from the Regina 

Leader-Post, of December 17, 1947, in which one Mr. Ted. Davis, publicity director of the 

Saskatchewan Liberal Association, is reported as having made a radio broadcast. Mr. Davis said that one 

private garage man complained that he had lost $10,000 worth of business to the government garage. 

May I say, Mr. Speaker, that if one garageman lost $10,000 in business, that the other garagemen lost 

very little business indeed. The total amount of business done by the Insurance Company’s garage at 

Battleford was $13,732.95; so that, let me repeat, if the one garageman lost $10,000 in business, the 

other garagemen all over the province were only deprived of a total of $3,000. As a matter of fact, the 

amount of business done by the Government Insurance Garage at Battleford was 4.5 per cent of the total 

amount of business for which the Insurance Office paid compensation and collision claims during this 

past summer. The total done by the Reconstruction garages, and the Government Garage at Battleford, 

totalled just over seven per cent. I am rather pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. Minister of 

Reconstruction is not here, else he would be insisting that we give his garages a larger percentage of the 

amount. 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

4 

If I might go on for a moment in connection with this radio address, I would like to deal with one other 

item. Mr. Davis cited the case of an independent garageman who quoted $790 to Government Insurance 

officials for repairs to a car. The Government said it was too high, and the car was removed to the 

Government Garage. After two and one-half months the car was returned to the owner. Mr. Davis said 

that it did not steer and track properly. Insurance officials said they paid $900 for repairs and could not 

spend any more. The actual situation in regard to that case is as follows: the quotation on repairs was 

$751 — the adjuster for the Insurance Office felt that that was out of line and attempted to secure a 

lower rate. When he was unable to do so, he took the car out of the garage and put it into the 

Reconstruction Garage in Prince Albert. Before the car was finished it was necessary to be driven to 

Battleford, in order to put it on the frame straightener as there wasn’t a frame straightener in Prince 

Albert that could do the job — it either had to go to Saskatoon or to Battleford — in order to get the 

frame straightened. When the car came back, and the bills were all paid, it cost the office not $900 but 

$549, so that actually there was a saving of just over $200 from the amount quoted by the garagemen to 

the office, instead of the Government having to pay another $110. So far as whether the car was fixed 

satisfactorily or not, I have here a sworn statement from the customer — I do not wish to give his name 

or the name of the garage involved — but in this sworn statement he states as follows: “My car was 

repaired at the Government Garage and I was satisfied with the repair job, except that there was a 

holdup in some of the parts. But the Government Garage advised they were on order, and they let me 

use my car as I was badly in need of it. The dashboard was missing when I took delivery of my car from 

the garage, and they advised me they would ‘phone me when the dashboard arrived. Later I asked about 

a dashboard, and they said they would get it for me within two weeks, and offered me the money to buy 

the part if I could get it sooner”. That, I think, Mr. Speaker, deals with only one instance of where 

complaints have been made and blown up to real complaints, with regard to some of the work done by 

the Insurance Office in the administration of The Auto Accident Act. 

 

We are coming close to the end of this year — that is, the end of another 12 months. The office has now 

been operating the accident compensation section for a period of two years, and we have been operating 

the collision section for one year. The accidents have cost more during this past year — the first 12 

months only $300,000, and the next nine months $330,000. I am unable to say, and anyone else is 

unable to say, whether that is a trend toward more accidents, or whether it is simply a variation and that 

the true average is somewhere between the two figures. It will require a considerable number of years of 

experience before we can determine that absolutely. 

 

In going over the collision claims that have been paid, and attempting to measure them up against 

previous years, it looks to us as though we have had an average year during this year, in collision 

damage in the province of Saskatchewan. We find, at the end of this 12-month period, that we are again 

going to have a surplus which we are estimating, at the moment, will run 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

5 

somewhere in the neighbourhood of $250,000. That will give us a reserve fund of very close to 

$1,000,000 when added to the surplus of the first year’s operation. 

 

Attention then, Sir, was paid to the question of enlarging the coverage. There are a number of places 

where the coverage could have been enlarged — we could have added fire and theft to the coverage; we 

could have reduced the coverage to $50 deductible, or we could have brought in, what the Amendments 

to the Act before us provide, public liability and property damage coverage. 

 

In going over those, there was considerable demand, I admit, to reduce the deductible on the collision 

damage to $50. I do not believe that it is advisable, at the present time, in view of the administrative 

difficulties involved, to reduce that coverage. We have only had one year’s experience so far in building 

a staff, and in building an administrative routine, to look after the collision damage above $100, and to 

load the office up again with the $50 deductible would more than double the actual number of cases, 

although the money involved would not be, by any means, doubled. 

 

The fire and theft could have been put in, but we find that actually more people claim, and a larger 

percentage of claims are paid, under public liability and property damage than there are under the fire 

and theft claims. 

 

Another factor has entered into the situation. The neighbouring provinces — that is, Manitoba and 

Alberta, British Columbia and Ontario, and in some 38 of the states in the United States — they have 

what is known as ‘Financial responsibility laws’. That law, being in effect in Manitoba and Alberta, 

affects a very considerable number of our people along the Eastern and Western portions of the 

province, who are under the necessity of driving, and who do habitually drive, into the other provinces. 

It affects some of them almost every day, as well as these financial liability laws affecting every tourist 

who leave the province of Saskatchewan. This so-called financial responsibility law provides that the 

driver of a motor vehicle must, in effect, secure public liability and property damage insurance before he 

can drive in the provinces which are involved. A number of press reports are coming through from 

British Columbia at the moment where ten and twelve cars a day are being impounded in Vancouver 

because their owners cannot produce the so-called ‘pink slip’ which indicates they have public liability 

protection. 

 

The provinces and states involved are not doing as we have done — that is, selling it on a non-profit 

basis, as a public service; they are simply putting the law into effect and requiring the motorist driving in 

that province to take out that insurance. I noted a press report from Manitoba in which some of the 

government officials there stated that they estimated close to 90 per cent of their motorists in the 

province had taken out this particular form of coverage, and, during one year, the increase in insurance 

premiums to the private companies in the province of Manitoba was $800,000. That is, the motorists of 

that 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

6 

province while, technically speaking, were not compelled to buy insurance when they bought their 

licence, nevertheless, the penalties were so severe that the great majority of them did buy the insurance. 

 

Now, this public liability and property damage insurance, Mr. Speaker, does not insure the owner of the 

car for damage or accidents to himself or his family. It simply insures him against having to pay 

damages to a third party whom he my have negligently injured. That is the standard public liability and 

property damage as sold by any company in any province. It simply insures the motorist that if he is 

sued for having negligently caused bodily injury or damage to property, and is sued for it, and a 

judgment is issued against him, the insurance company steps in and pays the judgment up to the limits of 

their policy. It does not, as we do in this province, pay compensation to every victim of a motor vehicle 

accident; it does not pay collision damage in every case of collision damage; but it is there essentially 

for the protection of what is known in the insurance business as ‘third party protection’. In view of the 

fact that any of our motorists in Saskatchewan who are under the necessity of leaving the province and 

travelling either in some four of the other provinces in Canada, or in 38 states in the United States, 

would be under the necessity of buying this insurance, we decided that probably the move to make at 

this time, in order to try and have the benefits paid approximately equal the premiums take in, would be 

to add the public liability and property damage to the Act. 

 

We estimate, at the present time, that that can be done without changing the premiums in any way 

whatsoever. The premiums which will go into effect with the selling of the licences have two very small 

changes. Motor cycle charges are being reduced slightly, and a small additional charge is being made to 

certain commercial vehicles and cars which come into the province with the ‘midway’ shows, showing 

at the “B” fairs — they were getting away with, if I recall correctly, something like 50 cents for their 

coverage. A slight addition is being made there and a reduction made on the motor cycles. It is my 

opinion, at the present time that, with the basis of our two years’ experience with the accident section 

and one year on the collision, and with an estimate only on the cost of Public Liability and Property 

Damage, that the fund at the present rate should approximately carry itself. Should there be heavy 

variations from year to year, we have, as I mentioned earlier, a reserve fund of close to $1,000,000, and 

by the time that works down a little we will have had sufficient experience to know exactly what the 

costs are. I do not anticipate, unless the people of this province desire to have still more coverage, that 

there will need to be any change whatsoever in the rates which are presently in effect. 

 

With the addition of this coverage, Mr. Speaker, we are giving coverage which purchased privately 

(some of it cannot be purchased privately, there is no insurance company in the world can give accident 

insurance to all of the people in the province of Saskatchewan, covering for motor car accidents — that 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

7 

is quite impossible) would cost considerably more. But taking the business and pleasure car, the present 

Board rates for public liability and property damage — that is, the items we are adding, this year, 

without any addition to cost — would cost $11. A collision $100 deductible collision costs $17; and a 

personal injury, covering only the occupants of the car, the driver and his passenger, will cost $3, or a 

total of $31, which today is being sold under The Automobile Accident Act for $4.50 for the smaller 

cars, $6 for the larger cars and $1 for the driver’s licence. 

 

I would like to deal now with one variation in the property damage coverage. The public liability 

coverage is standard in every respect — exactly the same as that purchased from a private dealer in the 

province of Saskatchewan, or anywhere else. The property damage section of $1,000 protection is 

standard everywhere outside of the province of Saskatchewan, and will meet all of the requirements of 

the other provinces and states which require financial responsibility coverage. In the province of 

Saskatchewan, the property damage coverage will have a deductible of $100 — that is, if, through your 

negligence, you cause an accident in the province of Saskatchewan involving, shall we say, $800, you 

will pay the first $100 yourself and the Government will pay the other $700. Outside of the province of 

Saskatchewan the Government will pay the full $800, or whatever the amount is, right up to the top of 

the amount covered, which is $1,000, standard public liability and property damage coverage. 

 

The reason that we are putting in that $100 deductible is, I think, very clear. In the first place there 

comes the administrative problem of dealing with property damage in every case for about 160,000 

motor vehicles. The second is the fact that the great bulk of damage caused by motor vehicles is caused 

to other motor vehicles — that is the property damage. At the present time the office, under The 

Automobile Insurance Act, repairs all cars over and above the first $100 — it does not matter whether 

the man upsets his own car in a ditch, or whether it is a collision, and since we are already repairing 

those cars it is not necessary that we should determine liability. Two cars smash together at an 

intersection — we do not have to go out and decide which one was negligent; we do not have to have 

witnesses and court cases and so on, because we are going to fix both of those cars anyway, and the 

owners of the cars are under the necessity of paying their own $100 to start with. If we put our property 

damage down to bedrock, then we would find ourselves continually in the position of having to 

determine where there was negligence in a collision between two motor vehicles, and it is when you 

start getting into that, that is where your administrative costs start to build up, and that is when you so 

often get into court and have court costs, and so on. For that reason, we thought that for a time, at least, 

until we again see how this was going to work out, it would be advisable to put on the property damage, 

let me repeat, within the province of Saskatchewan only, on the $100 deductible basis. Again, in order 

that I may be perfectly clear, the public liability will be standard both inside and outside the province of 

Saskatchewan, $1,000 for protection in case of one person injured in one accident; $10,000 for two or 

more persons injured in one accident. The property damage will be standard everywhere outside the 

province of Saskatchewan, but will be subject to $100 deductible inside of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

8 

I have given to the House, a moment ago, the figure of $31 as being the cost of the insurance if it were 

purchased at standard board rates. I think from that it would only be fair, in view of the fact that there is 

a $100 deductible on property damage within the province of Saskatchewan, to deduct approximately 

$2, leaving us with a net cost of $29. But, added to that, there should be the fact that every citizen of the 

province of Saskatchewan is insured against motor vehicle accidents, whether it is a man who steps off 

the street and, through his own negligence, steps into the road of a motor vehicle, and is run down — 

whether it is a small child, whether you are out driving and upset your car, or whether you injure 

someone in a horse-drawn vehicle, that cannot be measured up against the insurance given by other 

companies, due to the fact that no company has ever attempted or could possibly, write that class of 

business. 

 

In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, with this latest addition to The Automobile Accident Act, especially since it 

is evident that it can be done without changing our premium rate, that we have again placed ourselves 

far in the lead of the other jurisdictions, both in Canada and the United States, who have been attempting 

to deal with the incidence of motor vehicle accidents, and compensation for those injured in them. In 

spite of their financial responsibility laws in other provinces, the only people who are covered there are 

those where negligence can be proven against another person. They do not give the coverage that we do; 

they do not give any coverage at all under the financial responsibility law. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I wish to move that Act to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act, 1947, 

be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Delmar S. Valleau (Area 1, Great Britain): — Mr. Speaker, I speak on this Bill with a certain 

amount of hesitation. As the hon. members of the Assembly know, the Minister who has just spoken, 

and who introduced the Bill, is my father, and for a long time I have hesitated to speak in this House on 

his Bills, or following him, for fear the members might think I was doing so out of the fear that I might 

be ‘taken out to the family woodshed’ if I didn’t. On this occasion I want to assure the hon. members 

that such is not the case, and that I have no fear of ‘the family woodshed’. To illustrate the position in 

which I find myself, I think I could do it best by quoting an analogy of the fireman. Back in the days 

when the Minister and I were working together on the farm we found that we had a tractor and neither 

one of us know very much about the tractor, but we set to work to learn how. I wouldn’t go so far as to 

say that I learned to run the tractor because he was instructing me; it would be more correct to say that 

we learned how to run the thing together — and what a time we had! This applies, also, Sir, to this Bill, 

and many of the subjects that come up in this House, when I find myself in agreement with the Minister 

and sometimes in disagreement, as members may remember. 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

9 

Many people have heard the hon. Attorney General in his famous slogan ‘You are born into the old 

Parties, you have to think your way into the C.C.F.’. I want to assure the Assembly that I was not born 

into the C.C.F. On the contrary, even before the Party had a name, my father and I had thought our way 

into the C.C.F. together. 

 

In supporting the Bill, therefore, I do so on its own merits and not because of the Minister. I would like 

to use, Sir, another example from farm experience. When the Minister and I used to plow the fields 

together he would pace off one side of the field and it was my job to go to the other side of the quarter-

section and pace off my side. Then I would stand at attention while he came toward me on the tractor 

making the strike out. I always felt a certain amount of pride when he tripped out at the end and I could 

look down the furrow and see that it lay quite straight. I won’t say that it was always straight, but I did 

feel proud of the times when it was straight. And, today, when I look at the ‘furrow he has been 

plowing’ in his work on these Automobile Insurance plans, I think the ‘furrow is straight’, and I have 

that feeling of pride again. 

 

When this Bill is passed, Saskatchewan will have the most advanced Automobile Insurance plan in the 

world. This is certainly ‘new breaking in fertile soil’. 

 

The Bill before us would add two features to the original plan. These new features are public liability 

and property damage. These additional benefits will be given with the insurance we get when we buy 

our licence, but the cost will be no greater than last year. For my car, for example, the insurance would 

be $6 for the car, $1 for my driver’s licence, making a total of $7. And for this I would get a three-point 

policy similar to the standard five-point policies, plus the fourth point, not included in the standard 

policies of the private companies. I would like to emphasize that this would apply anywhere in Canada, 

Newfoundland or the United States, and, under the Amendments to the Bill, on ships plying between the 

waters of these countries. 

 

The four points that will then be embodied in this Bill — the four insurance points — are, first, personal 

injury; second, collision; third, public liability; fourth, property damage. Now, what would I get on my 

car for the insurance I have paid? What would the insurance benefits be? First, taking personal injury — 

that is the part we started with two years ago, and which was slightly amended by certain provisions of 

this Bill we have before us. It covers insurance for Saskatchewan motorists and citizens who may be 

killed or injured in motor vehicle traffic accidents. And the benefits are: 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

10 

death benefits which, in some cases, can be up to as high as $10,000; dismemberment benefits up to 

$2,000; supplementary allowances up to $225; weekly indemnities up to $2,400; funeral expenses up to 

$125. This applies anywhere in Saskatchewan while riding in a non-Saskatchewan car; or as a passenger 

anywhere in Canada, Newfoundland or the United States, while riding in a vehicle of Saskatchewan 

registry. It would also apply in Saskatchewan, riding in a Saskatchewan car. 

 

The second point of this four-point policy would be the collision insurance. In my car, a passenger car, it 

would be $100 deductible — that is, I must pay the first $100 damages myself. 

 

The third point is public liability insurance. This is insurance against financial loss, including legal 

expenses, due to liability imposed on me by law for bodily injury to other people, or to the death of 

others. This has an upper limit of $5,000 for one person or $10,000 for more than one person, injured or 

killed, in any one accident. 

 

The fourth point will be property damage insurance. This is insurance against liability imposed by law 

for damage caused by my vehicle to the property of others. This has limits also: $1,000 for damage to 

property in any one accident, and, as the Minister has stated, the deductible of $100 applies in 

Saskatchewan but not outside of Saskatchewan. 

 

If we examine the Bill closely we will see that it is adding a new principle to the original Act. The 

original Act, consisting of personal injury and collision, was paid to whoever incurred an accident, no 

matter who was to blame. The courts did not enter into it at all. No one was concerned with legal 

liability. This amending Bill will have public liability and property damage provisions which will 

satisfy, as nearly as we can tell from the reports we have from the other provinces, the financial 

responsibility laws of British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario and of a number of states in the 

United States. 

 

These latter two provisions, public liability and property damage, may require a proof that someone had 

a legal liability because of the accident. This proof must, I think, be proven either by court judgment or 

by settlement out of court, but legal liability must be presumed. 

 

I confess, Sir, that I have a farmer’s natural distrust of being involved with lawyers or the courts and I, 

therefore, hope it will be the policy of the office to settle as many of these cases out of court as possible. 

 

I have been asked a number of times by commercial travellers, and others, whether they should take out 

their usual five-point insurance. Commercial travellers, I think, have always made a point of taking out 

complete and adequate insurance, and with better times large numbers of others in 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

11 

Saskatchewan have come to consider that it was good policy to do so. My answer to these men who 

have asked this question is that if a company sells five-point insurance to them on the same basis as 

three years ago, then that company is cheating the customer. The policy which a company should sell 

today should be a specially designed policy, designed to fit in with this Act. If the ‘old type’ policy were 

to be sold I would not increase my benefits under the collision and property damage unless the policy 

specifically stated this. I could, however, buy a policy to bring the collision insurance down to a $25 

deductible policy, as an example, or to bring the liability up to say $20,000 and $30,000 instead of the 

$5,000 and $10,000, and could bring the property damage up to $3,000. I could also take out fire and 

theft insurance. 

 

Suppose I wanted all these things, how much should these additional advantages cost for an ordinary 

passenger car like mine? I have not seen any announcement, although I have been looking for it, by the 

private companies, nor by the Government Insurance Office. However, I did get in touch with the 

Government Insurance Office to see whether they contemplated such a policy, and they said that they 

did contemplate issuing such a policy, and seven other small coverages, made up in a ‘package’ policy 

that would sell for $18.80. If I add that cost to the $7 which I pay under this Bill I find that I have an 

adequate policy of five-point insurance at a cost of $25.80. When I remember that many policies not 

giving as great a coverage as this, a number of years ago, used to sell for $40, $50 and even more, and 

that in some parts of Canada they sell as high as $75, I believe that this Act which we are passing is 

going to make it possible for all of the insurance companies to sell policies such as this at prices which 

they never before would have been able to do. 

 

As has been stated, a number of provinces have financial responsibility laws, and just the last few days 

we have seen reports from British Columbia of the application of the financial responsibility laws there, 

and of Saskatchewan citizens who find themselves in British Columbia unable to get home unless they 

can prove they have financial responsibility — I read just a short time ago in the Vancouver Sun of a 

Saskatchewan motorist who had $65,000 worth of insurance, which must have included insurance 

outside of our Act as well, and he found that his car was impounded in British Columbia because he 

could not, apparently, show them the ‘pink slip’ issued by that government to prove he had financial 

responsibility. We are hoping this Act will make it possible for anyone to travel anywhere and simply 

point to a Saskatchewan licence and say, ‘I’m covered; you cannot impound my car’. That will depend 

how the other provinces look at it, but this, at least, will give them that coverage, and they won’t have to 

ask to see the ‘pink slips’. The story is told that one policeman in British Columbia asked a female 

driver if he could see her ‘pink slip’, and got his face slapped. I hope that Saskatchewan citizens won’t 

find themselves in that position. 

 

I shall support the Bill. 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

12 

Mr. Alvin C. Murray (Gull Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I believe the additions to the Bill give the people 

of Saskatchewan greater coverage; coverage that they are in need of and are looking for. In fact, I 

believe some people, in the past, believed they had more coverage than they did have. This will bring it 

in line with what they need, with the $100 deductible. If they want to have greater coverage than that it 

is their privilege to buy insurance right down to the $25 deductible. This, as has been stated, gives the 

motor owner protection in Canada, the United States or Newfoundland, or in transit between those 

places. 

 

I could go on and cite different cases which have come to my attention over the past year, of automobile 

accidents which might not be in line with this Bill, but I believe that this will give them the coverage 

needed. 

 

Several other provinces have been cited and they have what they call ‘liability insurance’. Here in 

Saskatchewan everybody is covered with the insurance, regardless of whether they own a car, drive a car 

or are pedestrians on the street. I have here a clipping from an item from British Columbia which states 

that the new insurance there will insure automobile owners up to 92 per cent. They may not call it 

compulsory insurance, but I maintain that it is very close to it. If you cannot produce, as has been stated 

in this House, your liability insurance up to $11,000, your car is impounded. 

 

I have here on my desk a Vancouver paper telling about a Saskatchewan motorist having his car 

impounded. He has, as I just previously stated, insurance; but he has to wait until he gets word from the 

insurance company he is insured with, whether it be a private company here in Saskatchewan, or the 

Government Insurance Office, that he is covered to the extent of the $11,000 they demand before he can 

have his car released, or, as it states, produce a ‘pink slip’ as the British Columbia government demands. 

 

I could go further and produce items of other cars being impounded. There is one here of March 9, 1948, 

of an ambulance being impounded and another one of six automobiles being impounded. That, I 

maintain is compulsory insurance. I believe it is a good thing that the motorist should be protected, and 

that the public should be protected against accidents by automobiles, but under this insurance, adding 

property damage and public liability as in the addition to this Bill, gives the people of Saskatchewan this 

added insurance. 

 

It is true that you can buy no insurance that will cover you as you are covered under this insurance. 

Previous to this coming into being, if you had taken out insurance with a company and someone was 

injured, if you were not liable I see no way in which they could collect insurance. I have had, in the past 

year, brought to my attention several different automobile accidents. There was one where a man was 

riding horseback and was killed. His family collected $7,450. Under this new insurance coverage, if it 

had been in effect, the damage done to another vehicle would have been covered. 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

13 

I have in mind another accident covered by our insurance of a car being hit by a train, and the amount 

paid in that accident was $7,450. If those victims who were killed had been married men with families, 

it could have amounted to $30,000 in that one accident. Compare that with another accident, very close 

to the same place, where an automobile hit the train and, I expect, the railroad could have sued this man 

for running into them; but the train, on which I was riding, backed up, and I, with other passengers, went 

out to see the accident. In looking over the car, and the people who were in the car, I found that it carried 

a Manitoba licence. I wonder just what benefits he would get for the $1 he paid to the Manitoba 

government, for his licence, or with the insurance he would be compelled to buy, with the set-up the 

other provinces have today. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, this Bill has been pretty well covered under Second Reading and it is not my 

privilege, I understand, to go into any details with regard to some of these other insurance accidents, but 

I just want to state that we have, and it cannot be disputed, the cheapest insurance any place on the North 

American continent. I do not know that that applies to other countries, for instance New Zealand. With 

this additional coverage I believe that it will be accepted by the people of the province, possibly not by 

some of the insurance companies and their representatives; but, as I say, it will be accepted and 

welcomed by the people of the province, and they know now that they will be getting this additional 

coverage with no additional premium. 

 

Mr. A.W. Embury (Area 2, Mediterranean): — Mr. Speaker, I rise, as I seem to have occasion to 

every now and then, to criticize the policy of the Government’s intervention into the insurance business. 

 

I do not propose to wander astray from the Bill which is proposed and covered by this Motion, and it is 

my intention not to go into the details of my particular section. Mr. Speaker, you will recall one of the 

first occasions on which I ever spoke in this House, and it was upon the first Bill introduced by the 

Minister (Hon. O.W. Valleau), at which time, on Second Reading, I was instructed by you, Sir, that I 

could not discuss the effect of particular sections because the proper time to discuss those was in 

Committee of the Whole. However, when I went to Committee of the Whole, and attempted to discuss 

what I had attempted to put before the House, on Second Reading, I found the Deputy Chairman of the 

Committee felt that it should have been discussed on Second Reading. 

 

Today, Sir, I am going to do my best not to offend against any of the rules in respect to the debate on 

Second Reading, but in making my overall comments it is going to be necessary, to some extent at least, 

to refer to one or two of the sections, with a view to showing that the coverage offered in this Bill is not 

adequate, nor as comprehensive as the hon. Minister would seem to have implied in his remarks in 

moving the Second Reading of the Bill. 

 

Before proceeding to it, I do not believe one can repeat too often what is the opinion of those who do not 

believe in Socialism, of the intervention of the Government into this business at all, let alone to go into it 

in such a way as to dislocate the automobile casualty side of that business, to the extent they now intend 

to do under this Bill. 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

14 

We have, and I do not want to weary you by repetition, Sir, on the Minister’s own word today, an 

indication from him that Government insured cars are now being repaired to the extent of 4 per cent at 

North Battleford, in a Government garage, administered by his Department. We have his statement 

further that, to the tune of 7 per cent, I think he said, of the losses which they cover, the cars were 

repaired in Government-owned garages whether it be the Department of Reconstruction and 

Rehabilitation or under his Department. If one takes 7 per cent of the $577,000 . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Valleau: — May I just correct the hon. gentleman . . . 

 

Mr. Embury: — Well, I imagine, Sir, it is fair for me without quoting to the hon. member the exact 

figure, that I will say that it was, at least, a very substantial sum of money indeed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Valleau: — For your information, that total of $577,000 you just gave, includes total losses as 

well. I was dealing with the amount spent in garages. 

 

Mr. Embury: — Irrespective of what the total loss is, he quotes here, losses paid amounting to 

$577,000, odd, being the damages paid for losses incurred under the collision coverage during the period 

in question. If he wants to deduct from that — and I may say that I did not attempt to interrupt the 

Minister when he was speaking and I would thank him to extend the same privilege to me. 

 

I would say, in any event, apart from total losses, that there was a very substantial portion of the garage 

business taken into Government garages. I only raise the point for this reason: to show that in the 

insurance business, covering as it does so many walks of mercantile life, such as the garage business, 

when you make a start in it, as they have in the garage business, it is a means whereby an encroachment 

may be made upon a great many other businesses as well. We have mentioned the case of the adjusters, 

for example. That is, I think, a fair point for those who criticize the activities of the Government in this 

regard. 

 

I am told, and I believe it is a reasonably accurate picture, that there are, in the province of 

Saskatchewan, approximately 15,000 men, women and children who derive some part of their livelihood 

from the insurance business — that is an approximate figure; it is very difficult for me to say exactly, 

but that is an estimate, and I think reasonably close. I am told by some men in the insurance business 

that that is what they reckon it to be. Those people each lose a little part of the money they used to live 

on in the province of Saskatchewan; 15,000 people. 

 

The hon. Minister, in his report which he tabled the other day, covering the period 1946-47, the annual 

report of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, indicates to us that under the fund — The 

Automobile Insurance Act of 1946 — there were, in that year, 2,728 persons injured or killed in 

automobile accidents. Presumably they, or their dependants, received the benefits 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

15 

provided for under the Act — 2,728 persons. There were 2,788 vehicles damaged to the extent of over 

$100, in connection with which losses the Government made a payment. Altogether about 5,800 persons 

received benefits of varying degrees under this Act. 

 

We, as a Legislature, and the gentlemen opposite as a Government, are interested, I take it, in the 

policies of government that there should be the greatest good for the greatest numbers, but if you are 

adversely affecting 15,000 people, of your own inhabitants in the province of Saskatchewan, and are 

only benefiting about 5,800, in the period under review, I suggest to you that it isn’t a bad idea to have 

another look at the Socialistic intention to go into the insurance business, and to progress further into the 

insurance business as one Session succeeds another, so long as they are in power. I suggest that to you, 

Sir, as a very reasonable argument. We are not doing the most good for the greatest number of people. 

And I do not want the House to assume, for one moment, that I am averse, in any way, to some sort of a 

compulsory insurance scheme: I do not wish to imply that at all. As a matter of fact, the question of the 

rising leases on the highways, (many years before the war the total loss arising on the highways, more 

particularly in the thickly populated areas of this continent, both the States and here, has been a problem 

of State and Provincial governments for decades — it has nothing to do with Socialism at all) has been 

before us. Various schemes were tried out to try and meet that public problem — sometimes they set up 

a fund, as in Manitoba, and sometimes they made insurance compulsory; but never anywhere did the 

government go into the whole insurance business on its own hook for the purpose of dislocating that 

trade. 

 

Persons under the Act were encouraged to insure, in fact, in some cases, were compelled to insure; but 

they were allowed to go and deal with the firm or agent of their choice, they were not compelled to 

come to the Minister. 

 

The Minister has said — and I think he is entitled to say — that he is providing this coverage at a fee 

very much smaller than one could obtain some part of this coverage for from private sources — I think it 

is fair to say that there is no doubt that he is. But I would suggest to him, in all fairness, that if any 

private insurance had the advantage which he has as a Minister, in the automobile insurance business of 

being able to avoid all acquisition costs entirely, then the problem of premium rating would be very 

much different than it is for the private insurer, and that any one of them would be able to do exactly 

what the hon. Minister is doing, and make a profit at it. Indeed, he has shown to us that in the period of 

his operations, thus far, he is ahead of the game to the extent of the surplus which he mentioned, of 

nearly $1,000,000, even on these rates. 

 

The difference, I suggest to you, Sir, is that before the Government went into this business, the insurance 

business was a very highly competitive business — there were board companies and non-board 

companies, and they all scrambled for business; and in circumstances of that kind, in free enterprise, 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

16 

there was not room for a people to be making an exorbitant profit because if the board companies, for 

example, started to do that, the non-board companies would come and under-cut their rates, and there 

was no arrangement made between them. 

 

The overhead cost of premium costs in the automobile business, before the Government went into it, 

were largely found, in the acquisition costs — and when I say ‘acquisition costs’ I mean the cost of the 

agents’ commissions, all over the province of Saskatchewan, general agents and the smaller agents in 

every town and village in every city, hundreds and hundreds of them, all over this province. Those were 

the acquisition costs. 

 

The hon. Minister takes a great deal of pride in having reduced the premiums, and I think we have to 

give him credit for it that we saved the money; but I do not think that we are really moving in the right 

direction, when we, as a Government, take pride in the reduction of insurance premiums by reaching out 

and saving these acquisition costs, which are the moneys which went to our own people in 

Saskatchewan. Now, if you carried that principle through into every commercial walk of life in 

Saskatchewan, you could probably do the same thing if you wanted to deprive people of their just 

earnings, and the earnings of their labours. You could probably do it in any business, and I do not think 

it is proper government business, and that is the objection I take to it. 

 

I know very well that the Government has heard these arguments many times before, and I am afraid 

they are going to have to hear them many times again, but I want to suggest to you, with respect to the 

Bill under review, Sir, that the coverage offered, and the extended insurance privileges offered, at the 

cost of say $7 or $8 for a man and his wife, including two operator’s licences, is not as adequate as 

speakers who have preceded me have suggested to the House. For example, in the case of the collision 

losses the Minister is giving the same average as he gave before. That amounts to the value of the car, 

less a deductible of $100. Now, anyone in the insurance business knows that the reason they put on a 

deductible average of any kind on a collision loss is because the insured could go and injure his own car 

deliberately, and not have to pay any part of the risk, and the insurer would have to pay it all. That is the 

reason they put a deductible average in it. But they have gone a step further in that type of coverage this 

year. 

 

They have gone into property damage and public liability. Now, with respect to the property damage 

coverage we also find the $100 deductible feature, which, I suggest, is an innovation, and not generally 

known to the trade in such a type of coverage. That is to say, where you have a legal liability question 

involved, the question of a deductible average is novel — it may have existed before, but I, personally, 

do not happen to have heard about it. But it is only up to $1,000. 

 

First of all, I think the Minister must admit that the very heavy majority of claims under property 

damage coverages do not equal $100 — I would suggest to him that the figure would probably be as 

high as 80 percent 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

17 

maybe even higher, of the total property damage claims which would be paid by a private insurer, 

without any deductible at all, are not covered by the Minister’s so-called coverage at all — and I say that 

that is a limitation, and a very serious one. 

 

The limit of his liability on this property damage coverage which, you will remember, is $1,000 — the 

legal liability owing to your own negligence. As the hon. Minister said, the standard policy almost 

everywhere has been $1,000. That sum has been put in, in years past, when it was thought that that was a 

fairly adequate coverage, generally, for the average private motorist. Today, with the average cost of 

automobiles having risen to $2,000, for the average  type of widely used car, the $1,000, as a matter of 

fact, is not adequate, and a great number of insurers are now recommending to their clients that they 

carry larger property damage coverage, because what they have is not adequate. I think the House must 

agree with me that with the cost of equipment, these days, $1,000 would not go very far in repairing the 

damages, the costs being what they are. Those are the features with respect to property damage which 

make it an inadequate coverage. 

 

When one comes to public liability, the proposal in this Bill is to insure public liability on the basis of 

what they call. 5-10 — $5,000 for any one loss to any one person, and $10,000 in any one accident. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that there are very few responsible people in this province who consider 

that that is an adequate coverage — I believe it is not an average coverage. I an quite sure that the 

Minister, and the House, would like to encourage motorists to carry adequate insurance, so that the very 

security which we are all hoping will be achieved for poverty-stricken people, when they are injured as a 

result of an automobile accident, their security may be achieved for them, and that there will be 

insurance and a fund out of which their damages will be paid to them. This Bill, Sir, does not, I suggest, 

offer sufficient public liability when it says 5-10. Most reasonable and responsible people like to carry a 

good deal more than 5-10: 10-20 or 20-40, or some higher amount. 

 

First of all, may I point out in this connection, the difference in cost between public liability at 5-10 with 

a private insurer and say 10-20 with a private insurer, is very slight indeed, amounting to only about 

$1.50, or something like that. So that, actually, most people do carry 10-20, 20-40 or something like 

that, which is not offered in this Bill. 

 

I hope it may be clear, then, to the House, in the opinion of, at least, some of us, that this is not adequate 

coverage. The part of the Bill which I wish to criticize most strongly is another very peculiar and novel 

feature of the Bill, which the hon. Minister did not mention to the House at all, or if he did I did not hear 

him when he was introducing it. With respect to the collision losses the hon. Minister has put in a brand 

new feature. He has said, notwithstanding that his policy is inadequate, that any man who goes out and 

buys another policy so that he will have adequate coverage, if he has such a policy then, although the 

Minister has compelled that man to pay under this scheme, still the Minister will not pay one cent 

because that man has taken out a private policy with a private insurer; until that man’s private 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

18 

policy has been exhausted the hon. Minister will not pay anything, but compelling him, all the while, to 

come under the scheme. I suggest to you gentlemen that that is not a fair way of doing business with the 

Saskatchewan public, and that it is not going to be favourably regarded by those who are compelled, on 

the one hand to go elsewhere to get more coverage and at the same time, be compelled to have no 

benefits accruing to them, or their insurers, or anybody else as a result of that fund to which they have 

contributed. I would say that where a man contributed to a fund, and the circumstances arose under 

which he would be entitled to share in it, he or his insurers should be entitled to share in it by reason of 

his contribution. 

 

That is not all. When one goes over to the section dealing with public liability and property damage, one 

also finds that some provisions: namely, that if a member of the public has done what the Minister has 

encouraged him to do, by giving him inadequate coverage, then his insurer must pay it all and the 

Minister will pay nothing, until the whole of his private policy, and the proceeds thereof, have been 

exhausted, and, again, he has been compelled to come under the scheme. 

 

That argument, I think, is based upon the assumption, that the insurance offered in this Bill is not 

adequate, and if I am right in that assumption, then I suggest to you that there is no reasonable basis on 

which the Minister should be allowed to proceed with the Bill he now proposes to sell to us. 

 

I have in my hand a document, which, I suggest, will demonstrate that the Minister himself does not 

agree that the insurance he is offering is adequate. This is a document which came to my hand from one 

of the insurance agents to whom it was sent, presumably by the hon. gentleman’s insurance department, 

dated March 10. You will recall that on March 10 this Bill had not even come into committee and had 

not been debated at all. At any rate, it has reference to the coverage which the hon. gentleman has 

described to us under this Bill, and it says this: “Automobile insurance, a package policy, an $18.80 

special, your licence” (meaning the compulsory contribution under this Act) “plus a package policy” 

(which he is advertising here) “equals adequate insurance”. Now, I suggest to you, that if you haven’t 

the package policy you haven’t adequate insurance. If a man goes out and takes adequate insurance 

somewhere else then the hon. Minister does not pay a dime to him under this policy. What kind of a deal 

is that, Sir, when you compel a man to pay? 

 

Mr. Myron H. Feeley (Canora): — Will the hon. gentleman permit a question? You suggest that there 

isn’t adequate insurance provided in this Act. Would you prefer that we would give complete coverage? 

 

Mr. Embury: — I hope I have made it clear to the hon. gentleman that I do not agree at all that the 

Government should be in this business. But I do say this: if you are going to go into the business, play 

the game fairly. If you are 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

19 

going to take a man’s money and make him a contributor to a fund, and then the conditions arise under 

which he would be entitled to participate in that fund, surely you are not entitled to take his money on a 

compulsory basis and drive him back on his private resources, so that you, yourselves, are relieved from 

any payment at all. 

 

I say (I do not expect my hon. friend for Canora to agree with me, I am happy to say I hold very few of 

the same views as the hon. member) . . . 

 

Mr. Feeley: — Thank God for that! 

 

Mr. Embury: — . . . that if I am right, and the Minister seems to agree with me, that additional 

coverage is required, then he has not offered us adequate insurance, and he seems to admit that himself. 

 

But this thing, Sir, as far as being an encroachment upon the private trade of the insurance business, is 

even more serious still, because the hon. Minister, knowing he was introducing this Bill, proceeds to 

work out what he calls this ‘package policy’. He is taking it for granted, no doubt, in making up this 

advertisement, that the Government is only going to be a ‘rubber stamp’ for what he is about to propose, 

because this advertisement is based solely and only and entirely upon the passing of the Bill which he 

has proposed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — He knows you cannot talk him out of it. 

 

Mr. Embury: — Well, I imagine so — I have tried it before, and I am afraid that is an accurate 

statement. But whether I am right or wrong is another thing. 

 

It demonstrates, of course, the Minister’s knowledge that the gentlemen in the House are simply rubber 

stamps, and that is a matter for you, not for me. 

 

The critical thing for those who gain their livelihood in the insurance business is that the hon. gentleman 

can introduce a ‘package policy’ of automobile insurance to fill in the gaps that he has left out; and it is 

true, provisions as I have mentioned to the House, of his escaping liability until the resources of the 

private policy have been paid, apply equally to him in a standard policy issued under the Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance office. At the same time, he can cover up because he gets a contribution which is 

paid at the time of the licence fee, so he cannot lose at all. The private insurer cannot compete with that 

sort of thing — he couldn’t begin to do it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Valleau: — I did not catch that. What was it? 

 

Mr. Embury: — It is this: that you are also in a position where, if I may use the term (and I do not 

mean to suggest anything fraudulent or anything like that) — where you confiscate, in short, according 

to my argument, to the Government his 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

20 

contribution when he buys his licence for $7 or $8 — that is his $6 plus his wife’s, and his own, driver’s 

licence — you confiscate that anyway. So that you can afford to pay under your $18.80 policy all right, 

but how can the private insurer compete with that sort of thing? He is not dealing with people under a 

basis where he can confiscate, taking people’s money away from them and paying nothing for it — he is 

not in a position where he can compel a man to contribute to the fund and by legislation simply creep 

out of the responsibilities involved. 

 

Those are, Mr. Speaker, the criticisms which I felt should be made in respect to this Bill, and I will not 

support the Bill but will maintain a critical attitude to it, Sir, during the whole of its passage through this 

House, to see whether or not it will be possible for me to obtain some modification of the proposals. 

 

Mr. J. Benson (Last Mountain): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a word with regard to this particular 

Bill. I very often oppose the Minister on the propositions he brings before the House, and I opposed him 

on the compulsory feature of the property damage in this Bill, last year. My main opposition previously 

had been, when he first introduced the Bill, he stated that the net proceeds from the operation of this Act 

would be for obtaining revenue to provide other social services in the province, and I disagreed with that 

principle, and at the time I stated I disagreed with it. I also pointed out, at that time, that when the 

owners and drivers of automobiles were asked to make contributions toward the public revenue for 

social services that other citizens of the province were not asked to make, then it was special legislation 

to derive revenues from certain people, that all people of the province were not subject to. 

 

Today, the Minister has assured us that this Automobile Insurance Act is being operated as a service 

institution. That is what I pointed out at that time, and I want to assure him that, so far as the Automobile 

Accident Insurance part of it is public liability, I think it meets with general approval throughout the 

province. I am very pleased to see that he has come around to my point of view, that an institution of 

this type should be used as a service to the institution, and operated, as nearly as possibly, at cost. He has 

now $1,000,000 in reserve, and I believe that is a good safe reserve to maintain in this particular type of 

service. He is going to extend the service this year, and he is not going to increase the premium. He has 

also advised me privately that as it operates, from year to year, he will control the premium according to 

the reserve and the service that it gives, and I think that that is a proper way to operate an institution of 

this kind. 

 

There has been considerable criticism in regard to the property damage feature of the Bill, and I am 

going to give you an example of the type of criticism I heard during this past summer. There was a chap 

at Raymore, who was not a supporter of mine but a good supporter of the Liberal Party, in season and 

out, condemned this Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

21 

He railed up and down about having to pay the premium. He purchased a brand new car last spring and 

drove it, I think, about 1,100 miles, and finally drove it on to the railroad track and stalled it there; was 

unable to get it off. Fortunately, the people who were in the car were able to get out, and none of them 

were injured, but the car was completely wrecked. He received complete compensation for this 

automobile from the Department and, needless to say, he is not very loud in his condemnation today, of 

this particular Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If anyone wishes to speak he must do so now as the Mover of the Motion is about to 

close the debate. 

 

Hon. O.W. Valleau (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry the hon. member for the 

Mediterranean Area (Mr. Embury) has gone out, because it probably would not be necessary for me to 

say anything further. However, I think that it is more than likely that during committee I will be able to 

give him a lesson or two in the insurance business. 

 

I must say that the basis of his remarks, compared with the first year, and last year, and again this year, 

has changed. Last year, he was complaining that there wasn’t any ‘jam’ on this thing, and this year he is 

complaining because it isn’t ‘strawberry jam’. 

 

He dealt with a number of minor items — I am quite aware that he inferred I deliberately avoided 

discussing some of the points. I had avoided those because they are more properly discussed in 

Committee of the Whole, than to discuss them on general reading of the principles of the Bill. I want to 

deal with just one or two of the points which he tried to make. 

 

From the general tenor of his remarks, he evidently believes that we run the insurance business in this 

province for the sake of people making a living, and not for the sake of those who benefit by payment of 

the premiums. I must confess that to me that is something of a new idea — I do not imagine that any 

civilized community should deliberately make work just for the purpose of giving people work. If you 

are going to have to support, as he said, 15,000 people, why not just support them instead of running 

around putting on an act of trying to work. 

 

He then went to great length that the $100 deductible was a limitation upon the coverage. It is — there is 

no question about that. A man who wants absolute complete and adequate coverage, in every respect, is 

going to have to purchase additional insurance. We have never tried to make any secret of that whatever; 

but there are thousands of people in the province of Saskatchewan who, under this Bill, are getting the 

first coverage that they ever had, and to the great majority of the people of Saskatchewan this coverage 

will be adequate. 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

22 

In The Insurance Act, which is more or less standard across Canada, the figures of coverage given are 5-

10 and 1. That has been in the Act for a good many years, and that is the coverage required under the 

financial responsibility laws of the other provinces. That is what we are providing, with the exception, as 

I mentioned earlier, of the $100 deductible. 

 

In dealing with, if I may, Mr. Speaker, (without getting too badly out of order because I still think it 

should have been dealt with in committee) the question of changing the Act to require a company which 

has written a policy at full premium should be allowed to pro-rate that policy with a premium written at 

$6, I cannot see it that way. If a company wants to go out and sell a policy for $50, $60 or $70 to a 

person here in the province of Saskatchewan — and many of them were sold — and yet when the 

accident occurs the company crawls around and says we are going to pro-rate that with the Government 

Insurance Company, and we are only going to pay half of the costs in this particular case, the company, 

to my mind, is selling insurance under false pretences; they are taking a full premium and paying 50 per 

cent of the loss. 

 

So far as the liability is concerned, this same restriction actually increased the liability coverage. That is, 

where the companies paid up to the $5,000, and the judgment of the courts is still in existence, then our 

coverage will start to take effect over that, so that if a man has gone out and purchased from a private 

company 5-10 and 1, under a standard policy, we do not pro-rate, we come in and give additional 

coverage at the end. 

 

I do wish, however, to take most serious and definite exception to the remark made by the hon. member 

(Mr. Embury) when he suggested that it did not matter to us whether we paid it under The Automobile 

Accident Insurance Act or whether we paid it out of this $18.80 package policy. There is no interchange 

between the two offices. The Automobile Accident Insurance Act is kept as a separate account, and the 

office does not benefit from it and pays nothing in to it in any way, shape or form — we are simply the 

administrators of The Automobile Accident Insurance Act, and the Government Office, itself, must 

stand on its own feet. The saving that it may or may not acquire to The Automobile Accident Insurance 

Act has no effect whatever — they are in the same position as the other companies in that regard. 

 

To come back to the first remarks that he had to make in regard to how much business we did. The 

actual business of repairing cars was not the figure he gave earlier of some $580,000 — that was the 

total losses incurred, in which we included the total losses where the car was not repaired. The actual 

amount of business received by body shops, or received by private owners, in lieu of damages, was 

approximately $350,000, of which the Government Insurance Office garage at Battleford did some 

$13,000 of business. 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

23 

My hon. friend was very much concerned with the garage business, and what I am going to do now, if I 

may, Mr. Speaker, is something that I had intended doing when introducing the Bill; I am going to 

repeat the statement I made a year ago. At the present time we have no intention of enlarging the 

Government garage, or opening other garages, as far as the Government Insurance Office is concerned. I 

will go further than that — no further garage will be opened by the Government Insurance Office until 

there is another meeting of this House, and before any such action is taken the House will be kept fully 

informed, so long as I am the Minister in charge of the office. That is the statement I made last year, and 

am repeating it at the present time. We opened that garage to get a sample of the charges which were 

being made by the body shops on repair jobs. Please remember that the great bulk of the work that is 

done is done not by garages but by body shops, of which there is a restricted number in the province 

who are fully qualified to do good business. We did a sample of business of less than five per cent 

which, in my opinion, is just adequate enough to allow us to arrive at some determination as to whether 

the costs we were paying were too high or too low. I might say, for the information of the House, that 

our garage business just nicely carried itself during the past year. 

 

Dealing with the question of how many are put out of work, and so on, we have in the province of 

Saskatchewan 230 companies other than life insurance companies — that is, 230 companies who are 

writing the same type of insurance as is the Government Insurance Office. Three of these have their 

head office in Saskatchewan — the other 227 have their head offices outside of Saskatchewan. Today, if 

you want to talk about work, we are giving employment in our office to approximately 100 people who 

otherwise would be working in Toronto, Winnipeg, Montreal or possibly New York. If the hon. member 

wants to see Saskatchewan people employed, and 90 per cent of the people employed there are 

Saskatchewan people or possibly better than 90 per cent, the way to do it is to patronize the Insurance 

Company which has its head office in this province. 

 

The Motion was agreed to, on division, by 32 votes to 2. 

 

Bill No. 76 — An Act to amend The Fur Act. 

 

Hon. J.L. Phelps (Minister of Natural Resources): — In rising to move the Second Reading of this 

Bill, an Act to amend The Fur Act, I want to inform the House that there are only five main points I 

would like to draw to their attention. One is the provision in the Act to provide that where Indians trap 

fur-bearing animals for food, as they are permitted to do under the old treaties, that the pelts of the 

animals will be the property of the Crown. That is to eliminate the possibility of any illegal fur, or fur 

that will be able to circulate, in seasons when they are not permitted to take fur, under our ordinary 

regulations. I might inform the House that a similar law has been in operation in Manitoba for a number 

of years. There has been an argument, in some cases before where fur has been taken outside the season, 

that the fur had come into their possession by that means. 



 

March 17, 1948 

 

 

24 

No. (2) I would like to draw to your attention, in the requirements under the Act, is for fur dealers to 

supply monthly returns to the department. I might say that this Amendment to the Act being proposed is 

similar to the ones now in operation in several States of the Union, and they have found it very 

beneficial indeed. 

 

Another clause in the Act which I would like to bring to the attention of the House is an Amendment 

which will provide for the streamlining of handling export permits by the registered fur farms and the 

licensed farms of the province. Formerly it was a rather extended process, where the proprietor of the fur 

farm had to make application for a permit, and some considerable time and delay ensued. This way they 

will be supplied with a permit at the time they are given their licence. 

 

No. (4) provides for evidence from the Provincial Laboratory, where a technician supplies evidence of a 

technical nature, that that may be admitted as evidence without being in the form of a certificate, in the 

manner that is provided in other Acts, without the particular person having to appear before the court in 

person. The certificate can be filed as evidence. 

 

The other point is a new principle. It conforms to other Acts and provides in towns or cities where there 

are any infractions of. The Fur Act, under the Act the fines themselves, where the information has been 

laid by their own police officers — that is, the town or city police — and the prosecution has taken place 

as a result of that, that they will be empowered to retain their share of the fine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are no other new principles. I move the Second Reading of the Bill. 

 

The Motion for second reading was agreed to. 

 

The House adjourned, without question put, at 6 o’clock p.m. 


