



















































Hansard: March 09, 1948


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Fifth Session — Tenth Legislature 

 

The House met at 3 o’clock. Tuesday, March 9, 1948 

 

 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Mr. H. O. Hansen (Wilkie): — I wish to call attention to the morning edition of The Leader-Post in 

which the hon. member for Moosomin when speaking in the House yesterday, referred to me as a 

Communist. I was in the House and this is not what I understood the hon. member to say. I 

understood him to say “I think you are one” and he did not make a direct charge. Had he made a 

direct charge I would have made the statement I now make — I am not a Communist nor have I ever 

been one. Further I have had no associations with Communists or any of their organizations at any 

time. The hon. member also said something of a Mounted Police record in the Attorney-General’s 

office; a search was made this morning and there is no such record concerning myself. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed, from Monday, March 8, 1948, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair (the House go into 

Committee of Supply). 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, all the hon. members who have taken part in this Debate have 

extended their congratulations to the Provincial Treasurer, and I wish to join them in extending those 

congratulations. 

 

I would like to say that I noticed in B.C., in their Legislature, and in the Manitoba Press, a good deal 

of credit has been given to the former Premier of British Columbia, Mr. John Hart, and to Premier 

Garson for the excellent work those two gentlemen did in negotiating the Dominion-Provincial 

Agreement and particularly in arranging a settlement over Treasury Bills, and I have no wish to 

detract from any credit that may be coming to either of those gentlemen who did a very excellent job 

in their negotiations in Ottawa. I would like to say to the members of this House that, in the old 

negotiations with reference to settling the Treasury Bills, our Provincial Treasurer had entered into 

those negotiations weeks before any other province had ever started on them, and that most of the 

formulas and the basis of the proposals had been worked out by him and the Minister of Finance at 

Ottawa, long before the other provinces entered into negotiations with respect to these Treasury 

Bills. I would like to pay tribute on behalf of the Government, and I am sure on behalf of most of the 

people of Saskatchewan, to the Provincial Treasurer for the very excellent job he did in making that 

settlement with Ottawa. 

 

 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

2 

 

In the course of this debate the Leader of the Opposition criticized Ministers’ travelling expenses, I 

believe it was for the year 1946. I think it should be kept in mind that, in the year 1946, the 

Dominion-Provincial Conference started in 1945 and was carried over into 1946 — I know myself I 

made at least five or six trips to Ottawa, and the Provincial Treasurer made many more trips than 

that, and stayed anywhere from five to ten days carrying on prolonged investigations and 

negotiations — and if there were some expenses for those Ministers’ trips to Ottawa, the people of 

Saskatchewan have had very good returns both for the time and the money invested. 

 

I would like to extend my congratulations to the member from Moosomin who, yesterday, made a 

speech which was his first this Session, and which he said himself might be his last. I have already 

expressed to him in this House my own admiration for the way in which he has carried on under 

considerable physical handicap over the years, and I also admire a fighter whether he is fighting on 

my side or the other side, and for that reason I have always admired the member from Moosomin 

although sometimes, when he hits under the belt, my admiration diminishes somewhat. I thought, 

however, it was a great pity that, in a speech that was such a fine fighting effort, he should have 

bemoaned himself by casting some aspersions on some of his fellow-members in this House. The 

record shows that part of what he said was this, speaking of the members who support the 

Government: 

 

“I want to tell them that they consist of two groups; one is Communist and one is no more 

Socialist than I am” . . . 

 

I think the second group are insulted almost as much as the first, Mr. Speaker: 

 

. . . “and I could point out in this House the representatives of the two groups without the least 

difficulty”. 

 

“Mr. H. O. Hansen (Wilkie): Would you name some of the Communists? 

“Mr. Procter: Well, if you want it, I think you are one, and I will tell you something else. There 

were more than that and they were reported on by the Mounted Police when the Communist 

party was illegal. If you want to check the files in the Attorney-General’s Department, you have 

it right in your teeth” . . . 

Then he said, “what about your seatmate?” 

 

But that casts an aspersion on two members of this House, the member for Wilkie and the member 

for Notukeu-Willowbunch. True, this is not a direct charge; but insinuating that some members in 

this House were reported on by the R.C.M.P. I have not searched the files, I do not know, but I 

would say that if any members were reported on by the R.C.M.P., it is not a reflection on the 

members nor on the Mounted Police; it is a reflection on people who have tried to use the Mounted 

Police for political purposes to spy on their political opponents. 

 

 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

3 

 

When my friends talk about the Mounted Police, they probably should remember the ways the Police 

have been used by my hon. friends. They probably have forgotten — I am sure they want the rest of 

us to forget — 1940 and the fall of 1939, when a Mr. Alois Schneider who came out after Munich 

with some of the Sudeten Germans and he settled up near St. Walburg, and who was arrested in the 

fall of 1939 because he was suspected of being a Nazi and an agent for the Nazi Government. Who 

was put in an internment camp, and who under pressure from Liberal members at Ottawa was 

released in the winter of 1940 so that he could take part in the election which took place in March, 

1940, and who after he had campaigned for two months, fresh out of an internment camp, because of 

the pressure of the Legion and the decent people throughout that part of the province, they 

double-crossed even him and put him back in the camp after he had helped them in the election. 

 

When my friend said there were two groups in the C.C.F., one Communist and the other Opportunist, 

I am sure that there are some things that it might be well worth my while drawing to his attention. 

First of all, the question of being Communists: I have in my hand an advertisement which appeared 

in the ‘Leader-Post’ during the last Federal election with a picture of Mr. Tim Buck on it. It says 

“Tim Buck proposes a Liberal-Labour Coalition in the coming Federal election”. It also says, and the 

member from the Mediterranean Area will be interested in this: “While part reaction stirs up the 

smoke-screen of State Socialism to obstruct reform, and the C.C.F. leadership flies in the face of 

reality with its Socialism and spreads defeatism and hopelessness with predictions of collapse at 

home and abroad after Hitler was smashed, the King Government has led our country’s magnificent 

war effort and is playing an important part in strengthening the United Nations’ unity. It can further 

strengthen national unity through Democratic Coalition with all patriotic forces. It then goes on to 

propose a coalition: “Signed by Mr. Tim Buck, national leader of the Labour Progressive party.” 

 

A few weeks ago, when the Communist party in Canada, now called the Labour Progressive party, 

publicly said it wanted to support the C.C.F., I, in common with other C.C.F. persons in position of 

responsibility, said that we neither wanted nor did we seek, any support from the Communist party, 

and that the Communist party in the last election had supported the Liberal party. The leader of the 

Labour Progressive party in this province came out and questioned my veracity, and said they had 

never supported the Liberal party. Here is a pamphlet sent out by the Labour party on their stationary 

called: “A Call for a Liberal-Labour Coalition:, and also signed by Mr. Tim Buck of the Labour 

Progressive party, and it says: “What shall Canadians do, and what shall the 

 

 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

4 

 

policy Labour be, this is the problem which occupies the centre of attention of all thinking people. It 

is the considered opinion of the Labour Progressive party that only a coalition of the Liberal, Labour 

and farm forces can express in Government form the national unity of Canada. A Liberal-Labour 

coalition Government offers the only practical political path ahead by which to maintain and 

strengthen national unity to win the war and the peace”. He goes on to say: “The C.C.F. leaders are 

among the chief critics and attackers of the United Nations and chiefly pounce on every war-time 

difficulty to win votes”. But it said Mr. King’s speech showed not only that he understand Canada’s 

domestic possibilities but also realized Canada’s place in the world to be. 

 

My hon. friend beside me says, “did the Liberal Government repudiate this shotgun marriage?” No! 

No! not at all! Now, of course, the Labour-Progressive party, being pretty good political prophets, 

seeing that the Liberal party is rapidly becoming a thing of the past, would now like to attach itself to 

a party that has tremendous possibilities for the future; so they would like to attach themselves to the 

C.C.F. I think the Labour-Progressive party makes me think of — I think it was the British 

Ambassador at the beginning of the last war, when he said to the German Ambassador: “In the last 

war you had the Italians; in the next war it is our turn to have them — tough luck!” So it seems to be 

that the Communists have switched over to our side, and that they solicited their support just as little 

as we did; but they took their support. And as a matter of fact (a significant thing) about a year 

before the Federal election, Mr. St. Laurent, who was Minister of Justice and who had banned the 

Communists, closed his eyes to the fact that the Communist leaders came up from underground and 

began to organize to support the Liberal party for the Federal election of 1944 and 1945! 

 

Yesterday, the member for Moosomin made a very touching and tear-jerking appeal to those who 

support the Government, not to have another Czechoslovakia! Well, Mr. Speaker, there is none of us 

more sorry than the members who support this group, about Czechoslovakia. Last Monday night’s 

paper quotes me as having said in an address which I gave last Saturday night before the 

Quick-Freeze Locker plant operators as follows: “Last week we saw one of the most tragic events of 

our time; a Munich in reverse; Czechoslovakia sold down the river by the Soviet Union:”. We not 

only regret at Czechoslovakia collapsing today; we regret at Czechoslovakia being sold down the 

river to Hitler ten years ago, when some of my friends were very quiet about it. What is happening in 

Czechoslovakia, today, is that the Munich chickens are coming home to roost. My friend, toward the 

end of his speech, with crocodile tears as big as snowballs, pleaded on us if we did not care for 

ourselves, for 

 

 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

5 

 

the sake of our families and our little children to change our ways. I would like to say to my hon. 

friend that we do not take second place to anyone in our affection for our families, and in our love 

for our homes I think we compare favourably with the member for Moosomin or any member who 

sits in the Opposition. It is because we love our homes and have affection for our families that we are 

seeking to build a better economic system for them to grow up in, where they can be free from 

poverty and unemployment and insecurity. That is why we formed this movement; and when my 

friend talks about Communism, I want to tell him this, that the only bulwark in the world today 

against Communism does not lie in the forces of reaction. The only effective bulwark against 

Communism today lies in the Social Democratic forces. It is only the Social Democrats who are 

holding Socialism back in Europe, today; the Social Democrats of Great Britain, France, Belgium 

and Holland. The hope of stopping Communism lies not in reaction but in those who are prepared to 

make the necessary Social and Economic adjustments, to make them constitutionally and to make 

them quickly. 

 

The member for Moosomin then attempted to deliver an apologia for the Patterson regime. He 

exhumed the body, tried to powder its face and apply rouge and lipstick and make it presentable to 

the public. Unfortunately, he found that decomposition and putrefaction had gone too far for any 

such surface treatments. He began to give us the record of the Patterson regime and the first five 

things he mentioned were Federal things; the P.F.R.A.; Children’s Allowance, or “diaper dole” as it 

is sometimes called. The first five were all Federal, and of those five three of them were brought in 

by Conservative Governments. The Farmer’s Creditors Arrangement Act; the P.F.R.A.; and the 

Wheat Board were all brought in by Conservative Governments against the opposition Liberal 

members who were in the House at that time. 

 

My hon. friend then went on, after he had finished with the Federal Government, and wanted to get 

around to what the Provincial Government had done, and all he could find was that they had made 

plans. Why, his office was just covered with plans of highways! But you could not ride on these 

plans; but the plans were there, and my hon. friend took them with him. I am sure he much often sit 

up nights and have a look at them; but they did not do a man much good who had spent four and five 

hours between here and Weyburn trying to get through on highway No. 39. They had plans, not only 

plans for highways but for Health and what is more my friend trotted out the Heagerty Plan. Mr. 

Speaker, the Heagerty Plan was the greatest deception and the greatest hoax that was ever 

perpetrated on an unsuspecting public. The Deputy Minister of Health in Ottawa, Dr. Heagerty, 

brought in a plan, and a fairly good plan considering we had no statistical date on which to work. A 

committee of the House of Commons was set up on which the 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

6 

 

C.C.F. had representation. The member for Melfort, Mr. Percy Wright, was one of the members on 

that committee, and the C.C.F. members supported the Heagerty Plan and the committee reported 

back to the House in favour of the plan. What happened, Mr. Speaker? They printed a Bill and Mr. 

Tucker, the Liberal leader in this Province, went up and down the constituencies where he spoke and 

waved this Bill in the air and said, “Here is Health Insurance”! But, just as the highways never got 

past the plans on the members wall, so the Health Insurance never went beyond the Bill; the Bill was 

never introduced into the House. The Heagerty Plan was dropped in the wastepaper basket; it was 

simply an election dodge. It is bad enough for the Liberal party to use the Heagerty Plan as a 

deception before an election, but for my friend to try and perpetuate the deception and tell us the 

Heagerty Plan never meant anything, they know perfectly well it was never committed to legislation 

and no plans were drawn up at all and no program was undertaken. 

 

Then he said they made plans for the Dominion-Provincial Conference and that we have reaped the 

benefits thereof. Well, I can tell you how many plans they had ready for the Dominion-Provincial 

Conference. When we took office in July, 1944, and we started to make plans knowing the 

Dominion-Provincial Conference would be called somewhere in the next 12 months or so, we could 

not find even an agenda. A tentative agenda had been sent out by the Prime Minister of Canada, and 

we could not find it. I had to write the Prime Minister of Canada and ask him if he would please give 

us a copy of that agenda, because there was nothing in the filing cabinet in my office when we took 

over on July 10, 1944. That is the plans they had; had no agenda ready for Conference. 

 

When my friend, the member for Moosomin, tries to make a case for the Patterson regime he has a 

task which even his eloquence will not meet. He paid me the compliment, yesterday, of saying that 

had I gone into law instead of politics and been a defence lawyer, there would not have been a 

murderer hanged in Saskatchewan, and I appreciate that. And I want to pay him a compliment. I 

want to say to him that he is a good defence counsel, and the only reason that one villain, namely the 

Liberal party, was not brought to justice sooner than it was was because he was such an able defence 

counsel. for it. But the best proof that he has not been a good enough defence counsel is that in spite 

of his eloquence, in spite of doing a lot of things with the facts, he has not been able to convince the 

people of his own constituency, and the Moosomin constituency, which he has represented for 14 

years, is now not even going to nominate a 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

7 

 

Liberal candidate in the coming Provincial election. He had better start doing some converting at 

home. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Oh! we will look after that seat, don’t you worry. 

 

Premier: — I think the most significant remark that was made, yesterday, by the member from 

Moosomin was when he said — looking across at us — “I hope that you will get your nose rubbed in 

the relief dirt yet.” I said, last year, I thought the Liberal party were probably the poorest sports, and 

had the least sense of sportsmanship, of any group I ever saw. I also said, at that time, there was a 

group of people that would rather see this Province waste than see a C.C.F. Government be 

successful. Yesterday, we had the proof of it. Here was a man who said, “I would rather see a 

depression; I would rather see women and children on three cents a meal again; I would rather see 

people living on relief orders; I would rather see poverty and drought and unemployment stalking 

this province in order that the C.C.F. Government might fall into disrepute.” Mr. Speaker, that 

reaches the all-time-low for being a poor sport. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — Mr. Speaker, I did not say anything of that kind, I did not want to interrupt my hon. 

friend’s eloquence. 

 

Premier: — Well, my hon. friend says he never said anything of the kind, but it is certainly so 

reported in Regina’s Leader-Post, this morning, and I am sure when the record of the House comes 

out it will bear up my words. If it does not I shall most certainly withdraw. 

 

Then my hon. friend said something about highways, and I do not propose to spend a lot of time 

arguing with him about highways, but I do want to refer to one or two things I think are important. 

For example, he talked about some 1,200 miles of gravelling, but he talked only of new gravelling 

that had been done, not highways which, under his regime, were marked as being gravelled but had 

no gravel, and which had to be re-gravelled. I want to put on the record, so there can be no argument 

about it, figures prepared by officials of the Highway Department — whom he praised yesterday — 

for the last four years my hon. friends were in office, as compared with the 1944 record up to the 

present time; another four years. 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

8 

 

Total for Construction:  Liberal Administration C.C.F. Administration 

 

Construction: 228.26 655.28 

 

New Gravel put on: 664.29 1681.36 

 

Being Regravelled: 393.17 660.44 

 

Bituminous Surface: 23.44 240.66 

 

My friend talked, yesterday, about the snow removal program; but the facts are these, and they are 

also prepared by the officials of the Highway Department. The number of miles kept open under 

Liberal Administration: 

 

    1940 - 41 1,500 

    1941 - 42 2,000 

    1942 - 43 1,800 

    1943 - 44 2,500 

    1944 - 45 3,500 

    1945 - 46 3,849 plus 

partial service on another 3,000 miles. 

    1946 - 47 to Nov. 22 6,500 

    November 4,200 

    December 3,900 

    January 3,000 

    February 1,200 

    February 10 - 22 2,800 

    February & March 3,400 

    March 1 - 5 3,500 

    March 18 4,000 

 

This Government has kept open on the average nearly twice as much highway as did my hon. friends 

when they were in office. My friend referred rather sarcastically to the fact that money was being 

spent in the Weyburn constituency because highway 39 was being hard surfaced. Does my hon. 

friend object to the hard surfacing of highway 39? If he does I know the people of Regina, Weyburn, 

Milestone and Estevan will be interested to know the Liberal party take exception to the fact that one 

of the main roads bringing people in from the United States, carrying heavy traffic, the hon. friends 

opposite object to it being hard surfaced. It was one of the roads my friends hard surfaced on paper 

on that map on the wall, but we are putting it on the ground; much more useful on the ground. 

 

The member for Moosomin also made some reference to a butcher in the east end who had received 

a gravelling contract. He did not say anything was wrong, but the insinuation was that something was 

wrong. Well, Mr. Speaker, I went into that very thoroughly and there are a number of small truckers 

in the east-end of Regina, none of whom had sufficiently large to get a contract, these men went 

together. The 

 



 

March 9, 1948 

 

8A 

 

contract was given to Mr. Schan who helped to get them together and, according to the officials for 

the Department (whom my friends praised yesterday), they did probably the best job that has been 

done all year. They did such a good job that he asked them to take other small contracts. I want to 

tell my hon. friend that Mr. Schan himself did not get a single dollar of that money. In each case it 

went to the different truckers. 

 

Now, when my friend starts to insinuate there is something here, I want to tell him he is treading on 

very dangerous ground, because I do not believe in picking up dead men’s bones or scouting through 

garbage cans. I prefer to let sleeping dogs lie. But if my hon. friend wants us to go back into the 

history of gravel contracts, I will be very happy to do it. If my hon. friend wants me to remind him of 

the days during the Liberal administration when they spent $6,500 building a road that was not there 

and never was there, and had to send one of . . . 

 

 

 

Continued on page (9). 

 

 

 



 

March 9, 1948 

 

9 

 

employees of the Government to jail and a member of the Legislature, from Kinistino I believe it 

was, to jail; or if my friends want me to remind them of some of the highway men they used to use as 

part of their Gestapo machine. A member in this House was just telling me of how, in 1938, one of 

these Gestapo came into his yard and tried to intimidate and told him if he ran for the CCF his son 

would not have a job. People of Saskatchewan have not forgotten that; and there is plenty more 

evidence if my friend wants us to start digging it up. 

 

Then my friend starts talking about scandals — of course he does not say there was one; he just 

hinted that there could be. He was throwing it out just to create a little suspicion. Well, I am not 

going to hint, Mr. Speaker, I will give my friend something he can really get his teeth into. I want to 

tell my friends, the members of this Legislature, the story of a company that was formed in this city 

on September 23, 1940, and was named the Acme Dye and Chemicals Limited. This Company, as 

far as we can find out, had as its sole function selling dye to the Government for the purpose of 

dyeing purple gas. This company had no warehouse; had no business premises — it had just a 

letterhead. It was capitalized at some $10,000,400 — $25 shares; but only four shares ever were 

issued, and three of them were in the hands of the former secretary of the Liberal Association, Mr. 

Peter Deis and his wife. They held three shares, the controlling interest — they had $75 invested. 

 

This company was incorporated, as I say, in September 1940, when Mr. Culliton, now the candidate 

in the Gravelbourg constituency was Provincial Secretary, I believe, and Mr. Deis, I also believe, 

was a college friend. The company was incorporated, and began to sell dye to the Saskatchewan Tax 

Commission — which, by the way, was under Mr. Culliton’s Department, and was presided over by 

Colonel Sifton. They bought, in 1940, 979 pounds; they bought, 1941, 2,002 pounds; and they 

bought, in 1942, 17,000 pounds, enough to last for four years, at least. They must have expected 

something to be coming along. When this Government came into office we set up, as the hon. 

members know, in the fall of 1944, the Saskatchewan Purchasing Commission, and in May of 1945, 

we called for tenders for 5,000 pounds of this dye. The Acme Dye Company submitted their bid for 

$5 a pound. Now we found that they had been selling it all along for $5.80 a pound. It seems strange 

that when the prices of dyes and chemicals were going up in 1945, that they should offer it for 80 

cents less than they were selling it before. So we began to examine the records and began to look 

over the correspondence of Colonel Sifton. We found that some of it had disappeared, very 

conveniently. We found, by getting in touch with a firm in Winnipeg (Harrison and Crossfield) who 

were the Canadian agents for this dye (the dye, most members will know, was put out by an 

American firm in Chicago, the National Aniline and Chemical Company) 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

10 

 

and when we got Harrison and Crossfield to supply the missing letters we found that there were two 

letters, July 11, 1940, and April 16, 1940, in which this company had offered to sell the government, 

for considerably less than the $5.80 the Government was paying for the dye, if they would buy it 

directly. But they did not want to buy it directly; they wanted to buy it through this ‘letterhead’ paper 

company in Saskatchewan. What was the result? It is obvious for we are, today, buying this dye 

directly from the firm which manufactures it in Chicago, The National Aniline and Chemical 

Company — we are buying it for $2.36 a pound; but the Acme Dye Company of Regina, this ‘paper’ 

company, was selling it to the government for $5.80 a pound, a difference of $3.44 on every pound 

of dye. Now, Mr. Speaker, does anyone suspect that the people who invested $100 in four shares got 

this $3.44 a pound? On the sales I mentioned, from the time it was organized in 1942, the total sales 

there were some 20,000 pounds, and the amount that they charged the Government, more than they 

are paying now, was $69,160. Does anybody suggest that the $69,160 went to the people who had 

invested $100 capital? Or was this one of the ways of buttressing the campaign funds of the Liberal 

party in this province? 

 

There is the situation —a dummy company selling dye in this province to the Government; dye 

which we can buy today, when prices are high, for $2.36, and they were selling it for $5.80; . . . 

(illegible) . . . $70,000, in the period of a couple of years that was taken out of the Treasury of 

Saskatchewan; and where did it go? 

 

My hon. friend, yesterday, talked about a butcher getting a gravelling contract. Well, what I want to 

say to him, is that, while this thing started under the Provincial Secretary in 1940, when the 

Provincial Secretary went into the Services, the Tax Commission was transferred to the Department 

of Highways, over which my friend presided. And my hon. friend either did not know this was going 

on — in which case he was inept and incompetent — or he did know it was going on, in which case 

he was a party to depriving the Saskatchewan Treasury of money which went either into the Liberal 

Party or into somebody’s pocket. 

 

Now, I want to say, in all kindness, to my hon. friend that most of this went on in 1940, 1941 and 

1942 — I can quite believe that he knew nothing about it. Those are the facts, and if my friend wants 

more of them he can have plenty more. This is just one of the ways in which the Liberal campaign 

funds were maintained in the years when the ‘machine’ needed a lot of grease. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to some of the criticisms that have been levelled at the Budget 

which was presented by the 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

11 

 

Provincial Treasurer. Every member of the Opposition who has risen to his feet so far has, with one 

accord, joined in the little song, “I don’t want her, you can have her, she’s too fat for me”. It is too 

big a budget, much too big, far too big. It is worth looking at what is happening in the Provinces who 

are close at hand. These provinces are good “Orthodox” provinces and supposed to be financially 

orthodox and have sound administration. Let us have a look at what is happening to their budgets in 

these times of rising prices and rising living costs. I will take only the round figures, and may I point 

out that in the case of all the Western provinces, except Saskatchewan, all are on a net budget 

whereas we are on a gross budget. 

 

If you take B.C., their budget in 1943 - 44 was $30,350,000; it went up in 1947 - 48 to $58,781,000, 

an increase of 94 per cent. This year it is estimated it will be $75,000,000, an increase over 1943 - 44 

of 143 per cent, with a population just a little greater than ours, and that is a net budget not a gross 

budget. 

 

In Alberta, in 1943 - 44 their budget was $21,654,000; the next year it went up to $47,000,000, an 

increase of 117 per cent. This year it has been announced $53,349,000, an increase from 1943 - 44 of 

146 per cent. 

 

In Manitoba, in 1943 - 44, their budget was $18,315,000. In 1947 - 48, it went up to $29,405,000, an 

increase of 60 per cent, and this year, it has just been announced at $33,679,000, an increase of 84 

per cent, and it is a net budget. 

 

In our province, in 1943 - 44, the budget was $29,799,000; in 1947 - 48, it went up to $45,571,000, 

or an increase of 53 per cent; and this year, $52,221,000, an increase of 75 per cent; but, Mr. 

Speaker, if we take out just the Federal Government’s share of the Old Age Pensions, which is not 

included in Manitoba and Alberta, we find that our budget actually is only $47,726,000 this year, or 

an increase of 74 per cent. So that actually in relation to our neighbouring provinces our increase in 

budget has not been as great as theirs. And if the hon. members opposite want to be consistent they 

ought to tell us how they reconcile the fact that, for a good part of one day here, they took up the 

time of this Legislature telling us we ought to increase our pensions for old people. 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

12 

 

We ought to pay more to old people. We were not doing right by the old people. How do you give 

the Old Age pensioners more money, and reduce the Budget? How do you provide health services 

and reduce the Budget? How do you do more for education and reduce the Budget? How do you 

build more roads and reduce the Budget? My hon. friends do not say; but what they do is this; Mr. 

Tucker goes down the length and breadth of the province, and he tells the people of the province all 

the extra services that would be given if the Liberal Party goes in. I added them up the other day. We 

would have a Budget of about $86,000,000 on revenue account alone, if we put into effect some of 

the things which Mr. Tucker has been promising the people of the province. You see, it is a 

marvellous team. Inside the Legislature the Leader of the Opposition says this Budget is too big; we 

must be more careful; we must think in terms of a rainy day; we must recommend ourselves to the 

financial institutions as being sound deep. But out in the country, Mr. Tucker goes around saying 

“You let me in and I will spend money right and left, and there is not anything that your heart desires 

that I will not give you.” It is a grand combination until you try and put it into effect, then you would 

find you had a pretty bad team. 

 

Now, in talking about this big Budget, both the Leader of the Opposition and the member for 

Moosomin, yesterday, tried to give the impression that the major part of the burden for this Budget 

would fall on people of lower income brackets. And the Leader of the Opposition depicted a load on 

the people of Saskatchewan, of $71.00 per head; $71.00 for every man, woman and child. Well, of 

course, Mr. Speaker, all one has to do is to look at the back of the Budget and see the Table printed 

there, and see the actual amount of taxes collected, the taxes which are paid by ordinary people on 

the street. What do we find? That in 1944, it was $11,259,000, or a per capita of $13.36. In 1947, it 

got up to $12,883,000, or $15.47. This year it was $12,841,000, or per capita taxation of $15.28. 

That is nothing like $71.00. Yesterday, the member for Moosomin said: “You say taxes have not 

gone up. Look at the gasoline tax, 10 cents a gallon.” Well, Mr. Speaker, when my hon. friend went 

out of office the people of Saskatchewan were paying 10 cents a gallon. They were paying 7 cents to 

his government and 3 cent to the Federal Government. More than that, they were paying 3 cents on 

their agricultural fuel, which they are not paying today. We wiped it out. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — When did you wipe it out? 

 

Premier: — When my friends take a look at what is being paid in other provinces for gasoline tax; 

Prince Edward Island, a Liberal province, 13 cents a gallon; New Brunswick, a Liberal province, 13 

cents a gallon; Nova Scotia, a Liberal province, 13 cents a gallon; Quebec 11 cents; British 

Columbia, half and half, 10 cents a gallon; Ontario 11 cents; Saskatchewan 10 cents. Only Alberta 

and Manitoba have a lower tax than we have, 9 cents per gallon, so that my friends are not on very 

good 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

13 

 

grounds when they talk about the gasoline tax which our people are paying. Our people are paying 

no more gasoline tax in total than they were paying in 1944. When you consider that they are not 

paying gasoline tax on their farm fuel, in the aggregate they are actually paying less. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, in one of his criticisms of the Budget, said that there was not enough 

detail given by the Provincial Treasurer. It was a mistake to make criticisms, especially when you 

leave behind printed speeches. The Leader of the Opposition was Provincial Treasurer for a number 

of years. I have here in my hand the last Budget Speech which he made on Tuesday, February 29, 

1944, and I find here on page 6, the total amount of information he gives on the fiscal year on 

revenue. Any person who looks at it will measure it about two inches; and he complains about the 

Provincial Treasurer now not giving enough information, and he has given three-quarters of a page. 

This just proves that “people who live in glass houses should not take a bath in the daytime.” 

 

One of the criticisms of my hon. friends was about the Crown Companies. I want to say a few words 

about them. First of all, the Leader of the Opposition took very great exception to the fact that the 

Saskatchewan Commonwealth carried a heading which said “FIVE MILLIONS OF SURPLUS 

AMASSED BY CROWN COMPANIES”. He said it was terrible; that no matter how you added it 

up you could not get five million. Add it up sideways, upside down, it did not make any difference, it 

would not make five million. Then to make it worse, he said here is the ‘Saskatchewan News’ and it 

says “CROWN CORPORATIONS SHOW NET PROFIT OVER FIVE MILLION”. He should have 

gone a little further. The Saskatoon ‘Star-Phoenix’ says “SASKATCHEWAN CROWN 

CORPORATIONS EARN FIVE MILLION”. The Regina ‘Leader-Post” says “CROWN 

CORPORATION NET TOPS FIVE MILLION”, and the Moose Jaw ‘Times’ said that the Crown 

Companies show profits more than five million. So, apparently everyone is out of step except our 

“Billy”, and nobody can add except the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Now, what are the main complaints about our Crown Companies. The first complaint is that they do 

not pay interest. These Crown Companies do not pay interest, but, Mr. Speaker, why should they pay 

interest? You have two kinds of investments, that of the bond-holder and the shareholder. The 

bond-holder put his money into bonds and he expects to get a guaranteed rate of interest. Well, it is 

true, we floated a reconstruction bond issue, and we pay the interest on that one million and 

one-quarter dollars of reconstruction bonds. But the other money which is put in on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan is share capital, and the people of Saskatchewan get the dividends back. 

Why would they pay interest as well as dividends? There is not group of shareholders who expect to 

get interest and dividends on their investments. My friends are simply trying to make a case when 

they have not any case there. 

 

Mr. Proctor: — You should have gone with “get rich Wallingford”, not the criminal law. 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

14 

 

Premier: — I do not know that I would want to go with “get rich Wallingford”; but I certainly 

would like to get up and tell the story of the “poor barefooted boys” who support ‘Jesse’ James 

Street. Yesterday, my hon. friend told us how many of the members in his group started out with 

bare feet, working on a farm, or tending cattle. I want to tell him that, as a matter of fact, all of us in 

this group started out with bare feet, some of us more bare than that. We were all bare at one time or 

another. I would tell my hon. friend this: it is not that you were born with the ordinary people that 

matters, but what matters is that you continue to be true to them. The crime is not that my hon. 

friends were born “with a silver spoon in their mouths”, — I know they were not — but that they 

should play the stooge for those who were born “with a silver spoon in their mouth” that is itself a 

tragedy. 

 

The second criticism my friends had about the Crown Companies was that we did not give them 

enough information about the Crown Companies. Well, Mr. Speaker, our members have had for 

some time the privilege of sitting in the Federal House. We have here much more information and 

much more control over expenditures for Crown Companies, than Federal members were ever given. 

In Ottawa, they set up their Crown Companies under the regular Companies Act, not even by 

Order-in-Council. A minister and a couple of other people in his department were simply named as 

directors of a company, and it was set up under the Companies Act responsible to nobody. They 

could not even get a committee for investigation. Here, these have been set up under The Crown 

Corporations Act, which is passed by this Legislature, responsible back to a Crown Corporations 

Committee, information is given in this House, and may I say, a great deal more information is given 

elsewhere. If my hon. friends read the Manitoba ‘Free Press’ they will notice that the other day, in 

Winnipeg, the Premier of that province was asked a question regarding the McKenzie Seed 

Company of Brandon, which is owned by the Manitoba Government, and he refused to give the 

information because it might be of value to their competitors. My hon. friends are making a very 

poor case when they try to tell people that they are not getting all the information that they require. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition asked me a question I want to answer at this time. He said he would 

like us to state whether or not the profits from the Telephones and the Power Company are going to 

be used for other purposes. May I say that we have worked out a plan for industrial development 

over a period of years, and that, for the next number of years, the amount of money that will be 

plowed back into expanding the Telephone and Power system of this province will be far in excess 

of any revenue which we expect to get from it. So that not only the profits but additional money is 

being spent, and will continue to be spent, for some considerable time, in expanding both the Power 

and the Telephone system. 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

15 

 

It is rather interesting to me to see the stand of my hon. friends opposite, on these Crown Companies, 

because, last fall, in a Radio Broadcast, I invited Mr. Tucker, who leads the Liberal Party in this 

province when he is at home, to state whether or not he would abolish the Crown Companies. He 

came on the Air and he went over the Crown Companies. He said: “Now, the Bus Company, that is a 

very normal thing to have for public ownership”. Then he speaks about the Insurance Company and 

says “No, I would not abolish the Insurance Company. I would remove any compulsory features”. 

Then he says “I would not do away with any company that was starting a new industry that was not 

in existence”. Well, that would include wool, shoes, the tannery, brick factory. What have you got 

left? Mr. Tucker says he is not going to do away with them, but my friends over there say there is 

socialism. I asked the member for Athabaska a question the other day when he was complaining 

about the Fish Board and the Timber Board; I asked him if he would abolish them. I thought he 

would say ‘yes,’ as he disliked them so bitterly, but he did not dare put himself on the record as 

saying he would abolish them. He said “No, I would take the compulsion out of them”; but he would 

not say he would abolish them, because he dare not go back to those people and tell them that a 

Liberal Government would abolish the Fish Board and the Timber Board. No, he only said he would 

take the compulsion out of them. That is a good Liberal line. As a matter of fact, I may tell the 

member from Athabaska he is in the wrong Party now. He should be in the Conservative Party, 

because it is the Conservative Party now that wants a Wheat Board in which you can either deliver 

your wheat or not deliver it. But the Liberal Party now, says it is compulsory to deliver your wheat to 

the Wheat Board, so he will have to move over to the Conservative Party if he is going to remove 

compulsion. The Liberal Party is now definitely committed to compulsory marketing Boards. 

 

One of the other criticisms which was made by the Leader of the Opposition was that there was not 

sufficient industrial development in the province due to the policies being followed by this 

Government. He said we all realized how important it is to have industrial development. I am glad to 

know that we all realize it. I would just like to know when the hon. Leader of the Opposition began 

to realize it, because certainly in the ten years that he led a government in this province, he did very 

little to bring it about. Now, my hon. friends have the impression that development has gone back 

while this government was in office, and he said there were only 215 mining claims. Well, that is a 

great deal more than there were when he was in office. Mineral production has gone up. In 1943 - 44, 

mineral production in this province was worth $18,362,000, and during this last year it was worth 

$32,539,000, an increase of 80 per cent. 

 

But my friend said he was not satisfied with that. He said it was because we have not got a Leduc in 

Saskatchewan. We have not got the Rocky Mountains nor the Great Lakes, but we cannot be held 

responsible for that. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the geologists claim that the oil was put there 

several million years ago and the C.C.F. was not in office 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

16 

 

at that time, and it is almost certain that they cannot be held responsible for the fact that we have not 

got a Leduc. But a considerable amount of progress is being made on what we have got. Now, it is 

not a Leduc, but at Lloydminster we have a promising field. It is a low-grade oil but still presents a 

great many technical problems. 

 

I would like to read from “Western Business and Industry”. A magazine which is not, by any stretch 

of the imagination, friendly to this government. This is what they say: 

 

“According to recently tabulated production totals for the Lloydminster field, the net barrel 

production for the year 1947 was 827,000 barrels, compared with 210,000 barrels extracted from 

the field during the previous year.” 

 

In other words, almost four times as much oil was taken from that field as had been done the 

previous year. Although these production figures included both the Alberta and Saskatchewan 

sections of the field, more than 65 per cent was produced in Saskatchewan. Output during December, 

totalled 118,000 barrels, 71,000 of it being produced on the Saskatchewan side and only 46,000 on 

the Alberta side; 87 per cent of the 282 wells drilled in the last eight years, have proved successful, 

according to F.H. Edmonds, Professor of Geology at the University of Saskatchewan; 140 have 

produced oil and 19 gas; 76 of the wells are now idle and 47 abandoned or suspended. Operations, in 

the past year, were on a considerably larger scale than in former years, and in 1947, 177 wells were 

drilled, of which 78 were in Alberta and 99 in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we are not asleep in the 

matter of the drilling for oil, and insofar as prospects there, those prospects are being followed up as 

rapidly as possible. 

 

These are some of the criticisms which my hon. friend has levelled at the Budget. May I just mention 

one or two things that they have not said with regard to the Budget. First of all, may I point out that 

they have not mentioned, throughout the entire Debate, the question of old age pensioners. They 

were so anxious to talk about old age pensioners; but now that the old age pensioners are to get 

$35.00 per month, which will mean our share of a $50.00 a month pension, and they are to get health 

services which cost another $5.08, which means a total cash outlay to these pensioners, or rather an 

income to these pensioners, both in services and money, of $40.00 a month, my hon. friends have not 

a word to say. I think I know why they have not anything to say; because the ‘ball’ is now at their 

feet. We have done our part for providing a $50.00 a month pension. The responsibility now lies with 

the federal government to make good the promise which it made in the 1945 election, when they 

promised to raise old age pensions and lower the age at which people would be eligible. 

 

Another thing they have not mentioned. They have not mentioned the reduction in the provincial 

debt — the fact that the debt of this province has been reduced by some $70,000,000 in the last three 

and one-half 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

17 

 

years, the greatest reduction that has ever taken place in any province in the history of Canada. Not a 

word has been said about that. They have not mentioned the reduction of municipal debt that has 

gone on. It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that according to the ‘Financial-Post’, last year, the 

municipal debt was beginning to rise across Canada; but in Saskatchewan it has continued to drop, 

and this is what the ‘Financial-Post’ has to say: “Provincially, the biggest improvement in debt 

position is shown by Saskatchewan. Its municipal debt has dropped from 68.4 million at the end of 

1939, to 17.7 million at the end of 1947.” That is a drop of 74.2 per cent. It goes on to point out that 

now in this province, with the exception of the small Maritime provinces, we have the lowest 

municipal debt in Canada. That is worth thinking about. For instance, British Columbia has a debt of 

96.6, Alberta 27.8, Saskatchewan 17.7, Manitoba 29.2, Ontario 242.5 and Quebec 424.9. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Who took the municipal debt down? Did you? 

 

Premier: — I will tell my friend who took the municipal debt down, certainly. The municipal debt 

was taken down because this government assumed millions of dollars of seed grain and relief debts 

which my hon. friends left on the doorsteps of the municipalities. 

 

The member from Moosomin, yesterday, was talking about all they had done through the relief. 

What did they do? They were trying to tell us that we did not have to do anything, today, because of 

what they did. Well, there are reasons, today, why we do not have to do anything. First of all, my 

colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, has carried out a preventive program so that instead of having 

to go out and bring seed in, you keep seed from leaving in the first place. And he conserved feed, and 

he helped communities to produce their own feed. That is why we have not had to ship in feed and 

seed to the same extent. Secondly, we have spent the last three and one-half years paying off the debt 

which my hon. friends shouldered onto the municipalities. Why, the 1938 seed grain was incurred in 

1938. My friends left office in 1944, six years after the debt was incurred, and they had not done one 

thing towards settling it. The 1935, 1936, 1937 seed grain debts were still there. By helping them to 

get rid of their debt by assuming it as the Provincial Government did, all except 50 per cent of the 

principal on the 1938 seed, we have reduced their debt considerably. In addition, we have taken off 

their hands a great many responsibilities which they formerly had to shoulder. We have taken all 

medical care for old age pensioners and mother’s allowance cases, which were formerly theirs. We 

provided 50 per cent of Social Aid which had formerly fallen upon them entirely. We provided 

medical care grants up to $100,000 per year, to help pay for municipal doctors. We spent about 

$175,000 in hospital grants to help these communities build hospitals. We have increased the grants 

to education, and thereby relieving some of the responsibility of the municipality. That the 

municipalities have been able to reduce, as they have, their municipal debt to the point where it is 

now the lowest in Canada, except 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

18 

 

the Maritime province, it is because this government has been able to give them very considerable 

assistance and very considerable support. 

 

The other thing my hon. friends have not mentioned when they talk about the Budget, they have not 

mentioned the increased salaries to the Civil Servants. The Leader of the Opposition complained 

about the increased cost of the Public Service Commission. Well, of course, the Public Service 

Commission costs more than it used to, because there was not any Public Service Commission 

before. There was just a Commissioner. This was all done by the people in the country, of course, 

who put their initials on the corner of the application form, saying “This man is a good Liberal, it 

will be all right to give him a job.” The civil service was not classified. You might have three or four 

people doing the same job, same kind of job, but all getting different salaries. There was no 

classification. There was no grading. The civil service has now been classified. It has been graded. 

Proper examinations are provided; proper tests as to qualifications. It takes some money, but the 

difference is that we are getting an able and an efficient, and what is most important of all, a satisfied 

Public Service in this province. 

 

Now, if I may take just a few moments more, and I must apologize for wearying the House at such 

length, I would like to spend just a few moments on the Department which I have the honour to 

administer at this time. I shall not deal with it exhaustibly because the estimates will be up in the 

course of a few days, and should be able to give what information the members ask. I should like to 

give, however, just hurried resume of the work of the Department of Public Health. I would like to 

point out that this province now has the distinction of paying the highest amount per capita for public 

health, of any province in the Dominion of Canada. We how pay 93 cents per head for public health 

in Saskatchewan, as compared with, for instance, 59 cents in Alberta, 64 cents in British Columbia, 

64 cents in Manitoba, 54 cents in Ontario, 61 cents in Quebec. The average for Canada is 60 cents 

for public health. In Saskatchewan it is 93 cents — about 50 per cent above the Canadian average. 

 

In reporting on the various divisions of the Department of Public Health, I should first of all like to 

pay a word of tribute to the Air Ambulance Service. A great deal has been said about it, there is no 

need for me to elaborate, except to say that all hon. members will be glad to know that we now have 

three shifts, so that we are able to give the pilots and the nurses a little more rest, and not keep them 

working at such a high speed as they have had to do in the past. One can get some idea of the 

pressure under which they work as is shown by the fact that during the past year, for instance, there 

were only 14 days that they were not in the air, only 14 days during which they could not be in the 

air. Since it has been set up, the Air Ambulance has made nearly one thousand ‘mercy’ flights. There 

has never yet been a complaint from any patient, or from his family, regarding the treatment of these 

patients while on the plane, or while being loaded or unloaded from the plane. I want to give this 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

19 

 

assurance to the members of this House and to those who may be interested, that no expense is 

spared in seeing that these planes are absolutely serviceable and airworthy, so that those who commit 

their loved ones to the care of these planes and their highly trained staff, will know that everything 

which money can do to see that their loved ones are safe and will reach their destination, has been 

done. We are pleased that so far there has never yet been an accident, and never yet has there been a 

patient hurt or killed. 

 

Now to say a word about our Cancer program. The hon. members know we have a Cancer Clinic 

both in Regina and in Saskatoon. Last year 11,996, almost 12,000 persons, went through those two 

Clinics, either as new patients or patients who were going back for a recheck. They will be glad to 

know that we have now expanded the service. We have, up until this last year, been paying for 

hospitalization, for diagnosis, for deep X-ray therapy and for surgery. In this last year we have added 

two new things. We provide now that where a patient is operated on anywhere in the province as an 

emergency operation and cancer is found, even though it was not expected prior to the operation, the 

Cancer Commission pays for that operation. Another service that has been added is this: if a person 

comes to the Cancer Clinic and surgery is necessary, and if the doctors where he lives have the 

facilities and qualifications, he can be referred back to his home doctor for surgery and the cost will 

be covered by the Cancer Clinic. Up until recently, only surgery done under the guidance of the 

Cancer Clinic was paid for. 

 

In order to get some idea as to how this Cancer program has grown and developed, let me just 

remind the hon. members that in 1942 - 43, the total expenditures for the Cancer program were 

$69,000 — I won’t use the odd hundreds — in 1943 - 44 it had gone up to $85,000. The next year it 

went up to $158,000; next year it went up to $374,000, then it went up to $451,000, and this year it 

will be well over the one-half million dollars — $548,000. Here is a service which has gone all the 

way, in these last few years, from around $60,000 to well over half a million dollars. But it is serving 

more people, and I am glad to be able to say two things: 

 

1. That a greater number of people are coming now before cancer has reached a malignant stage, 

and consequently we are able to do a great deal more for them. 

 

2. That the death rate for cancer is beginning to show signs of dropping in our province, as a result, 

we believe, of the program which has been carried on by the Cancer Commission and by the 

Cancer Society of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to say a word about the division of the laboratories. A new laboratory has been built in 

connection with the Cancer Clinic here in the City of Regina, and will be open shortly. Members 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

20 

 

will be interested to know that, in the last eleven months, 145,470 examinations went through that 

laboratory. They will be glad to know that this Legislature, which passed, two or three years ago, 

legislation providing that every person must have a medical examination prior to marriage; that the 

result of that legislation and the result of the examinations that have gone through the labs, have 

prevented many people, who did not know that they had certain ailments, from suffering in the years 

that lie ahead, and probably from having their families suffer too. 

 

The members will be glad to know that the Red Cross breast-milk bank service has now been put 

into operation in this province by the government, in conjunction with the Red Cross Society. 

 

Then I want to say a word, Mr. Speaker, about the division of mental services. For some time we 

have hoped that we could have mental hygiene clinics in the province, clinics that would care for 

people before they had to go to mental hospitals and, if possible, would prevent them ever having to 

go to mental hospitals. The first clinic has been set up now in Regina, and there is also a clinic in 

connection with the larger School Unit in the Weyburn-Estevan area, which, of course, is primarily 

for children. But there is a general clinic here in Regina, located at the General Hospital. We believe 

that this is the first step towards carrying on a properly organized preventive mental hygiene 

program. 

 

A problem in the mental hospital is continuing at the North Battleford Hospital. As of December 31, 

last, there were 1,788 persons in that hospital; 489 patients were admitted and 313 were discharged 

in the year. So, the hon. members will see that the population is still growing and our problem of 

crowded conditions is being accentuated rather than decreasing. 

 

In the North Battleford Hospital, a retraining program has been carried on by Dr. McKerracher, the 

Commissioner of Mental Services, to better equip the staff to better handle the patients who are 

committed to their care. I would like to read this memo from Dr. McKerracher, because Dr. 

McKerracher is recognized, today, as one of the outstanding psychiatrists in the Dominion of 

Canada. We brought him here from Toronto because we felt that this program needed overhauling 

and direction. This is Dr. McKerracher’s memo; he says: 

 

“Since my first acquaintance with the Saskatchewan Hospital, North Battleford, I have considered 

it an excellent institution; however, my observations of this recent visit lead me to bring to your 

attention my impression that the superintendent and staff deserve special commendation for the 

excellent work they are doing. A very heavy load is being carried in view of the staff training 

program and the training program of social workers and public health nurses. 

 

It seems to me that this training program and the care which the patients are receiving is at a 

standard, the equal of which I 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

21 

 

have not seen in any other institution which I have visited.” 

 

Dr. McKerracher has visited practically all the important institutions on this North American 

continent, and I want here to pay my tribute to Dr. McKerracher, to Dr. Nelson, the Superintendent at 

North Battleford, to Dr. Lawson, the Superintendent at Weyburn, and to Dr. Davison, the 

Superintendent of the Training School, and their staffs, for the marvellous way in which they have 

co-operated in helping to bring about a better mental hygiene program. 

 

At the Weyburn Hospital, as at December 31, the hospital population was 2,026. Last year, there 

were 363 admissions and 261 were paroled — an increase of 102. 

 

During the last year we built there, for the patients and the staff, a curling rink for their use; a new 

dairy barn to house 65 cows, so that we will now begin to supply some of our own dairy products; 

and a new water filtration plant. 

 

The Saskatchewan Training School, which is located at the Airport at Weyburn temporarily, has a 

patient population of 536, and there the program is a program of training defectives, that is, those 

who are not mentally ill, but those who have some defects so that they have a limited mental 

development and have to be taught to use their hands and, if possible, to earn a living in some other 

way than with advanced mental training. 

 

Then the far north division, it is now intended, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Patterson: — What is the patient population at Weyburn, in the original hospital? 

 

Premier: — It is 2,026. It has been reduced considerably, but may I say that although it has been 

reduced to 2,026, there are still far too many. We have hopes yet that we will be able to move more 

patients out of Weyburn and North Battleford, probably into the Airport at Weyburn, and move the 

Training School from Weyburn, possibly to someplace else. We have been looking over the Moose 

Jaw site as a possibility, but we are still facing the same problem of crowded conditions and I want to 

warn the Legislature that, despite the fact that our expenditures for Mental Hospitals have been 

heavy, this is one thing, I feel, we cannot economize on by forcing people, especially people who are 

mentally ill, to live under crowded and improper conditions. I would like, also, Mr. Speaker, before I 

leave the question of mental institutions, to invite all the members of the Legislature to visit either 

North Battleford or Weyburn mental hospital, to see the problem which is there and to see the 

excellent work which is being done. These hospitals now are not merely prisons in which to keep 

people who are 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

22 

 

mentally sick. They are places where treatment is going on, where staff are being trained, where 

patients are, in a good many cases, being rehabilitated back into civilian life and back with their 

families and their friends. 

 

I would like to say a word about the Far North Division and to say that we now intend to take over 

and maintain the outpost hospitals in the far north, which were built by the government and which 

had previously been administered by the Canadian Red Cross Society. In 1947 hospitalization was 

provided in the far north, for 446 persons; 447 persons were flown to Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and 

The Pas, Manitoba. We keep a doctor at Ile a la Crosse, who works at St. Joseph’s Hospital and who 

carries on a program there. At Cumberland House we have a Public Health nurse, and we supplied 

transportation during the last year, to 129 Indians so that they could be taken to a hospital and 

treated. From now on, these various hospitals in the north, Stony Rapids, Buffalo Narrows, etc., will 

be operated by Public Health nurses supplied by the Department of Public Health. 

 

With reference to the Division of Communicable Diseases, may I say that a total of 7,433 

communicable disease cases occurred in Saskatchewan during the first eleven months of 1946. There 

was an increase of 1,514 over that, in 1947, chiefly due to a cyclical rise in the incidence of mumps 

and poliomyelitis. Last year was one of our worst years for poliomyelitis. There were 246 cases, the 

highest, I think, since 1937. The hon. members will know that we have been providing free 

treatment, both by orthopaedic surgeons and by physiotherapists, for those who suffer from 

poliomyelitis. The regular clinic is in Saskatoon and, last year, during the emergency, we set up a 

clinic here in Regina and one at Moose Jaw to take care of people who were being brought in from 

all parts of the province. Last year, more biological were issued for immunization than in any year in 

the history of the province. That is due to the fact that these Health Regions in which we have Public 

Health doctors and Public Health nurses, are now getting a larger number of our children immunized 

against communicable diseases. I would like to keep stressing what I think is tremendously important 

— especially from the Scotsman’s point of view — that “an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of 

cure:, and that a few dollars spent in immunizing is vastly better spent money than in spending large 

sums of money trying to combat an epidemic when it is already underway. So we feel that the work 

done by the Health Regions and the money spent in free biological to immunize children, is one of 

the best investments for the people of this province to make. 

 

The Division of Venereal Disease Control has a good report for the last year. We have clinics at 

Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert and Meadow Lake. The total number of cases reported 

from January 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

23 

 

to November 1946, was 2,624, and for the same period in 1947 it had dropped to 1,648, a drop of 

about 1,000. I am glad to be able to announce to the House, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan now has 

the distinction of having the lowest syphilis rate, on a per capita basis, in the Dominion of Canada. 

We feel that the free drugs, penicillin and other free drugs, which we have distributed to the doctors 

in order to allow them to treat patients suffering from venereal diseases, and the pre-marital tests, 

have done a great deal to help reduce our venereal disease rate down to the point where it is now 

very gratifying indeed. 

 

I am not going to say a great deal about the Health Regions. Health Regions are now established at 

Swift Current, which is Health Region No. 1; Assiniboia is Health Region No. 2; the 

Weyburn-Estevan Region is No. 3; Moose Jaw, No. 6; North Battleford, No. 13; and Meadow Lake, 

No. 14. Last year the expenditures on these Regions, by the Provincial Government, were some 

$151,000, and for this coming year they will be $336,000, financial assistance which we will be 

giving to these Regions to help them carry on with their program. 

 

May I just say a word so that some of the misunderstanding that has been all too common, regarding 

these Health Regions, may be cleared up. When the people of Saskatoon and district suggested to the 

official of my Department that we might well set up a Health Region in and around Saskatoon, I, 

personally, was hesitant about undertaking such a large Region, because that Region would have cost 

us, this year, for the one Region alone, about $150,000. But it was felt that, as the Health Officer for 

Saskatoon was leaving, this would be a good time to set up this Health Region. Also, since the 

Medical School was being built, it was thought that the man in charge of the large Region could also 

do some work in the Medical School, and we could work in students into the Region and use the 

Region as a sort of a trial laboratory where medical students could get some training in carrying on 

Public Health work. That was one of the reasons why I agreed to setting up a Health Region in the 

Saskatoon area, if the people of that area wanted to. And I made it very clear that, as far as the 

Department was concerned, we were not prepared to enter into any extensive campaign to try to sell 

the people the program. We felt that that program had already demonstrated itself in other places, 

and that, as a matter of fact, we had a number of districts in the province who had already voted by 

majorities as high as 80 and 83 per cent, asking for Health Regions, that we have not been able to set 

up for the lack of personnel. So the officials of the City of Saskatoon, and the municipal 

representatives of the surrounding municipalities, met with the official of my Department and the 

Health Commission, to discuss the idea of setting up a Public Health Region. I want to express my 

concern, Mr. Speaker, that there were those in this province, and I think I know who some of them 

were, and I think I know the motive that lay behind their actions. There were those who deliberately 

went from door to door and said to these people, “Do you know that 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

24 

 

this is going to cost you $10.00 a head? Do you know that down in Swift Current they have to pay 

$40.00 per family for this?” Of course, they knew perfectly well that in Swift Current they have a 

complete health program covering everything, covering medical care, surgical care, and dental care 

for children up to 16, and carrying on a very extensive program, that that Public Health program 

would cost, roughly, about $1.00 per year, of which the Provincial Government pays 66-2/3 cents, 

the people would pay the other 33-1/3 cents per person. But they were already spending in this area 

22 cents on Public Health per person. So it should have left them somewhere between 10 and 15 

cents per head, that they would have paid for this new setup. I have the figures here from Moose Jaw 

which illustrate very well how this operates. In 1944 - 45, the City of Moose Jaw spent $11,809 in 

Public Health. There was nothing paid by the Provincial Government. The next year they spent 

$11,835; then they joined the Health Region and they paid the next year $7,579, and they received 

$7,579 from the Provincial Government. So they spent $15,158; they spent more money, although it 

cost them only half as much. 

 

This last year they spent $8,844; they received from the Provincial Government $8,844, and 

therefore spent $17,688. They got more health services, and it cost them less than when they were 

not in a Health Region. 

 

I think it somewhat tragic that there should be any group of people, who have political purposes or 

any other purpose, who deliberately mislead people and prevent the setting up of a properly 

constituted Health Region, thereby, menacing the health and welfare of women and little children, at 

a time when we so badly need these Health Regions to be established. 

 

As far as the Provincial Government is concerned, we saved $150,000 which it would have cost to 

set up the Saskatoon Health Region. But the people of the Saskatoon Health Region are going to be 

deprived of what would have been, and what could have been, a very excellent program. From the 

letters which I get from those people who are now beginning to find the facts, it is becoming 

increasingly apparent that they do not take kindly to those who misrepresented the situation to them, 

last fall. 

 

These various Health Regions not only each carry on a Public Health program, but in each of them 

we are doing certain experimental work from which we may gather data for doing a general program. 

For instance, as I said before, the Swift Current Health Region carries on complete health services as 

their contribution, and they are working out costs so we can get some idea of what it costs to give 

dental care, medical care and surgical care. In the Moose Jaw Region, they are trying out an 

experiment in nutrition, the effects of nutrition on children and on babies. That work is being 

supervised by our Provincial nutritionists and Dr. Kinneard, the Medical Health Officer. In the 

Weyburn-Estevan area we are carrying on a special mental hygiene program, working out new 

techniques whereby the Superintendent 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

25 

 

and the teacher and the social worker and the psychiatrist may together plan a social hygiene 

program for the better personality adaptation of the child, and there we are getting data which we do 

hope, in time to come, will enable us to have a better overall mental hygiene program. 

 

With reference to our division of Public Health Nurses, we have, as the hon. members know, doubled 

and trebled the number of Public Health nurses in the province, but we still need many more. I want 

to pay special tribute to those nurses who have worked at places like Buffalo Narrows, Cumberland 

House and Stony Rapids. These women, some of whom we went down to New York to take a special 

course in midwifery, are now able to come back and go into one of these isolated hospitals and there 

take care of maternity cases without a doctor, and carry on in these out-of-the-way spots with the 

result that I think they have rendered a great service to the people of those communities. 

 

I think that the figures that were mentioned, the other day, are of interest, and this is that we have had 

a steady decline in both the infant mortality rate for this province, and the maternal mortality rate. 

From 1936, our infant mortality has dropped from 53 down to 46.8 per thousand, and that our 

maternal mortality rate has dropped from 4.5 down to 1.7, down to almost one-third. That rate can 

continue to drop if we see to it that there are facilities in every Region and in every community, 

where women may have pre-natal care, where both the mother and child may have post-natal care; 

where children can be immunized; where diet can be supervised; where dental and mental hygiene 

clinics can, from time to time, visit the schools and help the teacher solve the problems which they 

may find among their children. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say just this one word about this Budget. A few days ago the 

Regina ‘Leader-Post’, in an editorial commenting on the steady growth of the Budget over the last 15 

or 20 years, pointed out that if the amount of the percentage of the Budget, which was spent on 

highways 15 or 20 years ago, had been maintained, we would be spending today about twenty 

million dollars on roads. But, says the editorial: “The emphasis has shifted, and now the major part 

of the Budget is going on education, social welfare and health.” Mr. Speaker, that was meant for a 

criticism. I take it as the greatest compliment which has ever been paid to this government. The 

Budget places the emphasis where this movement places its emphasis — on human beings; on the 

training of their minds; on the care of their bodies; on the sustenance of the incapacitated, the aged, 

the sick, and the fatherless. We believe that more important than anything else, in any community, 

are the human beings who make up that community; not the state, not buildings, not material things, 

although they contribute to human happiness, but the welfare of the individual themselves. That is 

why, Mr. Speaker, the emphasis of this Budget is on expenditures for people, because this is a 

humanitarian Budget brought down by a movement and a government which believes in humanity 

first. 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

26 

 

Hon. O. W. Valleau (Minister of Social Welfare): — I would like to follow up just briefly the 

resume, made by the Premier, of the Department of Public Health, with a fairly brief resume of some 

of the things being done by the Department of Social Welfare. 

 

I would like to point out, first, and emphasize what the Premier has just said, that out of this Budget 

of $52,000,000, the three Departments, Health, Welfare and Education will be expending 

$28,000,000. It is not at all strange that, in this province of Saskatchewan, a Provincial Government 

should find it necessary and desirable if it is serving the desires and wishes of the same people, to 

spend as large a portion as $28,000,000 out of $28,000,000 out of $52,000,000 on these services for 

the people of the province. 

 

This province, made up as it has been of pioneers from many different lands, associating together as 

we do from time to time — in fact throughout all our life — with men and women who have come 

from almost every nation in the world, we have come to have an appreciation of the value of 

humanity, not a narrow-mindedness which one sometimes finds in other parts of Canada, but an 

awareness of the value of humanity and of the dignity of mankind. 

 

Our Department, the Department of Social Welfare, has, like the Department of Health and 

Education, found it necessary to continually expand the services, and it seems as though every time 

you open up a new field that there are other needs and necessities arise. One can scarcely see the end 

of the service which could be rendered in Social Welfare, and while the Provincial Government and 

the Department of Social Welfare is carrying on an ever-increasing load in welfare services, it has 

not meant that thereby we could relieve all of their responsibilities; their responsibilities still remain. 

 

The Premier has mentioned something of the increased services which have been rendered to the 

municipalities, relieve them of the necessity of providing medical care for Old Age Pensioners, etc. 

and that relief or assistance granted to Municipal units extends throughout the entire program of the 

Department of Welfare. I venture to say that in no province in Canada today, with the exception of 

one, does the Provincial Government carry as high a percentage of the cost of welfare services as are 

carried here in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Our Department, this year, in the estimates, shows an expenditure in excess of $11,000,000. The 

municipalities, rural and urban combined 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

27 

 

in this province, will spend on Social Aid this year approximately $250,000. They have, of course, 

medical expenditures in addition to that, and they have in addition certain expenditures in payment of 

wardship fees for wards of the Minister. If I might, I would like to review one or two of the others in 

addition to the medical care that has been lifted off the shoulders of the municipalities. We have in 

the Department of Social Welfare accepted complete responsibility for the maintenance and care of 

children born to unmarried mothers; that no longer is any charge to the municipality concerned. We 

have in all wardship cases provided that the department should care for all costs in excess of one mill 

on the assessment of the municipality. 

 

I had the opportunity, a week or two ago in Saskatoon, of talking to the representatives of the 

Municipal Associations from both Manitoba and Alberta, and I found these people completely 

astonished at the assistance given to the municipalities in the Province of Saskatchewan which are so 

far in excess of those which they receive from their Provincial Governments. We carry 50 per cent of 

the Social Aid, in fact a great deal more than that; but we reimburse the municipalities 50 per cent of 

their expenditures on Social Aid. In addition to that we carry a somewhat greater load — 100 per 

cent — a greater load than the Municipal Aid expenditures are carried by the Province. In neither 

Alberta or Manitoba does the Provincial Government make any contribution whatsoever to Social 

Aid, that is left entirely and completely upon the shoulders of the municipality and municipal 

authorities. 

 

I mentioned, the other day in the House, the percentage of Old Age Pension costs which are charged 

back to the municipalities in both Manitoba and Alberta. Again that is different in Saskatchewan, 

where the province carries the entire one-fourth share together with all supplementary bonus. The 

same is true of the Mothers’ Allowance provisions; in Manitoba and Alberta the Mothers’ Allowance 

is charged back to the municipality concerned. 

 

In the administration of Social Aid we are under the plan that the recipient who has municipal 

residence shall make application to the municipality in which he lives and, having made that 

application, if it is refused or he feels he is not getting as much as he should be getting, he is then 

permitted to apply to the Department, and we are prepared under those circumstance to have a 

member of our staff interview the local council and the applicant, and endeavour to arrive at an 

agreement as to what amount should be paid to the applicant. However, the responsibility of 

designating who shall receive it, and what the amount 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

28 

 

shall be rests upon the local municipality. During the past summer we have been under the necessity 

of raising the rate or our minimum schedule — in fact we have raised it on two different occasions 

— we are today more than 20 per cent higher than we were a year ago, in an endeavour to keep up 

with the ever-increasing costs of food and other supplies. Four of the cities have now approached us 

and requested that they be allowed to put into effect the schedule, considerably above the minimum 

schedule, suggested by the Department, and we have agreed, and are prepared at all times, to meet 

the municipality on whatever amount they wish to provide, and keep as our safeguard the fact that 

the municipality in each case is paying half of the cost on their municipal cases. 

 

One of the interesting developments I would like to refer to, for a moment, is Juvenile delinquency. 

We have all heard of this, and I am very pleased to be able to report to the House that the incidence 

of juvenile delinquency appears to be on the decline. There was for a brief period after the war that it 

increased considerably, and we find in the Annual Report that the new cases of juvenile delinquency 

were some 747, last year 928, a considerable decrease. I would like, however, to deal with those 747 

cases as to what happened. Those are cases where boys — and they are exclusively boys — and the 

number of girls was 53, and I might point out that the girls are much better than the boys, at juvenile 

delinquent age anyway. As to those 747 boys, before anyone of those could be brought into court, it 

was necessary that the magistrate should have on his desk a report from our Welfare officer and a 

recommendation, before he could even try the case. We do not presume to tell the magistrate what he 

should do about the case, but we do try to give him our recommendations and our suggestions as to 

what might be done, and to offer our services. We managed to settle 575 of those cases out of court, 

boys who never came into court at all, and in our opinion that is a very valuable service. It never 

does a boy of juvenile age any good to come into court, if it can be avoided. We took court action on 

138 cases; that does not add up to the 747 — the balance are the hold-overs at the end of the current 

year. But out of those who did go into court two were fined, four warned, 80 placed on probation to 

our field staff. That is, all over the Province of Saskatchewan, each of the officers of the Department 

of Social Welfare are probation officers and are at the service of the Court any time the Court wishes 

to put a lad out on probation. To them they act as probation officers, and 80 of these cases went out 

on probation. Three of these were returned home; 29 committed to the Industrial School. So starting 

out with 747 cases, we managed to handle those cases in such a way that only 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

29 

 

29 of them eventually had to be sent to the Industrial School. To my mind, let me again say, that is 

one of the most valuable jobs we are doing at the present time. These youngsters who get into trouble 

for the first time, to clear up the case and offer to give supervision in the home, to act as probation 

officers having them report every week or two weeks to one of our staff, and in the great majority of 

these cases the situation is completely cleared up by our Department. 

 

It does not satisfy the staff; they continually come to me with the statement, “out of 747 cases we 

were able to deal with all but 29 of them. Why can we not deal with these cases before they once get 

into trouble?” That, Mr. Speaker, means additional expenditures, additional staff and possibly an 

addition to the Budget which, I am afraid, would be altogether too shocking a thing to talk about in 

view of the criticisms to which we have listened during the last week or so from the members of the 

Opposition. 

 

I must confess at this Session of the House I have been very disappointed. It is assumed in a good 

many quarters that we are going to have an election before the House meets again. It must seem 

strange to the people of Saskatchewan, because I can recall back in 1934 and 1935, and again in 

1938 and 1940, also in 1944 and 1945, that the question I was asked most frequently on the platform 

was, “If the C.C.F. get into power will we ever have another election?” Now to suggest that after 

four years of having been in office it must come as an awful shock to the Liberal party of this 

Province, especially in view of the fact that they who made the most fuss about it and talked the most 

up and down the length and breadth of my constituency telling the people that if the C.C.F. were ever 

elected you would never have another election, and who then themselves illegally stayed in 

possession of power, in this province, for a year beyond their normal term, it must seem strange to 

them to have this “thrown back into their teeth” — to use the expression of the hon. member from 

Moosomin, yesterday. 

 

I have sometimes thought of suggesting to the Attorney-General that we might give some study to 

the question of validating the laws and expenditures of the former Liberal government of this 

Province during the one year’s time when they illegally kept possession of the reins of office in this 

Province. 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

30 

 

They knew they were doing it and made no hesitation about it, because they knew they were going to 

be defeated and were not prepared to go to the country and abide by the democratic choice of the 

people of this Province. 

 

Then the hon. member for Moosomin, yesterday — I am sorry to see that the address to which he 

listened, today, apparently tired him more than the one he made yesterday — gave us some very 

interesting data on his approach to Economic problems, the idea apparently being, if you started out 

as a barefoot boy you would eventually end up as a Cabinet Minister or something of that kind. It 

reminds me of the story of a certain lake in which there was a large school of suckers and the suckers 

enjoyed life, but they were continually being disturbed by one large pike which insisted upon eating 

the suckers. The suckers decided to call a meeting to see what could be done and finally they passed 

a resolution that it was unfair. They took it to the pike, and the pike gave it some consideration and 

made a suggestion that every year two of the little suckers should be allowed to grow up into pike 

and that would settle the problems of all of them. Strange enough, being suckers, they agreed to that 

as being a fine idea. That is the principle of Economics which was enunciated in this House, 

yesterday; that, if you have the good fortune and happen to be lucky and, due to circumstances, you 

can be one of those who reach the point where you can prey on your fellow men, this is then a lovely 

world in which to live. 

 

Not only the hon. member from Moosomin but every member who spoke in this House and 99 per 

cent of those who presume to speak for the Liberal party outside of the House, are campaigning not 

on what they would do for the future of the Province but what they did in the past. They seem to 

have lost sight entirely, of the fact that the people of the Province of Saskatchewan told them what 

they thought about the record of the Liberal party back in 1944; and yet they are campaigning again 

back on that same old record. What is that record? I would like to run over a few of the things which 

comprise the record of the Liberal party in this province. 

 

This Liberal party whose Leader, afraid to come into this House (and I do not know why), but who 

campaigns and tells the reason he is campaigning on the particular platform he is — the 

Communist-scare platform — as he thinks it is the only method by which he himself can be elected 

in his constituency, and he does not care particularly whether they elect anybody else in the Province 

or not: 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

31 

 

that record — the Communist-scare record — of what the C.C.F. are going to do if they continue to 

be the Government of this Province. I recall back in 1940 what was known as the Northern Settlers 

Branch under the Department of the Government now administered by my colleague, the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs. We had up in the Melfort Federal constituency a camp of those people newly 

brought up from the Southern part of the Province and we called it Camp “K”; that was the name of 

the polling sub-division. In that poll there were 84 voters. Mr. Percy Wright who is the M.P. for the 

Melfort constituency went into that poll to address a meeting of electors, and six went into the hall; 

the rest stood out in the dark where they would not be recognized, and listened to the address through 

the windows. We could not get a chairman or a scrutineer and in that poll on election day, Percy 

Wright was elected with an overwhelming majority, and in Camp “K” the Liberals got 80 votes and 

the C.C.F. 4. 

 

That did not happen 100 years ago in Canada; nor did it happen in Bulgaria or Czechoslovakia or 

somewhere else. It happened here in Saskatchewan where people were afraid to come out and attend 

a political meeting of anybody excepting the party in power; and those people will never forget that, 

forget that they had to prostitute their ballot to vote for a party, under orders, they did not wish to 

vote for, because of the danger of starvation to their wives and families. 

 

We have heard of the ‘Police State’ — being warned against the Police State — at least no one yet 

has suggested that this Government shall prostitute the Police force or use them for canvassing. I am 

sorry the Leader of the Opposition is out, and seeing he is out I do not propose to use the material 

which I have here in my hand, today, which is an investigation by the Hon. Justices McKay, 

MacKenzie and Embury, on September 29, 1930, under which a former member of the Provincial 

Police testified that he had, while on duty, canvassed the constituency Pipestone to secure the 

nomination for a man who he called ‘Billy Patterson’, and to take that nomination away from a Mr. 

Finn who was the sitting member and who also happened to be a Liberal. In the latter part of the 

statement this man states his expenses were charged to the usual account, the “Administration of 

Justice”. 

 

During the past two or three years, we have heard considerable talk in this House about dossiers; not 

so much this Session as the last two. My. hon. friend the Minister of Education has come in, and he 

may be interested in this as he was the one who was accused of keeping dossiers upon the children of 

this Province. Well, I do 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

32 

 

not know anything about that angle of it. I will leave that to the Minister of Education; but I do know 

something about the dossiers which were kept on some 1,400 children who, under the category of 

neglected and dependent children, had been made wards of the minister. This is previous to the 

C.C.F. Government taking power. 

 

On the files of those children is a complete account of their background, whether legitimate or 

otherwise; why there were neglected and dependent — their fathers were drunkards or family 

troubles — the experiences of the child all through its life; and along at the age of 17 or 18, these 

children went out into the city of Regina and the Province of Saskatchewan to get work. They are 

encouraged to go to work although they remain the wards of the Minister until they are 21 years of 

age. Going out to seek employment, any employer or employer’s clerk could walk down in the 

Bureau of Child Welfare and look over those files, take a complete record of them and walk out, 

being under no obligation to keep it secret but spread it up and down the streets. That was done, and 

done constantly. These children, who have probably a greater claim upon us and on the Government 

of the Province because they have no natural protectors, and made the children of this Assembly; and 

yet no protection was afforded them in any way, shape or form. Those files were completely wide 

open for the general public. 

 

Speaking of the Department of Child Welfare reminds me of another case that was drawn to our 

attention, and may I say my hon. friend who seems so amused about this at the moment that he 

cannot get that information today; but anyone who has a legitimate right will have that information 

given to him where it is in the interests of the child. But those files today are regarded — as they 

should have always been — as confidential. We have the case of an unmarried mother who had 

secured an order for the support of her child, from the putative father, of $15 a month, but 

unfortunately the court had made the order payable through her lawyer. We caught up with the case 

two and a half years later, and found the lawyer was keeping eight dollars per month and paying the 

mother the remaining seven. 

 

Here is another one, and this is the past record of the Liberal party they are so proud of and are 

spreading up and down the Province of Saskatchewan. These are just a few of the things. One of the 

employees of the Department of Child Welfare approached the boys who were coming up to the age 

of 21 and who were joining the Armed Forces and going overseas, and this employee was getting 

each of these boys to make out his will in his favour. The law of averages meant that eventually he 

would 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

33 

 

succeed to their few earnings of sometimes $200 or $300 — what a beautiful racket! 

 

We have the record of the Liberal party in regard to Pensions, and I do not wish to dwell on that as 

we had considerable debate on it the other day; but it requires no stretch of imagination from those of 

us in this House to recall when the Liberal Government used to put caveats upon property in order to 

discourage the ‘would-be’ pensioners from applying for pension. We all recall when a married 

couple in this Province could get $15 a month each, or $30, when that pension was actually $20 a 

month. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What are you putting on in place of the caveats now? 

 

Hon. O. W. Valleau: — We also recall the situation in regard to the peddling of Pensions and 

Mothers’ Allowance cases became so rotten in this Province — M.L.A.’s and would-be M.L.A.’s 

were carrying application forms around in their pockets and buying votes with them — it became so 

rotten that finally the Auditor General of Canada sent out his staff and threatened to cut off the 

agreement between the Province and the Dominion; and the Auditor General had his men go over 

every Pension file in the Saskatchewan office. We are of course subject, year by year, to audit by the 

Treasury Department from Ottawa, as well as our own auditors here. The Auditor General’s people 

come into the office today and spend a day or two days and go on; but on that occasion, the situation 

in regard to pensions had come to a point where he found it necessary to go over every file 

throughout the entire record and cut off hundreds of them, and lay down an absolute rule which was 

followed for a number of years, that no application could go out without being numbered, because 

they were being used — let me repeat — for the purpose of buying votes. 

 

We also recall, those of us particularly who were in this House in Opposition — it did not happen all 

over but in many cases — that before an applicant for pension could have that pension start or for 

Mothers’ allowance — they were told to go into some little local office of some ‘party heeler’ — I 

do not know if he ever did anything or ever put his recommendation on it — but they were told to go 

in and see “so and so” before they could get a pension. These are the things the people of this 

Province recall. 

 

One other thing that was not an unusual thing when discrimination 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

34 

 

was shown in feed and seeding supplies, in summerfallow and harvesting supplies, during the tough 

years, when those of us who were known as supporters of the C.C.F., found difficulty not only in 

getting food for our families, but in getting assistance in operating our farms. 

 

We come to the Civil Service which the Premier has already dealt with. The question arises that it 

should be more difficult to run it, today, than back in the years when they just asked one question, 

“how do you vote”, and as long as you voted all right everything else was all right. Again I would 

like to draw to the attention of the Minister of Education the procedure which, if he were following 

precedent, he would have followed in selecting his new Deputy Minister. He has been severely 

criticized — no criticism whatever of the qualifications of the new Deputy Minister, but a criticism 

because that man happened to be a supporter of the C.C.F. 

 

Here is the procedure, if I may read a letter dated February 19, 1936. “Mr. L.S. Sifton, the Public 

Service Commission, Government of Saskatchewan: 

 

“Dear Sir: 

 

“The Government has recently opened a new Educational Department having appointed Mr. M. 

Ehman to take charge. I feel that an assistant will be required, and I wish to make application for 

same.” 

 

In other words, the applicants went and applied for the job and told the Government what the job 

should be instead of answering an ad for a position. He goes on: 

 

“I was born and raised my 27 years in Regina by a strong Liberal family which assisted Liberal 

campaigns for a good many years. Having received my Public School and three-years High School 

matriculation, I have two months at Success Business College.” 

 

He wants a job as assistant to the head of the Department of Education and he has had two months at 

Success Business College, 14 months in a Furniture Store, job at C.P. Freight Office as Ledger Clerk 

which lasted for a year and a half, and then worked as a ‘barnstormer’ with an airplane outfit and was 

injured. He 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

35 

 

then goes on: 

 

“My arm is again normal enough to use the pen and typewriter to good advantage. 

 

For references I refer you to the following: 

Mrs. M. Ehman  ........................... Patronage Committee 

Mr. N. Lambrecht  ....................... President — East End Liberals 

Dr. Sauer  ..................................... Broder Building 

Mr. Bayne  ................................... Solicitor — McCallum Hill Building 

Mr. J. McDaniel  .......................... Barrister — Broder Building” 

 

That is the way they used to put in applications and he got the job. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — How about Mr. McCallum and Mr. Joe Wheaton and hundreds of others. 

 

Hon. Mr. Valleau: — We have heard, time and time again throughout this Session, a great deal of 

criticism of this Government, or the predictions that all the business in the Province of Saskatchewan 

is going to depart from this Province. I would like to give you just a few comparative figures. In 

1942 — 43 and — 44 the number of new Companies incorporated in Saskatchewan is 136; in 1945 

— 46 and ’47, 432; the amount of capital from $9,100,000 to $51,300,000; the number of 

partnerships registered in the first three years, 461, and in the last 1,819. It does not seem as though 

business was going to entirely desert the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the things, Mr. Speaker, I have here a little book — the hon. members may recognize it — a 

report of the Saskatchewan Liberal Convention, and you can see they are not only trying to copy 

some of our platform; they are also copying the cover on the book. I do not know whether it is a 

subtle attempt to persuade the people of this province that they have gone ‘Red’ or not. I have wasted 

a lot of time trying to find out what the policy of the Liberal party is in this Province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You will not find it in that book. 

 

Hon. Mr. Valleau: — And you do not find it in the Addresses made 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

36 

 

to this House, nor do you find it in the addresses of Mr. Tucker, the new leader of the party, as all of 

the candidates and those who presume to speak for the Liberal party, all have their own ideas and 

thoughts, and fit their ideas and thoughts to the audiences they happen to be addressing. I have yet to 

find any clear-cut statement anywhere as to what they intend to do with the Government Insurance 

Office. That has been more bitterly fought than any other Bill before this House in the ten or eleven 

Sessions I have been in the House. I have heard the hon. member from Moosomin state, on one 

occasion, that he hoped the people did not insure with the Government Insurance Office, not only the 

Automobile Accident Act but the Government Insurance Office itself. I might say for the benefit of 

the House that the month of January, this year, in spite of the fact that roads all over the province 

were snow bound, brought us in the heaviest premium we have had since the office opened. 

 

Just what does the Liberal party, which today is putting itself up seriously, I think — they may only 

be making a joke of it — to be the next Government of this Province, intend to do so far as the 

Government Insurance Office is concerned, which is receiving a larger volume of public support 

than I had dreamed possible when we set it up two and a half to three years ago? 

 

What is the Liberal policy in regard to timber? We heard the hon. member from Moosomin, 

yesterday, making some wild statements about the decrease in the amount of the timber being 

harvested in the northern part of this Province. It is correct, sure it is correct, there is a lot less timber 

being cut up there. You see, the people who live down here in the south seem to think you can grow 

spruce trees like you grow wheat, sow in the Spring and cut in the Fall, and you have to judge your 

program by the amount you can harvest each fall. Those of us who have lived along the northern 

edge of this province have watched for years the timber creeping back and back and have realized 

very clearly that, unless something was done in a very short time, everybody in Saskatchewan who 

wanted a 2 x 4 would have to buy it from British Columbia. Five or six or seven years, at the rate of 

cutting that took place during the war, would have stripped the timber resources of this country. 

Certainly the amount of timber being harvested is being lowered, and it is rather significant, when 

the member for Athabaska was asked, that he refused to come out point blank and say he objected to 

The Timber Board. 

 

There is the same thing in regard to The Fish Board. What 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

37 

 

about the Transportation Company? Are they going to give away the Government busses and give 

the franchise back to the Greyhound Bus Company of Chicago? 

 

What is the policy of the Opposition in regard to Education? We have had a great deal of discussion 

in the Province and in this House in regard to the Larger School Unit. What are we going to do; what 

are they going to do? I would like to read just a word or two out of their Platform: “The Province 

accept a much larger share of financial responsibility. That a schedule of standard rates of local 

taxation be established and that the difference between these standards and the cost of an adequate 

basic standard of Education be met by equalization grants”. In other words, they propose that the 

Provincial Government — the Department of Education, not the Larger Unit, not the local school 

district, not the municipal authorities — but the Department of Education, sitting here in all of its 

glory in the city of Regina, should tell the people all over the Province how much taxes they are 

going to pay and how much is going to be allocated to their particular school district in order to carry 

on services. 

 

What is the position of the Liberal party in regard to the Farm Security law? Again we have had no 

clear-cut indication. What about the Box Factory? I am not going to go into the story of the Box 

Factory now, Mr. Speaker. We all know that the factory was taken over by the Government because 

a smart employer who had a so-called smart lawyer was trying to evade the laws of this Province and 

was proceeding to discharge men who were organizing a Union and who belonged to that Union. I 

would like to have — and I have never yet had, although I have asked Liberals all over the province 

— I would like to have a clear-cut statement as to whether they propose to sit idly back and see men 

fired for joining or organizing a Union. They did it before, and would likely be quite willing to do it 

again. 

 

Before we leave the question of Education; they go on and want a greater share, and further Federal 

financial assistance. I would like an amplification of that as to whether they propose to turn over to 

the Federal Government the control of education along with the further Federal assistance. 

 

Referring again to the Fish Board, I remarked that they had 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

38 

 

not set up their policy in regard to this, but here we have a reference: “We further condemn the Fish 

Marketing Board set up by the present Saskatchewan as a useless waste of the taxpayers’ money and 

favour return of the fishing industry of the Province to a competitive basis promoted by private 

industry”. I wish somebody would show that to the hon. member from Athabaska sometime. 

 

The most disturbing of the entire situation in this province at the present time is the point touched 

upon very briefly by the Premier, that we have, at the moment, in accordance with British 

Parliamentary practice, a party in power and a party in opposition, each of which should be equally 

seized with their responsibility — the provision of good government — and yet we have a Liberal 

party in this Province which, from all indications, is prepared to sacrifice the province and the people 

of this Province in order to gain a political advantage, because they think that it will injure the C.C.F. 

 

I asked, the other day in this House, and was followed immediately afterwards by the Leader of the 

Opposition — I asked if the Liberal party of this Province were prepared to stand side by side with 

this Government in demanding that the Dominion Government should continue to pay three-quarters 

of the necessary pension and I have yet to have any kind of an answer to my question. I also asked if 

they were prepared to stand alongside of this Government in demanding the implementation of the 

Dominion recommendations to the Dominion-Provincial Conference, and we still have no answer to 

that question. Still referring to answers to questions, we had, a little earlier this afternoon, a little 

laugh because there had been a slight delay in the tabling of the return by the hon. Minister of 

Natural Resources. 

 

I have here the Journals of the Session of 1943, an order of the Assembly by Mr. Feeley as to how 

many Old Age Pensioners in Saskatchewan are not receiving the full amount of pension allowed 

under the present Old Age Pension Act. That was in 1943, and we still have no answer to that 

question . . . a most significant thing and one which I, personally, would regret to see attached to a 

statement from this Government. We at least try to look after — and I hope I may be pardoned for 

repeating what the Premier said — to look after the human interests of the people of this Province. 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

39 

 

In conclusion I would like to say, that I propose to support this Budget and, if it is the last thing I 

ever do, I shall continue to support this Government. 

 

Mr. W. S. Thair (Lumsden): — I would like to join with the other members of this House in 

extending my congratulations to the Provincial Treasurer on his review of the financial conditions of 

this Province, and also the efficiency and the skill with which he has handled the financial affairs of 

the province during the past four years. 

 

I might say that the world affairs today are of momentous importance, and we cannot look out upon 

the world conditions of today without great concern for the future of mankind. 

 

I might say of major importance is the appeal for the starving children of Europe which has been 

discussed so often. Unless we provide them with clothing and other supplies, the world we must 

share with them will indeed be a world of tragedy for all of us. This is our opportunity to yet share in 

this task. 

 

I am pleased to note that a grant from this House for the above purpose has been made by this 

Government and has the unanimous approval of all the members of the House. 

 

It is most unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that when food is so much in need in Europe that 

Saskatchewan’s crop happens to be down some 70,000,000 bushels, this year, because of the drought 

conditions in July. 

 

As I represent a farming constituency, I would like to give a brief review of some of the general 

conditions in my constituency. In the heavy clay that we have in the Regina district the crops yielded 

from 20 to 35 bushels per acre on summerfallow land, but there was a large area within my 

constituency, and particularly from Regina Beach and Keddleston to south of Aylesbury, the yields 

were very low because of drought conditions, and this section will be eligible for the P.F.A.A. grant. 

I must say the P.F.A.A. grant, as stated by the hon. member from Bengough some few weeks ago, is 

a socialistic principle, and I trust that the P.F.A.A. grant may be shortly increased to meet the present 

production costs, and should be more on an individual basis. I believe this is right in line with the 

recommendations of the Municipal Convention in Saskatoon, last week. 

 

In the review of the conditions in my constituency I would like to give you some of the conditions in 

the northern part of it. The farmers in the above areas engage to a considerable extent in raising hogs 

and cattle. 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

40 

 

But I would like to say that the great rush of cattle to market after the packer strike, caused a loss in 

price of one and one-half to two cents per pound, because of the glut on the market at just that time. 

And again, because of lifting of controls on barley and oats, after these crops had been marketed, 

there was a loss of from twenty to thirty-five cents per bushel on the crops marketed. Possibly for 

this same reason, the hog production has dropped to new low levels. But practically all the farmers, I 

might say, because of government policy of self-help, have sufficient seed grain, and the fodder and 

feed situation is sufficient until spring. But I repeat that in many years in the province the crop 

conditions are very similar to what I have quoted, unfortunately; low crop yields and higher and 

higher prices for every commodity that is used on the farms, from groceries and clothing to farm 

fuels and farm machinery. The higher prices, I repeat, do not mean so much to large sections of our 

province. 

 

As a farmer, Mr. Speaker, I would like to deal briefly with some of the departments of government, 

particularly with some of the achievements of the Department of Agriculture. Considerable progress, 

I believe, has been made in the problems of feed and fodder supply through the self-help policy. The 

Provincial Minister of Agriculture believes it is possible to organize farmers to put up these supplies 

and to accumulate a reserve wherever available. This has been very satisfactory, this year. The 

addition of municipal feed banks and fodder stored by the province on Crown lands, has helped 

considerably. 

 

I would like to mention just here the Agricultural Representative Service which greatly assisted this 

policy of self-help, in getting together the feed requirements of the province. I would like to quote 

here from an article in the ‘Leader-Post’. In speaking of the Agricultural Representative Service 

which has been of such great value this past year, it says: “A group of men whose contribution to 

Saskatchewan agriculture deserves something more in the way of recognition than it ever appears to 

receive, are the members of the province’s Agricultural Representative Service.” I think we, perhaps, 

are liable to underestimate the great contribution they have made in a lot of the programs in the 

Department of Agriculture. 

 

I believe the above methods that I have outlined regarding feed reserves, show that the greater 

diversification of production, or mixed farming, brings a greater degree of stability to agriculture in 

this province. 

 

I would also like to add in regard to the Agricultural Representative Service under the direction of 

Mr. Brockelbank, they are doing splendid work and supplying a needed contact between the farmer 

on the land and the Provincial Department of Agriculture. Through its Agricultural Representative 

services, the co-operation of the municipal agricultural committees and district boards, along with 

the Provincial Department of 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

41 

 

Agriculture, the step is more than ever a publicity program for soil conservations and cultural 

practices including weed and chemical spraying and the use of commercial fertilizers. Considerable 

support will be given, this coming year, by the Federal Department of Agriculture, I understand, and 

the Agricultural Institute of Canada and the Extension Department of the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I trust that the recent announcement by the Federal government is correct with 

regard to new government policy empowering it to bring the marketing of barley and oats under the 

control of the Canadian Wheat Board or under similar Boards. I take it for granted that this was not 

just another political move on the part of the federal Minister of Agriculture, because of the 

impending possibility of a provincial election. But I believe that, in general, it will meet with 

considerable approval from the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to quote here from Mr. Hazen Argue — member of the House of Commons — when he 

was speaking on this matter, just the other day. He said: “This does not necessarily mean the 

government is going to take oats and barley off the Grain Exchange.” That is something that I am not 

certain about myself. Our C.C.F. members at Ottawa, as well as all the members of this Assembly — 

on both sides of the House — along with many farm organizations in the province, have constantly 

urged for the adoption of such a policy. It is most unfortunate that such action was not taken before 

the 1st of August, or on August 1, 1947. 

 

Now, I would like to say a few words about soil conservation, something which I have been 

interested in for many years. It is something that has been stressed more and more, this past year 

particularly. I think a matter that is of supreme importance to the farmers of western Canada, is soil 

conservation and, I might say, that embraces the problems of soil erosion, whether wind or water; 

soil depletion; the trash farming and better methods of cultivation; the burning of stubble; the 

chemical weed spraying and, as I stated before, the use of commercial fertilizers. I may say, quite 

frankly, that these problems, to a greater extent than ever before, are receiving the attention of the 

Provincial Department of Agriculture, and have been put into effect particularly by the Agricultural 

Representative Service. One of the most important conferences pertaining to agriculture, was held in 

Saskatoon, last fall, under the Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture, which is called the 

Saskatchewan Co-operative Agricultural Extension Program. It was attended by all the men in the 

Agricultural Representative Service and officials of both the federal and provincial governments and 

the Soils Department of the University of Saskatchewan. I would like to quote here, Mr. Speaker, 

from an address given at this convention by Mr. Wilkie Collins, who is chief of Agronomy Division, 

Soil Conservations Service, at Lincoln. I might say that he is supervisor of some seven states in the 

Northern States, and much of that land is very similar to the conditions of the land and the conditions 

that exist in our province at the present time. 

 

Mr. Collins said: “The average loss of top soil, due to erosion, has 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

42 

 

been about four inches, so we are the champion soil wasters. In a few generations we will have lost 

about one-third of our top soil. In addition to losing soil, one of the worst things is the decrease of 

organic matter some experimental stations in the northern great plains at South Dakota, during a 

period of fifty years they have lost about 45 per cent of the total organic matter, and naturally have 

lost some plant food. The question comes up, under this system of farming, what is agriculture going 

to be like when we have lost 75, 80 or 85 per cent of the organic matter of our soil? We have not 

farmed long enough to know whether we can maintain a permanent system of agriculture for many 

hundreds of years.” 

 

I would like to say that the February number of the ‘Farm and Ranch Review’ also contains a short 

review from an address by Stanley Ingham, who is President of Saskatchewan Field Husbandry 

Association, from which I would like to quote a few statements. Speaking on nation-wide concern 

for the need of soil conservation, he told the delegates that a well conceived conservation or 

utilization program could not be over-emphasized. He said: “It is easier to prevent soil erosion than 

to correct its damaging effect.” He declared — in speaking of the burying of stubble and the full 

utilization of trash cover — “that the modern machinery methods made the matter of working in the 

stubble an easy task compared to what it was formerly, and it paid very great dividends.” In closing 

he said: “This is one way we can do a great deal to our soil conservation with a minimum of effort. 

The stubble is there at hand and needs only to be made use of.” 

 

I have dwelt on this longer than I should have, perhaps, but one of the most important things in the 

field of agriculture, today, is the conservation of soil and stopping the depletion of soil. If the soil 

blows the top six inches, there is not anything left even in this province which grows great quantities 

of wheat. 

 

I would like to take a few minutes in the comparison of the Power Commission in this province and 

the power B.C. Electric. I was out at the coast for a few weeks visiting my family, and I was very 

much interested in two great corporations out there — not that I hold any shares or stocks in them 

whatever — but I could not help but compare our Saskatchewan Power Commission with the B.C. 

Electric. I thought it would not be out of place here, where you are allowed to roam as you will in the 

Budget Debate, to just make a few statements regarding the Power Commission, or the Regina 

Power Plant which is a great public utility, and the B.C. Electric — the great monopoly. 

 

The Power Commission in Saskatchewan has made a splendid beginning in extending electric power 

to many homes and industries in the province. The power rates have been lowered two or three times 

in the past two or three years, and it is interesting to note that, in the new power plant in the North, 

they are using natural gas which is only one-fifth the cost 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

43 

 

of diesel fuel at the present time. In the South they are developing power with lignite screen at 77 

cents per ton, delivered at the plant. The power is being actually developed under these conditions as 

cheap, or almost as low, as the hydro-electric in Manitoba. I think this is really a remarkable 

showing. 

 

More new users of electric power were connected in 1947 than in the previous 13 years, 1931-1944. 

Power line services are being extended as rapidly as we can get transformers, insulators and wire. In 

the rural areas, with a few users per mile, it is perhaps, very difficult to provide a low rate. But 

despite this, as I stated before, the rate has been lowered two or three times. I live on a power line. 

This line was put in some 16 years ago by the Anderson Government. It was known as the Montreal 

Engineering Company at that time. I was told then that the idea was to put it in at that time — hustle 

and hurry it in — because the government was soon going to take it over at a profit. This was one of 

Sir Herbert Holt’s subsidiaries — the Montreal Engineering. Before this government came into 

power I was actually paying eight, nine to eleven dollars per month to Prairie Utilities — it finally 

drifted into the hands of Prairie Utilities, and then the Power Commission. Now the rate of that rural 

area is cut down to five and one-half and seven dollars a month. 

 

The earnings of the Power Commission, I am glad to note have improved. There was a deficit, in 

1944, of $231,000; during the past nine months the Power Commission’s net earnings were about 

$900,000. 

 

With the exception of the Power Plant in Regina, which is a public utility, and the Moose Jaw plant, 

most of the plants in the province are now owned by the people. I believe that in fifteen or 20 years, 

according to Mr. Berry, the people of Saskatchewan will own and control and have paid for the 

whole power system of the province. 

 

I would like to compare this for a minute with British Columbia, where the B.C. Electric practically 

owns and controls the entire power system for Victoria, Vancouver and the mainland . . . 

 

 

 

(cont. on Page 44). 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

44 

 

It is the largest, the most powerful monopoly on the coast, and has a capitalization, today, of 53 

million dollars — started with one million dollars in 1900. How much is watered stock, of the 53 

million dollars, I am not in a position to know. But I do know that it has made remarkable growth, 

and its net earnings, in 1947, were some seven and one-half million dollars. 

 

I would like also to compare this great monopoly of B.C. Electric, which I have discussed, with the 

Public Utility or the Power Plant in Regina — belonging to the citizens of Regina. I think this is a 

good example of municipal social ownership, one of the finest examples, perhaps, of any of the cities 

in the province, outside of those under the Power Commission. I am sure the citizens of Regina, and 

the Chamber of Commerce, must be proud indeed of their publicly-owned enterprise, which, in 

addition to giving them a reasonable power rate, has over a number of years turned back to its 

ratepayers or its citizens, almost one million dollars per year in dividends. 

 

I would like to say a word, Mr. Speaker, about fish, which is a long way removed from my 

constituency; but still my constituency, like the constituency of the member for Arm River (Mr. 

Danielson), borders on Long Lake. I find that there seems to be general satisfaction among the 

fishermen of Long Lake, with the Government Fish Board, in spite of the statements made by 

members in this House. It is believed that three-quarters of a million pounds of tullibee fish will be 

taken from Long Lake, this season, in the Holdfast and Dilke areas. In this area, which has had 

almost a total crop failure, this brings an income to the fisherman — who are mostly farmers within 

this 20 mile area — of some thirty or thirty-five thousand dollars in that area this year. For many 

years they received about one to one and one-half cents per pound or even less for tullibee fish. 

Today, they receive four and one-half or four for whole fish, or five and one-half dressed. 

 

I would like to say that this delegation, which I headed myself from the Board of Trade at Dilke, and 

also a group of fishermen from the Holdfast area, had been in to interview the Minister of Natural 

Resources. They were well pleased with the Fish Board and commended the Minister of Natural 

Resources for his policy with regard to prices and marketing regulations and inspection of the fishing 

industry at Long Lake. 

 

I have been speaking of the power, and would just like to say another word about the power here. 

That is, I have simply been drawing a comparison between the privately-owned power system in 

British Columbia and the socially-owned system of Saskatchewan. In 1944 — 45 the pressure of 

public opinion was very great, out in British Columbia, to have the power taken over and controlled 

by the people. A report was brought in in 1945, which said this, and I quote from the 

“Financial-Post” Corporation Service here: “No plebiscite should be taken on the question of 

whether or not the voters favour the transfer of all the properties and 

 

 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

45 

 

the interests of B.C. Electric, to government ownership.” So nothing was done. With the present 

capitalization, that is fifty million dollars, the B.C. Electric is expanding at a tremendous rate, with 

the yearly profits divided among a few shareholders. One of the shareholders happens to be the 

present Premier of British Columbia — perhaps that was the reason they did not go any further. 

 

Apparently British Columbia was merrily on its way increasing its fares and rates to the people, with 

the sanction of the present British Columbia coalition government. When we speak of coalition 

government I would just like to say this, that the coalition government — the Liberal and 

Conservative Party — according to my observations and what I read when I was out there — does 

not seem to be operating very smoothly, because just around the corner is a federal election. In 

Saskatchewan, it seems to me that, in spite of the appeal made by the hon. member representing the 

Mediterranean Area, the other night, it seems probably that the Hon. J.G. Gardiner will swallow or 

absorb the Conservative Party in Saskatchewan in the mean time. 

 

Now, I would like to say a word about timber. I would like to commend the Minister of Natural 

Resources for the efficient measures he has taken to check the complete depletion of our forests in 

Northern Saskatchewan. The reckless cutting in the past would, if continued, have practically wiped 

out the white spruce stands of timber, and in addition to a serious depletion of other types of timber. I 

would like to quote from Mr. Black, the President of the Game-Forestry Association, the other day, 

speaking in Prince Albert, when he said: “The policy of the Resources Department should be adopted 

by the residents of Saskatchewan generally, and by the residents of the north particularly.” 

 

I am going to leave it to the Minister of Natural Resources to explain fully his forest-management 

plan and sustained yield. The Timber Board of Saskatchewan has sold the . . . (illegible) . . . cut of 

lumber in 1946 — 47 for a profit of $236,000, and has provided lumber for our own Saskatchewan 

people, when they might have shipped it down south, both this year and last year, at a very greatly 

increased profit. I would like to draw a comparison here, if I might just take the attention of the 

House for about another three minutes, between the timber policy of British Columbia — under so 

called monopoly enterprise — and the present C.C.F. government policy of Saskatchewan, under 

social ownership; where the natural resources, in this case of timber, are owned and developed in the 

interests of all the people of the province. There are many lumber mills along the Fraser River. I was 

amazed to find that a number of them belong to one company only. 

 

At this point I would like to quote from an article in the “Vancouver Sun”, January 16, 1948. I 

happened to get this the very date it came out, and could not help but spot it. Out there they allow 

more 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

46 

 

latitude, even in a Liberal paper, than the “Sifton Press” do in Saskatchewan. It reads as follows: 

“Gasps of amazement greeted the announcement of the H.R. MacMillan Export Company’s 

$7,000,000 profit for last year. Canada was astonished to discover a new industrial giant had grown 

up in British Columbia, second only to Consolidated Mining and Smelting. Formerly the 

packing-house industry was regarded as the last word in production-line efficiency. MacMillan’s 

have gone it one better. Packers are supposed to market everything but the squeal of the hog — but 

packers depend on private producers for the raw materials.” 

 

“But not MacMillan. The MacMillan Company owns the timber, cuts it with MacMillan machinery, 

hauls it to tidewater on MacMillan trucks over MacMillan-built roads, cuts it in MacMillan sawmills, 

finds a market and sells through wholly-owned MacMillan subsidiaries — and delivers overseas in 

MacMillan ships. All that MacMillan lacks is its own transcontinental railway.” 

 

One of the basic requirements stated in this article, also, is a plentiful reserve of standing timber. And 

I find in looking through the “Financial-Post” Corporation Service, that they already have acquired a 

lot of timber because it says here: “The Company’s available source of timber consists of over three 

and one-half billion feet board measure. Over 80 per cent of this is Crown granted, situated on 

Vancouver Island, and of the timber row 70 per cent is Douglas Fir.” 

 

In the conclusion of this article, Mr. Speaker, the “Vancouver Sun” sums it up like this: “Whatever 

else may be said about it, it makes for efficiency and it makes money.” 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Might I remind the hon. member that it is six o’clock. 

 

Mr. Thair: — I am just about through. I can finish it in two minutes if the House will bear with me. 

If not, I will adjourn the Debate. 

 

It makes profits, I ask you, for whom? That is the question; and to answer that question I turn again 

to the same Corporation Service and I find that all the shares of the present company were held by 

the officers and senior staff until 1945, when ten per cent of the privately-owned shares were sold to 

the public. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, pretty well proves who gets the profits. Now, I have endeavoured just in closing, 

to give some idea of the ramifications of this great private company in its timber operations in British 

Columbia, and also B.C. Electric as compared with our own natural resources development in this 

country. 

  



 

March 9, 1948 

 

47 

 

In closing, I would just like to mention briefly the hon. member for Moosomin, speaking yesterday, 

dealt at some length on the humble beginnings of himself and his followers. In this, Mr. Speaker, 

they are, I am sure, in no way different from the members on this side of the House, as far as their 

start in life and beginning were concerned. But the surprising thing to me is that they — the 

Opposition members — despite all their past and present hardship, have never learned their lesson, 

and would hand over, and have handed over, to private or monopoly enterprise, such as I have 

described, the natural resources of this province, who have throughout the last four years fought for 

private enterprise and who have, throughout the past four years, fought in this Chamber for private 

enterprise or monopoly enterprise such as the railroads, the mortgage and loan companies and other 

monopolistic institutions. In contrast to this, as I have stated, as was worked out by the H.R. 

MacMillan Company and the B.C. Electric, the aim of this government is through long-term 

planning to assure a steady yield from our resources, which will mean a more secure livelihood and a 

more bountiful heritage for the citizens of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing may I say that the aim of our C.C.F. Government for Saskatchewan citizens 

is security and health for all, a good education for every child and a future to which all may look 

forward with hope and confidence. I shall support the Budget. 

 

The Debate was adjourned by Mr. Gibbs. 

 

The House adjourned at 6:05 o’clock p.m. 


