



















































Hansard: March 22, 1948


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Fifth Session — Tenth Legislature 

 

 

The House met at three o’clock Monday, March 22, 1948 

 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 96 — An Act to amend The Power Commission Act 

 

Hon. J.L. Phelps (Minister of Natural Resources): — In rising to move second reading of this Bill, 

An Act to amend The Power Commission Act, I want to tell the House that there is no principle 

involved here. It is simply a matter of clarification of the control of the distribution of natural gas, 

particularly, a clarification of certain points that were obscure in the existing Act before. Details of this 

Bill can well be discussed in committee, and I would move second reading of Bill No. 96. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 97 — An Act to amend The Public Utilities Companies Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — The purpose of this Bill is to clarify the supervision and control of the laying of 

pipelines within the province of Saskatchewan. There is no new principle involved, and the details can 

be discussed in Committee. I move second reading of Bill No. 97. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 98 — An Act respecting Boilers and Pressure Vessels and Steam, Refrigeration and 

Compressed Gas Plants. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — This Bill was originally brought in to govern plants and 

boilers, of which there were between three and four thousand in this province, between 1910 and 1915. I 

believe there are only six at the present time. Since that time amendments have been added to the 

original Act from time to time which permitted regulations to be made for other new projects which 

were brought in, such as heating plants and boilers for large buildings, pressure vessels pertaining to air, 

oil distillation, refrigerator, and last year, you will recall we brought in one to take care of liquid 

petroleum gas. A great deal of confusion has resulted, and we wish to consolidate the Act and modernize 

it, to include all the previous amendments, because it has reached a point now where no one can tell just 

what is meant in the Act except those in our own Department. I would therefore move that Bill No. 98 

be now read a second time. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to. 



 

March 22, 1948 

 

 

2 

Bill No. 104 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1946. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — This Bill is now printed and on our desks. 

If the House wishes to give consent, I move second reading. This Act contains a provision for railway 

taxation and the organized hamlets, which are two new points, but those can be discussed in committee, 

and accordingly I move that the Bill be now read a second time. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 109 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Election Act. 

 

Premier Douglas: — This Bill contains amendments to The Election Act. There are no major changes. 

One change provides for political affiliation of candidates appearing on the ballot. Another will extend 

the vote to patients receiving treatment in tuberculosis sanatoria. The residential qualifications are 

changed slightly so that a person who has been a resident for two months instead of three months in an 

electoral division can vote. The advance polls are extended so that instead of applying only to 

railwaymen and commercial travellers, they now apply to persons who must be absent from their 

residence by reason of their business, and are prepared to take an affidavit to that effect. Those are the 

main changes, and I would therefore move second reading. of Bill No. 109. 

 

Mr. W.J. Patterson (Leader of the Opposition): — I do not propose to debate the second reading of 

this Bill, but merely wish to give notice that in Committee I propose to submit amendments which will 

provide for the Transferable Ballot or the Alternative Ballot, sometimes so-called. They can be 

introduced as amendments to the Bill, because after all there is no vital principle involved in the Bill 

submitted to us. 

 

Mr. W. Burgess (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — I am not sure whether what I have to say should be said 

on second reading or in Committee, but it does seem to me that perhaps to say something now might 

give me the chance to say it twice, which has certain advantages. 

 

The Premier, in introducing the Bill, said that there are no major changes in the Act. If I were going to 

criticize it, I think perhaps I would do so on that point, that there are not enough changes in the Act. It 

seems to me that this argument could apply to any Act, but I think it would apply more particularly to 

The Election Act than most others — that they should be written in a language so simple that even a 

layman could understand them. As a matter of fact, it is well known that the Election Act must, of 

necessity, be administered by laymen. It is the ordinary farmer, schoolteacher, storekeeper, and so on, 

who has to hold the office of Returning Officer, Deputy Returning Officer, Enumerator, Poll Clerk, 

Election Agent, and all the rest of it. I think that the vast majority of the people of Saskatchewan are 

anxious only that the election be conducted fairly and properly, and I do think the Election Act could 

have been simplified a great deal. It could 



 

March 22, 1948 

 

 

3 

have been written in a manner more easily understood. I think there are many clauses in the Act which, 

so far as I can see, are not even dealt with in this Bill at all, that perhaps might have been given some 

consideration. 

 

I am not going to attempt to mention all of them, but, if I am in order, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

suggest that some consideration might have been given to clarifying the clauses in The Election Act 

numbered from 173 to 178 — those things which apply to “corrupt practices.” We haven’t many corrupt 

practices in Saskatchewan, we are reasonably clear of them; but at the same time it does seem to me that 

I am not at all sure what these clauses mean. 

 

For instance, it states in Clause No. 174: 

 

“No candidate at an election, and no person who has been nominated or selected as a candidate for 

election by any political party or group of individuals at a convention, or by petition, request or 

otherwise, shall, at any time after his nomination or selection as aforesaid, and before the holding of 

the poll, if any, at the election, make or promise to make directly or indirectly a subscription or 

donation of any kind whatsoever for any religious charitable or philanthropic purpose or to any 

society or association except for Patriotic purposes, and it shall be an offence for any person to 

solicit any such subscription or donation from any such candidate or person during the period herein 

mentioned. 

 

“(2) A contravention of this section shall be deemed to be a corrupt practice within the meaning of 

this Act.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what is a “patriotic purpose?” I ask the Premier or the Leader of the Opposition to 

tell me what is a “patriotic purpose.” Would it be a fair definition to say that it is anything that is for the 

welfare of the country? If that be a proper definition of a “patriotic purpose” would a donation of $5.00 

to a junior hockey team for the purpose of upbuilding the youth of the country be considered patriotic or 

unpatriotic? And when is the time of an election? 

 

I do think we should be protected — possibly the idea is to protect candidates from being asked for too 

many donations; but is it illegal for any member of this Legislature, who has been nominated at a 

convention, to give a dollar to the Appeal for Children which we, as a Legislature, are asked to vote the 

taxpayers’ money to? Is it illegal for us to give a dollar of our own money to the same thing? Is that a 

patriotic purpose? Some might argue that it is. I think it is, but I do not know what that clause means. 

Certainly I am not pleading for the privilege of giving away money; but I contend that it is almost 

impossible for any person to absolutely follow that law to the letter, or, rather, for his to know whether 

he was following it or not; and I think that the Government, or somebody, might well have taken the 

whole Election Act and clarified and simplified it, so that even members of the Legislature might 

understand it. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to. 



 

March 22, 1948 

 

 

4 

Bill No. 110 — An Act to amend The Athabaska or Cumberland Election Act. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The purpose of this Bill is simply to bring this Act into conformity with 

amendments which have already been passed or are now before the House, providing for a vote at 

eighteen years of age, providing for the candidates political affiliation to appear on the ballot, and so on. 

I move second reading. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 111 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Act, 1946. 

 

Hon. O.W. Valleau (Provincial Secretary): — The amendments contained in this Bill are designed to 

overcome what appear to be some technical difficulties in providing what might be termed additional or 

supplementary public liability and property damage insurance. 

 

As the House is aware, we have on our desks, in The Automobile Accident Insurance Bill, amendments 

designed to place what is usually termed standard public liability and property damage insurance under 

The Automobile Accident Act. There are, however, many people in the province who desire to have 

liability and property damage insurance of a greater extent than that provided in The Automobile 

Accident Act. Under the usual procedure in writing dual policies, or duplicate policies, or two 

companies writing a policy covering the same interest, if the car owner took out another $5/10,000 

policy with a private company he would not have more than $5/10,000 protection; that is, if he were to 

become involved in an accident and damages were assessed against him, the two companies involved 

would pro rate their policies and he would only have protection up to the $5/10,000. 

 

This Bill proposes to give The Government Insurance Office the power to issue a policy for an 

additional amount. The amount we have in mind is $10/20,000, which will be in addition to the amount 

of protection which is provided under The Automobile Accident Act; that is, if we issue the policy for 

$10/20,000 the man actually has $15/30,000 — $15,000 for injuries to one person and $30,000 for 

injuries to two or more persons in one accident. If the policy proposed to be issued under these 

amendments contains $2,000 property damage, he would then have a total of $3,000 property damage. 

 

It is thought by the Legal Counsel and also by the Legislative Counsel that there is a possibility of there 

being some technical difficulties in writing that, under our Act as it stands at the present time, and we 

are therefore bringing in this amendment to the Act. I move that Bill No. 111 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. A.W. Embury (A.S.V.R.): — Will the hon. gentleman permit a question? Is this privilege of 

writing a supplementary policy extended only to The Government Insurance Office, or to other private 

insurance companies, as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Valleau: — It is only extended to The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office. I might 

say that up to the present time I have had no requests whatever 



 

March 22, 1948 

 

 

5 

from the private insurers as to whether they should have similar privileges and, while I do not wish to 

pose as a legal expert, I am personally inclined to think that possibly there is a provision within The 

Saskatchewan Insurance Act which would give then that privilege. I know we looked over the Act 

ourselves and tried to fit it in with our own Act, which is a special Act, to see whether that privilege did 

exist; but we decided that the simplest way to overcome the difficulty would be to bring in this Act 

clarifying our own position. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 112 — An Act constituting Lloydminster Hospital Board. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The purpose of this Bill is to make it possible to set up a Union Hospital district, 

in which the hospital district will comprise an area in Saskatchewan and in Alberta. The reason for the 

lateness in bringing in this legislation is that the legislation was submitted to the Alberta Government 

and has been submitted now to the Alberta Legislature, and has now been submitted to us. It will simply 

provide for setting up a Union Hospital board and a district, giving to that Board certain powers set out 

in the Act. It will be something unique in that the district will be made up partly of Saskatchewan 

territory and partly of Alberta territory. I move second reading. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 114 — An Act to amend The Public Revenues Act. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — There is nothing contentious in this Bill. It was 

considered necessary because of certain amendments that are being made to the Municipal Acts, and the 

purpose of it is to bring it into line with the changes there. I move second reading of Bill No. 114. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

The Northern Administration Bill 

 

The House resumed, from Thursday, March 18, 1948, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

Hon. J.L. Phelps (Minister of Natural Resources): That Bill No. 85 — An Act to provide for the 

Administration and Development of the Northern Part of Saskatchewan — be now read the second time. 

 

Mr. W.J. Patterson (Leader of Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I have frequently made the statement 

that, at each and every Session of the Legislature under the present Government, the powers, jurisdiction 

and the authority of the Cabinet and of individual cabinet ministers has been very widely extended and 

enlarged. In that respect, we are following that well-established precedent in being asked to support the 

second reading of Bill No. 85, to create a Northern Administration Area. 



 

March 22, 1948 

 

 

6 

We must remember, Sir, that under this Bill, the tremendous power and authority which it provides is 

going to a cabinet minister who, on a platform in, I think, the town of Melville, said that he had a lot of 

power and he was going to use it. 

 

Instead of the Bill being entitled “The Northern Administration Act of 1948” its title should be “To 

appoint a Dictator for Northern Saskatchewan.” The Bill, in effect, creates a little kingdom out of the 

northern half of the province of Saskatchewan, and reigning over that kingdom will be one who will be 

‘monarch of all he surveys’, and whose right there will be none to dispute. 

 

As a matter of fact, under the Act as it is presented to us, the area can be extended, and Regina and 

Saskatoon could, if the Government so decided, be included in the area, which the “Little Dictator” is 

going to have complete control of. 

 

I think most of us will agree, in general principle, that possibly there should be some method of 

administering the northern half of the province; but when the Minister simply takes parts of other Acts 

which were designed and passed, and which are applicable to fairly settled areas, where agriculture is 

the principal occupation, and where the administration is restricted to a comparatively limited area, and 

simply picks out those sections of those various Local Improvement District Acts and other similar Acts 

and applies them to the entire northern half of the province, which is very largely unsettled, which is 

definitely not agricultural, and which comprises, as I say, approximately, half of the total geographical 

area of the province, it would indicate that the problem has not been approached with any serious or 

careful study or consideration. 

 

Under the Act as it is proposed to us, there will be one assessment roll for the entire northern half of the 

province of Saskatchewan. The owner of property at Fond du Lac or Ile a la Crosse or at Denare Beach 

will be notified that this assessment roll has been completed. He will have thirty days in which to make 

his appeal against his assessment to the Saskatchewan Assessment Commission. The taxes to be levied 

are entirely in the discretion of the Minister, and without any regard whatever to the local improvements 

or the local activities that are to be undertaken in this tremendous Local Improvement District. 

 

In addition to that, the taxes on the acre or half-acre that a resident at Fond du Lac or Ile a la Crosse may 

happen to own will be a lien upon the fish that he catches in the lake, on the fur that he captures on his 

trapline, or on any timber that he may produce in any area in which he happens to be active. 

 

This tax roll is to be supplied to the Field Officers of the Department and to the Agents of the ‘dictator’. 

In other words, they will be put in the hands of the managers of the Hudson Bay Posts, where those 

managers happen to be the agents of the ‘dictator’. 



 

March 22, 1948 

 

 

7 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker: I rather think the Leader of the 

Opposition is out of order in using that word “dictator”, because I happen to operate in Local 

Improvement Districts under an Act which his government had in effect for many, many years — The 

Local Improvement Districts Act — and if he is going to call one minister a dictator, my Act is just 

about the same, and I think it is not very nice, in a democratic country, and he might withdraw. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don’t think the point of order is well taken. It is the opinion of the member that a 

‘dictator’, or call it what you like, is being set up, and I don’t think it is an unparliamentary expression. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if it offends the susceptibilities of the hon. Minister, we will 

refrain from using that term. We could use a very much stronger one, probably, one which would be 

more fitting and appropriate. 

 

As I say, there is going to be one assessment roll for the northern half of the province of Saskatchewan. 

Whether you are a resident of Fond du Lac or Ile a la Crosse or Denare Beach, you are all going to be on 

the same assessment roll, and the Minister is going to determine the taxes that will be levied. Those 

taxes, when collected, go into one common bank account, and then, again, the Minister decides how 

those taxes, so levied and collected, are to be spent. In other words, the fisherman who lives at Portage 

la Roche, who happens to own a lot there or a half-acre, or a quarter of an acre, whose fish and fur and 

timber production are subject to a lien for those taxes — when they are collected, the taxes that he paid 

may be spent to make improvements at Lac la Ronge or Denare Beach or at Reindeer Lake or at some 

other part of the territory. 

 

There are 110 sections in the Bill, and 65 of them have to do with the power and the authority of the 

Minister to levy and collect taxes, and the measures which he may take to enforce the payment of those 

taxes. As I have said before, let us provide, if it is necessary, for some form of administration in the 

northern half of our province; not a dictatorship but some practical method applicable and suitable to the 

conditions which exist in that part of the province. What operates very suitably and very satisfactorily in 

an area eighteen miles square in the southern half of the province, where agriculture is the major 

activity, and where it is possible for the people in the country to get together and discuss these matters 

— I say, to simply apply what may be practical and satisfactory in such a condition, to the northern half 

of the province of Saskatchewan, indicates at the least, that the Minister has not given very such study or 

very much consideration to the special problems that exist in that area. 

 

I feel there are many faults and many weaknesses in this Bill. I feel it is entirely impractical; that it gives 

the Minister far too much power; that it places the residents in these scattered communities, living under 

conditions which it is difficult for us in this part of the province to realize or appreciate, in an 

unfortunate position. I say the Bill gives him far too much power and far too much authority, and places 

in his hands a control and a regulation 



 

March 22, 1948 

 

 

8 

over the lives and activities of those people that this Legislature should not hand over to any minister, 

even so estimable a one as the Minister of Natural Resources, and I am going to move, therefore, that the 

word “now” be struck out and the words “this day six months hence” be added to the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I was rather surprised at the words spoken by the Leader of 

the Opposition just now in regard to this Bill, because it is, in very great part, exactly the same — or 

contains exactly the same provisions as are to be found in the Local Improvement Districts Act, and 

which have been in that Act for a good many years. 

 

He mentioned the completion of the Assessment Roll. If the hon. Leader of the Opposition would just 

watch Section 30, it might be interesting to note, “when the Assessment Roll has been prepared, the 

Minister shall cause to be posted up in each Post Office and in such other conspicuous places in the 

district as he may determine, a notice to the effect that the Assessment Roll of the district has been 

prepared, that information respecting the assessment of any parcel of land or of any business my be 

obtained at the District Office, and that any ratepayer desiring to object to the assessment of himself or 

of any other person must, within thirty days, after the date of the notice, lodge his complaint in writing 

with the Saskatchewan Assessment Commission.” Now, Mr. Speaker, that is not taken from the Bill. I 

have been reading from The Local Improvement Districts Act, and it is almost word for word. 

 

Again, he mentioned that the Minister would have the right to set the tax rate. Well, we turn to Section 

45 of the Bill, and if the members will just watch that Section — “As soon as practicable in each year, 

the Minister shall estimate the amount required to be expended in each district during the current year, 

and shall cause to be levied a tax at such rate on the dollar of the assessed value of the taxable property 

within the district as shall be required to meet such estimated expenditure. (2) If the tax of any person 

under the foregoing provisions is less than one dollar, the amount to be entered in the roll as payable by 

such person shall be one dollar.” 

 

Now, the hon. Leader of the Opposition knows very well that when he was mentioning the difference in 

the farming communities in the southern part of Saskatchewan he was inferring to this House that the 

people in those districts, under the former government, had some say as to what mill rate was going to 

be levied. In the rural municipalities where they have local self-government, yes — they set their own 

mill rate — but in the Local Improvement Districts they had no voice in it whatsoever. We have gone a 

little ways in establishing Ratepayers’ Associations in our Local Improvement Districts to give to the 

people some voice in the conduct of their own affairs, and I know that the Minister of Natural Resources 

will be one of the first to give to the local people in those communities in the far north not only the right, 

but to encourage them to organize inner associations in those communities with a view to having some 

voice in the conduct of their affairs. The Leader 



 

March 22, 1948 

 

 

9 

of the Opposition knows very well that it is impossible to set up the far north as a rural municipality; that 

it can only be handled on the same basis as a large Local Improvement District. 

 

Mr. A.T. Procter: — It’s sure large enough! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — This is not so very new, except that it may be new to the member for 

Moosomin; but for many years there was L.I.D. “A” in the far north, which contained all of the north 

halfway between Lac la Ronge and Prince Albert; from there north was all L.I.D. “A”, all one Local 

Improvement District. Maybe the member for Moosomin did not know that. I am not a bit surprised that 

he did not know it, because they never did anything there. They didn’t know the country existed, at all. 

 

I am going to oppose the amendment to the motion, Mr. Speaker, and if there is anything wrong in detail 

with this Act we can deal with it in committee, but in principle the Bill is exactly the same as the former 

government endorsed and practised, except that it has some improvements. 

 

Mr. D.S. Valleau (A.S.V.R.): — Mr. Speaker, this summer I had the opportunity to make a short visit 

to parts of the Saskatchewan Area in the north — Denare Beach and Beaver Lake and some of those 

areas — and was present at the establishment of a new townsite. I had an opportunity to talk with a 

number of the citizens of the northern district. I found they shared the feeling which I am sure every 

member of this House shares, and that is, a desire to have as democratic a government as possible, as 

soon as possible. They realized that there were many impediments, mostly impediments of practice and 

practicality. 

 

I gained the impression, in Flin Flon — for example — that it was a Company town, and that the real 

‘boss’ and the real ‘ruler’ was the mining company. On the other hand, outside of that area, and in some 

of the Saskatchewan side, one could not help but get the impression that the man who employed most of 

the key officials and the literate people was the man who occupied the place of the company town, and 

here I mean the Minister of Natural Resources, who is probably the greatest employer of salaried help on 

the Saskatchewan side. At that time I thought it was high time that we had a Bill stating and defining the 

powers and duties of the Minister, and preparing a framework under which democracy could grow. 

Democracy cannot be imposed from the top down, and under some conditions it is difficult for it to 

grow from the ground up; but democracy, in our modern study, is always defined as ‘rule under law.’ 

 

There is a tendency for ‘rule under law’, either under the Company town, or under the mining 

companies which are operating on the Saskatchewan side of the line, or even under a Minister who is 

operating as an employer or as a Minister responsible under a definite Act, to be ‘rule by discussion’ 

rather than ‘rule by law’; and I note that this Bill will set up definite rules and regulations under which it 

will be possible for democracy to grow, as we like to see it grow in the L.I.D.’s. 



 

March 22, 1948 

 

 

10 

I note under Section 16 that it will be possible for local citizens to organize Ratepayers’ Associations 

and gain practice in the elements of democracy, something which at the moment they cannot do — they 

are just persons living on Crown lands at the moment. 

 

Section 4 specifies powers and duties of a minister, and it is obvious that the Minister is standing in the 

place of a municipal council, rather than in the place of an employer. I think that is a vast step forward, 

that this Act is providing a framework under which democracy can govern; and therefore, I will oppose 

the motion for the “six months’ hoist.” 

 

Hon. J.L. Phelps (Minister of Natural Resources): — I want to speak to the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

I do not want to waive my right to reply to the motion, if that is necessary. 

 

The amendment proposed by the Leader of the Opposition is a typical Liberal amendment, which simply 

means, in effect, “Do Nothing.” That, Mr. Speaker, is what they used to do when they were on this side 

of the House. That is why they are over there now. So far as this Government is concerned, we are not 

going to be accused of taking that attitude. When the Leader of the Opposition sat over here as Leader of 

the Government, that is exactly what was noted out to the north country, and I want to suggest to him 

and to this House that I do not think it will set very well with the people of the north when the attitude 

that he has taken in this House is explained to them — that he wants to deny the people of the north a 

plan of democratic government to which they have long since been entitled. 

 

The hon. member for Moosomin snickers; but if he had been up there and had seen something of the 

north country he would not expose his ignorance in this House to the extent he does on this particular 

problem. The people of the north country have long since felt (and it is one of the things that they take 

up with me almost every time I go up there) — they say to me, “When can we have some set-up 

whereby we will be able to take part and know how this thing is being operated?” 

 

The Leader of the Opposition refers to “dictatorship”, and I think the point is well taken by my hon. 

friend, the Minister of Municipal Affairs, particularly at this time. There may be nothing in the rule book 

that says that such references should not be permitted, but I want to say this: At this particular time it ill 

behooves the Leader of the Opposition to create the impression he tried to do a few moments ago in this 

House. In all fairness to him and to this House, I suggest that he go and read the Acts to which I am 

going to refer in a moment. In other words, while I do not accuse him of being insincere, either he does 

not recognize his own legislation or he does not know anything about the legislation which they passed 

when they were on this side of the House, because the legislation which governs L.I.D. “A”, to which 

my hon. friend referred a few moments ago, was legislation which they themselves passed; and over 

two-thirds of this Act that is now before the House is the L.I.D. “A” legislation, word for word, as I told 

the House in 



 

March 22, 1948 

 

 

11 

moving the second reading of this Bill. Other parts are taken from the Town and Village Act, and the 

reason for that is simply that you have to have some provision for legislation to take care of situations 

that arise, that do not apply to a rural area or settlement in the country, as L.I.D. “A” was intended to do. 

L.I.D. “A” is the same Act as my hon. friend, the Minister of Municipal Affairs, administers, in almost a 

third of the area (in miles) of the province of Saskatchewan. And I repeat again, that I do not think it will 

be very favourably received by the people of the north, when they learn, to their surprise, that the Leader 

of the Opposition wants to again defer any action that will give them a say, or that will set up the 

machinery whereby the north half of the province of Saskatchewan can take its place in the economy of 

this country. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition once again travels true to form when he gets up in this House and does 

nothing but criticize, and ends up with a negative attitude. He has never yet said what he would propose 

as a substitute for this Bill. Typical Liberal tactics again! He says I don’t understand the North . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — At least, you have been there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, at least I have been there. That is more than the Leader of the 

Opposition can say! He has not been in to the far North, and when I say the ‘far North’ I mean just that. 

I do not profess to know all about the north country — I have a lot to learn about the north country, and 

the south country, too, and I am not so old that I can’t learn; but if my hon. friend was to interest himself 

sufficiently to go up to the north country and stay there for a few days, and find out at least a few of the 

things that are going on, he would not have come down to this House and made the statement and 

proposed an amendment of the type which has now been proposed to this House. 

 

In the matter of encouraging local committees, it just so happens in this particular case that I have a 

good witness in the person of the Premier himself, where he and I had a meeting in one of these northern 

centres, at which I think he will recall that question was asked and the suggestion was made that they 

could have a local committee. They were asking to get some say and some responsibility in drafting 

laws and working out laws for their own local self-government; and I promised them at that time, when 

the Premier was there, that that program would be carried forward, and it is being carried forward. 

 

Right at the present time we have two men in the north country, holding meetings with the settlers there, 

outlining to them what we are proposing to do in this field, and asking them to meet together and 

organize local committees that could act in an advisory capacity to the Northern Administrator, which is 

the machinery which has been set up to operate this Bill. It is not a matter of being a ‘dictator’ in the 

North, Mr. Speaker, but it is a matter of having a responsible head of a Department to administer any 

Act, and my hon. friend should know that. He does know it, and there is no need for him 



 

March 22, 1948 

 

 

12 

to lead this House to believe otherwise. 

 

With reference to some of the statements he has made that under this Act a person’s fish or his fur can 

be taken for non-payment of taxes: Well, Mr. Speaker, he did not hesitate, when he was over here, to 

pass legislation that stated that they would take the farmer’s wheat or his cattle for non-payment of 

taxes. Naturally, in that country, you have to take what the people have for payment of taxes. They have 

fish and fur, therefore those are the things you can expect them to contribute as a method of paying 

taxes. The people in the north country are ready and willing — my hon. friend is going to argue that by 

the payment of their royalties, that is sufficient; that they pay their share. Mr. Speaker, the payment of 

royalties is the payment to society as a whole for the depletion of property that belongs to society. It has 

no relation to local improvements and local self-government. 

 

Let us consider, for instance, the coal fields in Estevan. They not only pay royalties, but they pay 

amounts there for providing educational services, for the construction of roads, and they are now being 

assessed a municipal tax in addition to that. My hon. friend does not raise any objection to that, and I am 

going to say that this Government has recognized that we have a north country, and, that is more than 

the former government ever did. We have gone into that north country and given them education. The 

Minister of Education should be complimented on the degree to which, and the speed with which he has 

supplied educational services in a very short space of time. All the needs have not been taken care of — 

he is the first to recognize that — but in my opinion he has gone a long way in the time he has been at it. 

 

We are in the midst of a program of extending, very substantially, roads in that north country, and I was 

particularly pleased to have my hon. friend from Ile à la Crosse make mention of that the other day; and 

he is fair enough to recognize what that means to that north country, and to that part of the country 

which he represents. 

 

Mr. L.M. Marion: — My hon. friend, the Minister of Natural Resources, may as well know right now 

that I do not intend to support that Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — That is fine with me. My hon. friend can do just exactly what he likes. 

 

Mr. Marion: — I sure will. 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — He will have something to answer for to his constituents in the north, when he 

wants to deny them the right of local forms of self-government so that they can continue to have an 

expanding program of these services we have provided. 

 

Mr. Marion: — Not dictatorship! 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — The north country does not expect the south to always be Santa Claus to them. 

They want more roads, they want more schools, and they are quite prepared to do something to assist in 

the payment of them. They 



 

March 22, 1948 

 

 

13 

have indicated that in the various meetings we have held. Further, this Act is designed to do one other 

thing, and that is to assess taxes. Yes, there will be some taxes levied in due course. There is no logical 

argument why the north should not bear their share of the tax of this country; but my hon. friend knows 

when they were the government, they had some companies operating in the northern part of 

Saskatchewan which paid the whole amount of one dollar per store. Under this Act, those companies 

will contribute something to the education of the people of the north that they have ‘skinned’ for the last 

fifty years. 

 

My hon. friend who is sitting over on the opposite side of the House may not want to do this, but if I 

have judged his constituents right, they are anxious that that company will contribute something to the 

Provincial Treasury of this province, and, in turn, that money will be used for local education and 

improvements. In other words, the Northern Administrator will be the custodian of these funds, and they 

will be used for local improvements — not for the whole of the province of Saskatchewan — but for the 

area that it is designed to serve. I would like to ask my hon. friend how he would propose to have 

collected the money that is required to provide revenues, for instance, in the settlement in which he 

lives? I believe there are some services required there. 

 

The Act before you, now being asked for second reading — about ninety to ninety-five percent of it — 

is copied from the L.I.D. Act, and it simply provides for the ordinary machinery of the local government 

in the particular area it is designed to serve. My hon. friend says that whoever is going to administer that 

Act will be ‘Dictator of the North’. I want to point out again, Mr. Speaker, that he is not giving this 

House the proper information because he is reading into the Act something that he wants to read, that is 

all. If he were being fair, he would have referred to the clause that says that “the Governor in Council 

will set up the regulations under which this Act operates, and also define the area.” The people of this 

province have confidence in their government. Whether they have confidence in their Minister of 

Natural Resources or not, they have confidence in their government! Before that area will be extended, 

there will be an Order in Council by which all the ministers of the Crown will be represented, and will 

sanction; so I say, Mr. Speaker, this Act will give to the north country its Magna Carta. It will give to the 

north, for the first time, the machinery by which they can take an active part in the development — not 

only the government — and in the expansion of the program there that we have started, that is so 

essential to the development of that country in order that they can contribute their share to the provincial 

economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

I shall certainly vote against the amendment, and I hope that the members of this House will see their 

way clear to pass this legislation at this Session. 

 

The amendment was negatived by 42 votes against 5. 

 

The motion for second reading was then agreed to. 

 

The House adjourned, without question put, at eleven o’clock p.m. 


