



















































Hansard: February 06, 1948


 

1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Tenth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, February 6, 1948 

 

The House met at 3 o’clock p.m. 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier):  At the beginning of each Session of the Assembly, it has become 

customary for us to take a few moments to give some thought to some of those, it may be members of 

the Legislature, or prominent citizens who have made some contribution to our province, and who have 

passed away since we last met here in the Assembly. 

 

In accordance with that custom, which, I think is a very good, a very appropriate once, I should like first 

of all to make some mention of the passing of the late Archbishop Monahan, a distinguished churchman 

and a man of broad humanitarian principles. Let me give you something of his career. 

 

Born of Irish parents at Saint Lin, Quebec, in 1882, Peter Joseph Monahan attended Bourget College, 

Rigaud, and the Grand Seminary, Montreal, being ordained to the priesthood in 1909. From a year 

thereafter, he was professor at Jolliette College, and in 1910 was appointed assistant and acting Rector 

of St. Mary’s parish, North Bay, a position he held for ten years. In 1920, he was named pastor of St. 

Stanislaus parish, Copper Cliff, Ontario; then from 1921 to 1924, he was pastor of Blessed Sacrament 

parish, Sault Ste. Marie. He was pastor of St. Patrick’s parish, Fort William, from September, 1924, until 

on June 10, 1932, he was appointed Bishop of Calgary. He was appointed Archbishop of Regina, June 

22, 1935, a position he filled with great dignity and honour until his death, on May 6, 1947. 

 

While at Bourget College, the future Archbishop attained outstanding success in his studies, wherein he 

combined a commercial course, with the usual classical studies, a fact which was to stand him in good 

stead later, when he attained high administrative position in his Church. It is recorded of him, for 

instance, that at Sault Ste. Marie, he succeeded in wiping off a debt of $45,000 in 45 months in a parish 

of 180 families of working people. This almost phenomenal success was repeated at fort William, where 

he built and paid for the splendid $100,000 Arpin Memorial High School. In Calgary he built new 

churches, and in the twelve years of his incumbency, the Archdiocese of Regina recorded remarkable 

progress. More than 60 churches in outlaying missions arose; new organizations demanded by new 

economic and social conditions were founded; a virgin field was touched with the erection and opening, 

under Sisters’ Supervision, of a half-dozen large and well-equipped hospitals; new parishes were 

opened, and many other achievements stand to the credit of the organizing zeal and spiritual leadership 

of this great and tireless churchman, and citizen. 

 

So I would move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by Mr. Patterson (Leader of the Opposition): 

 

“That this Assembly records its profound sorrow and regret at the passing, on May 6, 1947, of His 

Grace the Most Reverend Peter Joseph Monahan, third Archbishop of the Roman Catholic 

Archdiocese of Regina. 



 

February 6, 1948 
 

 
2 

“A most distinguished Churchman and a great humanitarian of brilliant endowments, His Grace built 

an enduring monument in the hearts of the community he served and which he administered with 

exemplary nobility, unfailing kindliness and ever-ready sympathy. All who were privileged and 

honoured to meet him quickly recognized his sterling qualities of heart and mind; his generous spirit 

embraced all who came within his presence and the area of his influence. In the passing of His Grace, 

the province of Saskatchewan and the city of Regina have suffered the irreparable loss of an 

outstanding citizen, a true and noble friend.” 

 

Mr. W.J. Patterson:  In seconding the Motion moved by the Premier, I desire to associate myself 

with his remarks as to two outstanding qualities and qualifications which His Grace possessed: one was 

his sincerity, and the other was his energy. Possibly the fact that he was so energetic was in some way 

responsible for his untimely death. One could not help but be impressed by the fact that these particular 

and outstanding qualifications, along with many others he possessed, were devoted not entirely to the 

particular line of activity in which he was engaged, but was extended to the general welfare of his 

country and the promotion of those things which he thought to be in the interests of Canada. He was an 

outstanding promoter of all that stood for Canadian unity and Canadian citizenship, and, as the Premier 

has said, this Province and this dominion have suffered a severe and irreparable loss in the passing of 

His Grace, and I join with the Premier n this record of our recognition of that fact. 

 

The Motion was agreed to unanimously. 

 

Premier Douglas:  I wish to move, seconded by Mr. Patterson: 

 

“That the resolution of sorrow and regret at the passing of His Grace the Most Reverend Peter Joseph 

Monahan, together with transcripts of the oral tributes paid to his memory, be communicated to the 

Roman Catholic Clergy of the Archdiocese of Regina, on behalf of this Assembly, by Mr. Speaker.” 

 

The Motion was agreed to unanimously. 

 

Premier Douglas: Some former members of this Legislature have passed away since we last met, and 

I should like to place on the record something of the contribution which each of them made, each in his 

own time, to the public life of this province. I refer to the late Mr. Justice Donald Maclean, the late Mr. 

Justice William Gladstone Ross, the late Dr. Samson Wallace Arthur, and the late Rev. Thomas 

McAfee. 

 

Mr. Justice Maclean was born on Cape Breton island and educated at Pictou Academy and Dalhousie 

University. He came west and practised law at Milestone for a short time before moving to Saskatoon in 

1909. He was elected as a Conservative member of the Legislature for Saskatoon in 1917, and acted as 

Leader of the Opposition until 1921. His connection with the University of Saskatoon, which endured 

until his death, commenced in 1915, when he was appointed University solicitor, a post he held until 

1921 when he became a member of the University 



 

February 6, 1948 

 

 
3 

Senate representing the province at large. A Senate member until 1932, Judge Maclean was then 

appointed to the Board of Governors, being Chairman of the Board from 1938 to 1945. He was elected 

Chancellor of the University in 1946. 

 

Judge Maclean, in addition to his duties as judge of the Court of King’s Bench, acted as Chief 

Commission of the Saskatchewan Board of Review under the Farmers’ Creditors Arrangement Act, and 

has served on Royal Commissions appointed by the Provincial Government. 

 

Mr. Justice Ross was born at Moose Jaw, residing in that city most of his life. Receiving his public and 

collegiate education in his native city, he later attended Queen’s University, being called to the bar of 

Saskatchewan in 1915. An alderman of Moose Jaw for four years, he was elected to the Legislature for 

Moose Jaw City in a by-election in 1927. Defeated in the election of 1929, he re-entered the House in 

the general election of 1934 and again in 1938. He was appointed District court Judge at Moosomin in 

1943 and elevated to the King’s Bench Court in 1946. 

 

Judge Ross was a man of many public activities. A Past President of the Saskatchewan Red Cross 

Association, of the Moose Jaw Canadian Club, and of the Moose Jaw Bar Association, he developed and 

maintained a keen interest in the wild life of Saskatchewan. He was Honorary President of the 

Saskatchewan Fish and Game League, a Trustee of the American Wild Life Institute and President of 

ducks Unlimited (Canada), President of Saskatchewan Field Trails Association, and a director of prairie 

Airways. 

 

Dr. Arthur was born in Ontario, and won his medical degrees at Queen’s University in 1903. Coming to 

Saskatchewan, he settled in the Redvers district, where he practised his profession for forty years. While 

at Redvers he entered politics and was elected to this Assembly for Cannington Constituency in the 

general election of 1929 as an Independent supporting the Government headed by the late Dr. J.T.M. 

Anderson. In 1943, he moved to Portage la Prairie, in Manitoba, and continued in practice until his 

death. During his residence in Redvers he was active in community affairs, serving as a School Trustee 

and a Justice of the Peace. 

 

Rev. Mr. McAfee was born in County Antrim, Ireland, and came to Canada in 1893. He was Minister of 

St. Andrew’s Presbyterian Church at Indian Head from 1898 to 1925; Clerk of Qu’Appelle Presbytery 

for 24 years; Moderator of the Presbyterian Synod of Saskatchewan, and Clerk of the Regina Presbytery. 

During World War I, he served overseas as Chaplain of the 96
th

 Highlanders with the rank of Honorary 

Captain. While resident of Indian Head, he served as Trustee of the Collegiate Board and of the Hospital 

Board. He was elected to this Legislature as a Liberal for the Constituency of Wolseley in the general 

election of 1925. He was at one time Chaplain of the Saskatchewan Curling Association. 

 

I am sure there is no need for me to add anything to these short biographical records, except to say that 

most of us in this Legislature met these men either privately or in our public capacity at some time in the 

past few years. 



 

February 6, 1948 
 

 
4 

I think it is extremely fitting, that, on this day, just as we are beginning the session, we should pay 

tribute to their memory and say something of the service which they have rendered to their communities 

and to this province. 

 

I would, therefore, move, seconded by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Patterson: 

 

“That this Assembly records its profound regret and sense of bereavement at the death, since the last 

Session, of four former Members of this Assembly who, each in his own time, enjoyed the confidence 

of his fellow-citizens and rendered valuable service to the people and province of Saskatchewan, 

namely, the late Mr. Justice Donald Maclean, the late Mr. Justice William Gladstone Ross, the late Dr. 

Samson Wallace Arthur, and the late Rev. Thomas McAfee. 

 

“Judge Maclean, as a Member of this Assembly, served as Leader of the Opposition from 1917 to 

1921. An eminent lawyer and distinguished jurist, he early identified himself with the University of 

Saskatchewan, which he served as solicitor from 1915 until 1921 when he became member of the 

University Senate representing the province at large. He was Chancellor of the University at the time 

of his death. 

 

“Judge Ross was a member of the Assembly from 1927 to 1929, and again from 1934 to 1944, latterly 

serving as Deputy Speaker. An ardent sportsman and prominent in many community enterprises, 

Judge Ross maintained, throughout his legislative and judicial career, a keen interest in the 

conservation of the wild life of this province; he served as Honorary President of the Saskatchewan 

Fish and Game League, as a Trustee of the American Wild Life Institute, and as President of ducks 

Unlimited (Canada). 

 

“Rev. Mr. McAfee was a member of this Assembly from 1925 to 1929, representing the Constituency 

of Wolseley. During the period of his ministry at Indian Head, he closely identified himself with 

matters pertaining to the welfare of his community, serving as Trustee of the Collegiate Board and of 

the Hospital Board. Rising to high position in his Church, he was Clerk of the Qu’Appelle Presbytery 

for 24 years, was for a time Moderator of the Presbyterian Synod of Saskatchewan, and Clerk of the 

Regina Presbytery. During World War I, he served overseas as a Battalion Chaplain. 

 

“Dr. Arthur, a member of this Assembly from 1929 to 1934 representing the Constituency of 

Cannington, practised medicine in the Redvers district of Saskatchewan for 40 years, moving to 

Portage la Prairie, Manitoba, in 1943, where he continued in practice until his death, early in January. 

Prior to his entry into the political arena as an independent, Dr. Arthur had served his community as 

School Trustee and Justice of the Peace.” 

 

The motion was agreed to unanimously. 



 

February 6, 1948 

 

 
5 

Premier:  I wish to move, seconded by Mr. Patterson: 

 

“That the resolution of profound regret at the loss suffered through the death of the late Mr. Justice 

Donald Maclean, the late Mr. Justice William Gladstone Ross, the late Dr. Samson Wallace Arthur 

and the late Rev. Thomas McAfee, together with transcripts of the oral tribute paid to their respective 

memories, be communicated to the bereaved families, on behalf of this Assembly, by Mr. Speaker.” 

 

The Motion was agreed to unanimously. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 3:25 o’clock p.m. 


