



















































Hansard: February 16, 1948


 

1 

 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Tenth Legislature 

Day 7 

 

Monday, February 16, 1948 

 

The House met at 3 o‘clock. 

 

DEBATE DEFERRED 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Before proceeding to the Order, ―Special Order‖, the consent of the House to a certain 

arrangement is necessary. 

 

I have been informed that a tentative agreement has been reached by representatives of both sides of the 

House whereby debate on the proposed amendment of Mr. Danielson (Arm River) to the motion of Mr. 

Feeley (Canora) for the Address in Reply would be deferred until Wednesday‘s sitting. 

 

If the House consents to this arrangement, I shall allow debate on the main motion to proceed on the 

understanding that hon. members participating in the debate between now and Wednesday‘s sitting shall 

not have exhausted their right to speak on the amendment when it is again proposed. 

 

In the circumstances, I think it would be better were I to defer my ruling on the amendment until we are 

ready to take up the matter. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the House that debate on the proposed amendment of Mr. Danielson be deferred 

until Wednesday‘s sitting? 

 

(Agreed) 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Continuation of Debate on Motion 

for Address in Reply 
 

The House resumed from Friday, February 13, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. 

Feeley (Canora) for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Minister of Education):  Mr. Speaker, in joining the debate on the main motion 

before the House I should like to, first of all, join with those who have extended congratulations to the 

Mover and the Seconder of the Motion. The member for Canora spoke with his usual ease and sincerity, 

in giving an excellent outline of the present government. The member from Hanley spoke, as he always 

does, out of a deep humanitarian feeling, and I think members will agree that the address of the member 

from Hanley on this occasion and the addresses which he has given on at least two other 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 2 

occasions when speaking on resolutions dealing with a planned production and distribution of food for 

the millions of the world, were indeed masterpieces. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition made reference to the retirement of the two hon. members to whom I have 

referred and also had reference to his own ‗resurrection‘ in the field of politics. I imagine that it must 

have come as a bit of a shock to whoever controls the destinies of the Liberal Party in the province, to 

discover that their newly and recently chosen Leader, Mr. Tucker, could not stand alone. Like the 

conspirators who planned the death of Caesar. I imagine they must have looked around and looked at the 

present Leader of the Opposition and said, with them, ―Oh, let us have him, for his gray hairs will 

purchase us a good opinion.‖ 

 

In general, the pattern of the criticism of the Opposition has been, first, an attempt to belittle the 

activities of the present government with regard to agriculture, and health, and social services, and 

education; secondly, they have tried, as always, to continue to ‗scare‘ people by dragging out the old, 

bewhiskered charge of socialist centralization, regimentation and control. It is a matter of surprise, I 

think, that the Leader of the Opposition should, this year, as he did last year, attempt to belittle the value 

of a service such as the Agricultural Representative service. One can only surmise that he does not 

believe that the farmers of the province both want and need the latest available scientific information. I 

imagine that their attempts to belittle hospitalization, and health services, and other services, will be of 

little avail. Certainly when there is in every community in Saskatchewan someone like the person of 

whom I am thinking – almost every community, rather – someone like the person whose wife had to go 

to the hospital and remain there from the first of January until the end of July, or like a person who 

spoke to me recently telling me that his hospital and doctor bills over recent months would have been 

some $750, had it not been that he was in the Health Region and under the hospitalization plan – with 

people like that in many corners of Saskatchewan, then any attempts to belittle these plans will be of 

little avail. 

 

I imagine, too, that their attempts to convince the Old Age Pensioners of the province that a Liberal 

Government was and would be a great benevolent agency, will not succeed very well. Those Old Age 

Pensioners will remember the medical care and the hospitalization provided for them for the first time 

because of the activities of this government. The hon. Premier, in speaking the other day, had reference 

to the fact that these services were costing the rest of the people of the province something like $5.00 per 

Old Age Pensioner. Well, that may be the cost in terms of money, but it seems to me it is worth a great 

deal more than that to the Old Age Pensioners in terms of added security – in terms of the opportunity to 

live a little more free from fear than they could previously. Old Age Pensioners will remember also that 

it was not many years ago, under a Liberal Government in this province, when the amount of pension 

which they 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 3 

received was $25.00 a month; nor will they forget the refusal of the federal government, in spite of a 

surplus during the first ten months of this year‘s operation, of more than $740,000,000 in their treasury, 

to share more than a $30.00 a month pension. I think perhaps they will not forget that the present Leader 

of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan, who has been very vocal with regard to what a provincial Liberal 

government would do with regard to Old Age Pensions, has been surprisingly quiet in regard to what a 

federal government ought to do. 

 

Mr. Proctor (Moosomin):  On a point of Order: Is the hon. gentleman speaking to the amendment or 

to the main motion? 

 

Mr. Lloyd:  Mr. Speaker, I am speaking to the main motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  I think it would be just as well if the hon. member, in speaking to the main motion, 

refrain from dealing with old age pensions, as far as possible. 

 

Mr. Lloyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker: I have finished with my remarks on that point. 

 

It is, too, just a bit surprising to hear these valiant supporters of a so-called ‗free-enterprise‘ movement 

express concern with regard to centralization and control, because the entire history of the 

free-enterprise movement – so-called – is a story of centralization of economic power, controlled 

through the hands of a smaller and smaller group, and of regimentation because of the centralization of 

that economic power. The question is not now, and never has been, whether we are going to have 

controls or whether we are not going to have controls. The question is whether or not those controls 

shall be held by irresponsible financial institutions or whether they are going to be democratic controls, 

held and administered by democratically elected groups of people. 

 

The members have not been quite so frank in their statements as a speaker at the convention of the 

Association of Weekly Newspapers in the province of Manitoba some months ago. This speaker was 

holding forth the great benefits of the free-enterprise movement, and some of the dangers which he saw 

to it. He pointed out to the group there that in his opinion the two great sources of danger in Canada 

today to the free-enterprise movement were (1) the co-operative movement, and (2) the trade union 

movement. Now I think perhaps that is a very true statement of the situation – that in the co-operative 

movement and in the trade union movement there is a substantial danger to the free enterprise movement 

which hon. members opposite would like to defend. 

 

There was some criticism from them, too, of the provincial government for the non-removal of the 

Education Tax. They failed, however, to make any criticism of the federal government for maintaining a 

tax four times as great, on more goods. It seems to me that we should have the right to expect people 

holding such offices to be consistent. If it is right for the federal government to maintain an 8% sales tax 

then it should not be so very wrong for the provincial government, with much more limited finances, to 

maintain a 2% consumer‘s tax on some goods. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 4 

I think perhaps it might be mentioned here that such bodies as the Saskatchewan Teachers Federation, 

the Saskatchewan Trustees Association, have endorsed the Education Tax, and that while the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities did not endorse it in so many words, they did reject a 

resolution asking for its removal. 

 

During the course of the debate, there has been some reference to recent broadcasts by the Chamber of 

Commerce in Saskatchewan and in other provinces. I want briefly to refer to one of those broadcasts, 

which went something like this: 

 

―A man comes into a bookstore and puts down $1.50 for a book entitled ―How Green Was My Valley‖. 

The store owner replies that he has not the book in stock but he will order it for the customer. He 

comments that he does not keep a stock of books on hand as they are not dictating what people should 

read or should not read, but he will order what the customer wants. ―You vote for a book and we will 

order it for you – that is what free enterprise means‖, he said. ―You would not want a government 

bureau to designate what books you must or must not read. 

 

Well, I suppose that might be an example of free enterprise, providing, of course, there may be some 

limitations to the meaning of the word ‗free‘ by virtue of the natural restrictions on people to obtain 

books. 

 

I wanted to say something in regard to our library services in the province, chiefly the Public 

Information Library and the Travelling Library. As members probably know, readers of these two 

branches are asked to make suggestions as to books they would like to see added to the library. Just 

recently, within a matter of months, we had a request from a high school student in the province for 

information on a debate. The material was sent, the debate was won, and the library group received a 

fine letter of appreciation from this student. I wanted to mention that because the girl who wrote the 

letter was the daughter of Mr. Tucker. Perhaps what is even more interesting is the fact that in her letter 

she said she had not known about this service until she read about it in the Saskatchewan News. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank:  The ―News‖ gets around. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd:  There are some interesting figures with regard to the usage of books in the 

Travelling Library, and I shall give figures for 1943 and 1947. In 1943 the number of books circulated 

was some 26,400; in 1947 the number of books circulated by that branch was 60,000. Added to the 

library in 1943 were 964 books; in 1947 over 23,000 books; of these, 10,000 were the small, cheap 

pocket editions. Libraries sent out in 1943 were 588; in 1947, 1,500. In 1943, the new libraries during 

the entire year amounted to 56, and in one month of 1947, the month of November, 92 boxes were sent 

to new centres. That indicates a substantial growth in the use by the public of the service. 

 

There is a similar picture in regard to the use of the Public Information Library. Loaned during the year 

of 1943 were some 20,900 books; in 1947, 27,800. Add to the library in 1943, were 370; in 1947, 958. 

The number of new borrowers in 1943 was 676, and in 1947, 1,051. It is indeed gratifying to myself and 

to the 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 5 

members of the staff to see the growth of public interest and usage of these sources. 

 

Just within the last few years we have been doing some work with regard to the establishment of a 

Regional Library, or Regional Libraries, in the Province of Saskatchewan. Within the last month, a 

meeting of representatives of municipal and other groups was held in the city of Prince Albert, at which 

time they put themselves on record wishing to go ahead in that area with the organization of a Regional 

Library there. We hope that, before the end of the year, we might have the beginning of a Demonstration 

Regional Library in the area extending roughly from Shellbrook to Nipawin. 

 

I turn now to some discussion of the matter of the Larger Units of Administration. May I say first of all 

that there are 45 of these Units in the province, not 34 or 35, as the Leader of the Opposition suggested – 

these little inaccuracies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The criticism there has been about four-fold. They have criticized the method by which we have 

established Larger Units; they have criticized the method by which we have not established Larger 

Units. There was some question with regard to the use of surplus funds in the Larger Units, and there 

was some suggestion that the Larger Units were the cause of greatly increased taxation without 

commensurate services. 

 

With regard to the method of establishment: When the hon. member from Arm River was speaking on 

Friday, he seemed to view with considerable satisfaction the governments of Alberta and of British 

Columbia. I gather from his address he thought they were pretty good people, very good fellows. I think 

perhaps we might point out that in both of those provinces there was no vote in regard to establishing 

Larger Units, nor is there provision for a vote out of the Larger Unit. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  On a Point of Privilege I want to correct the hon. gentleman I never spoke of the 

government in Alberta or Manitoba in regard to Larger Units. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd:  That is quite correct, I did not suggest he had, I said he tended to view them with a 

great deal of favour. They were, in his opinion, good governments, he like what he had done. He did 

point out they were good ‗free enterprise‘ governments. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  I take an objection to the hon. gentlemen‘s deductions, in connection with anything I 

said. I never said one word in regard to my opinion about any government. I did not go as far as this 

government; I did not even say anything about Russia or the United States. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 6 

That is correct, Mr. Speaker, I expressed no opinion so far as I was concerned, to the merit of any 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker: The hon. member is quoting you of something you did not say? 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Mr. Speaker, my objection is this, that he is attributing to me a statement that I 

approved of the Government of Alberta and Manitoba. I never said anything like it and he knows I 

never. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  In regard to the Hansard, if it were up-to-date. This question then could be resolved; 

but if the hon. member says he did not make these statements, the hon. member must accept it. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd:  Mr. Speaker, I am quite willing to accept the hon. member‘s explanation. The 

second point of criticism was in regard to the fact that in 15 of the areas in the province, a petition has 

been received for a vote on the Larger Unit and this vote has not been held. I have on at least one other 

occasion explained why the vote has not been held in those areas. However, I am pleased to repeat two 

of the reasons that I have previously given. One was that in connection with the establishment of some 

45 Units in the province, there is a great deal of work and has kept the members of my staff busy and 

they have not been able to give the Unit Boards the service which they would have liked. The second 

reason is, that by virtue of the petitions in these areas, the people indicated they were not as ready to 

proceed with the establishment of the Units as in other areas. We felt that it is only fair to them to be 

able to put before them, when we ask them to vote on the matter, the actual record of what is happening 

in other Larger Units in the Province of Saskatchewan. Those are the two reasons why the vote has not 

been given. 

 

With regard to the surplus funds of local districts. The situation is that when a Unit is established, if 

there is a surplus of each or bonds or securities on hand over and above that to meet current liabilities, 

then that surplus is placed to the credit of that particular district, on the books of the Unit Board. When 

the Leader of the Opposition had reference to a district with $2,000 in cash taken by the Unit Board, he 

should have added ―taken by the Unit Board and placed to the credit of that local district on the books of 

the Unit.‖ 

 

Mr. Patterson:  May that $2,000 be utilized by the Larger School Unit Board in connection with its 

operations and administrations outside of the district it belongs to? 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd:  Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition will be patient, I am coming to that 

point briefly. There are three uses to which that money may be put; it may be spent for the provision of 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 7 

additional equipment or facilities in that school district. It may be spent for building improvements or 

new buildings in that school district, or spent for the purpose of paying off debenture payments in that 

district. Now the use of these funds for… 

 

Mr. Patterson:  It may not be used for any other than those three purposes? 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd:  Mr. Speaker, I am coming to the point as I told the hon. member just a minute 

ago. 

 

Premier Douglas:  No one interrupted the hon. Leader of the Opposition when he was speaking. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Oh yes! I was interrupted, and the Hansard shows it; but the hon. member told us he 

was going to explain this, then he said there were three purposes for which it would be used. He has 

enunciated the three purposes, are those all there are? 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd:  I have also said, Mr. Speaker, I have not finished my explanation. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  The hon. member speaking says he is not finished with this subject. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd:  There is no restriction against the Unit Board making use of the cash so available 

for purposes of temporary usage. That is they may, in effect, borrow from that fund, and I think it is 

perhaps not too bad a business to borrow from that fund then to go to an outside agency and borrow, or 

they may use that as security in borrowing from the banks. In some cases Units have made such use of 

those funds, in other cases they have not, but the fact remains that to the credit of every local district that 

had a surplus fund, the amount not used up in any of the three purposes which I enumerated must remain 

on the books of the Unit. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  The question I would like to ask is this: the hon. member has very clearly told us 

what happens to the money in a district that has a credit or money to put into the fund, but what happens 

to a district, or where do they get the money, which has no surplus money to put into the reserve account 

and then need additional services for their school? 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd:  In regard to that situation, the services are provided out of the general fund of the 

Unit obtained from taxation and school grants, and that, of course, is an excellent procedure, it is part of 

the basis of the Larger Unit that within that area there shall be a sharing of educational costs so there 

may be quality of educational opportunities. I have not the slightest doubt but that the member from 

Arm River does not believe in that. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 8 

The question also was raised in regard to how this money might be paid back if some Units were 

disbanded. First of all I think it is extremely unlikely that any of the Units will be disbanded if they are 

judged on the basis of their educational value. I have not much doubt but that some politicians will try 

their best to try and destroy the structure of the Unit. But the great majority of the funds in such cases 

will have been used up in the districts in the Unit. Secondly the Unit will have some funds either on 

hand or some funds due because of unpaid grants or unpaid taxes. And thirdly, the Unit will have other 

assets, assets such as their office buildings, their repair shop and new equipment. 

 

There has frequently been an attempt to persuade people that because areas were organized as Units the 

taxes of the whole area must, of course, go up. Now, I would like for a while this afternoon to just ask 

the members of the House to look at the books of a Unit which includes 100 school districts, and to look 

at the total budget of 100 districts operating outside of a Unit. Now there is only one of place in that 

budget or that list of expenditures in which there will be more money required by the Unit than by the 

other area. I should have also said I am assuming that both areas are paying the same salaries and 

providing the same services, even though the one area cannot do that in this case. There is one case only, 

in which the district operating as unit will be greater than the cost of the 100 districts operating as a 

non-unit and that place is in administration. That is, the Unit has a central office and the local districts 

will not have a central office, and that is an added expense. There will be some expense connected with 

the Unit board members attending their monthly meetings, the local boards will not have that expense. 

Outside of those rather small items, in the field of administration there are no excess costs. It is true you 

have a secretary-treasurer of the Unit; but it is true that in the other you have a total salary of 100 

secretary-treasurers. It is true that you will have the cost of auditing in the Unit; you will have the cost of 

auditing 100 individual districts in the non-unit area. 

 

As a matter of fact, the administration costs in a Unit are, roughly, in the ratio of five to four to those 

outside of the Unit. 

 

The 1946 Annual returns received in the Department of Education indicate that there are $81 per pupil 

taxes paid in the Unit during that year, including rural, village and some town schools. In the same year, 

there was an average of $81 per pupil taxes in the non-unit rural, village and town schools, and there 

was an average of $90 per pupil taxes in the non-Unit rural areas along. The overall increase then in 

costs is not due merely to the fact that the area is organized as a unit. In some districts within the unit, 

those districts of high assessment, it is true that there will be a considerable increase in costs because of 

the Unit organization there, and that is the principle which I think is worthwhile establishing. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 9 

But on the other hand it is also true that there have been rather substantial increases in cost in the 

carrying out of educational duties throughout the province. I think we need to look at some of the 

reasons. One reason is, of course, the increase in teachers‘ salaries. There has been an increase 

amounting to something over $2,000,000 in total teachers‘ salaries. The increase probably is not large 

enough, Mr. Speaker, but there has been an increase. There has been a considerable amount of building 

and repairing done throughout the province. May I suggest that it is not the fault of the unit or not the 

fault of the present government that there were so many buildings that needed rebuilding or extensive 

repairing and renovating. The increased cost of material and services is a very large consideration. I 

happen to have here a summary made by one of the units in this province, the Saskatoon East School 

Unit, indicating the rise in school costs over the period of 1942 to 1946. Roughly, the situation is this, 

that the cost of fuel during those years practically doubled. The cost of janitor services doubled. The 

amount paid out in teachers‘ salaries increased by something over 75 per cent. Now, if one compares a 

non-unit area with a unit area, one gets a rather interesting picture. 

 

I want to spend a moment in comparing the non-unit area of Rosthern with the unit area of Saskatoon 

East. The two areas are adjoining. Over this period, 194 to 1946, we find this, that the amount paid out 

in teachers‘ salaries in the non-unit area increased by 50 per cent; in the unit area, increased by 75 per 

cent. The amount paid out in repairs to buildings, increased in the non-unit area 250 per cent; in the unit 

area 330 per cent. The amount paid out for libraries decreased in the non-unit area, by 20 per cent and 

increased in the unit area by 800 per cent. Those are some of the reasons why costs are, of necessity, 

going up. I might consider the building program in another unit; the larger unit of Nipawin, which shows 

this: there have been twelve new one-room schools built; there have been five two-room schools built; 

there has been one six-room school built, and there has been, in addition to that, some nineteen 

classrooms added to existing buildings; a total of approximately fifteen new classrooms made available. 

Now, when it is necessary for an area to do that amount of work, then naturally, it is going to cost more 

money. The interesting part about this unit is this, that in spite of that work, and in spite of other 

improvements that were made, the actual amount of taxes levied last year was less than the amount of 

taxes collected in the year before the unit was in operation, because the equalization affected the unit 

itself and because of the equalization advance of the government. We will finally go back to the 

comparison between the non-unit area and the unit area, just for a moment. In addition to those 

increases, the… 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 10 

The unit also gives this service; free textbooks for all students up to Grade XII; 50¢ a day for pupils of 

rural districts taking high school work in villages; more adequate playground equipment; free exercise 

books, pencils, drawing material and other supplies; hot lunch equipment for the schools, and the School 

Board closes its statement by saying this: ―These are extra services provided by the unit and which are 

of great benefit to all children‖. Is that not the test? I think most of us would answer with a very fervent 

―yes‖ to that question. 

 

I think, perhaps too, we might point here the increase in cost with regard to building, is not alone 

because of the need for new schools. A very substantial reason for that increase is because of the greatly 

increased cost of building supplies, and I think that the Federal Government is not without responsibility 

in this field, having lifted the ceiling price from these building supplies. This situation is not finished. 

According to a report in Saturday‘s Leader-Post, we may expect further increases in the cost of building, 

next year, ranging from 20 to 25 per cent above a year ago. This in turn will add a heavier burden to the 

school units and other school districts in the Province of Saskatchewan. Now, in order that I may place 

before certain members, such as the hon. member for Rosthern, who intimated that he had looked for 

improvements with regard to the larger unit and had been unable to find them, I want to read some 

twelve or fifteen points which have been taken from reports sent in by the superintendents of schools in 

the province. These are ways in which they feel the larger unit has benefited their area: 

 

1. Uniformly improved school sanitation. 
 

2. Basic and circulating libraries, and improved library service to rural schools. 
 

3. A school maintenance repair and painting program. 
 

4. Salary schedules for teachers. 
 

5. High school assistance grants, scholarships, and payment of high school fees (They say that all 
the units with the exception of two, provide assistance for rural students going to high school, in 

one form or another. 

 

6. Helping teachers, and improved supervision through teachers‘ institutes. 
 

7. An extensive and systematic program of new school buildings and teacherages. 
 

8. Rehabilitation of school buildings, plant and equipment. 
 

9. Enabling of districts of low assessment to operate more effectively. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 11 

10. Economies in securing supplies through bulk purchases, and the uniform provision of school 
supplies. 

 

11. Paying off old indebtedness. (It is interesting to note here that for every $1.00 in 1946, that was 
paid off by non-unit rural areas, the larger units paid off $7.00 of old indebtedness). 

 

12. More satisfactory placement of teaching staff. 
 

13. A special music teacher. 
 

14. A guidance program. 
 

15. Facilities for vocational education. 
 

16. Audio-visual teachers. 
 

One Unit has placed some twenty film strip projectors in its schools. Another one has purchased some 

35 combination radio and record players in its schools. Two of the Units are providing scholarships for 

teachers employed by the Unit, to encourage them to go to summer school at university and so improve 

their qualifications. One of them has employed an Industrial Arts teacher who will give a five weeks‘ 

intensive course at some seven or eight points within the Unit. I think perhaps of special interest is what 

may be done in regard to a testing program. There is in education, Mr. Speaker, a great many testing 

devices for testing, diagnosing, which may be used to good advantage. When the area is not in a Unit, 

the superintendent in his work would have to get each individual Board to purchase the same kind of 

testing material and the same kind of remedial material, etc. It can be done in a planned way in a Unit; 

the one Board can supply the material necessary. It is of tremendous value in helping to assess the work 

of the educational program in that particular area. 

 

I should have mentioned this in regard to the building program. There has been set a large building 

program; the important point to be stressed is that the buildings are paid for without the issuance of 

debentures. In other words, the area is not in debt for the next thirty years, for payment of those costs. 

 

I want to read just two further comments with regard to the larger Units. The first is taken from the 

address of an inspector of schools in the neighbouring province of Manitoba. He is the inspector in 

charge of the one larger Unit in that province, and in addressing the Trustees‘ Convention in that 

province last year, he said this: ―The plan is not perfect, but it is superior to anything ever before seen in 

Manitoba‖. The second comment is one made by one of our own superintendents – a man who has been 

on the staff for some six years, so he was not an appointee of this government, Saskatchewan and he 

said this: ―In general, I should say that our advance, although not spectacular, is steady. Three years in a 

non-unit and three years in a Unit have given me a good chance to compare the two, and without 

hesitation I should say that the balance in favour of the Unit, when measured in terms of a better 

educational deal for the children, is overwhelming‖. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 12 

The problem of an adequate supply of adequately trained teachers continues to be our major problem 

insofar as education is concerned. In the Province of Saskatchewan, on any one day, we have 

approximately 7,500 teachers. In 1947 this group of teachers broke down in this way – something more 

than 700 had one or more university degrees: more than 600 had a complete year of Normal School 

training and at least one year of university: something more than 5,000 had an interim first certificate or 

better; in other words, they had Grade XII and one year of protectional training at the Normal School, 

but almost 1,000 of our group of 7,500 were teaching on a temporary certificate. That, I suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, is a serious situation. The fact that there is a similar situation in other provinces, and in many of 

the states of the unit of the United States, only serves to make the problem more serious. Here in 

Saskatchewan, the difficulty is accentuated by virtue of the fact that we have an abnormally large 

number of schools in proportion to our population. It is of interest to note that we have more one-room 

rural schools in Saskatchewan than have the provinces of Alberta and Manitoba combined. That makes 

our problem more difficult. The problem, I think, is not one of recruitment. Approximately 25 per cent 

of the 1947 Grade XII graduates came either to the Normal Schools of the province or to the University 

College of Education. The problem lies rather in the loss of teachers from the profession – now this less 

has varied over the years, but it has always been great. In 1936, the year in which the loss, I think, was 

the least, there 854 teachers left the profession. In 1923, the year in which, I think, it was greatest, there 

were 2,321 teachers not teaching, who had taught the year before. 

 

Taking one-year averages, from 1920 to 1924, 1,964 teachers a year left; from 1930 to 1934, 1,477 

teachers left; from 1940 to 1944, 1,568 left the profession in a year. In 1947 we lost about 1,200. In 

other words there are some 1,200 teachers who were teaching before the end of June last year, who did 

not come back to the schools in the fall. Now, this loss is compensated for by new teachers, by teachers 

returning to the profession, and the few teachers who come in from other provinces. From 1913 to 1947, 

this province has trained more than 29,000 teachers, and as I noted today, we have 1,000 on temporary 

certificate. There are a number of reasons for this loss, and one of the chief reasons, of course, is that a 

great many of them do get married. When we have a large percentage of women teachers, I suppose that 

is only to be expected. I sometimes think, Mr. Speaker, that one of the great contributions which 

education has made to the province, is in the supplying of so many wives to so many farmers. There is 

not doubt but what the salary level, when compared to the income earnable in other occupations, is one 

of the reasons why people leave the profession. It is true too that the comparative isolation of many of 

the schools, and the difficulty of obtaining a boarding place in those areas is a factor. Now, I wonder 

perhaps 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 13 

if there is not an under-rated factor in that, perhaps all of us have not sufficiently recognized the 

importance of education. The situation which we have today, can be improved and will be improved in a 

number of ways. The increasing salaries are, of course, a factor. We do have, in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, one of the best superannuation plans for teachers, of any province in Canada. The salary 

schedules, which have been accepted by every unit and which are being accepted by more and more 

towns, do hold an inducement which serves to keep teachers in the profession. The larger unit itself, by 

virtue of it being a possible promotion area, because it can make possible for representatives of teachers 

to particular in the work of planning education in that area, will be a factor: but everything possible 

needs to be done to attempt to stabilize the profession. 

 

I return now to charges which were made at this Session, by the Leader of the Opposition, similar to 

charges which several members attempted to make at the last Session, of using schools as the medium 

for political propaganda. I suggest to you that those charges were not substantiated; as a matter of fact, 

nobody except the hon. Leader of the Opposition, the hon. member from the Mediterranean, the hon. 

member from Rosthern and Mr. Tucker, seem to have been very exercised about them; but just in 

support of my point of view, I wish to place on the record a statement which appeared in the Leader-Post 

on February 24, 1947. It is a statement that tell of a meeting of the teachers in the Secondary Schools of 

the city of North Battleford and the town of Battleford. Anything of that kind would embrace people of 

all political faiths and of all religions. This group, because of the attempted storm by some members 

here – and one member not here, surprisingly – analyzed the test and has this to say: ―Members of the 

Secondary School Education Institute have found nothing controversial or contrary to the best interests 

of education, in the text-book ―The World Today‖. I simply mention that, not to revive the discussion, 

but because last year there were attempts to make this same charge, which has not been substantiated. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, this year, follows it up by statements with regards to the appointment of 

the present Duty Minister. the hon. Premier in speaking, dif refer to ―Little Sir Echo‖ as the echo of Mr. 

Gardiner in Ottawa. In this particular case, however, he is not even the echo of Mr. Gardiner; simply the 

echo of Mr. Staines, who made the first statement, very similar to the one he made in the Leader-Post. It 

must be very confusing, Mr. Speaker, that knowing who to echo when. 

 

Reference was made in his charge to former Deputies of the Department of Education. I should like to 

point out that one whom he names – Mr. Ross – was never a Deputy under a Liberal Government. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 14 

I should like to pay tribute to the service of Mr. Ross for some thirty years of service in the educational 

system of this province. Like the Leader of the Opposition, I do not know whether these men were all 

Liberals or not. They may have been at that time…in the words of one of Gilbert and Sullivan‘s operas: 

―Every child born into this world alive is either a Liberal or a Conservative‖, and I cannot see the 

members of that Government appointing a Conservative to the Post, so perhaps they might have been 

Liberals. I am prepared to say this, however, that I know, while they might have been Liberals now. 

They too have opened their eyes. 

 

His reference to the present Deputy was that his only qualification was that he had once been a C.C.F. 

candidate. Well, this is quite true that he was – not in 1938, but in 1934. These little inaccuracies again! 

But it does not seem to me that there is any disgrace attached to having been a seeker for a Seat in this 

Legislature. As a matter of fact, I would be inclined to feel that there is some honour to it; but the 

particular honour in this case when in a contest in which one of the Opposition was a Cabinet Minister 

and the other one was going to be a Cabinet Minister; are men who run for public office to be penalized 

because of their particular in one of democracy‘s basic operations? This is certainly most unfortunate if 

that should be the case. However, I think that charges from such a source will neither surprise nor 

influence the people of Saskatchewan. Many of the people of Saskatchewan will remember the 

Shellbrook by-election; they will remember that, at that time, the Liberal Party circulated a sheet of 

paper, drawing to the attention of the people in that constituency, a number of, they called them 

―Political Hacks and Heelers‖ that the Government had appointed. Included in that list of ―Political 

Hacks and Heelers‖, we found people like this: Dean Cronkite of the University; Dr. George Britnell of 

the University; Dr. Balfour Kirkpatrick of S.R.N.; Mr. A.M. Derby, of my Department; Dr. Spencer, at 

that time of the Cancer Clinic in the city of Saskatoon. These are the people – these hon. gentleman who 

were referred to as ―Political Hacks and Heelers‖. So undoubtedly Mr. McCallum is in pretty good 

company in being in that group. I should like to pay tribute to my present staff; I am more than a little 

proud of them. We have a large number of very capable men and women. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition need not think that by this means he will stir up strife and jealousy. I am 

sure that the staff will not be affected by that kind of political demagoguery indulged in by the Leader of 

the Opposition, last week. Perhaps, since the subject has been brought up, we ought to examine the 

qualifications of a good satisfactory Deputy Minister of Education. I would say that first of all he should 

have intellectual capacity. He should have a broad academic and professional background. He should 

have experience, 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 15 

and experience not too far removed, in the sc system of the province. He should have administrative 

ability; including the ability to work with a large and a versified staff; and he certainly needs the ability 

to meet effectively groups of teachers and trustees and other bodies interested in education in the 

province. Lastly, but by no means least, he should have as good an understanding as possible of the 

basic problems of the people of this province and of the people themselves; and I would add, preferably, 

a background of life on the farm and contact with farm life. I am quite content that I have all of those 

qualifications in my present Deputy. It is true, he has not been in the Department of Education for very 

long, but he has spent almost twenty years in educational work in the rural, village, town and city school 

systems of the province. He has a farm background and a contact with farm groups and with other 

groups that lead to an appreciation of their problems; two university degrees and including some work in 

law; a Bachelor of Education degree, obtained with great distinction from the College of Education in 

Saskatchewan; a completion of approximately fifty per cent of the work required for a doctor‘s degree in 

education, at Columbia University – that institution where he once taught a very large class. 

 

Those qualifications, academically and professionally, add up to better qualifications than possessed by 

any of the Deputy Ministers referred to by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, and I may say that I was 

more than a little surprised to hear this criticism of the appointment of a veteran. Mr. McCallum has five 

years of service in the Administrative, Intelligence and Educational work in the army in Canada and 

overseas. Now, I think it is more than a little surprising that such criticism should be offered. 

 

I am quite content with the training and the ability of the present Deputy, and I am more than certain that 

his appointment is acceptable to those groups and individuals in the province, who are really interested 

in the welfare of education. I suppose that one should not be too surprised at the Leader of the 

Opposition voicing such charges as these, however. He has had a considerable degree of experience and 

I suppose while I pointed out that the present Deputy has many qualifications for his position; but if one 

were to ask the Leader of the Opposition did he and his Government ever make any appointments of 

people to positions purely and solely because of their political past, he might answer again like the 

Gilbert and Sullivan Opera. He would probably say no, never; well, hardly ever! It is true that,… 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 16 

As I intimated before, educational costs in the province have increased. So, of course, have the costs of 

everything else. It is a little difficult to understand why people think that in a service involving as many 

other services as does education, that the cost should remain constant when the cost of everything else is 

going up. for the same reason that the cost of operating one‘s farm or one‘s business or one‘s home has 

increased, so has the cost of operating the schools; but it is interesting that the Opposition, while they 

can be very vocal on a point such as this, can be so very silent on other increasing costs. 

 

I have yet to hear one of them, for example, say anything about the increase of 12½% on the cost of 

farm machinery, which the federal government allowed a few months ago. I have yet to hear them say 

anything about the increase in the cost of petroleum products because of the removal of the federal 

government‘s subsidy and the action of the oil companies. They do not criticize that. I have yet to hear 

them criticize because of the federal government removing the milk subsidy, even after the Members of 

the House of Commons voted, asking them to retain it, and thereby an increase in the price of milk. I 

have yet to hear them say anything about the increasing cost of building materials – lumber and nails 

and so on – they have been very silent on that. I have yet to hear them say anything with regard to the 

federal government‘s recent imposition of a 25% excise tax. It seems very odd that their criticism should 

be levelled entirely at increases in costs, when people with to purchase themselves better services. 

 

I think it worthwhile that we just see what the present government has done to help meet those costs. For 

the year ending April 30, 1944 – I am taking that year, because that is the last complete year during 

which the hon. members of the Opposition, and the Party which they represent, had control of the budget 

of this province, — in that year, the provincial government assistance to schools was roughly 

$2,750,000. I might say that in that year the Education Tax was more than $4,000,000, and while they 

had budgeted for $3,000,000, they spent, actually, only $2,750,000 for total assistance to schools in the 

year ending April 30, 1944. 

 

The estimates for the present year, ending March 31, 1948, show these expenditures, proposed 

expenditures, and the money will be spent: 

 

In grants, four million, eight hundred and some thousand dollars; for the maintenance of schools in the 

northern part of this province, $98,168; for free textbooks, which of course relieves the local people of 

making that expenditure, $38,000 – and that is too low; for assistance in school buildings, $200,000; and 

for assistance to those school districts taking advantage of Dominion-Provincial grants, for providing 

vocational facilities, $300,000; the total sum then available for assistance to school districts this year, 

Mr. Speaker, $5,455,568. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 17 

Now, remember, that for the year ended April 30, 1944, the expenditure of the Liberal Government was 

$2,750,000. 

 

The amount of money available in grants, in money to keep the schools of the northern area operating, 

free textbooks, and assistance for building school buildings, and in assistance for those schools taking 

advantage of the Dominion-Provincial Vocational Education Agreement, a sum of $5,455,658, or an 

increase of almost 100%; and that money has been distributed on the basis of equalization. 

 

The Liberal Party has made, as one would expect, some promises with regard to education. They have 

talked about removing the Education Tax. They have promised lower taxes, they have promised to 

increase the expenditures for teachers‘ salaries; one of their candidates is even promising that the 

government will carry 50% of the cost of education. Now, Mr. Speaker, to carry 50% of the cost of 

education in the province today, at the present level of expenditure, would require another 

(approximately) $6,000,000 on behalf of the government. To assume 50% of the present cost, and to 

remove the Education Tax, would involve about $11,000,000; and that does not provide for any of the 

additional expenditures which they say they are gong to make. So that makes $11,000,000 at least, then 

to be obtained – where? Out of the Dominion subsidy, which, in net, is worth less than $4,000,000 to the 

province, more than the subsidy last paid when a Liberal Government was in power. It seems to me that 

the people who make that kind of promise either do not know the facts or are attempting to mislead the 

public. 

 

It is true, again, that cost have gone up. There is this point – that the larger units, and the equalization 

grants, have kept the costs down in those area which could least afford to pay higher costs. The 

equalization grant to the Hudson Bay Junction Unit, for example, is worth, to that Unit, 22 mills of 

taxation; to the Meadow Lake Unit, the equalization grant is worth 19 mills of taxation; to the Turtleford 

Unit, 12 mills of taxation; to the Sturgis Unit, 12 mills of taxation; to the Prince Albert Unit, 11.8 mills 

of taxation; and so on down the list. 

 

I think it is a matter of some regret that some people, for the sake of political expediency, see fit to so 

talk as to discourage the spending of money on education, and I suggest that that is the effect which 

statements such as those made by the hon. member for Arm River, when he talked about a tax strike, 

have. They actually have the effect of discouraging people from spending money on education. To all 

the members, Government and ops alike, I want to commend this poem for their consideration: 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 18 

―The wealth of the world isn‘t silver or gold 

Or diamonds or rubies its caverns may hold; 

Or the trees in its wood, or the power in its pools; 

The wealth of the world is today in its schools. 

For nothing has value which lies in our ken 

Without the high thinking of women and men. 

When you‘ve added the dollars and measured the ore 

Take stock of the children that play at your door; 

For the wealth of the world which on paper you pen, 

Is as dirt by your feet without God-fearing men, 

And the strength of the nation lies not in its guns 

But deep in the mind of its daughters and sons.‖ 

 

Mr. H. O. Hansen (Wilkie):  May I first of all congratulate the Mover and Seconder on their very 

fine speeches in Reply. I think the fine job they did is a credit to themselves, their constituents and to 

this House. I regret the fact that they are not coming back after the next election. That is particularly true 

of the hon. member for Canora whom I have known so well and so favourably, for so long. He id d a 

great work in the people‘s movement, in every phase of it, including the political, and I know that while 

he is leaving political life, he will continue to do what he can. He did such a good job the other day, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition failed to congratulate him on his speech, a courtesy usually 

shown in this House. 

 

The second day, Mr. Speaker, we spent much of our time feeling sorry for ourselves, and in regrets that 

certain people had passed on who had been of service to their province and to their church. I am not in 

disagreement with that at all – I believe that is as it should be. We even used the words ―profound loss‖, 

and that might be correct too. But it was left to the hon. member for Canora to mention the loss of a 

great man whose influence was felt – shall I say – in Church and State, among hundreds, millions of 

people – Mohandas K. Gandhi. We cannot measure such a loss. He was a great man, yet humble. 

 

This afternoon I am going to refer to some notes which I took while the Leader of the Opposition was 

speaking, and while I may mention the Leader of the Opposition a number of times I do not refer to him 

in particular, but rather to the group that he leads and to the capitalist party for whom he and his group 

speak. I took these notes in the hope that I would get something constructive, that might be of assistance 

to us and to the Government, and were it a matter of constructive criticism I would have very little on 

paper at the conclusion of his remarks. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 19 

I decided to make a note of most of the things the Leader of the Opposition says, and I have some 20 

criticisms and nothing in the way of anything constructive. 

 

Now I am not saying that is the function of a party in opposition, but they continue to criticize without 

offering something of a constructive nature. I would be ashamed of the CCF, sitting in opposition if this 

was all they could do, in this House or any other House. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition spoke of the Speech being of great length and containing 

capitalist-socialist theories, whatever that is, and being as I did not understand the term, I could not find 

it in the Speech. Then he accused the CCF of playing petty politics and he groped about in his batch of 

small potatoes and brought up the fact that the reeve of Warman, who is now the Liberal candidate, had 

been opposed because, as the record said, he had dared to accept the Liberal nomination, and I am 

quoting from Debates and Proceedings, February 10. Well, Mr. Speaker, I am not acquainted with 

Warman or what the temperament of the CCF people in that community is; but generally speaking, CCF 

people do not stoop to such things. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity to refer to my own constituency, where, after the election, and due 

to a long Liberal representation in the constituency, a lot of people expected everyone who was getting 

government pay would lose his job. Some CCF‘ers thought the same thing, I wish we could please 

everybody, but of course ‗in the multitude of conquerors there is wisdom‘, and the majority decided that 

was not gong to be the case. 

 

I want to refer particularly to the Liberal candidate who was and is one of the highway patrol men. He 

was doing a good job and we decided that no one in that constituency should lose his job. Only recently, 

Mr. Speaker, has his reappointment been confirmed, but, it has been said, he does not expect to win 

anyway so he may as well hang onto the job. 

 

I notice there is one thing the Leader of the Opposition is happy about, and that was the Royal Wedding, 

and we are all happy about that particularly if the Princess is happy with the husband she has chosen. 

 

He looked abroad and commended the United States for their giving to the nations of the world that are 

in need. I do not know what the Marshall Plan is, I have never seen it written, but we do talk about a 

Marshall Plan, and that people of the world who are in dire need are going to get assistance under it. He 

commended them for being willing to give of their wealth to people whom they had defeated. Well, I do 

not know that there is anything new in that, I think the capitalist class throughout the world at all times 

have given assistance to those who are in need. Think of the time of the 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 20 

slave state in the United States, a slave law was made in order that they might work for the capitalist 

class. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition made reference to the fact that some of the people spoke of United States 

Imperialism. I have also heard the terms ―Dolls‖ Fascism, and fascism connected with the administration 

of that country. Now, when anyone refers to the United States, particularly in this instance, they do not 

think about the people of the United States; they think about the administration. And the temperament of 

the people of a nation is not always reflected in the administration of that country but rather the birth and 

promises of the party from the time it took office. Today, when I say anything about the administration 

of the United States, I am not talking about the people, because I sometimes wonder if the people 

realized what they were doing when the present administration took office in that nation. As I said 

before, I am glad of anything that might come out of the Marshall Plan in the way of relief for the 

hungry people of the world. 

 

But I want to make mention of a few instances as to why people ask questions and wonder what is 

behind all of it; whether there is anything interesting about it. I have not the clipping here, but those of 

you who read the ‗Star Phoenix‘ shortly before Christmas will remember that it gave an array of United 

States Garrisons, Army, Navy and Air Force, which ring the world, and gave the personality of these 

chaps who were to be far away from home for the Christmas holidays. That is one. I have a few 

newspaper dispatches here, one from Athens, Greece, dated January 9, by the British United Press: 

―Which way is army aid going from the United States?‖ ―Twenty-one American officers, a Brigadier 

General, and 20 Lieutenant Colonels will arrive within a few days to advise the Greek army how to 

clean out the Guerrillas‖. We in Canada are sending men into China to help kill the people of China, 

while I suppose at the same time under the Marshall Plan, some of them are going to be fed. A great 

contradiction to capitalism. 

 

―Great movements of the people in these nations are called communists. I am sure these great 

movements of people do not know anything about communism, and they are not concerned with it. 

What they are concerned about is their livelihood, and so they organize that they might get it. They are 

called communists, and we send armaments and trained men to help kill them.‖ 

 

Further on in the same dispatch you will find this, that the Greek army had already got some 

$96,000,000 worth of supplies from the United States, and would soon get 40,000 more British rifles 

costing $3,000,000; $99,000,000 worth of armaments to a country that needs bread! 

 

Mr. Danielson:  I would like to ask him if he has any information on the number of British troops in 

Greece today. 

 

Mr. H.O. Hansen:  I do not know at the moment. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 21 

―Submarines to Turkey‖; it was in the January 9 Associated Press,‖ the United States sent to Turkey four 

fleet-type submarines and navy crews and they delivered them to a Turkish port. The submarines are 

among 15 native vessels of various types which the navy announced are being transferred under the 

$100,000,000 Turkish Air program voted by the last session of Congress. The announcement came 

while 1,000 marines are en route to strengthen crews aboard United States war ships in the 

Mediterranean.‖ Now, Mr. Speaker, some people see an announcement of that kind and wonder just 

what is behind the plan of the General who failed so miserably in China. He was sent to China to bring 

peace to that nation, and did nothing of the kind. 

 

I notice that the Leader of the Opposition does not like the Nollets and the Sturdys, the Lloyds and the 

Coldwells. Well, I would be surprised if he did; and if he did I would begin to wonder as to whether or 

not the CCF was a kind of organization I thought it was and what it would be. the very fact that he 

would pick them out is to me an indication that they are still doing a good job in the people‘s movement 

and gives me a little more courage and determination to go on. If the people in this Legislature, who 

speak of the Capitalistic class and their friends, if they do not hear through the Press and over the radio, 

criticisms of the people‘s movement, particularly to leadership, I would think there was something 

wrong and the people‘s movement was slipping. So I am glad to hear him criticize in that way. 

 

In the case where he stands, it also indicates that the leaders among us are still doing a job. The Leader 

of the Opposition spoke about the Geneva agreements, and he indicated that would mean increased 

trade. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is still to be seen, we wonder if it will give us increased trade, decreased 

trade, or what it will give us. At the present time we are not able to buy from the United States in the 

way we would like to, because of the restrictions placed on United States‘ dollars. However, we could 

trade with Great Britain, farmers in particular are concerned in getting rid of our grain, our wheat, and 

ship to Great Britain, our greatest customer, but because there is a certain clause in one of the Geneva 

Agreements which need not be applied till 1949 or even later, we cannot take goods from Great Britain 

as we would like to, or as we should, because we might offend against the administration of the United 

States. 

 

Mr. Abbott made it quite clear in the House of Commons at Ottawa, I have not the Hansard, but I did 

read that. Only recently he made another statement to the effect that the United States now has been a 

great and good neighbour and never restricted any goods coming in during the war. Why should they? 

They were making money, and we were carrying the ball for them. I say again, as to whether the Geneva 

Agreement may increase trade is something we have to witness. 

 

It is a conciliation that some elections in France indicate that there is a turn to the right. Well, I cannot 

understand the contradiction of Capitalism how at one time, can laud a person who was leading the 

people against Fascism and now is leading them back to Fascism. As a matter of fact it is something we 

should despair of as the people of France now seem to be turning to the right. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 22 

I noticed, too, that they criticize us for giving seed a free freight rate, as a matter of fact, not for giving 

the assistance, but because we did not give more – I do not know whether we should give the farmers 

the seed as well. I think this is a peculiar situation, in view of the fact that the Leader of the Opposition, 

when he was speaking, said that we had a poor crop in many areas of Saskatchewan, nevertheless 

bonuses were in full operation in those areas; people were going to get money out of participation 

certificates, and the price of cattle was good. There were indications that their returns from these 

sources, altogether, would be pretty fair. I can but conclude from that, that if we had a Liberal 

administration, they would not even pay freight on the seed to those areas. As a matter of fact, Mr. 

Speaker, from past performance, I am convinced that that is the truth. And so, if we are able, through the 

Department of Agriculture, or whatever Department it might be, to give some freight rate assistance, I 

think it is something to be commended, even if the return to the farmer is not as good as indicated by the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

I noticed in a recent article in the press that while the price of cattle has been very good, or 

comparatively good for this country, at least, that the producers of livestock are not altogether satisfied 

with conditions as they are; and I believe they have a very just grievance. The hon. members will 

remember that when the Federal Government decided to re-impose price controls, they did it on the 

products of the farm, and on meat and butter in particular. It had been re-imposed at a high level, and I 

do not think anyone would have, complained, not even the dairy farmers, even if the price was reduced, 

if everything had been reduced accordingly. But they have a just complaint when ceilings are put n the 

product of their labour without corresponding ceilings on the cost of production. And so, I do not think 

they take any particular satisfaction in the fact that the price of cattle has been good heretofore. In my 

community people are going out of pigs altogether, and with cattle they do not know what to do because 

their future and their business is so insecure at the present time. 

 

I want to touch, Mr. Speaker, on something that I touched on last year. Every time that we hear from the 

ops, or at least fairly often, particularly from the 20 per cent that is farmer, we hear something about a 

Silkin Bill. I do not think it was the hon. member for Arm River mentioned it this year; I believe it was 

the Leader of the Opposition himself – and I just wonder how many of the hon. members have read the 

Silkin Bill. Here is a copy of it and also the White Paper explaining it. They try to scare the people of 

Saskatchewan into believing again, as they have done before, they are going to lose their farms if they 

elect a C.C.F. government. That story is not new and they are not much concerned with it. I have said 

before and I believe I have said it in this House, that Hitler once said that if a lie is told often enough 

someone may believe it; and so they continue to tell the same old story. 

 

They talk about the Town and Country Planning Bill, which is sometimes referred to as the Silkin Bill, 

and I think that we should be very 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 23 

careful in this House and anywhere else, about any criticism we might offer of the British administration 

in the extremity of that nation. Under the Conservatives during the war, the farmers were regimented, if 

you like – they were told what to do in the production of necessary foods in order that the nation might 

fight. Now we are not giving the assistance to them to the same degree that we did during the struggle 

and they find it very difficult to carry on. It does not matter whether it is a Liberal government, or what 

kind of a government they have, the difficulties would be there and, I believe, accentuated if it wasn‘t 

for the Labour Movement. And if a government has to tell the farmers what they had better produce, in 

order that a nation might live, and grow, and prosper and so on, then I do not think we should criticize 

them for it. That they must be short of materials is indicated by the fact that I have in my hand a letter, 

measuring 4¾‖ x 7½‖, from a Minister‘s office, indicating how scarce newsprint is over there, and I 

know they are short of many other things. If a nation can produce food of the right kind by telling the 

farmer what he should produce, in certain instances, I would say more power to them, if they get things 

done, and I believe they are. 

 

We are no better judges of whether that administration is good than the people themselves, and in the 

first twenty by-elections, in which Labour men had held the seats before, they returned Labour men in 

each instance by records we have not heard of for a good many years and perhaps not in British history. 

That is the best criterion as to whether or not the Silkin Bill, or anything else that they are doing in that 

nation, is a good thing. 

 

The Opposition told the people in my constituency, and throughout Saskatchewan, before the election of 

1944, that if we had a C.C.F. government the farmers were going to lose their land. Well, we were in 

office a year and we hadn‘t got around to taking over any land – as a matter of fact we were disposing of 

some land – so, in order to ―save face‖, they sent out Hubert ―Cesspool‖ Staines, before the Federal 

election and they said ―oh no, they haven‘t done it yet, but wait until after the Federal Election, then it is 

going to start. If you elect many members from Saskatchewan to the House of Commons at Ottawa then 

they are going to start socializing the farms.‖ Well, the Federal Election went by and we sent all the 

C.C.F. members we could from Saskatchewan – as a matter of fact 18 out of 21 – and we haven‘t yet 

socialized any land. But they are still telling the people that because of a certain Bill passed by the 

British parliament, if anything happens to that nation, the same thing is going to happen to Canada, 

whatever that thing is. 

 

I have read the Silkin Bill, or the Town and Country Planning Bill, and I have gone through it a number 

of times and I cannot see any reference to agriculture at all; and yet I do not doubt the hon. members‘ 

word when they say there is a certain amount of regimentation; but, I say again, we want to be careful 

how we criticize a nation in its extremity. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 24 

The hon. Leader of the Opposition then referred to industry in Saskatchewan and said we had socialized 

fur, fish and timber in the province. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the trappers have as much freedom as 

they ever had, and certainly greater returns; because I know, as far as our fur-marketing is concerned, 

the great bulk of furs that come to that service have come in on a voluntary basis. 

 

In the fish industry there is still competition, although not as much as heretofore, but it is the ordinary 

―Joe‖ fisherman who goes out and does the fishing who is benefiting by the policy of this Government. 

And certainly one cannot say we have socialized the lumber industry, when we have such a large 

undertaking as The Pas Lumber Company, operating in the Province of Saskatchewan. Such words are 

puerile and not worthy of gentlemen who are supposed to be His Majesty‘s Opposition. 

 

I believe the Opposition said that centralization on and regimentation, and control, is foreign to this 

province: indeed it is, and is going to remain so as long as we have a people‘s government; but, Mr. 

Speaker, as soon as we have capitalism in control, and it does not matter what the members of the 

Opposition say, that kind of control leads to fascism, and you cannot get away from it; you are going to 

have regimentation sooner or later. He is quite right that centralization, regimentation and control are 

foreign to this province, and we want to keep it so. He talks about the function of the Legislature having 

been curtailed, without giving any evidence of it, and I have seen none of it during the years I have sat in 

this House. And certainly to we new members in the House, who love liberty, and come in here from the 

people‘s movement, it would be particularly noticeably if we were losing some of the rights and 

privileges we had, and want to retain. 

 

And then, of course, he went on and talked about increased taxation and things of that nature, which, of 

course, the people do not believe in when they know we are collecting less taxes this year from the same 

sources they collected from when they were in office, than the last year that they were there; and about 

the poor highways, and that the first concern of the C.C.F. is themselves, and so on. Well that should not 

be so bad. If you want to compare it with the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker, whether it is the first concern 

of a Party being the Party itself, representing the capitalist classes, as it does, and the C.C.F. representing 

the people. If that were true then it would be weighted in favour of the C.C.F.; but, of course, it is not 

true. 

 

The hon. Minister of Education has already dealt with an item that I put in my notes here: that of the 

appointment of the Deputy Minister of Education. I can only say one thing, Mr. Speaker, that we might 

add to that and it is that during the past year three deputies were appointed: one to the Department of 

Education, one to the Attorney General‘s Department (I do not suppose anyone will accuse him of being 

a former C.C.F.‘er, in that he had served many years in the Attorney General‘s Department and has 

practised for a long time in this province); and I do not suppose that anybody would 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 25 

suggest that the Deputy Minister of Telephones ever ran on a C.C.F. ticket, or that his qualification was 

the fact that he had been a C.C.F.‘er. So there again I say the argument is rather childish. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that when the election rolls around the people of the province are going to say that 

the record of the Government has been good, compared with that of the past administration, and that the 

credit of the province is still good. We are supposed to have ruined the credit of the province, but the 

people are going to say that the reduction of $72,000,000 is commendable – something that has never 

been done before. A start was not even made, Mr. Speaker, to do something about the old seed grain 

debt when the men who now sit in Opposition, sat on this side of the House; and we have had an interest 

saving of over $3,000,000 per year, which is certainly commendable as well. 

 

The people of this province are gong to say that they like the hospital services; they are saying it today, 

and while the Leader of the Opposition, and those who sit with him can say, if they like, that it is not 

free, though they were paid for them under the last Liberal administration, and felt rather flattered; I 

think, when the people of this province put $5 into a pool at the beginning of the year and can go to a 

hospital whether or not the bill is $5, or $10, or $1,000 and it is paid, they are going to say it is fairly 

free, and they are saying it today. 

 

The Ambulance Service is a credit to this province and that is the only thing, Mr. Speaker, I have never 

heard the Opposition criticize. I hope that all the hon. members, if they haven‘t seen the picture, will go 

and see it and try to get it into their communities. 

 

Certainly, as the Minister of Education has just indicated, the strides that have been made in education is 

something that the people of Saskatchewan are going to laud and praise. They have always said that in 

the rural areas, in particular, we have never had enough in the way of grants. Those that have been 

increased, as indicated by the Minister, no doubt will be increased again, as time goes on. 

 

In Social Welfare, again, we have had figures quoted from time to time in this House to indicate what 

has been done for the Old Age Pensioners, those on Mother‘s Allowances, and the Blind, and in my own 

constituency I have received favourable comments. 

 

I just want to hark back for a moment to what I said about hospital services; and I am thinking in 

particular, Mr. Speaker, of the Mental Hospital Services. From my own community, there has been one 

or two instances of people having to go to a Mental Hospital; there was the instance of a little 

ten-year-old girl, who was sub-normal, taken to Weyburn; the parents had not taken her there before – 

they investigated, and when they found this child was not going to be placed with people who were 

actually ―off the beam‖, they took a chance on it. That little girl, after one year, came home to spend the 

summer vacation with her folks, and they were so pleased with the progress made, and the little girl was 

extremely anxious to go back to that school. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 26 

The people of Saskatchewan are also going to say to the Government that builds more miles, gravels 

more miles, of highway than the former administration did in four years; and taking into consideration 

the cost of labour and material, and do it cheaper than the former administration, they are going to say 

that that administration is worthwhile. 

 

In summing up, Mr. Speaker, I believe that I can say that the Opposition always underestimates the 

intelligence of the people: when the election comes around they need not try to do it again because it is 

not going to work. The people‘s party is going to be returned, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I shall support the Motion. 

 

Mr. Van Eaton (Shellbrook):  I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate the member for Canora 

and the member for Hanley on the job they did in Moving and Seconding the Address in Reply to the 

Speech from the Throne. Mr. Speaker, I would also like to salute them, those two men, for the splendid 

work they have done for their constituencies in this province, and for their service to mankind through 

this organization and through this House. 

 

I was particularly pleased at one thing the member for Canora had in his speech, which was the 

reference to that great man whom the people themselves call the ―tallest‖ man in India, by way of moral 

character, Mr. Gandhi; and I would like to associate with him another man, whom we have a great 

respect for, or two men, perhaps, the leader that we had in our former leader, Mr. Woodsworth, Leader 

for the Dominion, and our provincial leader, George Williams. We know – at least I realize now – more 

fully the burden they had to carry when they sat on this side of the House. I remember Mr. J.S. 

Woodworth the beloved Leader of the Dominion, when he sat in the House of Parliament. May I read a 

small poem that I took out of the philosophy he taught of ‗humanity first‘: 

 

―If there breathe on earth a slave, Are ye 

truly free and brave: 

Is true freedom but to break fetters for our 

our own dear sake? 

No! True freedom is to share all the chains 

our brothers wear. 

They are slaves who fear to speak for the 

fallen and the weak. 

They are slaves and dare not be in the fight 

with two or three.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, in his time he only had two or three to fight for him; he stood by the principles of 

righteousness in government, and fought for humanity 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 27 

to the point where the crusade has reached the point now where we have one government with that 

philosophy. 

 

These problems of the government have been ably dealt with, most of them, by the different members 

and Ministers and those that have not, will be; and I only want to call attention, briefly, to two or three 

things that have been brought up by the Opposition in regard to roads and timber, as far as my 

constituency is concerned. 

 

The hon. Leader of the Opposition seems to take a great deal of satisfaction in talking about how bad the 

roads were in the province; I would like to tell him, and all and sundry, that the roads in our district are 

better and there are more of them than there ever have been. The Department of Municipal Affairs and 

the Department of Highways and the Department of Natural Resources have all worked in the northern 

constituency where I live and their program is made in a pattern, so that in another short while the roads 

will be so that you can cross east or west, or north and south on main market roads or highways, and go 

clear across the province, or any part of the constituency, anywhere you like. They are doing a good job. 

 

As far as the milling is concerned in the lumber industry, I have a short synopsis here of what has 

happened in my constituency, near Big River, when it shows that in 1945 there was about 3,600,000 feet 

of timber taken off. In 1946 and 1947 we have more operators; have up to 13 mills – practically all the 

same men – will amount to 8,674,000 feet. So as far as going out of the district in our country is 

concerned, they are only doing a better job and the roads have been opened up to more timber that was 

ripe, and they are being allowed to cut more timber in that district, than they have been cutting before. 

 

One more thing I wish to say in reference to what the hon. member for the Mediterranean area said just 

the other day with reference to the Premier having depreciated himself, or words to that effect; instead of 

preaching the gospel he had gone into politics. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 28 

I would just like to assure the hon. member, and all the people listening within the sound of my voice, 

that there are thousands of people in this province whose earnest prayer is that God will give the Premier 

strength to continue to be our leader and the Premier of this province for years to come. 

 

One other thing, one of the Opposition belaboured the fact that this Government were extinguishing the 

rights of the individual to carry on business, and were becoming a socialist monopoly I have here on my 

desk a statement of the Executive Council of the Canadian Manufacturers‘ Association, Toronto, which 

points out that everything that is done in the United States…I will read that paragraph: ―It must be 

remembered that Canada cannot be insulated to the effect of rising prices all over the world, and 

especially from the effect of high prices in the United States.‖ I have a little pamphlet here, edited by 

George Seldes, New York, in which he shows, and I would like to read excerpts from this – what the 

manufacturers and the advertisers in the United States are doing, in regard to business. It says: ―Billion 

dollar advertisers‘ campaign, to hoax the United States, begins this month, using slogan popularized by 

Hitler. The most ambitious project in the History of America to fool the people a large part of the time, 

went into operation February 1st. It is a great billion dollar public relations‘ advertising campaign, first 

exposed in this newsletter on April 29, 1946. The five-year plan calls for the use of ten per cent of the 

advertising budget of all American corporations for advertising, not their products, but their social and 

economic philosophy which, needless to say, is mainly reactionary. For this purpose, all the big 

advertising agencies in the United States have been mobilized. The five-year plan supersedes the two 

and three million plans of the national association of manufacturers. One of these, costing only seven 

hundred million dollars, succeeded in wrecking the Office of Price Administration, and cost the 

consuming public an estimated four billion dollars in increased prices. The new plan makes the annual 

expenditure of twenty-five million for the National Electric Light Association look picayune; yet the 

National Electric Light Association corrupted 80 per cent of the American newspaper press, and many 

of the biggest magazines, and was credited with changing the economic viewpoint of the population 

regarding private ownership of public utilities. The announced main purpose of this most ambitious 

propaganda campaign in the history of the nation is to sell the American people the slogan ‗free 

enterprise‘, as the American way of life. The corporations which are putting up the money for the 

present campaign are the same which put up the money for the campaigns of the national Association of 

Manufacturers. They have also engaged in public relations opinion, regarding creating propaganda 

advertising, in the past year. Their program is to propagandize free enterprise; to attack labour; to protect 

big business, which according to official government documents 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 29 

is more and more monopolistic — the opposite of free. to whitewash big business, which, despite its 

control over most of the newspaper and magazine press and its use of radio, movies and all means of 

communication, has not succeeded, up to now, in fooling all of the people all of the time; to 

propagandize away the most glaring fact 1945-48, the greatest profiteering by the corporations in the 

history of the world, the extraordinary wartime profits of nine and one-half billions a year, followed by 

annual profits of ten and twelve billions and now at least seventeen billions and may reach between 

nineteen and twenty billions, according to Senator O‘Mahoney; to propagandize the Republican Party 

policies on taxes; to save the corporations as much as possible and to perpetuate the hoax that 

management is willing to make friends with labour. The documentary facts published, in fact, is that the 

corporations refused the Roosevelt plan of labour-management committees, in wartime when the fate of 

the nation was at stake; to protect monopoly to attack anti-trust action as government interference, 

bureaucracy and so forth. 

 

―The entire program is a hoax because the main objective is embodies in the slogan ―free enterprise for 

the American way of life‖. The facts are that the term ―free enterprise‖ was coined by Hitler – that 

almost every big firm putting up money to propagandize the American people is today under indictment 

for monopoly cartel agreements, restraint of trade, and other actions, proving beyond question that 

monopoly, the exact opposite of free enterprise flourishes. 

 

―Here are a few of the names of United States businesses on the pending anti-trust roster, reported by 

‗Business Week‘: defendant, American Canneries on conditioned leases, awaiting trail; American 

Institutes, fixing prices, awaiting trial; American Petroleum Institution, exclusive dealing contracts, 

awaiting trial. This is under the ―Free enterprise‖ proved a hoax, by the Justice Department of the United 

States Government: Association of Railways, fixing rates, government evidence, suit pending; Chrysler 

Corporation, discrimination, awaiting outcome of a court case; Diamond Match, cartel; Dupont, 

monopoly, awaiting trail; Ford, restraint of trade; General Electric, four suits – cartel, monopoly, 

restraint and patent abuses. The unchallengeable documentation proves, first, that there is no real free 

enterprise, and secondly that the propaganda of the slogan is from the monopolists, trust and cartel 

members who want to cover their practices. Big business is anti-free enterprise, but it drags along with it 

all business propaganda contained.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to emphasize the fact that monopoly capitalism, using one thousand million 

dollars of capital, in combines and cartels, to crush co-operatives and small business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the Motion. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 30 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford):  Mr. Speaker, in rising to support the Motion before the House, I would 

like to join with my colleagues in expressing my appreciation to the Mover and Seconder of the Throne 

Speech, for their excellent contribution. It does not matter very much whether it is a ―swan-song‖ or not, 

so long as it is a song that will bear repeating, and I think that the Mover and Seconder of the Throne 

speech, this year, will be remembered as long as any of us are in the House. 

 

I regret very much, Mr. Speaker, being so placed in the House that I find it very difficult at times to 

follow the devious paths of the arguments of the Opposition; and I also regret that I am not so placed 

that I can get the benefit of the hon. member for Arm River, when he is in full action. From the corner of 

this House, it reminded me very much, the other day, of the proverbial windmill run on water. 

 

There has been much, also, said about lawyers and judges, and I assure you, Mr. Speaker, that I am 

going to refrain from very much comment; but I could not help recalling a conversation I heard between 

two law students at the university, some years ago; I happened to be in the background and I could not 

get away – I was in the dressing-room down at the pool – and they were discussing their law classes and 

one of them finished up by saying he had come to the conclusion that a good lawyer had to be a good 

liar. 

 

I am very sorry, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member for the Mediterranean area should have, in my 

estimation, lowered the tone of this Debate by referring to the hon. Premier‘s having forsaken the ideals 

and principles that led him to dedicate his life to the Minister. It is my conviction that unless a good 

many people, like the Premier, go out to interpret Christianity in a very practical way, it will go ill with 

humanity in this land or any other. ‖Ill fares the land to hastening ills a prey. Where wealth accumulates 

and men decay. 

 

I would suggest, after listening to the sweeping statements of the Leader of the Opposition, the other 

day, regarding the condition of the highways and the revenue that has been spent on them, that he ask 

his one-time colleague, and my 1944 Opposition, Mr. Kerr, just what condition he found the highways 

in, in the Northern part of his constituency in 1944. One of the defeating factors in Mr. Kerr‘s campaign 

was just mud – mud on the Liberal highways, and Liberals ―mud‖ on the airways. 

 

We are told, time and time again, what the highways are like in other provinces – in Alberta, Manitoba. I 

had the pleasure of attending a meeting to discuss the construction of the railway between St. Walburg 

and Pierceland; and there are a great many people in Alberta interested in that railway project, and some 

of them were at that meeting. They came over our northern highway and, for no reason that I know of, 

one of these gentlemen, who happens to work for a concern that is not too friendly towards us, came to 

me and said: ―There is one thing I want to congratulate you on and that is the shape you have the 

highway in‖. He said: ―If we had a road like that through Northern Alberta, we would be tickled pink‖. 

He said: ―It has got to the point where we say if we can get to into Saskatchewan, we can get to 

Winnipeg.‖ 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 31 

Another Liberal admitted quite frankly that this administration had done more for the North country in 

two years, than the Liberals had done in ten. 

 

The hon. member for Arm River, speaking the other day, twittingly referred to the Minister of Natural 

Resources as the ―King‖ of the North. Well, Mr. Speaker, I rather like the idea. Some people often speak 

the truth unwittingly, and in a very real sense the hon. Minister has become monarch of many of the 

problems of the northland. He has found time to visit many of the trappers, lumbermen and fishermen 

and to hold meetings and discuss their problems with them. He has spanned our Saskatchewan northland 

with an air service that is helping materially in making the northland yield up its latent riches, and 

helping to bring the social services of civilization, both of education and health, and law and order, to 

these frontiers of our province. I believe the hon. member for Arm River really paid the hon. Minister of 

Natural Resources a great compliment. 

 

I want to refer briefly to the fur industry this afternoon. I would like to deal with some figures relative to 

fur prices. Of course, you know we hear a great deal with regard to muskrats and skunks over the air and 

on the platform, where Saskatchewan prices are compared with the prices in Manitoba; but it is not only 

the net return to the trapper that is quoted. For instance, in the case of the big grass marsh in northern 

Manitoba, the trapper receives about 40 per cent of the sale price, and all too often it is the sale price that 

is quoted, when comparing those prices with the prices in Saskatchewan. I have here a few prices I 

would like to give you in connection with the price of muskrat furs in 1946-47 – that is the winter – the 

Manitoba government sold approximately 300,000 muskrat pelts, realizing an average of $1.38, while in 

Saskatchewan we sold approximately 360,000 bringing an average of $1.84. That is, in both cases, the 

net return to the trapper. Now the Minister of Natural Resources has been implementing a policy – I 

would say a progressive policy – of both production and conservation. He has been endeavouring to 

eradicate many evils that existed in the fur trade; many evils brought about by unscrupulous dealers; but 

in connection with implementing this progressive policy I would like to refer to a report that was 

brought into the House in 1934-35 and I quote: ―The present method of trapping is fast depleting the 

province of its fur. The present unethical methods of a percentage of the fur deals warrants the 

conclusion that government control of all raw fur is essential, if the -province is to reap the benefit of its 

fur resources, for any length of time‖. That report was brought in, in 1934-35 by the then Minister of 

Natural Resources, who today is the hon. Leader of the Opposition. Ten years after that report was 

brought into the House, nothing was done about the fur trade, and as soon as someone starts to 

implement a progressive policy of both production and conservation, then, of course, he is a ―dictator‖ 

and ―king‖ of the north. 

 

The hon. Leader of the Opposition said it was purse eyewash that the standard of living of the 

Saskatchewan people was being threatened by the price spiral. Yet, I was discussing business and the 

buying power of the 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 32 

public with more than one merchant, before leaving home, and I was surprised that business had gone 

down tremendously; they told me a great many people were living off their cream cheques, and it was 

the only buying power they had, and that there was an increasing pressure being put on the local 

merchants for credit. 

 

I would like to say a few words now about my own constituency. Unfortunately we have had three poor 

crops in three consecutive years. Naturally, Mr. Speaker, the second paragraph in the Speech from the 

Throne, dealing with the burden that decontrol measures of the Federal government policy brought to 

bear on the economic resources in these crop failure areas, is very disconcerting, to say the least. Men 

came to me last threshing time and said to me, ―if we sell our coarse grains today, do you think we will 

get the difference in price should there be a jump in the price of coarse grains, owing to decontrol 

measures?‖ Well, Mr. Speaker, to ask me to read the mind of the Hon. Federal Minister of Agriculture, 

is a much more difficult task than me guessing whether the member for Arm River is going to speak one 

hour or two, and need one glass water or four. But, my advice to him was that unless they had to, they 

had better not sell. 

 

The hog raisers found themselves in an even greater quandary. I was speaking to one man and he 

immediately started in to finish his hogs in the method suggested by the hon. member for 

Kerrobert-Kindersley, the other day; he was dressing them and selling them at half-weight. He got about 

half of them killed and then he did not know whether he should go on or not. His neighbour said he 

could not afford to kill his, and some of his neighbours also told him that he could not afford to finish 

them; and that was the situation brought about by such a policy as the Hon. Federal Minister of 

Agriculture has implemented over the last six to eight months. I probably should say six to eight years. 

 

Two years ago hogs were going out of our part of the country at the rate of a trainload a week. Today, on 

the whole line, there isn‘t a full car goes out in the same time. I know people who were making a 

business of hog raising – it was a cheap industry, and they supplied a market for low-grade grain to the 

surrounding neighbourhood; but they got out of hogs just as fast as they could; and today have they not 

only had to sell out the businesses that it took them years to build up, but the neighbourhood suffers 

whenever there is any quantity of low-grade grain, in that they have to take less for it at the elevator than 

the stockmen would give them. 

 

When one reads, as we have done during the past few weeks of the chaotic conditions of the market such 

as you have here in the Leader-Post for February 10 – ―Hog prices plunge‖, ―Grains recover‖, as, 

according to this news report, grains had been down lower and they came up a little. On the 13th, 

―Chicago market slump continues‖ – it is the old game of up and down, and, in this particular game, the 

farmer producer is on the long end of the plank, and he always takes the bmp at the bottom. That is 

suggested by one of the members of Congress in the United States, during the hectic days on the 

Chicago market. He said: ―At Washington a Congressional Committee ordered an investigation into the 

break for possible evidences that insiders evaded a loss, or even profited by it.‖ Representative, August 

Anderson, 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 33 

Republican Representative for Minnesota, charged that speculators, tuned to the pipeline of inside 

information, had dodged losses or even made tremendous profits in a few days. 

 

It is the old, old story. And here again we have another news item: ―Surplus of meat‖; but when you read 

the whole news item, again you find out that it is not a surplus of meat at all, it‘s the old vicious problem 

of under-consumption. 

 

I am sorry that the Hon. Minister for Telephones is not in his seat at the present time. I would like very 

much to congratulate him on the completion of the telephone line between Loon Lake and Pierceland, 

giving the people of that area telephone connections over most of the province of Alberta and 

Saskatchewan. There is a story behind this telephone line, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to tell the 

House, this afternoon. About 1933, the administration at that time under the late Dr. Anderson, put on a 

work and wages program in the northern part of the Turtleford constituency, and they got out native 

telephone poles and laid them along the highway from Loon Lake to Pierceland at the cost of about 

$1.50 per pole. In 1934, in the general provincial election, the Liberals administration was returned to 

power and these poles that should have constructed this telephone line were sold at 25 cents apiece. 

There are still houses built in the north country, and buildings that were erected out of those telephone 

poles, and the people in the north had to wait for the C.C.F. government to bring them a telephone line. 

There is one thing that I want to congratulate the Minister on – he got them in the ground, and anyone 

who wants to move them will at least have to dig them out. 

 

I would also like to deal with some aspects of municipal grants. I get quite a thrill out of this one, 

because I have listened to a great many Liberal broadcasts saying what they are going to do about 

municipal grants – are they going to be increased? I am glad they are, and I am glad they have been. I 

am going to give you, even if I weary the House a little, Mr. Speaker, I am going to give you the average 

grant in each one of the municipalities in my constituency, over a period of 1936-47 the seven-year 

period under the Liberals administration, and the three year period under the present administration. In 

R.M. 469, for the seven-year period, the road grant was $196 – I am just going to give you round figures 

– in the three-year period since 1944 it was $766. In R.M. 498, the seven-year period up to 1944 was 

$321; in the last three years the average was $866. In R.M. 499, the average for the seven-year period to 

1944 was $171; in the last three-year period it was $923. In R.M. 501 – this happens to be my home 

municipality – and incidentally, I used to be told that we should have a Liberal representative because 

they could always get more out of the administration here at Regina – during that seven-year period 

prior to 1944, we got an average of $228; during the past three years we have had an average of $900. 

There are some worse than that. Here is one R.M. 529, for the seven years prior to 1944 they had an 

average of $410, which included some work done by the Municipality; in the last three years they have 

had an average – and this, by the way, before I give you the figures, is the home municipality of my 

Opposition at the present time – of $183. The last one, R.M. 531, had an average prior to 1944 of $197 

and since then, $482, and the last year it could have been an average of $648 if they had completed their 

work. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 34 

I submit, that what we are told is going to be done has been done and I would like to congratulate the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

The hon. Leader of the Opposition spoke very disparagingly of Saskatchewan legislation. I notice also 

that in following the news and listening to the opposition that the interest in Social Service has been 

much greater not only in Saskatchewan but in the whole Dominion since the advent of CCF 

administration in this province. I do not mind whether it is Old Age Pensions, Health Services, Child 

Welfare, Mental Institutions, Auto Insurance, this government would have justified its existence if for 

no other reason than bringing these matters to the fore-front of public thought and discussion. 

 

I would like to say something about Auto-Accident Insurance. I have here in my hand a news item out of 

The Monetary Times for October 1947. It is dealing with the new Ontario Auto-Accident Insurance 

which is known as the Improved Highway Traffic Act. I am going to quote quite freely from this article. 

‗One aim‘ it says, and I want to lay emphasis on ‗One aim‘ because I am going to refer to it again: ―One 

aim of the act is to impose a clear cut responsibility on the owners and drivers of motor vehicles‖. Let us 

just see how they went along to draw up a legislation to accomplish this particular aim. 

 

The second thing was, that the Act ―gives protection to those who may suffer loss or injury arising from 

operation of vehicles by motorists lacking financial responsibility‖ It is fairly good so far. 

 

Here is number three, this is where our legal friends come in: ―Under the new legislation every 

judgement arising out of motor accidents in Ontario, whether of person or property damage, must be 

satisfied.‖ From there on let us examine just what that Act calls for to attain this end. The new Act also 

broadened the terms under which drivers‘ and owners‘ licences may be suspended on conviction. For 

example; Automatic suspension now follows convictions, where an accident occurs out of the following 

offences; failing to stop at a through street, failing to read traffic signals, making improper turns at 

intersections, failing to signal properly when turning; driving without prescribed lights, operating with 

defective breaks, crowding in drivers seat. 

 

For anyone of those offences your licence is automatically cancelled. 

 

We stated that the judgment must be satisfied and we have widened the terms of the Act so that it 

includes automatic suspension under the slightest infringement. The next question that arises; what are 

the costs, what are the benefits and to whom. From now on it is very 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 35 

interesting reading. We are told first that the fund is to be made up by a levy of not more than one dollar 

on each licensed driver in the province. Then they also go on to say, ‗although the unsatisfied judgment 

fund will be created by the collection of a fee, not exceeding one dollar for each person securing a 

driver‘s licence, or chauffeur‘s licence in 1948‘. It is expected that it will not be necessary to collect a 

full authorized amount in each year. Now that is wonderful. Auto-Accident insurance for the whole 

province of less than a dollar per driver‘s licence per year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I submit it is evident indeed to a childish mind, that a fund built up of levies not 

exceeding a dollar per year on a licence can never cover accident premiums in any one of our provinces 

under ‗Five Point‘ insurance. And so we will have to find out just how this fund is kept solvent and here 

is how it is done. 

 

When judgment is paid from the fund the judgment debtor may thereafter – that is if he is not financially 

solvent himself to meet his debt; the judgment debtor thereafter may neither own or operate a motor 

vehicle until he has reimbursed the fund with interest until he has filed proof of financial responsibility. 

And filing proof ordinarily implies filing with the department, either a certificate of insurance or a 

negotiable security in the sum of $11,000. 

 

Now for the extent covered by this insurance. The new law applies to all judgment relating to the 

operation of motor vehicles within the province since reciprocal agreements with provinces, and more 

than 20 of the States, have been made. So it does not matter whether you are in Ontario or a visitor there 

you still come under the law. 

 

I would like, at this time, to return to that ‗One aim‘. It said one of the aims was, but I submit, Mr. 

Speaker, that the other aim comes at the finish and this is it: ―The creation of the unsatisfied judgment 

fund along with the mechanism to operate it, in no way detracts from the value of motor vehicle 

insurance. While the prudent motorist is carrying insurance, takes the precaution of protecting himself 

from financial loss, arising from the operation of his motor vehicle, his small contribution to the fund 

will enable him to collect damages arising from the operation of some other vehicle which is not 

insured. In the light of added penalties, it is not unlikely that the recent legislation will encourage the 

motoring public to voluntarily take the precaution of securing insurance coverage. 

 

―As a service to the travelling public, the member companies of The Canadian Underwriters Association 

and the Independent Automobile Insurance conference have placed advertisements in representative 

Ontario papers.‖ That is the really ‗big aim‘. In other words, Mr. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 36 

Speaker, to secure any protection on the highways of Ontario at the present time, the motoring public are 

compelled to pay into a fund which is a mere gesture that insurance on the one hand and a tyrannical 

creditor on the other hand. At the same time under the improved Highway Traffic Act they are of course 

compelled, bamboozled and brow-beaten into buying insurance from the greatest money-hungry 

monopoly on the North American continent, the private insurance companies. 

 

Any one of us in this Legislature who pays this accident insurance can compare it clause for clause with 

the insurance obtainable through private companies, and will agree with me, Mr. Speaker, that the 

comparison, to say the least, is obvious. 

 

When I consider the material, in the Speech from the Throne as it looks back over the last three years of 

administration, and as it gives us a foreview of legislation for this session; as I look at the improved 

health services; the improved condition of the highways; progress in education; the increase in industry; 

the increase in insurance premiums, Mr. Speaker, I have great pleasure in supporting the motion. 

 

(The Debate was adjourned by Mr. Embury)) 

 

SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 5 – an Act to amend The Police Magistrates Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman:  This is an Act to amend the Police Magistrates Act. This is the Act which deals 

with the salaries magistrates of Saskatchewan, both city magistrates and provincial magistrates. I might 

say the amendment is being introduced at the suggestion of the auditors or accountants and it simply 

regularizes the present practice. Apparently at the present time there is nothing definite in the Act 

making the fees assessed and collected by magistrates the property of the Crown. Although, as a matter 

of practice, those things have always been turned over to the Crown. That is the first amendment. 

 

The second amendment is to regularize or legalize the present practice of each magistrate having an 

account of his own, called the Attorney General Policy magistrates‘ Suspense Account. Each Magistrate 

has an account, under the present practice, into which he deposits fines and costs as collected. Now, the 

Act does not provide for that special account and for depositing the money, but does provide that he is to 

remit the money immediately on collection. I am moving second reading of this Bill which will 

regularize the practice that now obtains. 

 

Mr. Embury:  Would the speaker permit a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman:  Surely. 

 

Mr. Embury:  Would the Attorney General say whether the remuneration of the magistrate himself is 

in any way dependent upon the fines and fees to which he has referred in the Bill? 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 37 

Hon. Mr. Corman:  My understanding is that it is not. 

 

The motion for Second Reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 6 – an Act to amend The Creditors’ Relief Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: This is a proposed amendment to the Creditors‘ Relief Act. This is the Act 

providing for the distribution of money collected by a Sheriff from a seizure under an execution, and it 

deals with places where sufficient is not realized to pay all executions and all costs on full. Under the old 

Act, in the case of there not being enough to pay everyone, the costs of the execution creditor who filed 

his execution first in point of time, were paid first. The Amendment provides that the priority for costs 

should not be given to the execution creditor who first obtained an execution and filed it, but to the 

execution creditor under where instance the seizure has been made. In other words, the execution 

creditor who does the work and gives the sheriff information, gets his cost first, if there is not enough to 

go around. 

 

The second amendment deals with the priority given to a claim for wages or salary. There is a priority 

for three months‘ wages or salary. Under the Act as it stands now, that priority is only given if the term 

of employment continues until one month of the date of seizure. If, for instance, a man left his 

employment six weeks before a seizure was made, he would have no priority, and this provides that 

three months‘ priority for wages and salary shall be given regardless of when the employment 

terminated. I would move the Second Reading of the Bill. 

 

The motion for Second Reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 7 – an Act to amend the Local Government Board Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman:  This is a proposed amendment of the Local Government Board Act. 

 

The amendment really has to do with provisions of the Local Government Board Special Powers Act, 

and The Local Government Board Temporary Powers Act. It has on the advice of the Legislative 

Council, been put in the general Act. There is nothing, I am sure, contingent about it, the two Acts I 

have referred to, provide that when the affairs of a Municipality have been brought under the Local 

Government Board, no action shall be brought against those Municipalities without the consent of the 

Board; but that is not the way the Act reads at present. It says that ―No action shall be brought against a 

Municipality until the Board has made an Order that this section shall not apply to that Municipality.‖ In 

other words, the only way in which the Board can act, is to take away from the Municipality the whole 

protection, even though the purpose is only to allow one action to proceed. I might say that this arose 

from a negligence action in – I do not know what city it was – in which the Board feel that they should 

allow the injured party to sue the city. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 38 

I believe the city is assured that there is no conflict between the city and the Local Government Board; 

but they cannot do it without taking that protection away from the city entirely. 

 

We are proposing that by an amendment the Board be given power to permit a specified action to 

proceed without throwing the door wide open to all actins. I would move the Second Reading of the Bill. 

 

The motion for Second Reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 8 – An Act respecting Savings and Credit Unions 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh:  This is an Act respecting Savings and Credit Unions, and is, in effect, 

consolidation of The Credit Union Act and the amendments that have been endorsed by the Legislature 

in recent years. There are some clauses that set out a greater measure of clarification in respect to their 

intents. This clarification is based upon the experience of the Credit Unions and after consultation with, 

and recommendation from, a number of individual Credit Unions and the Federation of Credit Unions. I 

do not think that there is any change in basic principle in respect to this Act that is now being submitted 

to the Legislature. I might, however, mention that a House Amendment will be introduced for the 

consideration of the Legislature, asking that Section ―I‖ under (18), be deleted, as the present need for 

that particular clause does not exist at the moment. 

 

I do not believe there is anything in the Bill but can be dealt with in Committee, Mr. Speaker, therefore, 

I wish to move the Second Reading of this Bill. 

 

The motion for Second Reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 9 – an Act to amend The Apprenticeship Act 1944 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams:  The Apprenticeship Act 1944, could be very well explained in Committee. The 

first part merely changes the word ―Schedule‖ to ―Schedule A‖ – actually there is no Schedule A. It is 

correcting a mistake in the original Act. 

 

Then, as regards the Regulations Clause, Clause ―M‖, is not very clear, and a strict application makes it 

much too restrictive; that is, the qualification to persons engaged in a trade when that becomes restricted. 

A strict application would prevent persons from outside the province coming in and getting these 

certificates. We just wanted to widen this provision and give permission to those outside the province to 

get these certificates of qualification; so I move Second Reading of Bill No. 9. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 39 

Mr. Patterson:  Why is it necessary to make the Act retroactive for three and a half years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams:  I cannot see where Bill No. 9 is making it retroactive at all. 

 

Mr. Patterson:  Section (5). 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams:  Well, it came into force on August 1, 1944. I do not suppose it makes any 

particular difference. 

 

The motion for Second Reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 10 – an Act to amend The Rural Telephone Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Phelps:  Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill to amend The Rural Telephone Act and merely gives 

Boards of Directors permission, with the consent of the Minister, to levy up to eight per cent of its paid 

up debenture principal of the company, for the purpose of renewals in reconstruction of its system, and 

in the case of old companies, up to 8 per cent of the paid up capital cost of the company‘s system. We 

have had several applications from companies, some of them very well-to-do companies, who find that 

the present four per cent is too restrictive, and they want to go up to maybe five, six, seven, but no 

higher than eight. We feel that the request is quite reasonable. It is surrounded with the safeguards that it 

must be following the resolution of the Board of Directors, and with the consent of the Minister. I wish 

to move the Second Reading of this Bill. 

 

The motion for Second Reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 12 – an Act to amend The Water Users Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps:  I want to inform the House that this Bill, together with the following two Bills, is 

designed for the same purpose. It is felt by the Government that these Bills would be better administered 

by the Department of Agriculture. The Water Users Act, Mr. Speaker, for the information of the House, 

is an Act that was set up and put on the Statute Books a number of years ago, to provide ways and 

means for a group of farmers to band together to make it possible to supply water And, therefore, it has 

been decided to turn the matters of irrigation over to the Department of Agriculture, as it comes more 

within their jurisdiction and closer associated with their work. So, therefore, this Act, together with the 

other two, is designed for the same purpose; simply to transfer it from our Department to the Department 

of Agriculture. I move Second Reading, Mr. Speaker, of this Bill. 

 

The motion for Second Reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 13 – an Act to amend The Expropriation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to move the Second Reading of this Bill; it is intended 

to do just exactly what I referred to in the previous Bill – transfer it to Agriculture. 

 

The motion for Second Reading was agreed to. 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 40 

Bill No. 14 – an Act to amend The Irrigation Districts Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Phelps:  This is an Act to amend The Irrigation Districts Act and again it is the same 

principle, transferring it to the Department of Agriculture from the Department of Natural Resources. I 

wish to move the Second Reading of this Bill. 

 

The motion for Second Reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 15 – an Act to amend The Change of Name Act 

 

Premier:  The proposed amendment is for the purpose of removing the necessity of advertising in the 

Saskatchewan Gazette and other newspapers, when the Director of Child Welfare, in the Department of 

Social Welfare, makes application to the Director of Vital Statistics for a change in the surname of a 

person who is a ward of the Minister of Social Welfare under The Child Welfare Act. It is felt that, in 

some cases, the advertising of a child, especially if the child is up in years, so that he can understand, 

may make it difficult for a child in after life and may even cause him some embarrassment at that 

particular time. I move Second Reading. 

 

The motion for Second Reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 16 – an Act to amend The Marriage Act 

 

Premier:  Mr. Speaker, at the last Session, on the advice of the Attorney General‘s Department, The 

Marriage Act was amended for the purpose of preventing re-marriage by a party or parties to divorce 

proceedings, before the time for appealing from decree absolute had expired. This has worked out 

perfectly satisfactory insofar as people within the province are concerned, but people from outside the 

province, especially where divorce is granted in the United Kingdom, has brought up some 

administrative difficulties, and this Amendment is for the purpose of dealing with those administrative 

difficulties. I move the Second Reading of this Act. 

 

The motion for Second Reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 17 – an Act to amend The Mental Hygiene Act 

 

Premier:  Mr. Speaker, these are two minor amendments to The Mental Hygiene Act; the first 

provides for the apprehension of a patient on the authority of two doctors‘ certificates. At the present 

time, under the Act, two doctors may convey a patient to the hospital, but it is not authority for 

apprehending him, although it has been assumed that it was; and this is to make it clear, that on two 

doctors‘ certificates, not only do the two certificates give authority to convey the patient to the hospital, 

but also to have the patient admitted to the hospital for examination. And it provides, secondly, that the 

superintendent may detain the patient on the authority of the Doctors‘ certificates, without the necessity 

of referring 



 

February 16, 1948 

 

 41 

the matter to the Commissioner of Mental Services, and the latter issuing a Warrant of Detention. Copies 

of the medical certificates, however, and the history record forms must be sent to the Commissioner, 

after admission, for review, and the right of appeal by relatives and friends is left as before. It simply 

changes the procedure whereby before, when a patient was brought to the Mental Hospital on the 

recommendation of two doctors, before the superintendent of the hospital could detain the patient he had 

to have authority from the Commissioner who is here in Regina. This allows the superintendent to detain 

the patient, pending further examination, in a 21-day period, in which the patient can be examined, and 

decision made as to whether or not the patient will be further detained. I move Second Reading. 

 

The motion for Second Reading was agreed to. 

 

Premier:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the House do now adjourn. 

 

The House adjourned at 5:55 o‘clock p.m. 


