



















































Hansard: February 05, 1948


 

1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Tenth Legislature 

Day 1 

Thursday, February 5, 1948 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation for the opening of the Fifth Session of the Tenth 

Legislature Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan, His Honour the Lieutenant Governor (Hon. 

R.J.M. Parker) entered the Chamber at 3 o’clock p.m., and was pleased to open the Session with the 

following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, and Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is My privilege and pleasure to welcome you to the fifth Session of the Tenth Legislature of the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Since the last Session of the Legislature, there has developed a keener awareness of the economic 

problems with which Canada and the other nations of the world are faced. The peace which force of 

arms secured, is jeopardized by the imminence of economic dislocation; hunger stalks the greater part of 

Europe and Asia; insecurity and fear are springing up in the wake of the devastation of the late war. The 

work of the United Nations in striving to realize one world is being seriously impaired by 

maldistribution of the world’s wealth. 

 

At the same time, the economy of the Province is being strained by a national policy of decontrol. 

Agricultural production which My Government has sought to increase and stabilize, is threatened by the 

uncertainties of uncontrolled prices; speculation is replacing orderly marketing; and many of the gains 

won in agricultural production during the past four years are now being lost. Consumers are finding their 

purchasing power seriously curtailed by rising prices, and many are hard-pressed to secure the basic 

necessities of life. As a result, the health of our people will be impaired, and the economy of 

Saskatchewan may suffer serious and irreparable consequences. My Government reaffirms its belief that 

upon economic planning of a national and international character, a sounder basis will be established for 

the production and distribution of the world’s wealth according to men’s needs. In this principle, the 

people of Saskatchewan find their best hope for prosperity and peace. 

 

The marriage of Her Royal Highness, the Princess Elizabeth, has been the occasion of widespread 

rejoicing. To Her Royal Highness, the Princess Elizabeth, and to His Royal Highness, the Duke of 

Edinburgh, the people of Saskatchewan extend all good wishes for their future happiness. 

 

For the purpose of advancing agriculture in Saskatchewan, My Government has recently established the 

basis for agreements with the dominion Government under which a water development programme may 

be initiated by mutual participation. Saskatchewan will thereby make available to the government of 

Canada water rights and provincial crown lands required for the construction and operation of irrigation 

projects. My government has executed the first agreement under this arrangement and it 



 

February 5, 1948 
 

 
2 

is hoped that early concurrence by the Dominion Government will facilitate construction of large-scale 

irrigation projects in Saskatchewan. to deal with development plan, an Irrigation division is being 

established by the Department of Agriculture. 

 

Progress has been made during the past year in developing the regressing, reclamation and conservation 

programmes of the Government. This has been of especial significance in the face of the extensive 

drought which the northern and southwestern parts of the Province suffered during the past crop year. 

The self-help features of the Emergency Feed and Fodder plan averted a major disaster in these areas, 

and the work carried on under The Grain and Fodder Conservation Act is resulting in the establishment 

of reserves against future feed deficiencies. 

 

A new grazing land leasehold policy has been developed on the basis of the carrying capacity of lands, 

and it is expected that this policy will result in the stabilization of the livestock industry and the 

encouragement of diversified farming. Better land use and better farm practices have been achieved 

through the transfer of the administration of agricultural lands to the Department of Agriculture. 

Legislation will be introduced at this session to alter the boundaries of certain forest reserves in the 

northern part of the Province with the object of achieving more efficient utilization of land resources. 

 

The services of trained agricultural personnel have increased in the past year; new veterinary districts 

have been formed, and graduates are returning to the Province skilled in veterinary science. Funds again 

will be made available during the coming year to certain agricultural societies for the purpose of 

providing accommodation for short agricultural courses. The agricultural representative service has 

expanded and will continue to render valuable assistance to farmers in all parts of the Province. 

 

During 1947, the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan completed its first year of operation, successfully 

removing the economic barrier to hospital care. During the year, approximately 130,000 persons, 

including 20,000 newborn babies, received hospital care. The Plan has now been extended to residents 

of the far north who may participate on a voluntary basis. 

 

Hospital facilities have been enlarged; in the past four years, 21 new hospitals were established and 

eight hospitals and nursing homes were extended. During the year, eight more Union Hospital Districts 

were formed, bringing to 67 the total number of hospital districts, 41 of which were established in the 

last three years. Bed capacity increased by approximately three hundred in the last year, and it is 

anticipated that approximately one thousand new beds will be added in the coming year. Extensions will 

be completed in 10 hospitals, and 23 new hospitals, and 23 new hospitals will be under construction. 

 

It is proposed to further extend tuberculosis control in the coming year through the installation of special 

X-ray units, the capital expense for which will be shared by the Anti-Tuberculosis League, local 

hospitals, and the Provincial Government. Under the Plan, patients entering hospitals 



 

February 5, 1948 

 

 
3 

having such equipment will receive a chest X-ray at public expense. 

 

Two additional Health Regions were organized during the past year, bringing the total number of 

established units to six. The number of patients carried by the Air Ambulance Service more than 

doubled in its second year of operation. A considerable increase also is noted in the number of patients 

diagnosed and treated by the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission. The quarters which have been 

provided for the Regina Clinic will enable it to give services unsurpassed anywhere in Canada. 

 

Great advances have been made in mental health through the inauguration of community programmes 

under the guidance of mental hygiene clinics, four of which have been established. Training facilities 

have been developed at North Battleford and Weyburn for short courses available to community 

professional personnel. At the same time, treatment and training at the Weyburn and North Battleford 

hospitals have greatly improved. 

 

Despite the continued shortage of materials and equipment, highway construction in the past year 

exceeded all previous records; building and surfacing covered a total of 2,185 miles. In addition to the 

improvement of existing roads, the Government’s programme of development pushed the frontiers of 

the Province further north to Lac La Ronge and along the Flin Flon highway. New roads were extended 

into the northern agricultural areas. The roads maintained by the Government during the past year 

reached an all-time high of 8,977 miles. The use of government crews has effected many economies, 

and as a result, the full advance in highway construction costs general throughout the continent, has not 

been reflected in construction costs in Saskatchewan. The bridge construction programme of the past 

year was carried out on as large a scale as materials permitted and it is proposed that it progress further 

during 1948. In the coming year, it is intended to continue an extensive programme of highway 

construction in every part of the Province. 

 

For the first time, applying a formula which recognizes local conditions, grants to municipalities for the 

construction of market roads were made upon an equalization basis. In view of its widespread 

acceptance, it is proposed to continue this policy in the coming year. 

 

Positive steps are now being taken to construct a bridge across the South Saskatchewan River. This 

undertaking will meet a long felt need in the southwest part of the Province. 

 

My Government, recognizing the important place of local government in provincial affairs, has been 

giving consideration to the needs of municipalities. The Province has assumed some of the burdens 

formerly borne by the municipalities, and additional revenues have been granted them. The government 

proposed to convene a conference of representatives of the municipalities and of the Province for the 

purpose of dealing with provincial-municipal relations. A study of their respective responsibilities and 

sources of revenue is now proceeding. 

 

In recent months an inter-provincial conference on municipality assessment 



 

February 5, 1948 
 

 
4 

has succeeded in devising principles to bring about uniformity in the assessment of property in the 

Prairie Provinces. 

 

Legislation will be submitted to provide the basis for the municipal assessment of railway property in 

the Province. It is also proposed to introduce legislation providing for a measure of self-government in 

hamlets, the residents of which will be empowered to elect committees to make special levies for public 

improvements. 

 

The Department of Municipal Affairs has completed its review of the 1928 Seed Grain Accounts in all 

municipalities and refunding will be completed in a short space of time. 

 

The Government is keenly aware of the needs of our senior citizens who are without the amenities of 

home life. Increased accommodation has been made available to them during the past year, and it is 

proposed to further extend these facilities. The Legislature will be asked to make provision for 

increasing the benefits granted by My Government to Those entitled to old age pensions. 

 

The transfer of administration of the corrective institutions to the Department of Social Welfare has 

made possible the implementation of a progressive programme of training and treatment along the lines 

suggested in 1946 by the Saskatchewan Penal Commission. 

 

Work among the Metis population of the Province has been accelerated in the past year; Metis schools 

and housing for teachers were constructed at Crescent Lake and Duck Lake, and expansion of this 

programme is planned in the coming year. 

 

For the first time, systematic fire inspections were carried out in the Province. The Fire Commissioner 

inspected more than six thousand buildings in the past year and developed a basis for the participation of 

local authorities in an integrated fire prevention programme. 

 

In recognition of the need for improved educational facilities in the Province, my Government paid 

increased grants during the past year. Rising costs have imposed greater burdens upon authorities 

charged with the responsibility of providing education. Bargaining between teachers and trustees has 

proceeded upon a collective basis in many localities, and progress is steadily being made in improving 

the status and remuneration of teachers. 

 

The in-service training programme for teachers has been extended during the year to include all 

superintendencies in the Province. 

 

During the year, the addition to the engineering Building at the University was completed; work on the 

Soils and Dairy Building, the School for Agriculture and the medical College building is likewise 

progressing. 1948 will see progress made in the construction of a building to house a betatron which will 

be available for atomic and cancer research. 



 

February 5, 1948 

 

 
5 

By the end of 1948 the school building programme in Northern Saskatchewan will be nearly completed. 

Although the cost of building materials has greatly increased, there has been satisfactory progress in 

building and renovating schools. 

 

A conference of farmer, labour and teacher organizations sponsored by the Adult Education Division in 

co-operation with the Occupational Group Council, the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, and the 

Saskatchewan Co-operative Union, succeeded in fostering understanding of the problems common to 

these groups, and paved the way to further co-ordinated activity. It is proposed that similar conferences 

be held in the coming year. 

 

The year 1947 established a record for mineral production and it is anticipated that Saskatchewan stands 

at the threshold of a period of widespread mineral development. Mineral production valued 

approximately at $25 millions in 1946, reached a total of $32 millions in 1947, being a gain of 25 per 

cent. This development is being encouraged by the extension of mineral surveys and geological studies. 

 

Industrial development also expanded during the past year. the output from the Government plants 

increased. Reports and financial statements of the crown corporations will be tabled in the course of the 

Session. There was also a rise in the general level of industrial activity, both private and co-operative. 

 

Research and experiment have proceeded in a variety of fields, including the use of Lloydminster oil, the 

refining of sodium sulphate, the mining of potash, the utilization of timber and pulpwood, the production 

of salt, the manufacture of rockwood and the processing of a wide range of ceramic materials. 

 

The Royal Commission on Forestry submitted its report in May of last year and a comprehensive 

programme of conservation and development has been set in motion with a view to prevention of the 

wasteful exploitation and maximum utilization of the Province’s forest resources. The Report of the 

Royal Commission on Fisheries has set the pattern for the Government’s fish policy which is designed 

to improve the quality of fish, to scientifically utilize fish products and to stabilize the fishing industry. 

 

The fur resources of the Province are being conserved and developed. It is expected that production 

yields will increase further through a proper allocation of trap lines and improvement of natural 

=facilities. 

 

A northern administrator has been appointed to co-ordinate governmental activities in northern 

Saskatchewan. Establishment of an administrative Act for that area will be considered in the course of 

the Session. 

 

To provide services to residents of the northern areas, the 



 

February 5, 1948 
 

 
6 

Government has established a Crown corporation to fly passengers, mail and supplies on regular 

schedules using Prince Albert as a base. 

 

The Provincial power system has expanded through the purchase of Canadian Utilities, Limited. This 

added twenty-four generating units, thirty-eight communities and 419 miles of transmission lines to the 

power Commission system, bringing to 45,087 the total number of customers served. A third reduction 

in rates was effected during the year, and at the same time, both consumption and net revenues 

increased. New generating units and transmission lines have made possible the extension of rural 

electrification in the Province. 

 

A further increase in co-operative activity was reflected by the number of organizations carrying on 

business in the Province and the volume of business transacted by them. Recognizing the dependence of 

Canadian agriculture upon British markets, and in order to better enable the United Kingdom to buy 

Saskatchewan’s produce, My Government has continued to stimulate trade with the object of effecting 

direct exchanges of commodities wherever possible. to this end, a trade delegation of Saskatchewan 

producers and distributors sponsored by the Government, will leave shortly for Great Britain to attend 

the coming British Industries Exhibition. 

 

The application of the Canadian railways to the Board of Transport Commissioners for a thirty per cent 

increase in freight rates, has been strenuously resisted by the Government, acting in co-operation with 

the other western provinces and the Maritime provinces: Saskatchewan’s dependence upon transport 

facilities necessitates continued opposition to every move designed to increase railway charges at the 

expense of western producers and consumers. 

 

Further encouragement was given to the extended use of the Hudson’s Bay Route, through which passed 

a greater volume of commercial exports in the past year, than in any previous year. A second delegation 

to Churchill is being sponsored to enable interested citizens to view the possibilities of the route as a 

port serving the western provinces. 

 

Research has proceeded into the construction and improvement of rural homes, the establishment of 

community centres and the use of building materials. The emergency housing programme was continued 

by the Department of Reconstruction and Rehabilitation during the past year; more than five hundred 

housing units have been completed to date, and one hundred more are under construction. Housing, 

dormitory and dining room facilities have been operated for student veterans and their families at 

various points in the Province. Citizens rehabilitation committees have continued their activities in close 

co-operation with the Government and are working out solutions to many veterans’ rehabilitation 

problems. Surveys of employment opportunities for veterans have been continuously conducted; training 

and apprenticeship have been encouraged, and a considerable number of placements has been effected. 

Twelve hundred and eighty veterans have been settled on provincial crown lands under a thirty-three 

year renewable lease 



 

February 5, 1948 

 

 
7 

system, with an option to purchase at the end of ten years, and one thousand farm units will be allocated 

in 1948. 

 

Since its inception, the Automobile Accident Insurance plan has dealt with 2,728 personal injury claims 

on which it has paid or is currently paying more than $600,000. During the year, 2,788 collision claims 

were dealt with, incurred losses for this period alone being in excess of $575,000. Amendments to The 

Automobile Accident Insurance Act will be presented with the object of further extending benefits 

without increasing fees. 

 

During the past year, My Government has directed its attention to the enforcement of laws designed to 

give security to farmers in their homes and farms, and to workers in their employment. The Government 

has won its right to appeal to the judicial Committee of the Privy Council from the majority decision of 

the Supreme Court of Canada concerning the Farm Security Act, and all steps are being taken to 

establish the constitutional validity of this basic legislation. Rights granted by the Legislature to labour 

have been jeopardized by certain judicial decisions, but during 1947, the Supreme Court of Canada, 

reversing the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, upheld certain of the powers of the Labour Relations 

Board. Appeals are pending in higher courts concerning the application of provincial labour legislation 

to railways, and to decide whether the labour Relations Board has authority to enforce important aspects 

of the Trade Union Act. Upon the outcome of the latter appeal may depend the authority of other 

provincial boards to effectively carry out their duties. 

 

During 1947, the Hours of Work Act came into force, and as a result, a substantial number of workers in 

the province now enjoy an eight-hour day and a 44-hour week, with the same take-home pay. This 

measure complements previous measures granting workers higher minimum wages, annual and statutory 

holidays with pay, and security in the exercise of their right to organize. Improvements have also been 

made in The Workmen’s Compensation (Accident Fund) Act, and it is proposed at this Session to 

introduce amendments further extending the benefits of this legislation. 

 

In accordance with the resolution of the Assembly last year, steps have been taken to prepare 

amendments to the Professional Acts, which will be submitted for your consideration. 

 

Certain amendments to The Saskatchewan Election Act, and The Athabasca and Cumberland Election 

Act will be presented in the course of the Session. 

 

The public accounts of the last fiscal year, together with the Estimates of the year beginning April first, 

1948, will be submitted. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session with full confidence that you will favourably discharge 

your duties and responsibilities in the best interests of our Province, and may Divine Providence 

continue to bless our Province, and to guide the Legislature of Saskatchewan in all its deliberations. 

 

His Honour then retired from the Chamber. 

The House adjourned at 3:40 o’clock p.m. 


