



















































Hansard: March 10, 1948


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Fifth Session — Tenth Legislature 
 

Wednesday, March 10, 1948. 
 

The House met at three o’clock p.m. 

 

ON THE ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

Mr. A. T. Proctor: — Before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I wish to refer to the speech 

which the Hon. Premier made, yesterday, in this House, in which he is reported to have said as follows: 

“‘Does anybody suggest that the $69,160 went to the people who had invested $100 capital, or was this 

one of the ways of buttressing the campaign funds of the Liberal Party?’” 

 

“The Premier pointed out that the Company had been incorporated in September, 1940, when Mr. E. M. 

Culliton had been Provincial Secretary. The concern sold the dye to the Saskatchewan Tax Commission, 

which was under Mr. Culliton’s Department. ‘It is very difficult for me to believe that Mr. Culliton, now 

a candidate in the Gravelbourg constituency, knew nothing about it,’ Mr. Douglas suggested. ‘When the 

Provincial Secretary joined the Army the Tax Commission was transferred to the Highways Department, 

presided over by A.T. Procter, the member for Moosomin’.” I was the Minister at that time. 

 

“Mr. Douglas said: ‘Either Mr. Procter did not know what was going on, in which case he was inept and 

incompetent, or he did know what was going on, in which case he was a party to depriving the 

Saskatchewan Treasury of money which went either into the Liberal Party’s or somebody’s pocket,’ the 

Premier charged.” 

 

I wish to state to you in this House, Mr. Speaker, that I listened to the charge Premier Douglas made 

yesterday in the House, with reference to purchases of dye from Acme Dye and Chemical Limited by 

the Provincial Tax Commission, and I have perused the report of his speech in this morning’s 

Leader-Post. When the Hon. E.M. Culliton joined the army the Tax Commission was transferred to me, 

as stated by the Premier. 

 

The official directly in charge of the Provincial Tax Commission was Colonel Loy T. Sifton, the 

Provincial Tax Commissioner, and all purchases of dye and other equipment and supplies were made 

under his authority. The dye used by the Commission was a dye specially developed for colouring 

tax-free gasoline, and was purchased in large quantities by the Commission, under arrangements made 

before the Provincial Tax Commission came under my authority. The reason for a large purchase in 

1942 was that Colonel Sifton had been advised that owing to many chemicals . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Does the hon. member wish to make a statement on his behalf? 

 

Mr. Procter: — On my own behalf — Yes! That is what I am doing. I am explaining it . . . that Colonel 

Sifton had been advised that owing to many chemicals being required for war purposes, there was a 

prospect that the dye could not be obtained unless ordered considerably in advance. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

2 

 

I have no knowledge who constituted Acme Dye and Chemical, other than the Premier’s statement, and 

I have no knowledge whatever of any moneys they may have been paid being diverted to campaign 

funds at any time . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — On a point of Order, Mr. Speaker! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will you state your point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps: — Mr. Speaker: I think it is quite in order that a correction be made, but my hon. 

friend is now introducing new arguments, and proceeding to give this House another debate on the 

Budget. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that he is exceeding his authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — As I understand the hon. member, he is making his own position clear, as far as the 

statement of the Hon. Premier was concerned. 

 

Mr. Procter: — Yes, Mr. Speaker: and I go on . . . I fully believe that this is simply another unfounded 

charge such as Premier Douglas . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, Order! We cannot get into a debate on it. 

 

Mr. Procter: — All right, Mr. Speaker. I wish to state on my behalf that I have every confidence in the 

administration of the Provincial Tax Commission . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, Order! If the hon. member will confine himself to his own particular intimate 

person . . . 

 

Mr. Procter: — . . . I have every confidence in the administration of Colonel Sifton under my direction 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, Order! If the hon. member wishes to make a representation on behalf of 

himself, I will rule that in order, but I cannot allow a general debate on it. 

 

Mr. Procter: — Very good, Mr. Speaker. For myself and my administration, not only of the Provincial 

Tax Commission but every Department placed under me, I say that nothing wrong or dishonourable ever 

took place in any one of those Departments . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — That is out of order. 

 

Mr. Procter: — Certainly it is in order! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member may want to make a simple refutation on behalf of himself, and I 

will rule that in order; but I cannot allow you to associate yourself with . . . 

 

Mr. Procter: — Any statement of inference or wrong-doing made against me by Premier Douglas is not 

only false but a malicious lie, told only for the purpose of obtaining political advantage for himself. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

3 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — I think we will have to have that last statement withdrawn — “malicious lie”. 

 

Mr. Procter: — Just a minute, and I will give you something further. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I hope the hon. gentleman will confine himself to the position I have placed 

him in, and keep in order. I cannot allow a debate to go on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — What about that statement about “a malicious lie”. 

 

Mr. Procter: — There is just one more statement, and I will give you something. It is smears like this 

that have kept honest men out of public life. The Premier of this Province is a “stinking skunk”! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! Order! The hon. member must withdraw that last statement. 

 

Mr. Procter: — I will not withdraw it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker: I do not think we should cause any unpleasantness, but give the hon. 

gentleman a few minutes to reconsider what he has just said. Now I would like . . . 

 

Mr. Procter: — My honour has been impugned in this House. I am the judge of what has been 

impugned, and without leaving this House, I am not going to withdraw it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker: All I wanted to do was to rise to say that, on behalf of the Government 

I am prepared, this afternoon, to give assurance that we will appoint a Royal Commission to investigate 

the charges made yesterday by the Premier, and to investigate the conduct of the past government with 

respect to the purchase of dye. We are prepared, if the members prefer, to appoint a special committee of 

this Legislature, on which will be every member of the Opposition; or, to refer this matter to the Public 

Accounts Committee with power to act. We are very anxious, Mr. Speaker, to have this matter 

thoroughly investigated, and if the Opposition would like that to be done, all they need to do is ask for it, 

and it will be. 

 

Mr. Procter: — Mr. Speaker: I have given this matter consideration, and I won’t withdraw a single 

sentence. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Then, if you will not withdraw, of course I am in no position to decide. It is up to the 

House to decide what is to be done in your case. 

 

Mr. Procter: — That is perfectly all right with me, Mr. Speaker. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

4 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Does the hon. member still refuse to withdraw? 

 

Mr. Procter: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Then I am afraid I will have to name him. 

 

Mr. Procter: — Very good, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — This places us all in a most embarrassing position, particularly in view of our 

friendly feeling toward the hon. member. Nevertheless, I think that we all agree that we must operate 

this House under Rules of Order and we must maintain a certain amount of order here; and we must all 

abide by the Speaker’s decision. If we cannot, then, instead of having order, we have chaos. I am sure 

we would not want that, and I would make one last appeal to the hon. gentleman to withdraw that 

statement to avoid any unpleasantness. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the hon. member prepared to withdraw? 

 

Mr. Procter: — No. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Then, Mr. Speaker, I move that the hon. member be suspended from the service of 

the House for the remainder of to-day’s sitting. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It is moved that the hon. member be requested to withdraw for the rest of this sitting. 

Those in favour will say “aye”. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — Who was the Seconder, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I do not know whether a Seconder is required to this Motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Seconded by the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Moved by the Hon. Mr. Fines and seconded by the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank, that the 

member for Moosomin be suspended from the service of the House for the remainder of to-day’s sitting. 

Those in favour will say “aye”; opposed will say “no”. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I declare the Motion carried, and I would ask the hon. member to withdraw. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — A recorded vote decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Call in the members. 

 

Mr. Procter: — Do I withdraw before the vote, or after, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The matter is not decided until after the vote. 

 

Mr. Procter: — May I ask for your ruling? I do not think I am entitled to vote on this. Am I correct? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think you are correct. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

5 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The vote about to be taken is on the Motion which arose out of the result of my ruling 

in regard to the withdrawal of an epithet which was used by the hon. member for Moosomin. Those in 

favour of the ruling being upheld on the Motion, which was that the hon. member be suspended from 

service of the House for the remainder of this sitting, will please stand. 

 

The Motion was agreed to, 43 to 4. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I want to say to the member that no one regrets this more than myself, and I think, 

upon reflection, he will regret it also. I would ask him to withdraw. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

The House resumed, from Tuesday, March 9, 1948, on the proposed motion of Hon. C. M. Fines 

(Provincial Treasurer): That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair (the House to go into Committee of 

Supply). 

 

Mr. H. Gibbs (Swift Current): — I wish to congratulate the Hon. Provincial Treasurer on bringing 

down such a fine Budget. True, the Budget is the highest in the history of Saskatchewan; but I have 

always been of the opinion that in advancing progressive measures, while we live and exist under the 

monetary system, we shall have to spend money; and as far as I am concerned, if money is being spent 

on behalf, and for the benefit, of our people here in the province of Saskatchewan, and for progress and 

development, and all that is vital to the welfare of our people and the province as a whole, then I am 

indeed greatly gratified. 

 

I am very sorry indeed that no action has been taken to completely eradicate the cantankerous Education 

Tax; however, I shall have more to say in this regard later. 

 

Since the opening of the present Session of the Legislature, I have listened patiently to the ranting and 

raving of my hon. friends and members of the Opposition, and how they have belaboured with 

castigation the members of the Government side of this House; and I have as yet to hear any one of them 

utter or come out with any kind of constructive criticism. To me their method seems to be — destroy, 

tear down, and destroy again; and of this method I shall have something to say again a little later. The 

record of the present administration in four short years of office speaks for itself, and myself as one 

humble member of the present administration, am mighty proud of these achievements which this 

Government has accomplished in so short a space of time. 

 

I am also certain and assured that the great masses of the common people of Saskatchewan feel and 

think the same way. It is true, Sir, we are not perfect; but I have yet to see or come in contact with 

anything that is. At least we are trying to build up and construct, under a planned economy, and province 

and future life that will be beneficial to every man and woman and 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

6 

 

child who are living within our boundaries. 

 

When we hear, Sir, from the hon. Opposition members (and I notice they have all left the House now, to 

sympathize with their colleague) about the terrible C.C.F.’ers and socialists, to the uninitiated it is 

enough to make one’s blood run cold. 

 

Now, Sir, I am not going to go into detail and deal with the progressive measures this Government has 

put into being and operation, because the Hon. Premier and Hon. Ministers and members who have 

spoken in the House previously, have already dealt with those matters; so in order to avoid repetition I 

do not intend to go over the ground that has already been covered; but, Mr. Speaker, I would like to deal 

briefly on one or two subjects that are vitally important to the people residing in the constituency of 

Swift Current, and the surrounding constituencies of Swift Current; and the first one is — yes, the hon. 

members may well smile, because you guessed it — the proposed Bridge at Saskatchewan Landing. 

 

Now, as you know, Sir, and also most hon. members of this House, the bridge has been the 

stock-in-trade ‘big laugh’ and a source of amusement for many, many years. I think I can say, possibly 

without fear of contradiction, it has been one of the biggest political footballs, too, that this province has 

ever experienced; however, I can say, Sir, that at long last the ‘pipe dream’ which some anti-socialist 

editors fondly loved to call it, is coming true, and they are beginning to wonder what magic powers the 

C.C.F. Government consist of. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, it is no surprise to me, because we have told them 

and told them that the socialist fundamentally and practically believe in construction and not destruction, 

and I want the hon. members of the Opposition to definitely note that. 

 

I would like to dwell for a few minutes, and point out to the hon. members, how this ‘creation’ — that 

is, the Bridge — took life. It was neither a miracle nor was it black magic! It was just a matter of 

determination, common sense, and the will to do things. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, in the year 1944 a 

new provincial government was born in the province of Saskatchewan, and in the election campaign of 

that year, Mr. Taggart, who was then Minister of Agriculture of this province, went on the hustings; 

thing in the political world did not look too rosy, and the perpetual promises of the Liberal Government 

had about petered out. So, Mr. Taggart and his Liberal cohorts were at their wits’ end and did not know 

what to drum up for eyewash, to try and fool the electors with again; however, one of the bulbs burst 

with a loud bang and somebody said — I presume some member of the Liberal Executive — “The 

Bridge! the Bridge! We can fool them again!” You see, it was in the dying hours of the campaign; there 

wasn’t much time left, and something had to be done and done quickly, in order to elect Mr. Taggart. So 

out of the bag came the old, old bogey, and once again the creation — only it was a ‘soft-soap bridge’ 

this time — and as you will recall, instead of soft-soaping the electors, the marvellous ingenuity of the 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

7 

 

Liberal pranksters soft-soaped themselves out of office. You see they never figured it would boomerang! 

 

I do not need to repeat to this House as regards the two bridge Resolutions that were submitted to 

Ottawa, because they only went the way of several others relative to this province, and that was, in my 

estimation, in the wastepaper basket, or the ashcan! 

 

However, this Government and my colleagues never lost sight of the project, and we kept working, and I 

am most happy to say a solution has been found and brought to fruition. We went to work and set up a 

non-political bridge committee composed of good citizens of various political affiliations. This 

committee was split — half to work north of the River, and half to work south of the River — to raise 

$600,000. As you know, the bond drive is on, and I have no doubt whatsoever it will go well over the 

top, in spite of Mr. Walter Tucker, the Provincial Liberal Leader, who, when he spoke to a large meeting 

in Swift Current, a short while ago, tried to deliberately sabotage the whole project with his fantastic 

statements. 

 

The Committee had previously gone over the pros and cons long before Mr. Tucker came to Swift 

Current, and I can tell this House we will look after the details without Mr. Tucker’s aid, and also the 

Federal Government’s aid. They have not yet offered us one red cent. 

 

Mr. Tucker, in his speech at Swift Current, tried to discourage the people at that meeting. He told them it 

would be foolish to put their money into such a foolish venture, and here is the report in the 

‘Leader-Post’ the day after Mr. Tucker spoke at Swift Current: “Tucker counts on Spring Election” and 

then in great big letters — I believe everyone in this House can see them from here — “C.C.F. Bridge 

Plan Obsolete.” That is what it said. 

 

Well, I can tell Mr. Tucker, as we told him up there that day, when he tried to bring in the implication 

that when Mr. Gardiner’s proposed Dam for irrigation purposes, was finished — that if we put in the 

bridge it would be under water, on account of the backwater from the proposed dam down at the Elbow. 

We had already discussed those things, we had gone into them thoroughly with this Bridge Committee; 

and when Mr. Tucker made the assertion, one chap who was sitting in the front row at the meeting said, 

“Well, it is like this, Mr. Tucker — we have been looking for a bridge for the past thirty-five years in 

this neighbourhood, and a bridge under water is better than no bridge at all, so we’re going ahead with 

it.” We did arrange that if the Federal Government or even the weaklings of this province want to come 

into the picture, it is still wide open. We are making reservations for the construction of this thing. If it is 

necessary, if we deem later, that it should be a high-level bridge, we are prepared to build the abutments 

and the piers to take care of a larger and heavier construction. 

 

At this point I would like to thank the leading personages up there in Swift Current, who have taken 

such great interest and put such effort into getting this Bridge proposition under way. I would like to 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

8 

 

thank Mr. Gillander, Secretary of the North Committee; Mr. Trumble, Secretary of the South 

Committee; Mr. D. Harding, General Chairman; the Hon. Minister of Highways; the Hon. Provincial 

Treasurer; and last, but not least, Mr. Tom Bentley, Federal Member for Swift Current, who gave us 

information and kept us fully informed as to what was going on, from Ottawa; and I sincerely thank 

Tom for what he has done, so that we can now see our dream coming true. 

 

At this point I would just like to read an excerpt from a letter I have received from the General Chairman 

of the Bridge Committee. The bonds were put on the market around February 1, and I got this letter on 

March 1, and he says: “Up to date, Harry, applications have been received to the amount of $105,000 

already.” I understand, too, that the Hon. Provincial Treasurer has received applications from Ontario, 

Manitoba and possibly one or two more. So, you see, in spite of what Tommy Tucker did, in his 

‘wind-bag’ talk up there, things are moving along very favourably indeed. 

 

I would like to say, too, for the benefit of the House, that the Headquarters’ Office for purchase of bonds 

is at the Newton Motors Company, Box 836, Swift Current — so don’t be shy, boys! Send in your 

applications, and I am sure we will have that bridge in the very near future. 

 

Now, Sir, I would like to bring to the attention of my hon. friend, the member for the Mediterranean 

Area — I am very sorry he is not in his seat to-day — that when he is casting reflections and throwing 

insults in his overbearing and pompous manner, at the Socialists or ‘Communists’ as he is so very fond 

of calling us on this side of the House, that I was raised and brought up a Socialist and for his 

information I want him to thoroughly understand that I am heartily proud of the fact, and I am also quite 

content to align myself with the Nollets, Sturdys and Lloyds — so that may be another one for his book. 

The hon. member apparently believes that the Socialists are forever destroying and ready to blow up 

everything in sight. My experience has been the direct opposite, and I would submit that by the actions 

and comments of the hon. member from the Mediterranean Area, in this House, he is the one who would 

probably enjoy doing the things he accuses the Socialists of doing. 

 

I would just like to quote what one gentleman said a few years ago. It goes like this: “I painfully reflect 

that in almost every political controversy if the last fifty years, the leisure classes, the titled classes, have 

been in the wrong. The common people, the toilers, the men of uncommon sense — these have been 

responsible for nearly all the social reform measures which the world accepts to-day.” Now, that was not 

a quotation from Karl Marx, or Friedrich Engels, or Nikolay Lenin. That was from one of the most 

eminent statesmen of Great Britain, William Gladstone. In my lifetime we have fought two wars to end 

war; at least that was the general impression, and yet the blood-soaked battlefields of Europe are still 

wet, and the talk still prevalent is — War! War! War! I do not think it is fair, or playing the game, to 

shout from the house tops and lay the debacle of unrest, chaos and bloodshed at the feet of the Socialists; 

because my hon. friend must know 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

9 

 

that war, chaos, destitution and degradation, are the spawn of capitalism and human avariciousness. 

 

I have been around a little in my time, but have yet to see monuments and statues put up in honour of the 

working man; so I will leave it to my hon. friend’s imagination as to who the monuments and statues 

represent that I know he must have seen while he was over in other countries. I think, though, that in the 

great paintings of the world, where the artists have painted the common people as their subject matter, 

we find them portrayed in peaceful industry. Take, for instance, Millet’s work of “The Gleaners” and 

“The Angelus” — just humble working folks trying to live in serenity. Now, my friend will observe that 

mostly the common people largely constitutes and believe in the philosophy and doctrines of Socialism, 

and there is a reason — and a big reason — why that is so. Take, for instance, the history of the 

working-class people of Great Britain, of which I am a native. When I look back over my childhood 

days, and reminisce, and look back over some of the deplorable conditions under which the common 

people had to work and exist, and were being exploited by unscrupulous and ruthless employers, it is no 

wonder to me that the great masses have changed their political viewpoint and rejected the old line 

Parties, whose main belief, to my estimation, was the law of ‘Rule and Divide’. 

 

I wonder whether my hon. friend had to come through the bitter experiences that millions of 

working-class people over in Great Britain and the countries of Europe have had to suffer. Does he 

realize that hundreds of thousands had to emigrate to Canada, the U.S.A. and countries of the British 

Commonwealth? 

 

Hundreds of thousands of Socialists and their children fought in wars. We have had two great wars in 

my lifetime. I was over in one of them, as you know; and my hon. friend was over in the last one; but it 

seems as though he would like to give the impression that he was the only one that ever was in the war, 

and that he won the war. The scurrilous statements he has made at this side of the House! When I, 

brought up as a Socialist, defended my Country as a Socialist, fought for democracy, fought wars to end 

war, and then another world war comes along — and who goes into it? The very children and families of 

the men who fought the First Great War. Hundreds of thousands of our children have died on the 

battlefields, they have been debauched with bloodshed, and yet we hear the statements coming over 

from my hon. friend of the Mediterranean Area. Surely it is about time he took the cobwebs from his 

eyes, and looked around to see what was going on! We have had good Socialists in this world, and 

Socialists will fight — they will fight for democracy, no matter what land or what nation they belong to. 

 

I do not think, Mr. Speaker, that any man or woman wishes to leave the land of their birth on their own 

volition. In the great majority of cases it is a matter of bettering oneself, both from a monetary and an 

economical viewpoint. True, there are a few cases where it is a matter of health — so, 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

10 

 

by taking the picture of exploitation, desolation and poverty, I think it clearly sums up why we here in 

Canada have such a cosmopolitan populations, and also why the good people of Saskatchewan, through 

the years of economical unrest, saw fit to change past governments, for a People’s C.C.F. Government, 

which believes in humanitarian security for its people. 

 

I wonder if my hon. friends have ever done any reading of Socialistic works? Sometimes I wonder at the 

statements they throw over here to us on the Government side of the House. I would just like to refer 

them to some of the Socialists of an older day, or some of the members of the Fabian Society which 

preceded the Socialists — good people, every one of them — and to-day, over in Great Britain, we have 

a Socialist Labour Government through the efforts of those people and the working class, combined. 

 

I would like to refer my hon. friends to the works of Robert Blatchford — “Old Non-Com,” that was his 

‘nom de plume’ in those days. I remember reading Robert Blatchford when I was just a schoolboy, when 

he wrote “Merrie England”, “God and My Neighbour”, “Britain for the British”; and the books of 

Robert Tressall, who wrote “The Ragged-Trousered Philanthropist.” I wonder if my hon. friends have 

ever read any of those books? If not, I advise them to get busy and do so, because I am sure it would not 

only improve their minds but probably improve a heck of a lot more. 

 

I wonder if these men have ever heard of the good Fabians, the like of George Lansbury, Sydney Webb 

and his wife, Arthur Greenwood, Bob Clynes — they are not Communists, Mr. Speaker — they are all 

good men and women, of good British stock, people of the British Commonwealth; and this is what we 

get from our friends over on the other side of the House, throwing only epithets and everything else over 

at this side. Why, a lot of them have never even been out of the country! It is about time they started to 

travel! I wonder if they have ever thought of scientific advancement. It seems to me, here in this House, 

that they don’t want to advance anything; but yet, every day in their lives, they see scientific industrial 

advancement taking place. I am not going to go into detail about these advancements, but what do we 

see, Mr. Speaker? I, as a railroader, had quite a few years of railroading — started as a young man — I 

have seen tremendous changes. I was on the road when we had nothing but wooden coaches, with bare 

wooden seats and everything that went with them. The railway companies had to advance with the 

times, and what do we find to-day? We find things considerably changed on both the C.N.R. and the 

C.P.R. The wooden coaches and boxcars have been replaced with steel; we see larger locomotives. The 

other day, when I travelled to Swift Current, possibly I was lucky, because I know the C.P.R. hasn’t got 

many of these coaches out yet; gut I travelled in a brand new coach that was a treat to ride in. It had 

what they call “sleepy hollow” chairs, that conform with the body make-up, and there is no doubt they 

are a comfort to sit in. Now, these companies are putting millions of dollars into expansion and scientific 

advancement of their line of business. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but the railroads of to-day have on the 

road to-day a coach which cost around $60,000 — it is a school in itself. I hear my friends talking about 

the Larger School Units, and all this and that, but here is a coach put on the road for the benefit of the 

employees; and in our district Mr. Bert 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

11 

 

Knox, a locomotive engineer, is one of the head men of the Safety Movement. They go from place to 

place, trying to cut down the average of accidents to save lives, to better the community, to better life all 

around. Of course, we have people in our own workshops who are stupid and stubborn, who want to still 

carry on with the old way of doing things. They do not like to adopt anything new; and of course we 

have quite a little trouble trying to educate them in the importance of these safety movements. 

 

I suggest to the Liberal Party — we see all these changes, they go on right under our eyes each and 

every day — they can see them too, but they do not want to change their political activities or their 

political stride. They seem to think that everything else can change but politics. Well, I say it is about 

time politics had changed — we are changing them, and I think it is all for the better. 

 

Under the caption — “Socialism — What is it?” — and giving a thumbnail description, I would like to 

quote the description given by a lady, Mrs. Jessie E. Cameron, which I think is excellent, and I quote: 

 

“I believe in the four-fold plan of life — the intellectual, the physical, the spiritual and the social. 

Socialism, then, to me is this: How can I be happy intellectually, physically, spiritually and socially if 

you are not happy intellectually, physically, spiritually and socially?” 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, embodies a great deal of what the common people are thinking and hoping for 

to-day, and we are not crying or wanting war and bloodshed on our doorsteps. We wish to live generally 

in peace and happiness and comfort, and without class diversion, and surely in a great country like 

Canada this philosophy can be accomplished if we can get together and oust the bitterness and hatred 

from our social and political life. 

 

I would like to quote a few words of a man who lived a number of years ago, who said: “No men living 

are more worthy to be trusted than those who toil up from poverty, none less inclined to take or touch 

aught which they have not honestly earned.” Now, those words were not uttered by Maxim Gorki, Joe 

Stalin, or Leo Tolstoy, but the great American Emancipator, Abraham Lincoln. 

 

I am sorry my hon. friend, the member for Moosomin is not in his chair, but after that exhibition of 

Monday, I was really going to say something; but possibly at the present time he is feeling a little ‘down 

in the dumps’, for I know that our hon. Premier, yesterday, gave him more than he could take, and 

possibly that is why he is feeling as he is to-day. 

 

Now, Sir, if our friends of the Opposition and the hon. member for the Mediterranean Area can 

obliterate from their minds — and I would suggest that their minds are completely befogged at the 

present moment as to the philosophy of Socialism, and, in particular, our C.C.F. Crusade — well, then, I 

would suggest that they throw in their lot with us on this side of the House, and 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

12 

 

fight with us instead of against us, in order that we obtain for the people of Saskatchewan and of Canada 

the security and comfort we so much desire, and forever do away with that great curse — Fear! It seems 

to me, Mr. Speaker, that is the very thing the Opposition members are preaching at the present time. 

 

I have another quotation to make here —a quotation by Cicero: “The recovery of freedom is so splendid 

a thing that we must not shun even death when seeking to recover it.” 

 

I sincerely believe the majority of the people of this province have great faith in the present provincial 

government in the things they have accomplished for the betterment of our people. I do not intend to go 

into detail about the progressive legislation brought down by this government, because other speakers 

have dealt with those matters, and a very fine over-all picture was presented by the Hon. Provincial 

Treasurer in bringing down the Budget, and for the larger part of the Budget I can only offer my 

commendations; but, Mr. Speaker, I am very sorry indeed to see that nothing more was done to eradicate 

the Education Tax from our midst. 

 

For some years now I have been anxious as regards this Tax, and it was, and is to-day, a much talked-of 

topic; in fact, ever since the past Liberal Government put it into effect. I remember some years ago, 

1939, I believe, when I was an Alderman for the City of Swift Current, there was much criticism about 

this tax, and I submitted a Resolution to Council at that time which was accepted and forwarded to the 

urban Municipal Convention asking the Liberal Government to completely eradicate the Education Tax. 

The Convention passed the Resolution by a very substantial majority. Nothing, to my knowledge, was 

done about it for the remaining years the Liberals were in office. It ended up like a lot more Resolutions 

— as I suggested previously — in the wastepaper basket or the ashcan. 

 

However, since the C.C.F. came into power they have gradually taken the tax off various commodities, 

for which I thank the administration; however, I earnestly felt that by the time our first term had expired, 

complete eradication of the Education Tax would have been observed. I am of the opinion that still more 

graduation of the Tax could have been made this present Session and that at least it could have been 

taken off all clothing, especially where school children are concerned. I think we are all aware of the 

vast amount of clothing growing boys and girls go through in the course of a year, and I sincerely hope, 

Sir, that my appeal will not be wasted and that the Government will give it serious consideration at all 

times, and in so doing, will rectify this regrettable matter. 

 

Well, Sir, before I take my seat I would like to say that a few years ago, when we were supposed to be at 

peace with the world, conditions in Saskatchewan and other provinces in Canada were absolutely 

deplorable, and we saw the atrocious waste that was going on, with unemployment rife, and prices at a 

very low ebb for the essentials of life we produced. It made one’s heart 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

13 

 

sick to hear and read about the food produced in our country being deliberately destroyed, and much of 

the fish and fruit used as fertilizer, because of the simple fact the market was so low it would not pay 

producers to ship. 

 

We cannot forget those conditions just as easily, perhaps, as our Liberal friends would like us to do. As 

Emerson said, “The firmest and loveliest ground on which people can live is Truth — the real with the 

real, a ground on which nothing is assumed,” and I can assure my hon. Friends that is one thing the 

C.C.F. people’s Party of this province believes in — Truth, Honesty! 

 

My thoughts go back to a few years ago, when, in the State of Tennessee, there was a court trial about 

whether evolution should be taught in the schools. I think members will recall that a terrific debate 

ensued between those two eminent lawyers, Mr. Clarence Darrow and Mr. William Jennings Bryan — 

since the time of that episode, and seeing and expressing what has gone on in Canada and other 

countries, for that matter, and hearing the other day my hon. friend, the member for Rosthern, mention 

the Darwinian theory, it struck me as rather funny. We have been accustomed to his fairytales, and his 

childish statements. I remember the first or second Session we were in here, he made some remark about 

himself, likening himself to a mouse — I think all hon. members remember that — a mouse! why, I 

don’t know — whether he looked mousey, or felt mousey, I don’t know; but he did refer to himself as a 

kind of mouse. It might have been ‘Mickey Mouse’ for all I know. Well, the other day, he mentioned the 

combination of the Darwinian Theory of monkeys and man. As a matter of fact, he made that remark to 

one of our hon. members on the government side of the House. I could not get the drift of it at all, but, of 

course, I had heard the hon. member rave before, but this time he was talking about the Darwinian 

Theory. In previous Sessions, that same member talked about ‘Cinderella’ and ‘Little Red Riding Hood’ 

and ‘Little Bo-Peep’. They seem to be his favourite classics. I would like to suggest to the hon. member 

that he try something else in future, go in for something a little heavier, say, ‘Aladdin and his Wonderful 

Lamp’ or ‘Robinson Crusoe’. This is the member who talks about ‘Socialist drivel’! I often wonder 

whether the hon. member has given any study to the Darwinian Theory. He seemed to be a little 

self-conscious when he mentioned it; and I must confess that at times I have been guilty of looking very 

seriously in his direction, because sometimes it struck me there was a very striking resemblance to the 

Simian variety. It is too bad that there are not a few chandeliers around here. We could have had some 

fun, for I am almost certain he would have been swinging! 

 

I picked up a rather amusing diatribe the other day, and it happened to be concerned with — not the 

human viewpoint — but the monkey’s viewpoint! It reads like this: 

 

“Three moneys sat in a cocoanut tree 

Discussing things as they’re said to be. 

Said one to the others, ‘Now listen, you two, 

There’s a certain rumour that can’t be true 

That men descended from our noble race. 

The very idea is a darned disgrace. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

14 

 

“’No monkey ever deserted his wife, 

Starved her babies and ruined her life, 

And you have never known another monk 

To leave her babies with others to bunk, 

Or pass them on from one to another 

Till they scarcely know who was their mother! 

 

“’And another thing you will never see, 

A “Monk” build a fence ‘round a cocoanut tree, 

And let the cocoanuts go to waste, 

Forbidding all other monks to taste. 

Why, if I’d put a fence around the tree 

Starvation would force you to steal from me! 

 

“’Here’s another thing that a monk won’t do— 

Get out at night, and get on a stew; 

Or use a gun, or club, or knife 

To take some other monkey’s life, 

Yes, Man descended — the ornery cuss, 

But, Brother! he didn’t descend from us!’” 

 

Before taking my seat, I would like to draw to the hon. members’ attention the complaints I have 

received recently as regards the Federal Income Tax forms that western farmers are receiving. They tell 

me the questions they have to answer are absolutely absurd and ridiculous, and that they differ to those 

which the eastern farmers have to make out. Sometimes I wonder whether Saskatchewan is labelled or 

not — could be, you know. 

 

For the benefit of my hon. friends in the Opposition, who are always overjoyed whenever the Labour 

Party or Socialists or C.C.F. lose a Seat — a few weeks ago, I believe it was on the Throne Speech, the 

hon. Leader of the Opposition mentioned some of the C.C.F. seats that had been lost in Canada, and I 

happened to remark to him — “What about Great Britain?” The other day, we got a report —“The 

Thirty-Seventh Win by Labour” — in the Seat of Wigan, Lancashire, they won another seat. They have 

lost one seat out of thirty-eight contested so far since the Labour Socialist Government came into power 

in Great Britain. It indicates that the large masses of people, the working class, farmers, businessmen 

and so on, see that it is the only future for them — to have labour legislation or socialist legislation; and 

I am glad that they took Wigan seat by a very comfortable majority — I happen to come from about six 

miles from Wigan. 

 

My hon. friends talk about the scourge of Socialism and what it is going to do to the people of Canada 

and to the people of the world. I took a clipping out of a Canadian paper the other day. The headline is 

—“Legacy left British Labourites Despite Education in Socialism.” I will just read you a couple of 

excerpts from this paper. It says: “The windfall came from a wealthy Yorkshire industrialist, one Robert 

A. Atkinson, who recently died, leaving his 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

15 

 

entire cash assets to the Labour Party, naming four Labour members of the Party as trustees. He directed 

in his Will that the money be used for the education of the people of this country in the principles of 

Socialism. The Trustees, two of the five appointed to administer the educational trust were Mr. 

Greenwood, and the Party Secretary; the others are, Emanuel Shinwell, M.P., Chairman of the Labour 

Party; Philip Noel Baker, M.P., and Thomas Williamson, M.P. Atkinson’s fortune was left in the names 

of the first four.” 

 

That man, Mr. Speaker, left in the neighbourhood of one million pounds to the Labour Government of 

Great Britain. In our money, that would be approximately five million dollars. I wonder what our 

Opposition thinks about that? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He wouldn’t be a capitalist, would he? 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — Maybe he was, but he had seen what was going on in the Old Country; I mentioned in 

my speech a little earlier what went on — what you fellows yet haven’t got through your thick skulls 

can happen, but it will happen if we keep the likes of you in power! 

 

As I say, Mr. Speaker, we are a Government and a Party that believes in advancement. The other day I 

was seated at my desk when a group of young girls came and stood at the door of the House, and said, 

“May we come in?” I said, “Why not? Your parents helped to buy this place, helped to build it. It 

belongs to the people of Saskatchewan — not to a private few.” Those children came into this Chamber, 

Mr. Speaker, and they all wanted to sit in the Premier’s chair — they considered that an honour. They 

will remember the day they sat in the Premier’s chair, as long as they live. 

 

There are other suggestions I would like to make at this time, Mr. Speaker, to show you the 

advancement that is taking place. We members sit in nicely upholstered, comfortable chairs. I presume 

when this place was first built they sat on hard chairs — I don’t know; but I have often wondered how in 

the world the spectators (and we have quite a number here every day) can sit on those antiquated, 

outdated seats up in our Public Galleries; and I suggest that if we cannot completely do away with those 

seats, we could at least have them cushioned, to make them more comfortable. Now, perhaps there is 

something about those seats — maybe there is a history behind them — possibly the Liberals never gave 

it a thought, because I don’t suppose it mattered to them — maybe no one ever came to hear them; but 

we do have large audience, and I will leave that just as a suggestion. It was rather amusing when I first 

took my seat in this House in 1944 to see the comical side of a lot of things; and when I saw you, Mr. 

Speaker, come in the House with your three-cornered hat on, it made me smile. I thought to myself, 

‘Well, that’s peculiar,” because I had read about the Seventeenth and the Eighteenth Century, and my 

mind went back to when the Bow Street runners of London used to wear the same kind of hat that you 

are wearing now — the three-cornered hat. You see, the Bow Street runners preceded the present 

‘bobby’. Not only that — the highwaymen of those days, the bad bandits used to wear these 

three-cornered hats — Dick Turpin and others; and so, Mr. Speaker, I think it might be a little more 

dignified even if you adopted the old college mortar board or something like that, to uphold the dignity 

and decorum of this House. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

16 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I am confident that when election day rolls around again, the people of this 

province will re-endorse the present Government, who have done so much for their welfare; and I shall 

definitely support the Motion. 

 

Mr. Wm. J. Arthurs (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to support the Budget which was brought 

down a week ago last Thursday by our Provincial Treasurer, I do so with great pride. Sometimes I think 

I am in the same position as most of the Opposition, although I may have a little more insight into it. 

The question is this — they just cannot understand how this Provincial Treasurer can bring down a 

Budget as large as this — last year it was larger than the year before, this year it is larger again — and at 

the same time pay off $70,000,000 of debt in this province without putting on any additional taxes. You 

may have noticed, Mr. Speaker, the same as I did, that the other night, when the Provincial Treasurer 

was making his Budget Speech there wasn’t any person in this House who was pounding his desk any 

harder or any more often than the hon. Leader of the Opposition; then next day he came back to tell us 

that everything was wrong with the Budget. 

 

The hon. member for Swift Current (Mr. H. Gibbs) mentioned the fact that he was not quite satisfied 

with the Education Tax. I might say that I was in that same position for a long time myself, and what 

changed my mind with regard to the Education Tax was when this question came before our 

Convention, which represented the whole province of Saskatchewan, at Saskatoon, last year, and they 

voted unanimously in favour of not taking the tax off. That is why we have the tax to-day — because the 

people of Saskatchewan want it still left on; and it was not “boys in the back room” who arranged to 

leave this tax on. 

 

I have heard a lot of criticism of the Government; in fact, just a few days ago, we had a Resolution 

before this House, one dealing with coarse grains and doing away with the Winnipeg Grain Exchange. 

True enough, no one can deny that it was a socialistic resolution. I have heard the Opposition, day after 

day, crying down Socialism; but, after they had delayed this resolution, talking against it for some two 

hours — you have heard that old saying about when you have to stand up and be counted; well, that is 

what happened that day. When the Motion came before the House for a vote, every one on that side of 

the House, including the hon. member for the Mediterranean Area, stood up in favour of the socialistic 

resolution to do away with the Grain Exchange. 

 

I really like honest criticism, Mr. Speaker, but when the hon. member for the Mediterranean was 

discussing a certain question the other day, what did he say? He was opposed to a thirty-three year lease, 

absolutely, and then he wound up by stating that the Veteran should be able to buy his land shorter than 

the ten-year waiting period; then he said this, that the rent charged by the Government was one-sixth to 

one-tenth percent — one-sixth to one tenth of the crop. He said it was no inducement for a man to buy. 

Isn’t that a wonderful argument against a thirty-three year risk? In his own argument about selling the 

land to the Veterans he says, “They re charging so little rent, there is no inducement for the Veteran to 

buy the land at all.” 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

17 

 

On the subject of co-operative farms, he went on in the same manner — he opposed co-operative farms, 

but wound up by stating that these Veterans who are on them are perfectly satisfied. Now, what can I, or 

anyone else listening to him, think, other than that he was merely giving one man’s opinion? 

 

The hon. member for Rosthern, the other day, made a statement that the Liberal Government had put on 

the Statutes of this province 325 Acts, of which 13 were for agriculture. I think perhaps the Liberal 

Government did a lot of work, in a province where there is as much agriculture as in Saskatchewan, to 

get 13 Acts pertaining to agriculture, out of 325 Acts passed. That is a record they should really be 

proud of. 

 

That is the trouble I find to-day with our Opposition — they have not discovered yet why they were 

defeated in 1944; but I would like to quote from the Calgary paper of April 18, 1944: 

 

“Legislation being brought down at this Session is bringing to a glorious conclusion, under the 

leadership of Prime Minister King, the platform adopted 25 years ago by the Liberal Party.” 

 

That statement was made by Mr. Gardiner, on April 18, 1944. Again I say, as Mr. Churchill said — 

everything that they had been doing was ‘too little and too late.’ 

 

I think the Liberal Government put some very good legislation on the books of Saskatchewan, but they 

did not follow it up. It was the Liberal Government that put The Moratorium Act into effect, and until 

this Government came into power they had only used it five times; but this Government has used The 

Moratorium Act over forty times since they have been in power. 

 

I would like to say something, also, in regard to the Larger School Unit system. I believe it was the 

former government that started that, as far back as 1918. The Foght Report of 1918 had recommended a 

change in the system of Saskatchewan administration of rural district schools. Again, the Martin Report 

of 1939 approved of the Larger Unit principle, and recommended a pattern of organization in some 

considerable detail. This Report recommended that three experimental Units be established — one in 

south-east Saskatchewan, one in the Kindersley district, and one in the Nipawin district. In the 1940 

Session of the Legislature, The School Divisions Act (1940) was passed. This Act was varied in terms, 

and in fact, was the basis upon which the present School Unit Act, R.S.S. 1944, Ch. 41, was constructed. 

The 1944 Act was permissive in nature, but remained inactive, and no units were established before the 

change of government. It is noted, however, that in 1943, progress was made toward organization of 

School District Unit No. 1 in the Swift Current area; however, bad weather intervened at the time set for 

the necessary organization meeting of trustees and ratepayers, and the project was dropped, never to be 

revived until change of administration in 1944. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

18 

 

With the advent of the C.C.F. administration, steps were immediately taken to implement the provisions 

and recommendations of the Martin Committee, and to make effective the legislation of 1940. The result 

— the present Larger School Units. Within six months after this government came into power, they had 

set up Larger School Units at Estevan, Swift Current, Herbert, Foam Lake, Saskatoon East, Biggar, 

Turtleford, Radville, Maple Creek, Kindersley, Langham West, Saskatoon, Prince Albert and Meadow 

Lake. Since June, 1947, we have set up 31 more Larger School Units, making a total of 45, or 

three-quarters of the entire province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, the Liberals of that time started off on good legislation, but they did not carry it on — it was 

inactive — there was nothing done, and it was not until this government came in that they picked up 

what was really good legislation and carried it on to a successful conclusion. 

 

Take the Saskatchewan Anti-Tuberculosis League. I think the previous government helped quite a lot in 

that. This League was formed back in 1929, by the government paying one dollar per bed for each 

patient in the sanatoria; and then the Act also gave the League something that I think should be changed, 

although it has not been changed yet — after getting this one dollar per bed from the Government, they 

are allowed to charge back forty percent to the urban and sixty percent to the rural. I do not think any 

League or anyone not elected by the people of the province of Saskatchewan should have the right to put 

on taxes against the people of this province. Dr. Ferguson at Fort Qu’Appelle has done a wonderful job. 

He has taken to heart the work that he has followed; but if Dr. Ferguson was to pass on out of the 

picture, I do not know where you would get another to take his place. 

 

I would like to deal for a minute with the Cancer Clinic. Here, again, the previous government started 

something that they never finished. The Saskatchewan cancer program had its origin in the Cancer 

Committee of the College of Physicians and Surgeons back in 1929. The Committee recommended to 

the government that a Cancer Clinic should be set up in Saskatchewan — one in Regina to serve the 

southern part of the province, and one in Saskatoon to serve the northern part of the province. It 

recommended that the government purchase adequate supplies of radium, and assure adequate facilities 

were provided for the treatment of this disease. At the beginning, the two Clinics were situated in 

General Hospitals, but were not equipped with a full-time medical roster until 1939, when full-time 

medical directions was given. In 1944, free treatment for cancer patients was introduced. The whole 

Saskatchewan program, as it exists to-day, may be considered to be formed on two basic principles, 

centralised in the two cities, and free treatment. I must say there was no free treatment of cancer until 

this Government came into power in 1944. True, the previous government spent some money on cancer 

research — in 1938, they spent $46,000; in 1939, $48,000; in 1940, $96,000; in 1941, $63,000; in 1942, 

$60,000; in 1943, $69,000; and in 1944, $45,000. In 1945, though, after this Government went in, we 

spent $158,000; and in the next year, 1946, we spent $374,000; in 1947, $451,000. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

19 

 

The number of admissions to the Cancer Clinic was just about the same: in 1943, 1,600; in 1944, 2,000; 

in 1945, 2,600; in 1946, 3,200; in 1947, 3,697. Each of those admissions, prior to the present 

government going into power, had to pay a fee for this service, which has not been the case since this 

government came into being. It was a case of the former government starting something, and the present 

government seeing it through to a conclusion; so that, to-day, we have free hospitalization and free 

medical care for cancer patients. 

 

The same thing applies to the Power Commission, which first came into being in 1929. In 1930 the 

Commission purchased the Canadian Utilities Branch at Watrous and Nokomis, with a transmission line 

serving ten towns and villages, at a cost of $465,000. The Commission carried on until 1944. They then 

had 1,445 miles of transmission line covering 129 villages and towns, as well as Saskatoon, North 

Battleford and Swift Current. 

 

When the Commission was handed over to this government on July 10th, the Commission came to us, 

being $74,582 in the red; but then the C.C.F. Government came into power, and when you get a 

government that looks favourably on public ownership, the picture is changed. In 1946 we reduced the 

rate twice, and paid off the $74,582 that we were in the red, and showed a surplus of $414,282.64; and 

had 2,651 miles of transmission lines, serving 259 towns and villages, with a total of 45,084 consumers, 

and was on the right side of the ledger at the end of 1947 — not $74,582 in the hole, but $972,475.02 on 

the right side of the ledger. That goes to show you what can be done when you get a government that 

looks favourably on government ownership. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to spend a few minutes on my own constituency, which lies on the 

North Bank of the Qu’Appelle Valley for about 105 miles. I do not thing we get very many complaints. 

Last year, we had, in the Melville constituency, 100 miles of highway regravelled — there is not very 

much to complain about there. This government said that if the Melville School District was prepared to 

take a vote, they would advance them some $40,000 to enable them to have a technical school there. 

Melville has taken the vote, and it was pretty nearly unanimous. I am satisfied that we will have a 

technical school there before long. 

 

Last year, we had our first chance to have a little bit of ‘hard top’ being done on No. 10 and No. 15 

Highways, which I hope the Government will, in future years, continue on a little further. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

20 

 

I mentioned a year ago that we had in that constituency a very scenic part of the province, especially the 

north shore of the Qu’Appelle Valley, and I am still hoping that the Government will see fit to build a 

scenic highway right from No. 47 to No. 9, which can later be connected up with No. 10, which is the 

prettiest part of the province of Saskatchewan, and I am hoping that they will do that in the near future. 

 

I am not a candidate for the next election. Our convention, which was handled the same as every other 

C.C.F. convention, is a democratic organization, and they have their choice for candidate a Mr. George 

Webster, a farmer of the Balcarres district. He is a graduate in agriculture from the University of 

Saskatchewan, and I believe they have a first class man, and I haven’t a bit of doubt in my mind that the 

Melville constituency will return him to a seat in this Legislature. 

 

I have heard so much with regard to fear — everything seems to be fear. Well, I have some fear myself; 

I believe we all have fear, but my fear differs to a lot of the other fears: my fear is that the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan do not have the fear they should have of the Liberals, to see that they do not 

get back into power after the next election and undo the things that this Government has done for the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. That is not a ‘bogey’ fear — after we have seen what has been 

done with regard to automobile insurance, fire insurance, hospitalization treatment, cancer treatment, 

and everything else that is pertaining to the welfare of the people of the province; they want to have 

some fear in having somebody in this House that will not carry this on as it has been in the last four 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to support the Budget. 

 

Mr. F. Dewhurst (Wadena): — In rising to take part in this Debate I, along with other members of this 

side of the House, wish to, first of all, extend my congratulations to our Provincial Treasurer (Hon. C. 

M. Fines) who has, in my opinion, brought down the best Budget Address that this House has ever 

listened to. It is true that I haven’t been in the House the number of years that some of the others have, 

and heard as many Budget Addresses; but I have had the opportunity to read some of them, and the way 

the Budget Address was brought down, this year, by the province of Saskatchewan was a credit to any 

man. There is no wonder the financial critics of the East refer to the Provincial Treasurer of 

Saskatchewan as one of the most able and clever Provincial Treasurers throughout Canada. 

 

Not only in this Budget has he made an outstanding mark for himself, but also in the way he has handled 

the finances of this province. When we turn back the pages and look at what Saskatchewan bonds were 

selling for a few years ago —selling at a discount, below par — and we see what 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

21 

 

they are selling at today, that, in itself, should be enough recommendation for a Provincial Treasurer. 

Beside that, he has been able, through his steady hard work, to help bring down the debt of this 

province; and also devise ways and means whereby we are able to reduce the debt of the municipalities 

in the province; and, at the same time, we have provided increased assistance not only in one line but in 

every line of our social activities — in education, health, roads and numerous other things. I believe, in 

general, we can congratulate every Minister in this Government for the work that they have done. I 

intend to deal, to a fuller extent, a little later on, with some of the municipal work, and also with 

education. 

 

This morning, Mr. Speaker, I was shown a copy of a hospital bill of a girl who is in hospital now in 

Regina. This girl is ten years old and has been in the hospital twice already, this year, and is now in the 

hospital for the third time. Her father was showing me these bills, and he said with the amount that 

would be charged against his daughter now, plus the receipts which he had shown me, that hospital 

would have cost him over $800 if it wasn’t for the splendid hospitalization scheme. He went on to point 

out how he would not have been able, in four or five years of work, at his average rate of employment, 

to pay that bill himself; and he hoped that, in the future, he would never have any of his friend or dear 

ones in the hospital but that he will be able to continue to pay his share of that hospitalization scheme so 

that he may be able to help others to receive the benefits which others are helping his daughter to receive 

at this time. Words like that, Mr. Speaker, coming to us from people who are in very meagre 

circumstances, are more highly treasured than gold, as far as I am concerned. To have the appreciation 

of people who know what it is to be hard up; to know what it is to fight for a living and a bare existence 

all the time, when they come to you and highly commend you for the work you are doing on the social 

aspects of their life, that does mean a lot. 

 

In Saskatchewan we have had governments since 1905 when it first became a province: there was a 

government here before that time, but Saskatchewan was not a province then. In that 40 years, up to 

1945, we have had only five years of prosperity, other than war — it was either war or depression. I 

think that any government that cannot provide security for the citizens, other than using war as a means 

of getting rid of over-production and unemployment, that government is not fit to represent any decent 

thinking man or woman, of any community, whether it be Saskatchewan or any other. In this province 

we have had 34 years of Liberal government, five years of a Conservative government, and we will so 

have had four years of a C.C.F. government; and I think that the records show, for the period of time this 

Government has been in office, that four years under their administration has far outstripped any 

preceding eight years in the province. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

22 

 

I would like to talk now on conditions in the North, for a few moments. The part of the country I live in, 

Mr. Speaker, used to be right on the fringe of the timber. I remember, as a lad, I used to be able to hear 

the whistles of the lumber mills as they were sawing lumber; the fringe of the timber was some five or 

six miles from my own home place, where I was raised; but, today, you will travel a long way before 

you will find any merchantable timber — as far North as you want to go there is very little left. When 

my parents, and others, settled in the district, it was full of fur of one kind and another, lots of game and 

lots of timber. Today, the sloughs and lakes have all dried up, the bush has disappeared and so has most 

of the game. 

 

In the fall of 1939, along with several others, I took a trip to the Northeast part of the province, hunting. 

We journeyed through the town of Carrot River, and from there went east; we went east for over 60 

miles, which was 40 or 50 miles past the settlement, and for about 15 miles we did not see any lumber 

that could be used for milling purposes. We went through a strip of timber east of Carrot River, where 

The Pas Lumber Company were logging, and went as far east as where the Sipanook Channel and the 

Carrot River join. We there crossed the Carrot River and went north, hunting along the Sipanook 

Channel. Years ago, that had been a real forest in every direction; you could see by the stumps 

remaining that there had been, at one time, lots of timber; but all that was left along there to mark the 

activities of human beings was a series of graves along the river banks. These were the graves of the 

men who had worked on the timber operations, helping to drive logs down the channel — many of them 

had given their lives in getting the timber out of that country. But, in giving their lives, they were giving 

their lives to free enterprise to make more profit for those who had, and little or no provisions were 

made for their wives or families, or the dear ones left behind to mourn them. 

 

Last spring, I took the opportunity of taking a little trip around the northern part of the province to see a 

few of the things for myself. I took a trip through Prince Albert, and visited the different branches of the 

Department of Natural Resources, and as there were very few people there who knew me by sight, I had 

an excellent opportunity of talking to the employees to get their opinions on what they thought of things 

in and around Prince Albert and from there North. I remember quite well, one man, in particular, said 

that he had spent pretty near all his life in the Department of Natural Resources. He had made 

recommendations on several occasions on what should be done, but, he said, it was almost as much as 

his job was worth to make a recommendation to a superior. Now, he said, it is quite the other way, and 

has quite a job to get enough recommendations to hand in — the Minister tells them it is their job, 

working in the department, to have suggestions to hand on and to know what should be done, perhaps 

they will be accepted and perhaps not, but, at least, their opinion is wanted. That is something new for 

those employees working for a department of the Government. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

23 

 

I also took a trip through Battleford and went through the Mental Hospital there, and the one thing that 

was very noticeable was the crowded condition of that institution. In a room where there should be three 

beds, there were five; where there should be five beds, there were eight, and that was the general picture 

all through that institution. I must say that the cleanliness was very good and there was very good order 

around there, and most of the patients seemed fairly happy. A lot of the patients in the Mental Hospitals 

aren’t all clean off their heads; there are a lot of those patients who go around doing everyday work, and 

to the casual observer you would not know he was an inmate of the institution. 

 

I was talking to the manager of the Irrigation Farm and he was telling me of one little incident that 

happened early last spring. One of the patients went from the farm to town. He went into the bank — the 

following day there was to be a sports day — and he wanted to see if he could get a little money to 

attend the sports day. Some of the attendants had noticed the man was missing and sent the wardens 

after him to being him back. The man was quite peeved about it, as he said he had just about got the loan 

through from the bank, and the manager was quite agreeable to giving it to him — he didn’t want very 

much, only $43,000, and he could have had a good time at the sports day. However, he was taken back 

to the Institution; but this just shows that these people are not vile, or dangerous, the majority of them, 

and there are very few that have to be guarded very closely. There was one ward which I was shown 

through with some 40 or 50 patients in it; they had to have guards there at all times because these people 

were, more or less, of a violent nature and, naturally, the guards had to watch that they didn’t abuse 

themselves. 

 

It stuck me as rather odd, yesterday, when I was listening to the address by the Minister of Social 

Welfare. He was talking of the conditions in his Department pertaining to wards of the government and 

the plight of their conditions; and I noticed the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) sat there with a 

big grin all over his face — I think, Mr. Speaker, it would have been more fitting if he had hung his head 

in shame because of the conditions that were allowed to exist which the Minister pointed out, yesterday. 

 

I would like to refer to a few of the causes in this province which makes harder times for the people. 

There is one case where a man brought in a car to be overhauled: it cost over $240 to have the job done. 

He took his car out and having driven no more than 1,000 miles when a connecting rod came loose and 

went through the block which ruined the motor, and he had to go to considerable expense to have it 

fixed again. There had been no keys put in the connecting rod bolts and some of the bearings were never 

tightened on some of the other connecting rod bolts — they could be turned with the fingers. Well, I 

think if those things are going to continue we will have to have legislation brought down in this House 

for garagemen to guarantee the service which they render. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

24 

 

The other day, a friend of mine was telling me that a few years ago he worked for the Goodyear Rubber 

Company. While he was working for that company he was able to buy tires at cost. That meant that, for 

a number of years, it didn’t cost him anything for tires because he bought four tires for $13.50 — these 

were 600 x 16 tires; yet the cost of one of those tires to you or I would have been around $24 - $26. He 

was allowed to get one set of tires per year. He would run his car for one year on the set of tires and sell 

his tires for $5 each, get a new set of tires and still be $5 to $7 better off by doing so. We heard some 

talk of members of this House being born barefooted, but it is conditions like this which keep us bare, 

not only at birth but afterwards when we have to pay exorbitant prices for the things we have to buy. 

 

A few weeks ago we heard in this House an address by a Mr. Fisher, speaking on conditions in Europe 

— the plight of the children over there — and asking for aid for European children. That address was 

very touching and appealing, and I can believe, very readily, what he said on that occasion. But yet the 

Hon. J. G. Gardiner, speaking last October in Yorkton, despite all those facts says they are not as tough 

conditions as the Western plains was in the ’thirties. It took him a long time to realize that conditions in 

the ’thirties were pretty tough: the members in this House at that time told him how tough the conditions 

were, but he refused to admit it — now he says they were tougher than the conditions in Europe. I do not 

know whether they were or not, but I do know that they were bad. 

 

We also hear a lot of criticism on Crown Corporations — that the Crown Corporations aren’t giving big 

returns immediately, and so forth and so on. As in this House most of the members are farmers, I think 

they will realize that when a farmer buys a half-section or section of land, especially if that land is 

covered with bush, which the Northern section of the province all was originally, and when they buy the 

farm they hire the bush taken off it and break it up; work down the breaking and put the seed in. If they 

take an inventory on that farm, and farm operation, before they take off their harvest, they are definitely 

going to find that they have a big deficit. But if they take it after harvest, they find that their deficit is not 

so great — it takes a few years to get back what you put in. That is the same with the Crown 

Corporations: in order to establish these corporations you cannot expect, in the first year of business, to 

get back all you put in and leave a good big healthy return, because that just isn’t possible. 

 

A few days ago I happened to be having coffee with the member for Moosomin (Mr. Proctor), and he 

was telling me that when he went to law school he got $15 per month. Well, I think he will realize, also, 

that he had to spend so much time and effort in order to build up his practice as a lawyer before he got 

any returns from his business. So it is just good common sense that we must realize that we ‘can’t have 

our cake and eat it too’. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

25 

 

We have heard a lot in this House about the roads in this province as compared with the roads in the 

States. I happened to be talking to one of the American tourists, last summer, and we got to talking on 

this line. I asked him if it was his first visit to Saskatchewan but he said it wasn’t; that he had been here 

on numerous occasions before. He said it was true that the roads here were not as good as the ones in the 

States, but that was understandable because they get a lot of Federal assistance for their main roads; and 

he said this was a country with a smaller population with a lot of roads to build up and could readily 

realize that it would take longer for the roads to become the same as in the States, without getting the 

same assistance. I think any fair-minded tourist, or anybody else, will adopt the same attitude. 

 

I also was talking, this last summer, to a man who was a pretty good friend of mine but, politically, he 

was a good friend of the last administration. I have known him for a considerable number of years, and 

he was known all through those years to be a strong Liberal. He told me that, a year ago, he took a 1,200 

mile trip through this province; and he said, “if you and I want to be fair, we can honestly say that the 

roads are not as bad in this province as they were five or six years ago — we know they are not if we 

would only admit it.” 

 

I think that the way the Opposition gets things twisted around when they are talking about things is 

much the same as a little story I heard about what happened in the British army some years ago. One of 

the British officers thought he would like to see how a message would travel by word of mouth, so he 

lined up 100 men about six or eight feet apart and whispered a sentence to the first man; the first one 

was to whisper it to the second one and so on, and the last man was to bring back the message as he 

received it. The message as given to the first man was: “We are about to advance, please send 

reinforcements.” When that message came back to him it came back as: “I am going to a dance, please 

lend me two and fourpence.” The general rhyme sounds much the same, but the meaning is entirely 

different. 

 

We have also heard a lot of the increase of taxes in this province. The Provincial Treasurer’s Budget 

Speech has shown that the taxes to the rank and file people of this province have not increased; but, in 

taxes, it is not what they pay that counts; it is what we have left and what we get in return for those 

taxes. We should put ourselves in a position whereby we can pay more taxes and not less; by paying 

more taxes, if we could have more social services that will relieve us of expenses with the other — 

providing them on a proper provincial or federal basis, then we are so much better off, just as I 

mentioned earlier with the hospitalization case. 

 

I was talking, a while ago, with a restaurant keeper in the town of Wadena, and he was telling me that he 

had just got in a shipment of coca cola; in fact he showed me his invoice on that shipment. The coca cola 

cost $40, but the Federal Tax on it was $20, make it $60 for the drink and the tax; besides that he had to 

pay over $20 more as an advance against the crates before he could even get the drinks. Therefore, it 

cost him over $80 before 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

26 

 

he could get $40 of goods into his restaurant. Those are the things which make it harder for the smaller 

businesses to carry on; and, as this man pointed out, he couldn’t see any place where the Federal 

Government were returning those taxes to help relieve the needs and sufferings of the people of this 

province. 

 

Last summer, I was in an office where the man was an issuer of radio licences: it happened that the 

inspector had been around there checking up on radio licences and, naturally, there was quite a run by 

those who did not have their licence to get one before meeting the inspector. One man came in to get his 

licence, and the issuer thought he would have some fun with him and said: “Well, John, even if we do 

have a C.C.F. government, you still have to buy a radio licence”. The farmer turned around and told the 

issuer in no uncertain terns that he needn’t think, for one moment, that the farmer was that dumb, 

because the farmer knew just as well as the issuer that the radio licence was a Federal licence, and not 

provincial; and why blame the province for all the ills and grievances which one may have! 

 

We have heard a lot about school taxes being increased in this province. It is true that school taxes, on 

the whole, are higher now throughout the country than they were back in the ’thirties. There are several 

reasons for this, and good reasons. Back in the ’thirties the teacher got little or no salary for their work, 

which made it cheaper to operate a school. Another thing, during the ’thirties a lot of the taxes were not 

paid, and they became back taxes. When the war broke out and people started to get a little more for 

their produce, they were not only paying up their present taxes but they were paying part of their arrears 

of taxes, each year; and while a school might have a tax of seven or eight mills, in addition they were 

collecting the equivalent of four or five mills in arrears of taxes, which gave them something to operate 

on. As the people were able to pay up their back taxes there were on of two things which had to be done; 

they had either to bring down the teacher’s salaries and services again or the taxes had to be increased. 

So, whether we are in a unit or not, the taxes, comparing them now, for schools, have gone up to what 

they were in the ’thirties; but the units are helping to give far more value for money received. 

 

I have here a few of the accomplishments of the Wadena unit, which takes in the greater portion of the 

constituency of Wadena. The unit has only been organized for two years. It was organized on March 1, 

1946. Since that time, Wadena unit has erected four new one-room schools, and two two-room schools; 

two three-room schools; and also have added five additional classrooms to existing schools, making a 

total of 19 new classrooms in that unit. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

27 

 

They have, in the past two years, made 32 major repairs costing $200 or more; they have made 57 minor 

repairs costing from $50 to $200. In addition to that, they have increased the efficiency of the schools by 

providing better library service, drinking water facilities, more sanitation and so on. They have, at the 

present time, a library in every school. It is true that they are not large libraries yet, but it is a start in the 

right direction. They have also negotiated satisfactorily a salary schedule with all their teachers. The 

mill-rate in the Wadena unit for last year (I do not know what it is for this year) was 15 mills rural, and 

18 mills urban. The town of Wadena had come into the unit at their own request, by negotiation. The 

secretary of the town told me, just before I came down here, that he had expected their mill-rate would 

be about 22 mills in the town of Wadena for the coming year; but, he said, if they were doing the same 

on their own as was planned for Wadena, it would cost them 35 or 40 mills. While the units are making 

these progressive strides forward they are on a ‘pay as you go’ policy. They are not leaving a lot of debt 

behind them, and having to issue debentures, which was done by the small districts. 

 

If we can keep on with this rate of accomplishment, in a period of eight or ten years from now we will 

have all the schools brought up to a first-class standard. 

 

The Foam Lake unit, which takes in most of the rest of the Wadena constituency, is much along the 

same line as that of Wadena. They, also, have a record to be proud of. The Wadena unit does not have 

dormitories like the Foam Lake unit has — they have two dormitories, one for the girls and one for the 

boys — but both units provide assistance to students attending high-school, if they are more than four 

miles away from their home. They provide assistance by a grant of 50 cents a day to the parent or 

guardian. Those are things that we never had before, and things that any rate-payer in a unit can be 

proud of. 

 

A little while ago, in the House, I asked a question on grants to the Rural Municipalities in the Wadena 

constituency. The answer, as tabled, is on the desks of all the members, and they can go over them and 

check the figures if they so wish. I asked what grants were given to 10 different municipalities fro the 

fiscal years from 1937 to 1947-48, inclusive, and I find in the fiscal year of 1936-37 there were only two 

municipalities received a grant at all — the two of them together got a little over $1,000. In 1938-39 — 

that was the election year — though it wasn’t a Liberal constituency, there were four municipalities 

received grants, and the four of them together received $3,300. It happens that one municipality got well 

over half of that — $2,000. 

 

There is a rather interesting story behind that $2,000. I remember when the election was taking place in 

1938, the reeve of that particular municipality used to be a Conservative, but he was then working 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

28 

 

hard for the Liberals. I know two men who went to him and asked him why it was that he had turned 

away from the Conservatives to support the Liberals. “Well,” he said, “It is like this, I can get far more 

from the Liberals by being a Liberal than I can by being a Conservative, so I thought by turning it would 

help the people of my municipality far more”. So that year the municipality received $2,000. For the 

four succeeding years it did not receive one cent, so I do not know how much he helped them then; but, 

nevertheless, he has still stayed with the Liberal party. 

 

In 1941, not one of the ten municipalities received any money. For the first eight years of this list the ten 

municipalities altogether received $11,284.90; but since this government came into office, the last four 

years, the grants they have received, along with the equalization grant established last year, was 

$32,256.64 — almost three times as much in four years as they received in the previous eight. And yet 

we hear members of this House say that we are doing nothing for the municipalities excepting increasing 

the municipalities’ burdens! I think those figures speak very capably for themselves, and I think it ill 

becomes any member to get up and say that this government is not doing anything for the municipalities, 

when different municipalities give the same report as my own. 

 

We have heard a lot of talk about Communism and of the Socialist members of this House being 

Communists. There in only one way, in my mind, Mr. Speaker, to stop Communism — it is not a cause, 

it is a result; and the easiest way to stop it is by removing the cause. All this House has to do, or any 

other democratic House, is to make democracy work; to give the people true freedom and that is not just 

allowing them to vote every four or five years. They want freedom from fear, so that when they are sick, 

or in a position that they cannot provide for themselves, they know they are not going to be destitute. If 

we do the things that are right by the people of this country, or of any other country, then Communism 

will just die a natural death; but any country that fails to do those things and always attacking 

progressive ideas in order for the people to bring in progress they go to extreme on the ‘left’ and, 

therefore, they have to resort to force. I think those are things that we should always bear in mind. 

 

There are considerable other matters I would have liked to have discussed on this Debate, but they have 

been discussed at some length by other speakers before me, so I think I will support the Budget. 

 

Mr. A. C. Murray (Gull Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to do the same as previous speakers and 

congratulate the Provincial Treasurer on the way he presented the Budget. I am going to try and take 

very little time of the House, as we seem to be having a kind of marathon speaking 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

29 

 

tour here; but I would like to touch on a few things that have taken place in the Budget — some of the 

changes, and a few of the things which affect the constituency. 

 

I would like to mention a few of the things, in passing, which will be of great benefit to the people of 

this province. By the increase of $5, with the province paying $35 to the Old Age Pensioner, and 

charging nothing back to the municipalities, as is done by the provinces on either side of us, Manitoba 

and Alberta, we are now paying our share of a $50 pension, and it is now up to Ottawa to come through 

with their part of the pension bringing it up to $50 for the Old Age Pensioner. 

 

Also, by changing The Automobile Insurance Act, increasing the benefits of the automobile insurance, 

we have, Mr. Speaker, been saving the people of this province a considerable amount of money in the 

automobile insurance we are giving them. It costs motorists $4.50 or $6, plus their $1 for the Driver’s 

Licence, and make it what we call a ‘four-point’ policy; compare that to the other provinces on either 

side of us — to Manitoba, Ontario, Alberta and British Columbia. The Opposition will tell us we have 

compulsory insurance because you pay for insurance as you buy your licence, but they also have 

compulsory insurance in the provinces that I have just mentioned. 

 

cont’d on page 30 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

30 

 

I have here in my hand a copy of an insurance policy issued to a motorist in Alberta, and in figuring up 

what it cost that car owner in Alberta to get practically the same, not the same — I will have to correct 

that — it is not the same, because here in Saskatchewan, under the insurance that we pay, everyone that 

rides in that car and every pedestrian on the street is insured. In Alberta this insurance policy is what 

they call a ‘five-point’ policy. Deducting for fire and theft, $6.50, practically everything else is the same 

excepting that they do not cover the people as we do here, it will cost you in Alberta approximately 

$34.61 according to this policy issued by a line company in Alberta. 

 

The Opposition might say that this is not a compulsory feature; but I have here a clipping from the 

Regina ‘Leader-Post’ a few days ago. It states: “In British Columbia, 50 to 55 per cent of the people 

carry insurance on their cars”. After this was brought in a few days ago in British Columbia, they 

estimated that 90 to 92 per cent of the people that are motorists will carry automobile insurance. So, if 

you are going to drive a car in one of those provinces you are pretty well compelled, if you intend to 

continue driving, to take out insurance at a higher rate than what it would cost you here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like, at this time, to mention a few of the things that I think will be of great benefit to the 

constituency that I represent. I am sorry to have to report that part of the Gull Lake constituency has had 

a partial crop failure this past year — not all the constituency but part of it. Being a constituency that 

stretches over 135 to 140 miles in length, it naturally takes in all types of soil and, as the weather in this 

past few years has been rather streaky, there are some parts that had a fair crop. But there are parts of the 

Gull Lake constituency that have had three years’ crop failure. 

 

That constituency is also a large stock producing area. It has some very large ranches and ranchers that 

are just in stock producing and not grain growing. 

 

The policy of the federal government, this past fall, affected the Gull Lake constituency as it did most all 

other parts of the west, in stock raising areas, especially the small rancher or the farmer and rancher 

combined. In our part of this province, a great many feed stock during the winter, and they had to ship 

grain in. The federal government changed their policy and in some cases that grain was never taken out 

of the elevator, because the stock men could not buy the grain at the price it was at that time. It is true 

that, after it had had its little flurry on the Winnipeg Grain Exchange, it did drop back down; but the 

stock men in most cases unloaded their stock because they believed that the price was going to stay up 

the way it was. 

 

I would like to refer to an article — I believe this article has been read in this House before — by H. H. 

Hanham, President of the Canadian 

 

 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

31 

 

Federation of Agriculture. What he had to say on that I believe fits pretty well over the Province of 

Saskatchewan as a whole. This is what he had to say, last fall, on decontrol of grains by the federal 

government: 

 

“Nothing that has happened in many years has stirred farmers and dairy farmers throughout Canada to 

such a high pitch of resentment as this recent action of the dominion government in the removal of 

ceilings and subsidies from coarse grains at this particular time. The government’s action has cut the 

feet from under the best stock program we ever had in Canada; a program that not only achieved the 

greatest production of livestock, dairy and poultry products in our history, but, what is more important, 

established some degree of stability in the whole agriculture program and offered hope for some 

permanency to this stability in future.” 

 

I think Mr. Hanham quoted it very good and fitting western provinces. 

 

I was back to the Gull Lake constituency over the weekend, and I can tell you something that was 

quoted by the member for Swift Current (Mr. Gibbs) that affects the farmers and has them worried right 

now, possible as much as the stock situation, and that is the new income tax forms. I do not know if all 

the members of the Chamber have seen the new income tax forms that a farmer has to fill out now. I am 

told by some of the people that have made those forms out for the farmers, that they will have nothing to 

do with them this year. One man that has done that for years for the farmers said that he cannot make 

them out. He said that, if we had to charge a farmer what it would cost to make those out now, the 

farmer would think that he was robbing him. Another gentleman that has been doing this, told me, last 

Saturday, that he did not know whether he would be doing that work this year or not — probably not. 

 

The form, which I believe has been shown in this House, stretches out about four feet long, and you will 

agree it will not fit into a typewriter. These gentlemen say that they have to write that out by hand, and it 

will be impossible to do it for the same charges as what they have been doing it for in the past, and also 

the questions that are asked. Unless a farmer is a good bookkeeper he may make out the first one; but he 

is going to get caught in the next two or three years with that same type of form, because, if he does not 

keep his capital separate from his income and balance that each year, he is going to be in trouble with 

the Income Tax Department. In visiting the constituency I found that that was the biggest holler right 

now, and I am sure that that will continue to be so until after the end of April when the farms has to have 

their forms in to the government. 

 

Another thing I would like to mention that I believe the people of the Gull Lake constituency are very 

favourable to and that I think are the agricultural representatives. I believe they are doing good work. 

They have set up agricultural committees and I believe they are of assistance to the farms in their work 

and will continue after they get somewhat more acquainted with the work they are supposed to do. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

32 

 

Mentioning the Department of Highways, we have not had as much highway in that constituency as we 

would like to have, but what highway we have had built by this government, by the Department of 

Highways, we can say is good highway. I am sorry to say that there was a contract let in that 

constituency, last fall, and no work started on it. So that ‘has gone by the board.’ We did not get as much 

work done on the highways as we had hoped to get done. 

 

I could go on, Mr. Speaker, and mention many other things. One other thing that I would like to mention 

that affects especially the south part of the constituency, is Air Ambulance. It has come up to that part of 

the province a great many times, not because we have not got hospitals — we have plenty of hospitals 

and we have some good hospitals; but in emergency cases that the doctors feel they cannot handle and 

the hospitals cannot look after them, they are brought into the larger centres. It is very pleasing to have 

people come up to you and tell you that, if it had not been for the Air Ambulance, they would not be 

alive today. I want to pay a tribute, too, to the people that fly that Ambulance; they take their chances. I 

know in one case where the pilot told the doctor he should not go, that he was taking a chance because 

the weather was not very good and it was getting late. The doctor told him it was up to him but the 

patient would not live until morning. The Ambulance left, and landed in Regina, and the patient was 

back in about three weeks, hale and hearty and able to get around. It was an emergency case, and had to 

be looked after at once. 

 

I could go on and mention many other things that affect the Gull Lake constituency, but I am going to 

pass on from that. I want to mention something that has been mentioned in this House several times 

today, and that is what the Opposition have had to say about us on this side of the House. They have 

called us Communists; they have inferred that we have Communists among us. I want to tell them that I 

have no more use for a dictatorship such as they represent, than I have for the dictatorship of the left. 

The type of government that they represent is what breeds Communists. I just want to read an article 

here, Mr. Speaker, and I think it fits very well into what I am talking about: 

 

“We live in such a maniacal world that it is useless to prophesy, but one must wonder why the Asiatic, 

the Europeans or the North American would want to fight for the ownership of a graveyard — for that 

is what the world would be. Nor could the clash of arms decide the basic issue of Free Enterprise 

versus Communism. That ideological conflict will be determined when the free democracies of the 

world have succeeded or have finally failed to unite in giving to the civilized peoples a decent, secure 

and hopeful life.” 

 

The writer of that article in Maclean’s Magazine is Beverley Baxter, a very reactionary Tory, on a visit 

to the United States. I think that gentleman is changing his views somewhat to what they have been. I do 

not usually agree with what he has to say, but if anyone has not read that article in Maclean’s Magazine, 

March 1st, I would advise them to get and read it to get an idea of what he thinks is going on in the 

North American continent today, and it is not very favourable to people that think they are living in a 

democracy. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

33 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Opposition have said that they do not believe in controls. They believe all 

controls should be lifted. I think, a few days ago, the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson), whom I 

see in his seat, stated that he did not believe in controls by a government. He believes the government 

should get away from controls. Well, Mr. Speaker, if the government gets out of controls, we still have 

them; not by the people or not for the people, but by monopoly enterprise. I have here in my hand a list 

of companies in Canada, and we have some of them that have their factories here and take their money 

to the United States — they have their head office there — I think the contract would be considerable 

greater, but I am going to give you a few figures of what happens when a government gets away from 

controls and leaves it to monopoly enterprise. That is what we have today; not free enterprise, we have 

monopoly enterprise. As the comparison in the percentages between the profits of 1945 by some of these 

companies and 1946, I have the figures here and will just give some of the percentages. Simpsons — I 

think you all know who that is — 156 per cent greater profits in 1946 than in 1945; Dominion Stores, 

150 per cent, Loblaws Groceterias, 139 per cent; some of the food companies: Canadian Bakeries, 85 

per cent — is it any wonder that we are paying more for a loaf of bread now than we were a couple of 

years ago? Now going farther down on the list: Borden Company, 62 per cent; Silverwood Dairies, 101 

per cent. I think this will affect the most of us in this building that wear good shirts, Tooke Brothers, 222 

per cent; National Hosiery, 522 per cent greater profit in 1946 than in 1945; Monarch Knitting Mills, 

309 per cent; Regent Knitting Mills, 394 per cent. Is there any wonder that the clothing is costing us 

more now than what it used to? 

 

A name was mentioned here, yesterday, by the member for Lumsden (Mr. Thair), the H. R. McMillan 

Export Company made 90 per cent more in 1946 than they did in 1945; and the Canadian Western 

Lumber, 122 per cent. Now we come down to a company that we, as farmers, have to buy machinery 

from: the Cockshutt and Massey-Harris, 34 per cent greater profit. Is it any wonder that we have to pay 

considerable more for a combine or a tractor, today, than we did a year ago! They have been going up by 

hundreds of dollars. 

 

I mentioned that we are controlled by monopolies and cartels. Some two weeks ago, I saw in the 

‘Leader-Post’ an advertisement where a company were showing pictures over in Eaton’s store — the 

Aluminum Company of Canada. I was interested in that article some years ago, and thought that I would 

like to go over and have a look at the pictures and see how aluminum was made; I thought that was what 

it was. I took the time to go over, and I did not like what I saw there, Mr. Speaker. All I saw was some 

nice pictures down at Shipshaw, the building of the Dam; and a gentleman with a loud speaker telling 

the people that they had built this Dam during the war to help the war effort, without any subsidy from 

the federal government. Well, I might have and I believe I would have, if I had the figures — I had read 

them some years before — I think that I would have interrupted his little tea party right there; but I did 

not have the facts. I have been thinking about that since then. What they were trying to do was to build 

up the prestige of that company across Canada. I have been told since that that gentleman was 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

34 

 

speaking to different organizations here in the city, trying to tell them what wonderful things the 

Aluminum Company of Canada had done in the war effort. So I took the time to go down to the library, 

Mr. Speaker, and read and hunt up some of the material of what went on in the case of aluminum here in 

Canada and across the world. 

 

I found that during the war the gentleman said they got no subsidy from the federal government. Well, 

back in the records, I found that Shipshaw received a write-off of three-fifths of their building plan, 

which amounted to $154,000,000; and they received another write-off and bonuses amounting to 

$23,000,000, making a grand total of $177,000,000. Then that gentleman comes up here and tries to tell 

the people of Saskatchewan that they had never received any subsidy from the federal government. 

 

Also, to go back to the records, in evidence that the Aluminum Company had given, they could produce 

aluminum at 8.93 cents per pound; and what did they get during the war? The Government of Canada 

paid them 16 and 17, mostly 17 cents per pound. A lot of that aluminum went out of there at 21 a pound 

— in U.S.A. dollars — that is, shipped to other countries. 

 

It was proved, in committee at Ottawa, that they could produce for 8.93 cents and only working on 

out-of-date equipment and only producing part time. But what were they doing even back in those few 

years? I found, in hunting back through the records, that four-fifths of aluminum of the world went to 

build Hitler’s machine. If any of the members of the House want some interesting reading just go back 

through some of those records and you will find what monopolies control Canada, especially a cartel 

such as the Aluminum Company. 

 

You might wonder why are they able to get such concessions. I have heard said that these large 

companies used to hire a lawyer to lobby for them. Then they got a better idea; they put their lawyers in 

the House of Parliament. But the Aluminum Company of Canada, they have a better idea; they put them 

in Parliament and they put them on the Board of Directors, so that they have an interest in it. I have an 

article here and in looking over the Board of Directors, I find Hon. Leighton McCarthy of the Board of 

Directors. I wonder if he has anything to do with giving that company such a favourable deal during the 

war: Also, this company has 22 subsidiaries. They operate in 50 countries throughout the world. If 

anyone can tell me that that is not a monopoly, a cartel of the most vicious type, I would like to know 

what cartel is. 

 

We have in this House taken considerable criticism from the Opposition. They had no foundation for 

their criticism; they offered nothing constructive, but they just want to criticize. They remind me of a 

cartoon I saw a short while ago in some paper, of a store with a buggy whip hanging out and the 

storekeeper standing there and he was wondering why the sales of buggy whips had dropped down 

because he is making just a good a buggy whip as he ever made. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

Opposition is back 

 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

35 

 

as far as the storekeeper. They do not know that the world has moved on. They do not know that 

monopoly enterprise is out, and the cartels have moved in and taken over free enterprise. 

 

The member for Moosomin (Mr. Proctor), a day or two ago, went over the members of the Opposition, 

telling what they had come up from, what they had started with, the kind of families that they were 

raised from; all poor people. Possibly some of them are not too wealthy today. But still it is unbelievable 

that people of intelligence as they should have, still continue to support a system such as we live in 

today, a system that depends on booms and loss, depends on war for prosperity. It is a pitiful condition 

when the only time that we can have prosperity is when we have a war, or just previous or just after. We 

have to sacrifice men, women and children, and if we have another war it will be more sacrifice, I 

believe, of women and children than happened in the past war. It is regrettable that people of this day 

and age cannot open their eyes and see what it going on around them and begin to wake up and work for 

the people of Canada. 

 

We in the C.C.F. have been working to make a better Canada, and we will continue to work. We believe 

that our support will continue to grow because the old capitalistic system, now that monopoly and cartel 

enterprise have taken control, today is outworn; and we believe that the C.C.F. will continue to grow and 

will work for the betterment of the people of Canada. Mr. Speaker, I shall support the motion. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 73: An Act to amend the Surrogate Courts Act. 
 

Hon. J. W. Corman (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, this is a proposed amendment to The 

Surrogate Courts Act. As the Act stands now, anyone dying outside of the province, where letters of 

administration have been taken out, say in Ontario, in coming into this province to have those letters 

resealed, as it is called, is able to apply in any judicial district. I do not think that ever was the intention; 

one district court judge has held that that is the case. It means for instance that they could all go to 

Moose Jaw or all go to Regina. The amendment we are asking for will provide that in such cases — in 

cases of resealing — it shall be done in the judicial district in which the deceased had profited. I would 

move second reading of this Bill. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 74: An Act to amend The King’s Counsel Act. 
 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill will be considered at more length in Committee. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

36 

 

This is a proposed amendment to The King’s Counsel Act. Now that is the Act which prescribes the 

conditions under which the Lieutenant Governor in Council may appoint barristers to be King’s 

Counsel. The Act was amended in 1945. Prior to that time the Lieutenant Governor in Council had the 

power, with certain exceptions, limited exceptions — one was that a man must have practised ten years 

— had the power “To appoint from members of the Bar of Saskatchewan, residing in the province, such 

persons as he deems fit to be, during pleasure, provincial officers under the name of His Majesty’s 

Counsel, learned in the Law.” Practically an unlimited discretion to the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

Now in 1945 that was amended to provide that no appointment should be made unless it was first 

approved by a Committee consisting of the Attorney General, the two Chief Justices and two benchers 

of the Law Society. The Bill before the House does not change the principle introduced into the Act by 

that amendment, as far as the general profession is concerned. The purpose of the amendment, however, 

is to leave with the Lieutenant Governor in Council the prerogative to appoint barristers who are 

members of the Public Service without going to that Committee. That is the essence of the amendment. 

Now there are a number of reasons for that; no doubt questions will be asked in Committee; I do not 

think I have to go into them all, but I would like to point out that, in the first place, barristers in the 

Public Service are, in the true sense of the word, King’s Counsel, since they act for and on behalf of the 

Crown in their whole practice of Law. In other words, whether appointed or not, they are, in effect, in 

reality counsel to the King or to the Crown. 

 

Another reason is that this Committee setup cannot have much personal knowledge of the ability of 

barristers or law officers in the Public Service, simply because they do not appear before them in courts 

as the ordinary practising barrister does practically every day. 

 

The third reason is this: it is my intention to use the officers of the Crown — the law officers — in court, 

to use them in litigation more than has been the practice in the past. There are two reasons for this. In the 

first place, before you can properly advise on Law, you should have some practical knowledge of 

procedure in the courts. Another reason is the question of economy. We realize that, in some cases, we 

must employ outside, but there are cases that can be handled by our own law officers and it is the 

intention of this government to use those law officers more than they have been used in the past. I might 

say, within the last three months, two of our law officers have appeared before the Supreme Court of 

Canada on behalf of the province; and I might say that others will be appearing before the Privy 

Council. We have three appeals before the Privy Council. Two have originated recently — The Farm 

Security Act and The Trade Union Act; and we have an old appeal: the International Harvester 

Company is appealing from a decision of the Supreme Court of Canada against an assessment of 

Corporation Tax. We have to be there, and some of our law officers are going over to appear in those 

cases. I might say, in conclusion, that to give the Lieutenant Governor in Council power to make these 

appointments without limitation and without restrictions, there is nothing revolutionary 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

37 

 

about it. In Great Britain the appointments are made without any Statutes; it is absolutely discretionary. 

There they are made on the recommendation of the Lord Chancellor. In this province we have no Lord 

Chancellor; they only have me, so they are made on the recommendation of the Attorney General. But I 

might say that in Great Britain, Ontario, Quebec and in Prince Edward Island, the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council is left to use his own discretion in making these appointments. Now we are only asking that 

we be given that discretion as far as our own law officers are concerned; and I would like to point out 

again that this Committee we set up to pass on the qualifications will remain, and it will still have to 

pass on the qualifications of members from the general profession before thy can be appointed King’s 

Counsel. I move second reading of the Bill. 

 

The motion for second reading of the Bill was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 75: An Act to amend The Interpretation Act. 
 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — This is a proposed amendment to The Interpretation Act. Apparently a little 

mistake was made in the consolidation of this Statute in 1943. Prior to that some words were left out, 

Mr. Speaker, as contained in the Bill, which will be explained in Committee. I would move second 

reading of this Bill. 

 

The motion for second reading of the Bill was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 71: An Act to amend The Forest Act. 
 

Hon. J. L. Phelps (Minister of Mines and Resources): — I just want to explain to the House that the 

only principle involved here is one to add a certain part of land to the Cypress Hills provincial park, 

which came into the possession of the Department during the past year, and which we believe would be 

ideal to add to that particular provincial forest. Also to add similar lands in the Fort a la Corne provincial 

forest, and which have been exchanged during the past two years; to exchange certain parts of land in 

the Manitou Forest, take one part out which is on one side of the railroad track and belongs to a farmer; 

exchange that for one that, in our case lies on the outside of the track, which would be much better for 

both parties concerned — that is an exchange. 

 

The other is to provide for a new provincial forest to be called the Meridian Provincial Forest. Mr. 

Speaker, that comprises the land that has been recently taken back to the province, comes under 

provincial control, from the National Park which formerly was administered by the federal government. 

By agreement they have turned this land back to us, and a very large proportion is now being made into 

a new provincial forest called the Meridian Provincial Forest. There will be one House Amendment, Mr. 

Speaker, also amending the Pasqua Provincial Forest boundaries. That will be introduced in Committee. 

I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

The motion for second reading of the Bill was agreed to. 

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

38 

 

Bill No. 72: An Act to amend The Workmen’s Compensation (Accident Fund) Act. 
 

Hon. C. C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — This Bill provides for six improvements in The 

Workmen’s Compensation Act, and I will just briefly enumerate them: 

 

1. To transfer railway employees who are working as locomotive firemen, wipers, hostlers, 
watchmen and coal passers, from The Workmen’s Compensation Act to the Workmen’s 

Compensation Accident Fund Act. 

 

2. It will raise the ceiling of earnings on which compensation may be paid, from $2,500 per year to 
$3,000 per year. 

 

3. It increases the payment to widows from $45.00 per month to $50.00 per month. 
 

4. It increases the payments of orphans from $15.00 to $25.00 per month. 
 

5. It provides for payment of a clinical or disability rating to employees, despite the fact that their 
earning capacity may not have been impaired. 

 

6. It gives the Board power to add to industrial diseases to those referred to in Section (2), and I 
think the details can better be discussed in Committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Therefore I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 68: An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Corporation Income Tax Act. 
 

Hon. C. M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — We have nothing to do with this; it is clearly the federal 

government. All we do is to pass the Legislation for it. But these are a number of amendments that they 

have asked for their Legislation, which we have to pass through this House. After I have had a chance to 

talk to the Income Tax officials in Regina, I will be in a better position to explain the details. I expect to 

have one of the officials with me when we put them through in case there are any questions. I move 

second reading of this Bill. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 77: An Act respecting Certain Contracts for the Sale of Certain Farm Implements. 
 

Hon. I. C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — In moving second reading, Mr. Speaker, I merely wish 

to explain that the purpose of this Bill is to  

  



 

March 10, 1948 

 

39 

 

legalize the annulment of a previous order-in-council that placed on classified jeeps as a large farm 

implement, and as a consequence of that it would be necessary to enter into a Form A contract between 

purchaser and seller of jeeps. In the recent years the need for the jeep is not as great with the implement 

situation improved, and, in addition to that, it is generally felt that the jeep is not adapted to heavy draft 

farm work; and of more importance still is the fact that there is a good deal of confusion surrounding the 

definition of a jeep. It is defined in accordance with the Revenue Branch, as being a motor vehicle, and 

the federal authorities classify it as a truck, and the transportation companies, I believe, classify it as a 

motor vehicle. As a consequence it was felt that the order-in-council made previously, under which the 

jeep was to be sold under the Form A contract, was not necessary and only confused the whole issue. A 

subsequent order-in-council rescinded the previous one, and this Legislation gives full approval to the 

cancelling order-in-council. I might say that there are only a very few contracts that have actually been 

entered into, and this will have the effect of legalizing those contracts; but hereafter it will not be 

necessary for the jeep to come under Form A under The Farm Implement Act. I move second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to. 

 

The House adjourned at 6 o’clock p.m. 


