



















































Hansard: February 09, 1948


 

1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Tenth Legislature 

Day 3 

 

Monday, February 9, 1948 

 

The House met at three o’clock p.m. 

 

Mr. A.T. Procter 

 

On Orders of the Day: 

 

Mr. Speaker:  As the rules of the Assembly require Members to stand while addressing the House, 

and as the member for Moosomin has been very ill, it would very probably be deleterious to his health; 

so I think the Members will agree with me to set aside that procedure in his case and ask him to remain 

in his seat, and that we will receive any of his comments and speeches, either in the House or in 

Committee . 

 

I think we are all agreed that we feel the hon. member has more or less overdone his duties to his 

constituency in being here at this Session, and I am sure you, with me, wish him a speedy recovery and 

that we will do everything we can to make his burden as light as possible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Valleau (Melfort):  Before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I would like to draw 

to your attention, Sir, and to the attention of the House, a typographical error which crept in to the 

Speech from the Throne, in the seventh from the last paragraph; the paragraph dealing with the 

Automobile Insurance Act stated that during the year there were 27,788 collision claims. That is 

incorrect: it should be 2,788. Will you have that correction made? 

 

Hon. Mr. Phelps (Saltcoats):  Before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I beg to lay on the 

table the annual report of the Department of Natural Resources and Industrial Development. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Motion for Address in Reply 

 

Mr. M.H. Feeley (Canora):  I have the honour to move, seconded by the hon. member for Hanley, 

(Mr. Aitken): 

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour The Lieutenant Governor as follows: 



 

February 9, 1948 

 

 
2 

To “His Honour The Honourable Reginald John Marsden Parker, Lieutenant Governor of the Province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

May It Please Your Honour: 

 

We, His Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious speech which Your 

Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the outset of my remarks, may I gratefully acknowledge, on behalf of the good people of 

the Canora constituency, the honour done them by the hon. Premier in according to me the privilege of 

sponsoring this historic Motion for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

The mover of this Address in Reply, traditionally, is expected to set the tone for the entire Session, but it 

does not always work out that way. He is expected to be, if not non-political, at least as little provocative 

as possible – sometimes it is difficult to draw the line between the provocative and the non-provocative. 

However, I will do my humble best to fulfil the requirements, remembering always how nearly 

impossible it is to please, or to satisfy, everybody. 

 

The Speech from the Throne was one of the most gratifying I have ever listened to in this Legislature, 

covering mainly past accomplishments and the forecast of a continuation of great progress for the future. 

I shall deal with it in my summary of accomplishments as I proceed. 

 

But, first, may I make a few comments on the world situation, for most of us now realize that we cannot 

live unto ourselves, and that what happens, even in remote parts of the world also affects us. the world 

today, with its unrest, strife, bloodshed, starvation and want – one might be forgiven for wondering 

whether our civilization is not about to pass into oblivion, as have others in the past. However, I believe 

we have, in the excitement and stress of the moment, overlooked a tremendous current of development 

and progress that has, more or less, taken place in many parts of the world to an extent probably never 

before equalled. From India, for example, comes stories of fighting and bloodshed that so attract our 

attention that we are inclined to overlook the fact that nearly 400 million people have, without a 

struggle, been granted complete independence by Britain’s Labour government. 

 

Speaking of India, I feel this opportunity should not go by without mention of the tragic death of 

Mohandas Gandhi. In his address over the C.B.C. in the series “Week-end Review”, on February 1, 

1948, Professor Glen Shortcliffe has this to say: 

 

“The violent death of this man, it seems to me, characterizes our age, for it illustrates the fate of 

reason, moderation and goodness, in a time given over to bitter conflict. This man’s crime, in the 

inflamed mind of his murderer, was simply to have desired peace – to have desired peace even with 

those who had done most to wreck his lifelong dream of a free and independent India. Ours is surely a 

time in which it is those who live by the plowshare who perish by the sword.” 



 

Monday, February 9, 1948 

 

 
3 

And again he states: 

 

“The world does move after all, and even in the century of the atomic horror, the fundamentally 

Christian outlook of such a man as this still has the power eventually to sway the conscience of 

mankind. 

 

“Gandhi was idolized not only by millions of Hindus but by many Moslems as well, and his 

martyrdom may well provide an element of unity that India very badly needs. Perhaps we may hope 

that Mohandas Gandhi will prove as powerful in death as he was in life, for the international reaction 

to this shocking incident has shown that even in time of bitter social conflict, he who can stir mankind 

to a remembrance of its own humanity, commands the imagination of the world.” 

 

Even in death great things are often accomplished. 

 

From Great Britain comes stories of austerity and shortages; of their struggles to readjust themselves to 

changed conditions due largely to sacrifices made during the war and to the pre-war failure of free 

enterprise to meet successfully, the economic problems of that time. It is encouraging to see that slowly 

but surely they are forging ahead. 

 

In addition, we also find great social progress being made with a great deal less labour disturbances and 

less general hardship than during the corresponding period following the first world war, when 

capitalism was ‘muddling through’. that Britain is making such progress is because the policy of 

democratic socialism, which the labour Government is carrying out, seeks to create conditions in which 

a good life may be obtainable by every individual in the community – free from oppression, either by 

government or by vested interests. 

 

Outstanding among the achievements of the British Government is the fact that for the first time in 

peace, scientists are working in the national interest to invent and improve industrial processes, and so to 

increase production. How far this new, and supremely important, use of brainpower has progressed, has 

lately been revealed in a report by the Hon. Herbert Morrison, on the Activities of the community on 

Industrial Productivity. Such a constructive program for science could be carried out only under a labour 

government, prepared as it is, to set the general well being above the consideration of private profit. In 

other words, ‘humanity first! 

 

In the Western world the United States is struggling desperately to stave off a depression, and from the 

reports we see in the paper during the past few days, it seems very questionable whether or not they will 

succeed. 



 

 

Monday, February 9, 1948 

 

3(a) 

 

Here in Canada we, too, have our problems and our Federal Government are trying, in every way 

possible, to preserve a social order that is in almost complete decay. Their action in removing price 

controls and subsidies, that had been so successful in preventing inflation during the war, has had the 

result of a disastrous rise in the cost of living. Lack of any long-term policy for agriculture has left the 

Canadian farmer uncertain and discouraged, and has left the livestock industry, in particular, a blow 

from which it will not soon recover. 

 

In the midst of all this, the accomplishment of Saskatchewan’s Co-operative Commonwealth Federation 

Government, stands out like a beacon pointing to the rest of Canada the way to a better and a more 

generous life. In fact, the only bright spots on the horizon today, are where we have socialistic 

governments in power; Great Britain; New Zealand, the Scandinavian countries, and so forth. 

 

Here in Canada our enemies are striving, in season and out, to frighten people by telling them that under 

socialism they will lose their freedom and that socialism will lead to Communism, whereas, Mr. 

Speaker, the reverse is true and I charge that Capitalism, through its failure to prevent depressions will 

inevitably be responsible for a return to the conditions of the hungry thirties; conditions which will, this 

time, result either in war or a dictatorship of the right or the Left, and possibly both war and dictatorship. 

 

Democratic Socialism, through its distribution of income, which capitalism cannot provide, is the only 

way to avoid depression and dictatorship. Therefore, I submit, that in Socialism lies our only hope of 

combating the spread of dictatorships, either communist or Fascist. And may I point out that while our 

enemies are continually stressing the dangers of communist dictatorship, they completely fail to point 

out the more real threat of a Fascist dictatorship, brought on by the very same people who financed 

Hitler and made possible his rise to power, and who now finance all of our opposition parties; namely, 

‘big business’. 



 

February 9, 1948 

 

 4 

In the nations having socialistic governments, these governments, like the C.C.F. in Saskatchewan, came 

to power as the democratic choice of the people. There has been no freedom lost, save the freedom of 

the rich to exploit the poor. The people have, in fact, a great deal more real freedom than ever before. 

 

In reply to the attempt of our Opposition to prove that Socialism will lead to communist dictatorship, 

and in support of my claim that the reverse is true, may I quote from the article in “The Nation” of 

September 13, 1947, entitled “Socialism, communism and the West” written by Margaret Marshall. I 

quote: 

 

“While civil rights and freedom of thought, speech and inquiry were, for reasons good, bad, and 

indifferent, not inherent in the October Revolution and are still, after thirty yeas, non-existent in the 

Soviet Union, the British revolution was accomplished without the sacrifice of those great Western 

concepts. On the contrary, they were the machinery by which the change from capitalism to socialism 

was effected. The great significance of the advent of socialism in Britain is that it offers another 

alternative, a democratic socialism, democratically achieved. and further, (she states), if British 

socialism is successful it cannot help being the first step toward a democratic socialist Europe. And 

again I think that Soviet Communism as it is now constituted could not maintain itself very long in a 

Europe which had attained democratic socialism; but the pressure which a democratic socialist Europe 

would inevitably exert upon Soviet communism would be, not the threat the government le___, of 

military destruction but the peaceful and irresistible pressure of people on people. …….Again, with a 

democratic Socialist Europe pressing upon it, Eastern Europe could turn out to be not the opening 

wedge of totalitarian communism moving west but the opening wedge of democratic socialism 

moving east, bringing in its wake the prosperity, peace, and genuine security in which the police state 

must wither away.” 

 

The fact is that in every country in the world where we have democratic socialism in power, the people 

have more real freedom. The threat of dictatorship is being removed. Mr. Speaker, the trend toward 

democratic socialism throughout the world today is a silver lining in a cloud in the sky that would 

otherwise be black indeed. 

 

I would not like to refer to a few of the accomplishments of Canada’s first C.C.F. Government, dealing 

first with the Treasury. I place it first because the limiting factor in all provincial government 

departments is the amount of money available. We were warned that a C.C.F. Government would ruin 

the province’s credit. After three and a half years in office, what do we find? Has our credit been 

destroyed? No. On the contrary, it is the best that it has ever been in all our history. -Saskatchewan 

bonds, that were selling in the 90’s in 1944 are now listed as high as 113. Where reconversion was 

necessary, we have been able to sell our bonds at the highest figure ever received for Saskatchewan 

bonds. As at April 30, 1944, Saskatchewan’s net debt was $214,253,111.00. By 1947 the estimated 

figure is $144,000,000.00, a reduction of over $70,000,000.00. 



 

Monday, February 9, 1948 

 

 5 

Putting it another way, the per capita debt of the province has been reduced from $230.00 in 1944 to 

$169.00 in 1947, a reduction of $61.00 for every man, woman and child in the province. The reduction 

in interest charges is even more striking. Where the 1942 interest charges were $7,800,000.00, in 1947 

they have been reduced to $4,500,000.00, a saving to the people of Saskatchewan of $3,300,000.00 

every year. Not a bad showing for a group that our Opposition used to refer to as “a bunch of 

inexperienced teachers and broken-down preachers”. 

 

I well remember, Mr. Speaker, a certain former member of this Legislature, who used to say – “I would 

not want to trust them with my business. Would you want to trust them with yours?” Today, the Hon. 

C.M. Fines is recognized as being the outstanding Provincial Treasurer in all Canada, a credit that is 

justly deserved. 

 

The record of our Department of Public Health, under the dynamic leadership of our Premier, Hon T.C. 

Douglas, is one of which we may be justly proud. The slogan of this Department could be – ‘The Best 

Possible Health Services to Everyone in Saskatchewan, irrespective of his Ability to Pay.” Perhaps the 

most outstanding achievement of this Department, so far, is the inauguration of our complete, prepaid 

hospital services for all Saskatchewan citizens, the first of its kind on the North American Continent. It 

has been so successful, and is giving such general satisfaction, that even the local Press gives it faint 

praise. It has aroused interest and favourable comment from many parts of the world. 

 

May I at this point pay tribute to the members of the Health Services Planning Commission, who, along 

with their many other duties, are responsible for its smooth operation. Six health regions are already 

established, with financial aid from the government, and Health Region No. 1 at Swift Current is 

supplying medical services for the entire population, and dental care for the children. It is the largest 

area in Canada providing these services. 

 

Encouragement and financial aid has been given local authorities, with the result that hospital capacity 

has been greatly expanded. Work has begun on the Medical College at the University, to enable doctors 

to get their training here in Saskatchewan. 

 

All mental health services are now completely free. One of the blackest pages in the history of the 

province is our treatment in the past of our mentally ill patients. I wonder how many of you have ever 

visited one of our mental hospitals? I did shortly after this Government took over, and I am certain that 

if you could have visited with me you would have come away, as I did, determined that you would never 

rest until conditions there had been changed. But you need not take my work for it – let me quote from 

an article in the January, 1948 issue of The Canadian Forum, entitled “Our Shameful Mental Hospitals” 

and written by D.M. LeBourdais: 



 

February 9, 1948 

 

 6 

Mr. LeBourdais was for six years director of the Division of Education for the National Committee for 

Mental Hygiene in Canada. 

 

“Perhaps the greatest overcrowding in any Canadian mental hospital existed in the Weyburn Hospital 

in Saskatchewan up to a year ago, the culmination of twenty years of neglect. At that time the hospital 

contained six hundred children who should never have been there at all, and against whose presence 

social workers and others had been complaining for years. The Douglas Government, however, has 

taken hold of the situation in a determined manner. Its first step was to make mental hospitals free to 

all patients; then the children were evacuated from Weyburn to a place especially prepared for them; 

and a new hospital is being planned.” 

 

Again, in the much publicized Liberty magazine of March 8, 1947, Mr. LeBourdais had this to say after 

describing conditions in several provinces: 

 

“Nevertheless, for the miserable wretches in Saskatchewan hospitals there is hope. The government 

seems determined to come to their rescue. Although this will take some time, they have something to 

look forward to. I wish I could say the same thing for those who crowd the mental hospitals of 

Alberta.” 

 

“After talking with many Ministers, I am convinced that the whole thing depends upon whether the 

government -- sometimes merely the Minister directly responsible – is sufficiently alert to the need for 

mental health.” 

 

Whereas previously attendants were required to work long hours at low pay and as a result their average 

ability was not high, today hours have been shortened, pay increased, personnel is carefully selected. In-

service training is provided for them. They are organized into unions of their own choice and the overall 

picture is vastly improved. 

 

Mental illness is sickness, the same as any other, and can happen to any one of us or to our families. If 

this government had nothing more to its credit than the improvement of conditions in our mental 

hospitals, it would have justified its existence, and all of the work and sacrifices it has cost its 

supporters. 

 

The case of the children in the mental hospital at Weyburn is a very touching one indeed; whereas 

previously little was being done in the way of special training, great strides in that direction are now 

being made. It is our hope that most of these boys and girls can in time be made useful citizens. It is 

surprising how in many cases nature appears to have, in a measure, compensated them for their other 

deficiencies by giving them special physical aptness. Some can be trained as cabinet makers; others have 

special talents as gardeners; and others can work wonders in caring for livestock, etc. All of these talents 

they will now have an opportunity to develop. Again, Mr. Speaker, in this great work we find we have a 

dollar deficit but huge 



 

 

Monday, February 9, 1948 

 

6(a) 

 

returns in human welfare. Once more we have placed ‘Humanity first’. 

 

It may be well to add that by rehabilitating these unfortunates now, in time it will turn out to have been a 

good financial investment as well. Medical authorities say we can virtually empty our mental hospitals – 

if we care enough. 

 

We are being accused of extravagant spending. The costs of our improved care of mental patients are, I 

admit, rather high. Will anybody suggest that we should return the former conditions in order to save 

money? I think not. 

 

Another field in which this government has pioneered in order to serve the people, is our flying 

ambulances. It has attracted attention from many parts of the world. The National Film Board has just 

completed a picture of it entitled “Mercy Flight” which will be shown all over Canada and in the United 

States. 

 

(continued on P.7) 



 

Monday, February 9, 1948 

 

 7 

We now have three planes fully equipped to give emergency first aid, trained nurses and attendants, the 

most capable pilots in Canada, and these planes fly to remote and isolated parts of the province, pick up 

emergency cases and fly them out to receive the hospital attention that they need. All at a cost of only 

$25 to the patient. Today a total of 800 patients, and over 100,000 miles have been flown and no person 

has been refused because they have not the money. 

 

I would like to quote just two of the many cases, to give you the contrast between former conditions and 

conditions as they are now with this wonderful service available. yesterday a man from my constituency 

– who is, I believe, in this building today – told me of the time in the hungry thirties, when free 

enterprise had full play. When is wife became ill in the dead of winter, she was loaded into a sleigh, 

covered with blankets, and in 30 below zero, and wind, her husband drove her the 30 some miles to the 

nearest hospital. Changing horses three times on the way he arrived there in the middle of the night. But, 

Mr. Speaker,, he was held up at the door of that hospital until arrangements could be made to have the 

hospital bill guaranteed. Now, Sir, that was not the fault of the hospital authorities, they had already 

bankrupted themselves giving services to people who could not pay. Pretty grim, Mr. Speaker, but let us 

never forget, that under free enterprise the limiting factor is always the almighty dollar. 

 

In contrast may I now list another case. It occurred on January 31
st
. last. On January 28

th
. a doctor at 

Spiritwood phoned for a plane to take a patient to the San; this was a case that could wait for a time. On 

January 31
st
. at 8:30 a.m. at Melfort, a doctor phoned, a lady with a fractured spine, an emergency. The 

accident had occurred at the school house the previous evening and they dared not move her until the 

plane arrived. The same day at 11:05 a.m. another phone message came from a doctor at Rose Valley. 

An eight-year old baby with dysentery had to be taken to Saskatoon. One plane was undergoing repairs 

at Saskatoon, another had left Regina at 7:20 a.m. carrying repairs for the plane at Saskatoon. Contacting 

Saskatoon this plane left there at 11:05 AM, flew to Spirit Wood, 87 miles, picked up a patient, left there 

at 12:25 P.M., arrived at Meskanaw, 125 miles at 1:30 P.M. and left Meskanaw at 1:50 P.M., arriving at 

Rose Valley, 65 miles at 2:20 P.M., picked up the infant and its parents, left Rose Valley at 2:45, 

delivered the first person to Fort San, 105 miles at 3:45 P.M., the second patient delivered at Regina, 46 

miles at 4:30 P.M., the third person was transferred to another waiting plane and was in Saskatoon by 

6:00 P.M., just nine and one half hours after the first emergency call was received, and six hours and 55 

minutes after the plane took off from Saskatoon. Three patients 



 

February 9, 1948 

 

 8 

for widely scattered parts of the Province had been delivered to the hospital. That, Sir, is an example of 

service under the C.C.F. No loss of freedom here, but strong evidence of humanity first. 

 

Again, our air Ambulance Service shows a dollar deficit but a great credit on the side of service to our 

people. 

 

This Government has made a courageous attack on the question of education, and may I here, Sire, 

express my regret that certain groups in the Province are attempting to make political capital out of 

increased educational costs, something which the Government, as is well known, has little or no control. 

May I further suggest that if economies become necessary, our educational system should be the last 

rather than the first to suffer. 

 

We believe that every child has the right to a good education, and to this end we have, among other 

things, established 45 larger units of administration. We do not suggest that the establishment of these 

will solve all our educational problems, but they will help in many ways. For example they make 

possible, more efficient administration and most units have started extensive building programs. In the 

45 units, 206 new schools with 289 rooms have already been built and 131 new classrooms added to 

existing schools, 247 new teacherages have been constructed and these, Mr. Speaker, are not the open-

air type that we formerly had in so many places throughout the province. 174 new basements and 225 

new stables were built, repair programs averaging $37,000 per unit have been carried on. Mill rates in 

units compare favourably with those in non-unit districts. Other outstanding improvements include 

teacher training, improved educational services that have been provided in the far northern districts of 

Saskatchewan, make a thrilling story all by itself. Grants have increased with a total of $2,765,693 in 

1943 and ’44 an estimated, $4,818,490 in 194 and ‘48. In making these grants the deciding factor is the 

financial need of the district involved, plus their ability to meet that need. In some of the poorer districts, 

this Government is paying as much as 75 per cent of all cost of education. 

 

Turning now to Social Welfare. Not only has the Government, through the Department of Social 

Welfare provided increased financial aid through increased Mothers’ Allowances, increases for Old Age 

Pensioners and other groups, and most important of all, complete Health Services free for all in these 

groups, something that cannot be computed in dollars and cents, but in terms of peace of mind and 

freedom from fear. 

 

These people are no longer made to feel that they are receiving this hep as charity, but rather as their just 

due in a Christian democracy. I regret the failure of Ottawa to accept its responsibility to provide 

adequately for our Old Age Pensioners, particularly in view of the fact that the increased costs of living 

which bear so heavily upon them, are the direct result of the 



 

Monday, February 9, 1948 

 

 9 

weak policies of the Federal Government. 

 

The Minister of Social Welfare has also been responsible for the inauguration of our Automobile 

Accident Insurance – another “first” for this government – which gives security to the victims of auto 

accidents in Saskatchewan, in additional to providing compensation for collision damages. The objective 

of this plan is to provide protection against loss caused by motor vehicles, at the lowest possible cost. 

 

Since few statistics were available, we proceeded cautiously at first. Last year, finding we had a surplus 

over necessary reserves, we expanded the protection, and I am pleased to note that it is planned to give 

still wider coverage this year without any increased cost. 

 

The outstanding features of this insurance are: (1) Protection, wider than that obtainable from any other 

insurance company at any price, at a cost that is by comparison, ridiculously low; (2) The fact that 

personal health benefits are increased in accordance with the number of dependants concerned – again 

“Humanity First.” 

 

May I quote two outstanding cases out of many that have been dealt with: 

 

In the case in the Swift Current district, a man failed to stop at a stop sign for a railway crossing. His car 

was hit by the CPR mainline train, the man was instantly killed. He was survived by a widow and six 

children – all daughters. They received a supplementary allowance of $10; funeral expenses of $125; the 

wife as the primary dependant received $3,000; five of the children were dependants and they received a 

total of $3,125. In addition, $800 was paid as collision insurance on the car. As a result this family 

received a total of $7,060. 

 

In another case, a driver applied for and received his licence and driver’s licence, which included 

insurance. the same day his car overturned on the highway, and he was instantly killed. The next day his 

son, not realizing that the licence in Saskatchewan now included insurance, went in to apply for a refund 

of the licence fee. To his surprise, he found that the dependants were eligible for insurance benefits. The 

wife as primary dependant, received $3,000; the secondary dependants, 3 children, under eighteen, the 

total of $1,875; funeral expenses of $125 were also paid. Thus they received a total of $5,000, not 

including payments because of the collision damage suffered by the car. This policy is another example 

of humanity first. Were it not for our accident insurance, there would have been no protection in either 

of these cases. 

 

It is a matter of pride to me, as a farmer member of the Legislature, that this government, consisting 

largely of farmers, has enacted the most advanced labour legislation in all Canada. We recognize that 

only well-paid and prosperous workers will be able to provide a market for our agricultural products. 

 

With the expanding use of motor transportation, particularly in a province with such wide distances as 

we have in Saskatchewan, highways and market roads play an every-increasingly important part in our 

economy. 



 

February 9, 1948 

 

 10 

Recognising that fact, our Department of Highways have been allotted much larger sums of money than 

was formerly the case, in order to meet the emergency in which we found our provincial highways. This 

was made necessary because of the fact that our highway system had been allowed to deteriorate to a 

point where almost the entire system had to be rebuilt. That this money has been wisely expended is 

shown by the fact that since 1944, 232 miles of bituminous pavement have been constructed; 710 miles 

of new grade have been built; 1,680 miles of worn out gravelled highway has been re-gravelled; 1,810 

miles of earth road gravelled; 950 miles of worn out grade reconstructed; 242 bridges of timber and 22 

new concrete bridges have been built. 

 

Because of the elimination of patronage, letting contracts for construction on bids instead of hiring out 

bids by the hour, as was previously done; by purchasing our own equipment as far as possible and doing 

as much of our own construction work as possible, we are now building a much better type of highway 

and, in addition, effecting material savings. We found, for example, that with our own equipment and 

construction crews, we can construct our highways at greatly reduced costs, as compared even with 

contract work, and it is the intention of the Department to continue to do more of our own construction 

work as rapidly as we can secure equipment and personnel. 

 

I believe that owing to ever increasing dependence on motor traffic transport, it is going to be necessary 

to spend a lot more money on our highways and, here again, the Federal Government should aid us. In 

Montana – just South of us – where their problems are quite similar to ours, the United States 

Government is granting 8 million dollars a year for 3 years, in order to help them meet their highway 

problems. 

 

We are the only government to establish a Department of Reconstruction and Rehabilitation and may I 

say that no more ready and able champion of our service people could be found than Jack Sturdy, the 

Minister in charge of this department. 

 

Do you remember the days of the hungry thirties when these boys, and sometimes the girls, were being 

herded back and forth across Canada in box cars, unwanted, often cold and hungry; when our free 

enterprise that we hear so much about, just now, failed to give them an opportunity to earn a living and 

live normal, decent, human lives; when the only freedom we had was the freedom to starve, or be herded 

into concentration camps? Then came the war, and overnight they became heroes – we had plenty of 

money then. Well, Mr. Speaker,, the war ended but the Government of Saskatchewan – yes as our 

Opposition is fond of calling us, the C.C.F. ‘Socialist’ Government – felt a responsibility to give these 

boys what aid our limited means in the Provincial Government allow. 



 

Monday, February 9, 1948 

 

 11 

Just to mention a few of the things our Department of Rehabilitation and Reconstruction has done for 

them: we have made 550 housing units available in various cities and towns. Outstanding in the 

Provincial Government’s housing program is the community apartments development, established by 

the Government at Saskatoon for the veterans attending the university, taking Canadian Vocational 

Training. Here suites for 185 families have been provided; there are 370 adults living there, organised 

co-operatively and govern themselves through an elected council. A community dining hall cafeteria 

provides meals at cost. A supervised nursery is provided for the 125 children, most of whom are pre-

school age. Rentals are from $15.00 to $35.00 per month. 

 

The Reconstruction Corporation has purchased vast quantities of material from war assets and made 

them available to hospitals, municipalities and co-operatives, at very low prices, saving many thousands 

of dollars for these organizations. 

 

As a farmer member I am justly pleased with the progress made in improving the lot of farmers and their 

families in this province. Our crop failure legislation; provision of security for a farmer on a quarter 

section on which he resides; extension of the agricultural representatives services; aid to the livestock 

breeders through our veterinary services Act; making grants available to help pay costs and encourage 

veterinaries to take up practise in various centres in the province; the feed and fodder conservation 

program and many other innovations made by and through the Department of Agriculture, have been of 

direct benefit to all farmers. 

 

There is a tendency on the part of some to suggest that our only aid to agriculture is action taken by the 

Department of Agriculture. They think that agriculture consists solely of hay, wheat, pigs and cattle. We 

believe that the most important factor in agriculture is the farmer and his family. No other group in 

Saskatchewan economy benefits so greatly from improved health services, better educational facilities, 

better roads and highways and, in fact, general improvements of any kind are directly or indirectly aids 

to agriculture. Therefore, speaking as a Saskatchewan farmer, I wish to express my appreciation to the 

Government, not only for the direct aid provided for farmers through the Department of Agriculture, but 

for the even more important benefits that the farmers’ family receive from other services, provided by 

other Departments of the Government. 

 

Having complimented the Minister on the good work of his department, I feel that I must again call his 

attention to a serious situation that is developing throughout a large part of the north country, namely: 

the rapid destruction of our tree growth there. I suggest that an intensive campaign of publicity, which is 

the least that should be done, to encourage farmers to retain a certain amount of the native timber on 

farms throughout the Park area; preferably in strips, rather than in blocks. 



 

February 9, 1948 

 

 12 

In the past, when land was cleared – largely by hand – natural growth pretty well kept pace with the 

clearing, but now powerful ‘cats’ and brush-cutters are clearing millions of acres and unless some plan 

is adopted to preserve at least a portion of our trees, we shall soon have all the ills experienced in the 

south during the drought years. We have no heavy rain falls, only the protection against evaporation by 

our trees enabled us to grow crops while other parts were dried out. 

 

Among the more important developments throughout the world today is that of the co-operative 

movement. The C.C.F., as the name applies, is a firm believer in co-operation as a solution to most of 

the world’s economic problems. It is, therefore, not surprising that we have established a Department of 

Co-operatives, under a responsible Minister, to which every aid and encouragement has been given to 

co-operation in all its branches, with the result that great progress in co-operative development has taken 

place. 

 

One of the fundamental differences between the C.C.F. and the other major political parties in Canada is 

that while other parties claim they are opposed to Government interference with, or control of, industrial 

enterprises, the C.C.F. believe that in all cases where a monopoly control exists, (statistics prove that 

this covers a very wide field indeed) people should own and operate those industries through 

Government Departments and Crown Corporations. We also believe that the natural resources belong to 

all the people of the province and should be developed in the interest of the people of the province. In 

both cases, the profits derived from these industries and resources, instead of going to enrich a few, 

should be used by the Government to provide social services for the many. To this end a number of 

Crown Corporations have been set up. It is encouraging to learn that in spite of many difficulties 

encountered, and the fact that they are only now getting well started, very satisfactory reports are being 

received, both as to service given, the amount of additional employment provided, and the profits from 

them, that are being made available for either further development or to provide funds for social 

services. 

 

Possibly the proper slogan for the Department of Natural Resources’ new policies would be ‘planned 

conservation’, to the end that our natural resources would become and remain for all time a source of 

revenue for the people of Saskatchewan. Our forest resources, in particular, have been exploited for the 

profit of the few to the extent that – according to the Forestry Royal Commission -- chief lumber species 

would not have lasted more than another five years. Today all logging on crown land is on a sustained 

yield basis. Lumber is handled and sold by the Saskatchewan Timber Marketing Board and the profits 

made are either ploughed back into the development and protection of our forests, or used to pay for 

increased social services. 

 

The fur industry was in much the same unsatisfactory condition as the forest industry. We now have the 

larger part of the province organized into fur conservation areas, where trapping is on a quota basis, thus 

providing a sustained income for the trappers, as well as some increase in provincial revenues. A 

program of transplanting beaver was undertaken and in 1947, 627 beaver were transplanted into new 

areas, the largest undertaking of its 



 

Monday, February 9, 1948 

 

 13 

kind in the world. Already these industrious little animals have been responsible for constructing dams 

and raising water levels that will aid in protecting our forests from fire hazards as well as being 

beneficial in other ways. 

 

May I now refer, for a few minutes, to my own constituency of Canora – situated as you all know in the 

N.E. portion of the province, ‘Where all of nature pleases and only our economic system is vile”. 

 

The topography of that part of Saskatchewan, together with a few stones and other handicaps make 

farming more expensive than in some other parts of the province. Nature, however, has compensated us 

by providing rainfall and wind protection as a result of which we have never had a complete crop 

failure. 

 

By hard work and economy, the people have succeeded in overcoming the difficulties mentioned, to 

such an extent that it is now known as the garden spot of Saskatchewan. One of the outstanding 

characteristics of our people is their Co-operative spirit as illustrated by numerous flourishing co-

operative enterprises, both producer and consumer, and many community halls scattered throughout the 

district. All the result of local co-operative effort. 

 

Development was at first rather slow, but nevertheless steady and considerable increase in population 

resulted from the farmers moving in from the drought areas during the late thirties. With increased 

population came problems, such as roads, schools, hospitals, which were not properly recognized by 

former governments. 

 

That our health needs were inadequately met is shown by the fact that we had just over two hospital 

beds per thousand of a population – less than half the number estimated to be needed. However, may I 

say that during the depression even these were not all occupied. In those days, people without money 

had difficulty in getting into hospitals. In many cases they just stayed home and died. 

 

This Government provides generous grants to aid in costs of construction, and in various other ways 

encouraged communities to expand hospitals, with the result that when we have completed our present 

building program – sometime this year – we shall have approximately five beds per thousand. The 

number, medical authorities advise us, should about meet our needs. 

 

Through grants to rural municipalities to aid them in paying the salaries of doctors, they have been 

encouraged to engage municipal doctors, with the result that we now have more doctors than we ever 

had before, which taken together with our prepaid hospitalization (and free hospitalization for those 

unable to pay) and other services provided for the entire province, we 



 

February 9, 1948 

 

 14 

shall, by the end of the present year, be fairly well equipped in so far as medical needs are concerned. 

 

Next in importance to health needs come education. Again, I think our part of the province was the most 

poorly equipped to meet our educational needs. This applies particularly to the north part of my 

constituency. In fact, it was general throughout most of that part of the province bordering on the forest 

reserves. 

 

Early in 1945 the Sturgis Larger Unit of Administration was established – no vote having been asked 

for. This larger Unit of Administration lies along the Thunder Hill branch of the CNR. Almost 

paralleling it to the South is the Canora Superintendency, which is still unorganized into a Larger Unit. 

Because of their similarity, we have a very good opportunity to make a comparison between the two 

systems. 

 

First as to cost. 

 

It is interesting to note that in the Larger Unit, while it is true levies on the more highly assessed 

property have increased, the average assessment is rural districts for 1944 was 16.6 mills, and in 1947 it 

was 17 mills, an increase of only .4 mills. May I say that at that time in 1944, while the average 

assessment was 16.6 mills there was a tremendous spread. We had some school districts as low as 5.8 

mills and other school districts with levies as high as 40 mills. 

 

In the Canora Superintendency the average rate in 1944 was 12.1 mills and in 1947 it had increased 

almost to 17 mills – an increase of 4.8 mills. 

 

In the Larger Unit more services are provided. In addition there was expended in 1947 on construction 

and repairs, in the Larger Unit, $58,061.87. $20,000 of which was spent on the new composite school at 

Sturgis, which when completed will enable about one hundred boys and girls to obtain technical 

education, who otherwise, would have been denied this type of education in most cases. 

 

This expenditure that I mentioned as compared to the expenditure in the Canora Superintendency, an 

expenditure of $16.618. Remember, Sir, I pointed out the fact that the levy had increased by over 4 mills 

in the Canora Superintendency. In expenditures they have $57,000 in the Larger Unit and $16.618 total 

spent on capital expenditure and repairs in the Canora Superintendency. 



 

Monday, February 9, 1948 

 

 15 

In the matter of gravelled highways and market roads, Canora has again been neglected. When we came 

to power in 1944, my constituency had only 15 miles of gravelled roads. When the program for 1948 is 

completed we shall have approximately ten times as many miles of good highways built and gravelled. 

Two highways, No. 49 and No. 5 cross it from east to west; and No. 9 crosses it from north to south. 

 

Generous grants have been provided to aid municipalities to construct market roads, and political 

patronage in this case, as in all others is no more. All grants are made on the basis of need, and as a 

result, two of the rural municipalities in the Canora constituency get two of the largest grants in the 

province. 

 

While we in our part of the province appreciate the greatly increased aid we are receiving, and realize 

the limitations of the financial resources of a provincial government, especially in Saskatchewan, we ask 

that both the provincial government and all other groups in the province join in presenting to the 

Dominion Government the case for increased financial aid from them in order that our social services 

may be properly financed – especially in the case of Health and Education. 

 

In conclusion, Sir, in fairness to previous governments, it should be stated that we have had certain 

advantages that they had not. Advantages, that those responsible for the drafting of the CCF deemed 

essential. 

 

1. The CCF had a platform that had been hammered out, plank by plank over many years, by 
conventions of democratically elected delegates; conventions held annually, Mr. Speaker,, not 

once in every twenty-eight years. 

 

2. Realizing that, ‘he who pays the piper calls the tune’, money to pay election expenses were 
contributed by thousands of people from every corner of the province, each paying in accordance 

with his ability, with no strings attached. 

 

3. Because our supporters had agreed that employment in the Civil Service must depend upon the 
ability to do the required work, without regard to party affiliation, this government has not been 

hamstrung by patronage and its resultant inefficiency. 

 

Admitting these advantages, without which little progress could have been made, the record of 

accomplishments of this Government, in just over three and a half years, is still remarkable. 

 

And, Sir, it is with the utmost pride, that I now move, seconded by Mr. Aitken, that an humble address 

now be presented to His Honour The Lieutenant Governor, as herewith submitted. 



 

February 9, 1948 

 

 16 

Mr. J.S. Aitken (Hanley):  Mr. Speaker,, in rising to second the Motion of the Address in reply to the 

Speech from the Throne, I would first of all wish to congratulate the mover, the hon. member for Canora 

(Mr. Feeley), on the fine address to which we have just listened. Those of us who know the hon. 

member know that for long years he has been a student of those problems which confront the people of 

Saskatchewan. To them he has given long and serious study, and this afternoon, out of that study, he has 

given us of his best, and I am sure we all appreciate it. 

 

I believe it is a time-honoured parliamentary custom in this debate, for those who take part in it to say a 

few words regarding their own constituency, and I do so with pleasure. I might say that when I was 

honoured by being asked to second this motion I could think up more reasons for declining the honour 

than I could for accepting it, and I finally thought that perhaps it was due to my constituents to accept it, 

and I accept it, and I accepted as a tribute to them. In Hanley constituency we are not quite so much 

favoured by nature as I gather the constituency of Canora is. We are not quite so much favoured by 

nature; nature, when those processes which went to form our prairie soil, was not too generous with 

Hanley constituency. 

 

We have all types of soil there, from the best to the worst. In one area, around Aberdeen, we have a 

particularly fine area of rich soil, an area in which there is hardly ever a crop failure. Then we have other 

areas such as that which is now the Military Camp at Dundurn, which is utterly unfit for agriculture. But 

in between, we have a lot of very good soil, but it does need rainfall and lots of it, and at the right time. 

In 1945 it was light, in 1946 it was light, and this last year, in 1947 it was very scarce indeed, so much 

so that we have suffered from drought conditions. And so the financial condition of the farmers of my 

constituency have not been as good as I would like. Yet, someone driving through there would think this 

is a very prosperous country, because if they drove through there at the present time they would see 

more empty farm buildings than there have ever been in that constituency – empty houses and empty 

barns. Some of the farmers have gone to British Columbia, some to Saskatoon, and it is regrettable that 

these things are happening – that the trend is in that direction. 

 

Instead of giving you a description of general conditions, I think I will give you an outline of one 

specific instance of what happened this fall, something which tends to the direction of part-time farming. 

If it was only an isolated instance, I would not bother, but because I think it is typical of what is 

happening all over a large area of Saskatchewan, I will tell you about it. 

 

After the small harvest was reaped, it was realized that some feed grain would necessarily have to be 

imported. In my own constituency one councillor called a meeting of the farmers of his division so that 



 

Monday, February 9, 1948 

 

 17 

they could talk things over and buy their grains co-operatively. I happened to be present at the meeting. 

There were about twenty farmers there, all of them had some livestock for which, in order to carry 

through the winter, they would have to purchase feed grains. 

 

Our agricultural representative was there, and the Pool Elevator Agent, and among them all they 

arranged to purchase several cars of oats and barley. It was quite a complicated business – we had the 

Municipality, and the Provincial Government here – but they got it arranged and I believe one car of 

oats was shipped in and the price agreed (and the price was a serious factor). These men, remember, had 

had two light crops and one almost crop failure, and to finance it – well, there may have been one or two 

of them who could put some cash down, but the others said, “We will put the grain in the elevator and I 

will get a few loads, and when I have fed so many hogs or cattle I can sell these and come back to the 

elevator and buy some more grain.” they were working, you see, on a pretty narrow financial margin. 

 

Well, they had just got one car of oats delivered when oats and barley were thrown on the open market. 

Oats went up about twenty cents and barley about thirty cents, and the arrangement was all shot. I do not 

know what they did. But you see these were the same conditions which confronted thousands of farmers 

all over the drought-stricken part of north Saskatchewan, and these men were asked to take a gamble in 

feeding that livestock. At the old prices they might have broken even, but the new high prices – neither 

they nor anyone else could tell how they were going to make out; and can you blame these men if they 

decided that one gamble – one gamble of growing a crop was enough and that they were not going to 

gamble on raising livestock, and so many of them disposed of their livestock, for in that rush of 

livestock to the markets, after the stroke, and after the prices of coarse grains went up, it was more than 

the usual fall rush – it was also a clearance sale. The farmers are sick and tired of working for nothing, 

they have had too much of that now and they do not want any more of it; and so you cannot blame them 

if they pack up and go to British Columbia for the winter, or go in to Saskatoon. And here may I say that 

those men who do go to Saskatoon do not go as many people think they do, to retire and have an easy 

time. I know quite a number who are working in Saskatoon, and they will come back to their farms and 

put in their crops in the spring. 

 

The constituency of Hanley, unfortunately, was last year visited by those twin demons of destruction, 

flood and fire. they came in that order. When the ice went out of the South Saskatchewan River last fall 

you all remember the serious flood conditions. The district of Moon Lake was flooded, and some 

farmers there suffered serious loss in grain and property damage. Fortunately there was no loss of life, 

but one young lad 

 

(continued on P.18) 



 

February 9, 1948 

 

 18 

had quite a narrow escape. The flood caught him while he was driving his tractor, and he just managed 

to leap on a huge cake of ice and float down the river to safety. 

 

The fire in Hanley town destroyed the main business section of that town. Again there was no loss of 

life. Well, sometimes out of calamity good comes, and I was pleased to see that out of that flood at 

Moon Lake, there is going to be an irrigation project undertaken in that district and the neighbouring 

district of Pike Lake. I believe the level of these lakes is to be raised and some irrigation work is to be 

undertaken, thanks to our Department of Reconstruction and to the P.F.R.A., jointly working on that 

project. 

 

Here will be a good place for the new division of the Department of Agriculture, this Irrigation Branch – 

a fine place for them to do some experimental work this summer, and I am sure they will do the best 

they can. The soil of Moon Lake district is eminently suitable for market gardening, and I am sure that at 

this time, when vegetables are so scarce under this austerity program, that this irrigation project in Moon 

Lake will be very opportune. With the co-operation of the producers and consumers in the City of 

Saskatoon and elsewhere, I hope there will be an abundant supply of cabbages at less than nine cents per 

pound. 

 

Now, coming to the Speech from the Throne, which has been so ably dealt with by the Mover, the 

opening paragraphs are most admirable for clearness, conciseness and accuracy in the summing up of 

world conditions, and it is not a pleasant picture. It is a picture of a world in which hunger and fear and 

insecurity are still all too prevalent; and here, it seems to me we agriculturalists of Canada, we farmers, 

have a part to play. We are a food-exporting nation, and here is a hungry world. The question is, are we 

doing everything possible? Are we doing all we could do to remedy that desperate situation? I do not 

think we are. 

 

For one thing, I believe our farmers have not the confidence they should have, to go ahead and put in an 

all-out program for production. Now I admit I do not know the feeling of the farmers as well as I should; 

owing to personal reasons I do not even know my own constituency as well as I should, and so I am 

going to fall back upon the opinion of a gentleman who should know – the Leader of the Opposition in 

the House of commons, Mr. Bracken. Mr. Bracken, as you know, is an ex-Professor of Agriculture, and 

he does understand conditions. In Hansard, of Monday, December 8, Page 50, Mr. Bracken has this to 

say: 



 

Monday, February 9, 1948 

 

 19 

“I have mentioned the critical condition of our primary industry. Never before in Canada have I seen the 

farmers so disturbed or so disillusioned and with so little faith in the future of the industry. They feel 

that they have been led down an empty trail. In Western Canada the hog industry is back to where it was 

before the war. Here in Ontario it is rapidly getting back to that position, and the same is true all over 

Canada in all branches of the livestock industry – beef, hogs, dairying and poultry; and this situation, 

remember, is in the face of a world that is desperately in need of food.” 

 

Now Mr. Bracken goes on to lay the blame at the door of the Federal Government. I am not concerned 

in defending the Federal Government although I think some blame can be attached – but I do think there 

is more than that – I think the cause goes deeper. It may be said that there is enough inducement in high 

prices for the farmer to produce. Well, prices are high – it must be admitted that they are, but the farmer 

knows from long experience that that is not the whole answer. There is an old Scottish proverb, very 

terse and very short, which says: “A Burned Bairn Dreads the Fire”. If you want me to interpret that, it 

means that the child who has once been burned is ever afterwards afraid of going near the fire. The 

farmer is in that position today. He has been singed by inflation and scorched by deflation and he dreads 

the future. He has not the confidence to go ahead and produce as he should in the face of world 

conditions. 

 

If this were only a Canadian condition, Mr. Bracken might be right in attributing the blame to the 

present Federal Government, but it is not. If there is any country where the people should be secure and 

happy, producing confidence, it is in the great Republic to the south of us. they are prosperous, sure, and 

yet this is the opinion, the summing up of a well-known American writer, George Seldes. This is his 

summing up of the situation: 

 

“The world moves into opposing camps, and there is not only talk of a coming war, but vast 

preparations. Nations are impoverished because billions of dollars voted in the annual budgets for war 

supplies for maintaining armies and navies, for the scientific search for weapons more powerful than the 

newest, untried atomic super-bombs. Reaction is on the march in many countries. Fascism still exists in 

some. It is being revived in others. Socialism has been adopted by several nations. Communism has 

spread throughout a large part of Europe and Asia, and in the United States, for the first time in history, 

there is a growing doubt that capitalism is the best way of all, the well-advertised American way of life. 

There is not only great doubt, but even greater confusion in America. 

 

One of the reasons, I think, for this lack of confidence in among the farmers and everyone else is, to 

some extent, the disappointment that we all feel today. In those long, terrible years of war we 



 

February 9, 1948 

 

 20 

all buoyed ourselves up with the hope that out of all that misery, out of all that blood and sweat and 

tears, something better would emerge, something better would come. We have been disappointed. You 

remember the high hopes that were raised by the Atlantic Charter – that great statesman and great 

President, Roosevelt, who said that in the New World there should be no want and no hate; and here we 

are in a world of fear and want and widespread depravity. But Roosevelt did make an attempt to remedy 

that terrible situation. Roosevelt called a conference at Hot Springs, Virginia, which laid the foundations 

of an organization which came to be known as the Foods and Agricultural Association, and the objects 

of that Association were, first of all, to increase agricultural production, and then, if those surpluses did 

accumulate, the foods and Agricultural Association was to devise ways and means of distributing that 

surplus to the hungry people of the world who could consume it. 

 

You see, that had been the problem in the pre-war days. Our problem today is as real, however. There is 

no question about that, the food does not exist; but in those days there was hunger and the food did exist, 

and we do not want a repetition of that if we can help it, and I do not see how it can be helped. There 

were some men who said that it could be, and one of them was the head of the Foods and Agricultural 

organization, Sir John Boyd-Orr. He was a scientist who had made a study of nutrition, and he had 

found that food and health were linked up. He published a book – I think it was in 1935 – which shook 

the conscience of the British public. In that book he proved conclusively that half the people in Great 

Britain had not enough money to buy the food they needed. 

 

Well, that effort of Sir John Boyd-Orr has not been wasted, for I believe that his scientific knowledge 

which he spread at that time is being used today by the British Labour Government in making available 

to the people the best possible diets with what food they can get. they cannot get enough, but under Sir 

John Boyd-Orr’s findings they are distributing that food so that it is being made the best use of. 

 

A similar survey in the United States showed almost similar results, and yet today that is one of the fears 

at the back of the minds of the farmers – What if we do go ahead? What if we do produce? We will all 

be faced with a surplus, and a surplus means low prices, and I do not see anything to prevent it. 



 

Monday, February 9, 1948 

 

 21 

Had the plan which was laid by Sir John Boyd-Orr been carried out, surplus could have been disposed 

of. Boyd-Orr said that there was no need for farmers to go on producing until they produced themselves 

into bankruptcy, it was simply foolishness. but what has happened the F.A.O. I am not quite sure, it 

seems to have faded into the background and free enterprise is once more in the saddle riding high and 

handsome, and I do not know where it is going or do I think anyone else does. 

 

Here I deplore the lack of leadership in Canada today, because it is the same old group who are saying 

or doing nothing but marking time. We should be making progress but we are not. Outside of the CCF, 

platform and policies, and leadership which it is giving, I see no hope at all. Politicians are just carrying 

on as politicians used to do – the same old way – if anything needs to be done, we’ll appoint a 

committee and let the committee bring in the report and then shelve the report. That is what we are 

doing today about the high cost of living. 

 

And if we turn to the press there is no leadership in our capitalist prices. We have just one plan and one 

program, and that is to oppose every progressive measure that is being brought forth. 

 

As I read these papers, as I see the slanted and distorted headlines, and as I read those clever and 

unscrupulous editorials, I am reminded of a little verse which a British Socialist wrote about the British 

Press and it applies quite appropriately and probably with some force even to our Canadian Press. This 

is the verse. 

 

“You cannot hope to bribe or twist, 

Thank god, the British Journalist, 

But seeing what a man will do, unbribed, 

There is no occasion to.” 

 

The mover of the motion said many fine things about our Democratic system, and the Democratic 

philosophy behind our CCF. Yes, it is a great system, this Democratic system. It can do wondrous things 

in the way of change, a government can be in power one day and it can be in the opposition the next. In 

the course of the long years, we have come to regard that as quite in the Democratic condition and we do 

not object – it is Democracy. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan, the government at that time faced an election and in a few days found they were 

in the opposition. Well it is usual in such cases, for the defeated party to meet the situation with as much 

good grace as they can command. It always seemed to me that our opposition never had a very large 

measure of that good grace and never did seem to accept it democratically. As the time goes on the 

measure of good grace seems to be coming less and less, and more and more they are trying to infer that 

this movement is something alien, something foreign and something subversive. Well 



 

February 9, 1948 

 

 22 

our social democracy is not alien and is not foreign. It is an old philosophy – quite old – it is at least 160 

years old and might be more, but I know that 160 years ago, a great poet – his name was Burns – 

summed up social Democracy this way. 

 

“The wretch who would a tyrant own, 

And the wretch his true born brother, 

Who would set the mob above the throne, 

May they be dammed together”. 

 

“Who will not sing, God Save the King, 

Shall hang as high as the steeple, 

But while we sing, God Save the King, 

We’ll not forget the people”. 

 

And there you have it, written a hundred and sixty years ago but it might have been written yesterday, 

because you have there a description of the two dictatorships, a dictatorship of the right, the tyrant, and 

then the communistic dictatorship, ‘who would set the mob above the throne’, is a good description. 

 

Coming down to a later date, we have another great democrat who also stated our philosophy very 

clearly. He said, whenever there is a conflict between human rights and property rights, human rights 

must prevail’. Now to our opponents that might sound like a quotation from Karl Marx, but I assure you 

it is not, it is the words of the greatest democrat this North American continent ever saw, Abraham 

Lincoln. 

 

I would say to those who say we are a foreign organization, it is nothing of the sort. 

 

Our neighbours to the south who seem to have a special ability for making slogans of one kind and 

another have recently produced one, they speak about the grass roots, well it is true today that the C.C.F. 

has its grass roots in Saskatchewan. As long as I can remember I always seemed to know some man who 

had lost all faith in the two old parties and said that someday the people of this province would elect a 

third party, a peoples’ government. 

 

The first record which I have is dated February 19, 1914; this was a third party debate at the 

Saskatchewan Grain Growers Convention, held in Moose Jaw on that date. But, as I recall, there were 

debates before that time but this is the first of which I have any record. At that convention, the following 

resolution was made; whereas the present political party system tends to disunite our forces, unimportant 

questions, vital to the farmers. Therefore let it be resolved that this convention is in favour of a farmers 

party being brought into existence to be financed by voluntary contributions from local Grain Growers 

Associations. That you see, was long ago, there was this dissatisfaction with the two old parties, and it 

increased and grew as the years went by until – well you all know – what happened in June 1944, and I 

am sorry for the victims of that disaster… 



 

Monday, February 9, 1948 

 

 23 

I would say to them, however, that they should not take it too seriously, because it was destined and it 

was not their fault. It was just a long accumulation all through these years until finally it fell upon them 

and that was their misfortune. The mistake that the two old Parties always made was that they 

underestimated the intelligence of the people of this province. They made many mistakes of one kind 

and another, but that was the fatal one. they realize now, I think, that you cannot fool all the people all of 

the time – it just cannot be done. 

 

Well, the Mover of the Address reviewed in detail the record of the various departments. He made a 

very fine job of it, and so I will say nothing more than that I agree with what has been said; but in paying 

tribute to all these departments I would just say that while it is all true I wish also to pay a tribute to a 

group of men who are often criticized by our opponents – they usually refer to them as ‘those imported 

Socialist planners’. We are much indebted to these men, because of the ability and experience which 

they have given to our problems and our success, I am sure, is to a great extent due to their efforts. 

 

Why our Opposition is so bitter about these ‘imported Socialist planners’ I do not know, because they 

know quite well that all governments have experts of one sort or another, and that the Federal 

Government at Ottawa has plenty of expert advisers, but they do not seem to be making a very good job 

of it. I do not think they have the right kind of planners down there. They may be ‘imported’ – I do not 

know where they got them – but I would suggest that they get some Socialist planners and then they will 

have something worthwhile, some constructive program in this Dominion of Canada. 

 

The Speech from the Throne refers to some of our legislature which has been contested in courts and 

which is at present in an uncertain state, some of it going to the Privy Council. I am very sorry that 

among those measures is The Farm Security Act, because that is a piece of legislation which we farmers 

felt very proud of – I know I did. I felt when that Act was passed that here was something that we had 

accomplished; if we never did anything else we had put the indebted farmer in a more equal position 

with his creditors. 

 

Three thousand years ago a very wise man said a very wise thing. He said – “The borrower shall be 

servant to the lender.” It was true then, and it is true today, but I do think that we have been too 



 

February 9, 1948 

 

 24 

much the servants of the mortgage companies, and the mortgage companies have been too much our 

masters. I believe that it is not so much the fact of what the mortgage companies are going to lose, that 

they are worrying about, but they are worrying about losing their power – they are not going to be the 

masters that they were in the past, if this legislation goes on the Statute books, as I hope it will. 

 

Then, some of our labour legislation has been contested. As a farmer, I would like to follow the example 

of the Mover of the Motion in saying a few complimentary words about labour. 

 

We have been told for so long, by wise men both of the East and probably of the West, that labourers 

and farmers could never get along, could never agree. Well, this group is giving them the lie. Whatever 

happens to us old farmer M.L.A.’s in the days to come I do not know, but one thing I am sure of, that 

we, in looking back upon the time we spent here, will always recall with happiness our associations with 

those men who represent labour. Our relations have been very cordial indeed – and why should they not 

be? We of the C.C.F. understand the philosophy of labour. We understand that when labour is not 

unionized it is generally (not always, but generally) underpaid, underfed and underprivileged. We do not 

want conditions like that in Saskatchewan, and so among the first things this labour government did, this 

C.C.F. Government, was to go out and organize as many labour unions as possible. I am not going to try 

to outline that legislation. Labour legislation is quite complicated, and frankly, I probably have not paid 

the attention to it that I should have; but I would like to say something of the philosophy of labour. 

 

I remember reading a book by a man called Huxley – he called it, I think, The Brave New World. It was 

a fantastic, nonsensical sort of thing, and at first I thought of throwing it aside, and then I realized that he 

had something, because in this ‘brave new world’ he was writing about, there were two classes – the one 

class was the masters and the other class was the workers. But these were not ordinary men, they were 

created by some special scientific process which left them near roots. they were men without souls. And 

I have often thought that that was what capitalism would really like to have as workers – men who were 

only bodies, and with the souls crushed out of them; and in the long and dark history of capitalism, that 

has too often happened. but you see, a working man has a soul too, as well as his master. 



 

Monday, February 9, 1948 

 

 25 

One day Robbie Burns was out walking somewhere and he saw a poor working man asking a 

neighbouring rich landlord for work, and as we would say, he was given the ‘brush off’, and so burns 

went on burning with indignation and he wrote those lines: 

 

“For if to be yon landlord’s slave, 

By nature I’m designed, 

Why was an independent wish, 

Ere planted in my mind.” 

 

And all the long years since that have not given an adequate answer, but we are coming nearer to it. 

 

The day is coming, I believe, when labour will be in full partnership with capital and they will have 

something to say a bout the production and management and all the rest of it. 

 

I am not trying to suggest that the problems before us are of easy solution, and you could elect a CCF 

Government in every province in Canada, and in the Dominion House in Ottawa, and we would still 

have a lot of problems. 

 

The biggest problem of all is to reconcile two things; is to reconcile what I have just been saying, that is 

to establish an economic order which will be so regulated that it will function efficiently, and still leave 

men with that measure of freedom and liberty to which he is most justly entitled. 

 

Again, I make no apology for quoting Robbie Burns: 

 

“Preserve the dignity of man, 

With soul erect, 

And trust the universal plan 

Will all protect.” 

 

If I had my way, Mr. Speaker, I would have those lines engraved over the doors of every parliament 

everywhere, whether it was Moscow or Washington; London or Regina, because that is the supreme task 

which confronts all Legislatures, to preserve the freedom and then, to yet give them economic security. 

 

I have much pleasure in seconding the motion. 


