



















































Hansard: March 07, 1949


573 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Eleventh Legislature 

 

Monday, March 7, 1949 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o‟clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. Mr. Fines: 

 

That Mr. Speaker do not leave the Chair. 

 

Mr. M. J. Willis (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I would first like to offer my congratulations to the 

Provincial Treasurer for presenting to us this budget in his usual capable manner. This is the fifth budget 

address that I have heard in this Legislature, and each one is presented in a clear and concise manner to 

the members of this House. 

 

I was pleased with the amendments that have been brought in to The Automobile Insurance Act because 

I know there are several constituents of mine, and I presume in other constituencies in the province, that 

have desired these two added features in our Automobile Insurance Act. Since we have added these two 

amendments, namely, the loss by fire or theft with the $100 deductible, in this bill, another principle has 

been brought to bear in that a recognition of the year and the make of a car and those cars that were 

made prior to and including 1932, the insurance will cost $4.50. The 1933 to 1936 models will cost $6; 

from 1937 to 1942, $8, and from 1942 on, $10. I would like to ask the members of this House where 

could you find automobile insurance with six-point coverage that is given for the money, as by this 

automobile insurance? I read a few days ago where, in the province of Manitoba, it was headlined across 

the Free Press and the Winnipeg Tribune that “Insurance rates were to be raised by 21 percent”. Instead 

of that we have brought it down for two reasons: because, first, the coverage we are given, and, 

secondly, all motorists are insured. Moreover, this government has indicated that after the experience of 

a year, if they find that they have surplus they will still go further and bring the deductible down 

somewhat, based upon the statistics of a year‟s operation. 

 

In regard to the policy of extension of our power lines — and I have heard it contended “where are 

they?” — I would like to say that I believe some of the hon. members opposite were in my constituency 

during the election in 1948, and I do not think they were always rained out. I know the Leader was 

rained out once when he was in and we enjoyed the rain, but he came back when it was fair weather; 

however, fair weather did not bring much luck in the poll to him, but we welcomed him to our 

constituency. I cannot see why they could not see the power line that had been built. He came down the 

road. They say that we connected a number of towns, villages and hamlets in that extension to the extent 

of over 100 miles of power line. It was sorely needed, and I am hoping that other hamlets and villages 

and farmers along these lines will be connected in the years that lie ahead. But the record shows that 

something has been done. We have found that there are 4,190 miles of transmission lines in this 

province in 1948, as compared to 1,626 miles in 1944. With regard to the farms connected, in 1947 there 

were 690 farms connected to power and last year 985 — a total of 1,675. I do not minimize the 

difficulties of rural 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
574 

electrification in this province of ours, where we have many areas with sparse population and, therefore, 

large distances to cover. But we have at least seen there has been extension in our power development. I 

know, of course, another problem that faces rural electrification is the trend in areas where we have 

mechanized farming of the rural residents moving into the villages and towns. It is not an easy problem 

to solve and will have to be done with a great deal of deliberation. 

 

In the field of insurance that is operated by our Government Insurance Office, we have accomplished 

two main things: first, we have helped to keep the rates of fire insurance down in this province, and, 

secondly, the profits that accrued have gone back to the people of this province, and not to outside as 

formerly. Sometimes it is said that our rates are not down. Well, I am going to quote rates this afternoon 

on a town in which household furniture was insured prior to the government coming in and the same 

amount of insurance was placed on this household furniture after the government came into the business. 

In the town of Eston the premium rate is $1.30 for $100 coverage, or on $2,000 of household furniture 

the premium was $26. That same insurance with the government was 85 cents for $100, or $17 for the 

$2,000 policy. Moreover, the Government Insurance Office did not lose money at $17 as shown by the 

record of the company for the year. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Was the $26 a mutual fire insurance rate? 

 

Mr. Willis: — Absolutely. 

 

I feel the greatest criticism to be offered to the budget by the opposition will be the total amount of it, 

but let me say, as an individual, have we not found that the cost of everything has gone up. We find that 

purchasing power of the dollar is down around 60 cents. Consequently, why should we expect the 

government to finance on a budget that is very low when your purchasing dollar hasn‟t very much 

power. Let us be fair. Comparisons have been made with regard to other provinces, but I quote from a 

clipping in the Leader Post that “the budget submitted by Premier Manning of the province of Alberta 

has estimated expenditures of $66,659,000”. These estimated expenditures of Alberta included increases 

for education, public health and public welfare in the main, and upon analysis you will find, in 

Saskatchewan, the increases are mainly for education, public health and social welfare. 

 

Before I go any further, I would like to analyze some of the criticism that was made by the former 

Leader of the Opposition. I could not but smile when he claimed that this government was slow in 

making payments to a friend of his; it took over six months. I have on my desk a letter, and I quote: 

“Lucky Lake, February 23. Dear Sir: (this is addressed to myself) Re: Gravelling of Highway No. 42, 

three miles west of Lucky Lake in October, 1936.” In October, 1936 there were nine local farmers who 

gravelled by team a little better than one mile of highway. Now they are wondering why this account 

that was made 13 years ago has not been paid. This is just 27 times as long in making payments as this 

government was to my friend. I was really amused when he listed out of the telephone directory 

officials, but I noticed, and I listened carefully, he did not list any government road supervisors who 

could have been quite easily found under the former administration, and I am afraid the hon. member for 

Cannington (Mr. Patterson) made a serious mistake 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
575 

when he referred to highways and that they were not in a deplorable state in 1944. I feel sure that in 

many constituencies they were not deplorable because there weren‟t any. There were only signposts. I 

often wondered if they were placed in the Elrose constituency as a memorial to the last buffalo. 

However, I feel the former Leader and some members of his former Cabinet should have got together in 

respect to highways in 1944. 

 

In Elrose press of June 8, 1944 here is a letter addressed to the electors of the Elrose constituency, and I 

quote: “Travelling about the constituency, I have been impressed with your need of all-weather 

highways, and as your representative I can and will secure for you a greatly improved system or roads. 

Sincerely yours, H. Staines.” 

 

Mr. Tucker: — They probably would have done it too. 

 

Mr. Willis: — Well, the Leader of the Opposition says “probably they would have done it”. After not 

doing it for 35 years, we could mark it off in centuries. 

 

I am in agreement with the statement that they needed, but they were needed not only in 1944, but for 

the past 35 years prior to that date. Since that time, what has been accomplished? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nothing at all. 

 

Mr. Willis: — All right, friends. I invite him to come with me and I will show him what has been 

accomplished. 

 

An Hon. Member: — In your constituency? 

 

Mr. Willis: — Seeing is believing, my friend, and I hope you do not wear smoked glassed. 

 

Mr. Marion: — Come to Athabasca. 

 

Mr. M. J. Willis: — The highway has been built from the town of Eston, with a population of over 

1,200 to the towns of Eastend and Dinsmore, which allows the intervening towns to have a way out to 

Saskatchewan. It has been graded and graveled by this government. Now, when friends in the opposition 

say “nothing has been done”, I invite them to come to my constituency and travel over that road, and our 

people will treat you cordially — I think they treated the Leader of the Opposition cordially when he 

was in that constituency during the election. I heard that he hadn‟t time for questions, but I know he is 

very busy and some of the questions might have been just a little pertinent. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Right after that meeting, that night, I had to be a t a meeting in Battleford. 

 

Mr. M. J. Willis: — We were worried about that Battleford meeting. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I got there too. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
576 

Mr. M. J. Willis: — I quite realize the Leader had a long trip, too, and I only wished that he had had 

more meetings because Kyle poll gave me the largest majority in my constituency. 

 

I have been impressed since I came here by the films that have been shown of our Nation Park. But in 

order to attract tourists from that great republic to the south, we need highways, and one of the great 

obstacles to the people coming from the south, particularly to Waskesiu, has been the ferry north of 

Swift Current, known as Saskatchewan Landing. During the fiscal year 1947-48, 30,743 vehicles, or ten 

percent of the total vehicles carried by the 41 ferries in the province, passed over and were counted by 

that ferry; and there were 60,000 passengers. But, at long last and after years of patient waiting and 

many promises of former governments, I am pleased to announce that this C.C.F. government has 

awarded the contract to build a bridge at Saskatchewan Landing. 

 

An Hon. Member: —It will be four years before you get it. 

 

Mr. M. J. Willis: — If we get it within four years, that will be 100 times faster than we had hoped from 

the former government. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You will be out of here then 

 

Mr. M. J. Willis: — I say, further, the dream of many pioneers in that vicinity will become reality. 

 

The criticism of the former Leader of the Opposition was directed at getting rid of the frills in education 

and public health, and I am afraid that when he touched on education and the elimination of frills he was 

on very thin ice in the month of March, because, if I remember rightly, during his regime there were no 

clothes, let alone frills, for those in the education field. This government has no apologies to make for 

the amounts to be spent on education. We find, in 1943-44, the former administration spent $4,073,000 

on education. Remember this: during that time revenues were buoyant. In 1942 the province had one of 

the best crops in the past ten years. In 1949-50, this government will spend $7,613,000 on revenue 

accounts, and another $2 million in capital account to be used to make grants and loans for school 

building and equipment, and another $1 million to be set aside to provide financial assistance to worthy 

students. In other words, over $10.5 million will be spent on education in the year 1949-50. We will 

have spent over two and one-half times as much on education as the former government in the year 

1943-44. Now, what frills would the Leader of the Opposition desire us to eliminate? 

 

The other frill, we have been told, should be eliminated in the field of public health. The estimates of 

$10.75 million for 1949-50 show an increase of $1.3 million over a year ago, and of this increase, over 

$500,000 will be spent on our mental institutions; $171,000 will be spent for the treatment of cancer; 

over $500,000 of this increase will be used for hospitalization of cancer cases and old age pensioners. 

Surely, these increases are justified from a humanitarian standpoint to help those unfortunates in our 

mental institutes 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
577 

and the aged who have helped to make this province one of the great wheat belts of the world. 

 

So often we are told in this Legislature what the province of Manitoba is doing. Let me give my hon. 

friends an example. It is rather personal, I will admit, but last October a friend, in fact the best friend I 

will every know, was sent to the Winnipeg General Hospital and had an operation for cancer which was 

only a temporary measure of relief, and was in the hospital for three weeks and his bill at the end of that 

time was $410. If this person had lingered and become a bed patient for weeks or months, he would 

have completely used up his life‟s savings. Fortunately, in this province a like case would be looked 

after and cared for by the province. If this was one of the frills that my hon. friend wanted us to get rid 

of, I can only say that irrespective of what members are elected in the future, this frill will not be 

eliminated by the people in this province. 

 

I have noted, too, that the expense of the air ambulance has been brought up. Possibly that was another 

frill. But what has this air ambulance meant to the people of Saskatchewan? Some say it is only helping 

the rural residents to get into a hospital, but I noticed in the press since I came here that, where we have 

a 25-bed hospital at Eston, the air ambulance went and carried two patients to the city of Saskatoon for 

specialized treatment. The people want that service. This government is going to give them that service. 

 

Furthermore, we have recognized that if you are to get medical service in the rural areas of this province 

you have to provide facilities for medical men to work. I was please to note in this budget that $300,000 

is again being made available for loans and grants to hospitals and health centres which aid the poor 

districts in the erection of small hospitals, and by so doing they will be able to have medical services and 

teach young doctors. 

 

In closing, I will admit the budget is large, but we have contended and we still contend we have set the 

budget to meet some of the human needs of this province, and as long as I am a member of this side of 

the House I will support a government that places value on human needs and not on the sign of the 

dollar. I shall support the budget. 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas (Rosetown): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate, I feel that I should, 

at the outset, express to you my congratulations on again being appointed to your high office of Speaker. 

As a former member of this Legislature, I know that you are well endowed with the qualities that are 

required for such a position. You have a sense of fairness, a sound judgment and, above all, the integrity 

that is required for a position of this kind. 

 

I would also like, at this time, to extend to the Leader of the Opposition a welcome to this House. I know 

that in former years we would have been pleased to have had him here to take up with him and discuss 

with him some of the statements that he has made across this country from time to time, and I am sure 

that all members of this House join me in wishing him a long tenure of office. I am quite sure that there 

is no danger of the Conservative party every easing him out of being the Leader of the Opposition in this 

Legislature. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
578 

I would also like to extend to the Provincial Treasurer my congratulations on what I believe to be a very 

fine presentation of the most outstanding budget that ever was presented to this Legislature. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — The biggest anyway. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — It is the biggest and we are not ashamed of it because that budget being large 

means that there is being returned to the people of this province more of their taxes than ever was 

returned to them before. But I want to say that when I listened to the hon. Provincial Treasurer on 

Wednesday afternoon I wondered how long we could expect him to meet the increased services that we 

are giving the people of Saskatchewan without, at the same time, raising the tax level of this province, 

and I say, Mr. Speaker, that he is to be congratulated on the very fine job that he has done in presenting 

this budget to us. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — What about the increase in taxes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — It is not my intention to discuss the need of increased revenue, but I would like at 

this time to recall to the members of this House that if the people of this province expect to receive these 

increased benefits, then we must look somewhere for increased revenues. I would recall to you that two 

years ago when this province entered into agreement with the federal government on the field of 

taxation, it was done after a conference had been called and had placed before it certain propositions by 

the federal government. I would like to point out that up to this date the federal government has not 

fulfilled all the promises they made at that time. They made certain promises with regard to increased 

social services. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — They did not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Certain promises in regard to a scheme of public investment that would take care 

of public building and the building of roads and matters of that kind. We are still waiting for the federal 

government to assume the responsibility in that respect, and to return to the seven province who had 

made an agreement with the, their fair share of the taxes which we gave up at that time. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You know they weren‟t promises; they were proposals. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Proposals is correct, but the proposals have never been consummated. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if the federal government was sincere in their proposals at that time, now would be 

the opportune time to again call these provinces together in conference and to further discuss these 

matters. I know they quite laid the blame for the break up of that conference on the shoulders of Messrs. 

Drew and Duplessis, but since that time we have Mr. Drew travelling all across this country and telling 

the people of Canada that he is now the champion of the provinces and that he is prepared to co-operate 

with the provinces in a new tax agreement. So, I say, Mr. Speaker, now is the logical time for Ottawa to 

again call that conference because, with the very close 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
579 

tie-up that appears to exist between Messrs. Drew and Duplessis, Mr. Drew would have to bring Mr. 

Duplessis along with him if such a conference was called. But up to the present time, we have seen no 

effort being made on the part of the federal government to again get the provinces together to discuss 

another agreement on the basis of the proposals they made in 1945. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tell us about the highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Oh, I will tell you about highways in a while. Don‟t worry about that. There is 

still a lot of time for highways. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — That is what you have always said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — I notice that the opposition maintain . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — if the hon. members have anything to say would they kindly rise to their feet. I think it 

is high time that his continual interruption from one side to the other side ceased. If you have any 

questions to ask the speaker, kindly rise and see whether he wants to answer them or not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I was saying that the opposition have made the charge that we had 

lost the rural vote in this province because they did not agree with the taxation policies of this 

government. Well now, I have made a pretty exhaustive study of the vote that was taken in this province 

last June, and I find that we did not lose the rural vote. Going over this province and taking the strictly 

rural vote, I find that we have increased our votes in the rural polls, not decreased. Not only did we 

increase the over-all vote in this province, but we increased our rural vote; and while I will have to admit 

we lost some support in the small towns and villages, I think we know where we can lay the blame for 

that. We can lay it largely on the shoulders of the Chambers of Commerce and the insurance companies. 

They are the ones who did the work in the small towns and the villages in an attempt to discredit the 

government. But I want to say that already there is a change in opinion among those people in the small 

towns and villages. I have talked to a lot of merchants who have told me quite frankly that were they 

voting again they would again vote for this government. They realize they had the wool pulled over their 

eyes by the mount of propaganda that was carried on across this province by big interests, a lot of them 

leading from Toronto or Montreal. 

 

I would also like to tell the Leader of the Opposition — he was boasting about what might have 

happened if there was a certain change in vote. All it required was a shifting of 1.037 votes to have taken 

11 of the members across three ridings of Melfort, Humboldt and Kinistino, it just required a shifting of 

15, 16, and 45 votes respectively to have placed those three constituencies in the C.C.F. column. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How about Hanley? 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
580 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — I will also tell those hon. gentlemen that had it not been for the heavy rain that 

fell that day and the bad roads — yes, the bad roads because most of the people had to travel over 

municipal roads . . . There is another feature in regard to this that I would like to call to the attention of 

the House and that is, I find that 55 percent of those of us who sit on this side of the House are here 

because of overall majority in our constituencies. But I find, of the 19 Liberals who sit across the House, 

that only 37 percent of them represent a clear-cut majority in their constituencies. 

 

We made a very remarkable showing last June, when you realize that we had a combination of all the 

political parties in this province lined up against us. That includes the Communist party, as I shall prove 

in a moment or so. We saw a lot of shot-gun marriages in this province and some of them are not 

proving out to be too happy. You know, an old Conservative friend of mine was talking to me the other 

day. He shook his head and said: “I never thought what I would live to see the day when Jimmy 

Gardiner would have control of the Conservative organization in this province. Nor, either, did I expect 

to see the day when Duplessis of Quebec would dominate the Conservative party in Canada.” That came 

from an old Conservative friend of mine, and he wasn‟t feeling very happy about it. I am afraid the poor 

old Tory party in Canada is in rather bad shape; almost as bad as the Liberals. 

 

Before I leave the matter of the campaign last year, there is one other thing that I would like to bring to 

the attention of this House, and that is that we have done something that we said would happen years 

ago. We have forced the two old parties together. We have evidences here, right in this House, and while 

the Conservative member did have his eat moved from the front line row to the back row — I guess he 

felt he was being fenced in — but he is still part and parcel . . .  

 

Mr. McDonald: — May I ask the hon. gentleman a question? I was referred to here, just a moment ago, 

as a Conservative member. I want it know in this House that I ran on a joint ticket and that I was elected 

with both Liberal and Conservative support, and I intend to sit in this chair here, not that one . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Are you asking the hon. member a question? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Yes, I am asking him a question. If he thinks I am a straight Conservative member, 

he is mistaken, and if he thinks I moved from that chair to this one, he is also mistaken. It was my own 

will. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member is not asking a question, he is making a statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — I am very glad to accept the hon. member‟s correction. He is not a straight 

Conservative. I will admit I am mistaken, but I was told so by the Conservative organizer in this 

province who was my opponent in the last campaign, and he told me the other day, I think in the 

presence of the hon. gentleman, that he was 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
581 

here to see that he followed his truce Conservative path. If I am mistaken, I am glad to accept the hon. 

member‟s statement. However, it is strictly for the proof of what I just said. We have forced the two old 

political parties into one camp in this province — that is where we want them. There is no mistake in 

that. Furthermore, they had to get there in order to save a remnant of their support to carry on the fight 

for big business in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — What about communism and you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Now my friend mentioned communism. I had almost forgotten that. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Never forget them because they are right behind you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — You know, when I hear these men talking across the way, they remind me of a 

man with a guilty conscience. They are always talking about the communists and they are trying to lay 

the blame on the C.C.F. Well, the C.C.F. never did work with the communists in this province, but I 

have ample proof here that the Liberals did. Right here. Tim Buck‟s picture in a large advertisement 

proposes a Liberal-Labour coalition in the coming federal election. Did the Liberals refute Mr. Tim 

Buck‟s offer? Oh no, they didn‟t. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — What year was that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — That was in 1945. Not very long ago. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Was it in a C.C.F. paper? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — No, in the Leader-Post. Here is another advertisement in the Leader-Post, 

“Canada is in danger, the Tory plot unfolds. Make the Labour a partner in government. Coalition of the 

Progressive-Labour and the Liberals.” 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Why don‟t you read about 1948, where they ask . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — This is very recent. January, 1945. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What about Nelson Clark? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Here is another one. This was taken from the February 5, 1945 issue of the Owen 

Sound Daily Sun, and was published by the authority of the North Grey Liberals Association, and this 

advertisement goes on to show the prominent men who were supporting the Liberal candidate in the 

election, and here they are: Malcolm McLeod, Harold Prichett, C.S. Jackson, Bruce Faggoson, Pat 

Sullivan and Nigel Morgan. Nigel Morgan is the British Columbia leader of the Labour-Progressive 

party. These are the men that the Liberals advertised as supporting their candidate in that by-election. 

Did you get any prominent Liberals getting up and doing as Mr. Coldwell did when they offered their 

support? 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
582 

Mr. Tucker: — Yes, you did. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Here is Mr. Coldwell‟s statement: 

 

The C.C.F. will not collaborate with the Labour-Progressive party in any way, direct or indirect. It will 

not enter any electoral arrangement with them or with any other party whether on a national, 

provincial or constituency basis. There is a fundamental difference between the C.C.F. methods and 

philosophy and those of the Communists . . .  

 

Mr. Tucker: — Did your Leader make a statement like that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Yes, he did. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Read it to us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — I had forgotten to read this, but I am glad you mentioned it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What about the highways? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Well, now you are anxious about highways, and I am very anxious to add to it. 

 

I noticed the member for Cannington (Mr. Patterson) who was acting as the financial critic of the 

government made a two hour speech the other day. I was very interested in it, but I noticed through that 

entire speech there continued that old note that has been evident in all the speeches in the House during 

the last five years. While I followed him very closely, because I was hoping he would give me some 

material for this speech this afternoon, I found there was very little in that speech to answer . . .  

 

Mr. Tucker: — It was really good. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: —  . . . but there was one thing he said that I agree with him in: he said that a 

yardstick by which a government should be measured should be to set its attention to expenditure, and I 

agree with that. And then he went on to criticize this government because we had been lax in our 

expense in this province. Well, I am going to ask him to refer to Public Accounts of 1935-36. I believe 

at that time he was Leader of the Government of this province. He will find, at page 99, an item of 

$55,940.95 that is set aside for relief purposes. Of that amount $23,295/59 — almost half of it — was 

paid out in salaries and expenses. And among the names of some of those who received that were men 

who were well known in this province as Liberal organizers. And if he will turn to page 307 of Public 

Accounts for 1936-37, he will find another item of a similar nature; $60,000 this time for relief, 

expenses and salaries $23,619, leaving a balance of $36,380 for the people on relief. I do not think I 

would say very much about watching public expenditure after reading those two items, and I can dig up 

a lot more if it were required. 

 

Now, to accommodate my friend across the way: I noticed that in defending the highway policy of the 

last government, and the proof that they had 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
583 

good highways was the fact that in our Manifesto of 1944 we made no mention of highways. Mr. 

Speaker, that was not required. The highways of Saskatchewan were known from one side of Canada to 

the other as this nations‟ worst, and we are just now trying to live it down. We did not have to advertise 

the fact; everyone knew it. The former Leader of the Opposition said we made no promises regarding 

highways. That is quite correct. We never will. That is a prerogative we will leave the Liberals Party — 

to go out and promise highways on the eve of an election. We will continue in the future as we have 

done in the past. We will go out and build highways and we will go to the country on our record of 

performance, not on the basis of promise. 

 

Before I go to what we have done in this province in the matter of highways, I am going to, for the 

benefit of the members opposite, just give them a short résumé of what we did have in Saskatchewan 

when we took over in 1944. We took over, as the hon. members know, the largest highway system of 

any province in Canada, and the worst. Of that system of over 8,000 miles, I find that over 70 percent 

was entirely worn out. Tat means there was over 5,600 miles of road that had to be completely rebuilt, 

and that is a mighty bit task. It is pretty hard to realize that in a province as young as this, that you could 

have a highway system with 70 percent of it entirely worn out. I know that people are justified in asking 

how it could happen that in a province as young as this, that has spent over $80 million for highways, 

should find themselves, in that time, with 70 percent of the system entirely gone. The answer is not hard 

to see. The answer is that due to the parsimonious attitude of the former government in failing to provide 

enough money for highway construction, and particularly highway maintenance, is the reason for that 

highway to have got into the dilapidated condition in which we found it. 

 

The other day someone said that the former Minister of Highways did not build many roads in his own 

constituency. I would say he did not build many roads period. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Where did you build yours? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — I remember, also, when sitting in this House last year, he made the statement that 

you require $300 per mile per year to maintain a mile of gravel road, and I agree with him. But if he 

knew that, he did not act on the information he had, because on the basis of over 4,000 miles of graveled 

roads, or roads which had been graveled rather, in this province he should have had a vote of well over 

$1 million for that purpose alone. But I find that in the budget which we had to accept when we took 

over in this province, there was only $1,000,000 allowed for maintenance purposes, and the year before 

it was around $900,000. So that is the reason for the rapid deterioration of the highway system we had in 

this province prior to 1944. 

 

I remember quite well, when I took office, I called for an inventory of what equipment we had. When I 

received that inventory I found there was not a single piece of modern construction equipment in the 

whole Department of Highways. It is true that a few pieces had been purchased, but there were on load 

to the Northern Areas Branch of the Department of Municipal Affairs. In the field of maintenance 

equipment there were 61 power maintainers, when there were 200 required, and of that 61, Mr. Speaker, 

21 of them were old gas-powered 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
584 

machines that are obsolete and should have been in the ash can. That is what we had to take over. When 

I came to check on the personnel of the department — I am not going to say anything about the political 

organizers; the men who were termed as road inspectors — I found there was a dearth of trained 

engineers in the Department of Highway, men who had the ability to go out and to build roads that 

should be built and to give the necessary instruction. I want to say this: on the face of what I found in the 

department at that time, I would say that engineering meant very little to the former Liberal government 

in this province. I also found that I was the first Minister of Highways to take any interest in the 

graduation class of civil engineers in our own university, and I am glad to tell this House that every year 

since we have taken office we have taken a number of these young men on our staff. In fact, we have 

taken on as many as we could get. I am also glad to inform you that, by and large, they are doing a good 

job, and they are making a very worthwhile contribution to the staff, and it is the policy of this 

government to continue to take on trained men, men who will build up and make a further contribution 

to our organization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 1944, saw the culmination of 34 years of Liberals maladministration as far as highway 

construction is concerned, and I can assure the members opposite that the people of this province are in 

no mood to again give them the opportunity of going out and doing as they did in the years gone by. 

 

Now, it is only fair to ask what we have done. Well, first we took the equipment that was in this 

province and we kept it working from spring until fall every year between taking office to the present 

time. It is true, the first two years that we were in office we were unable to spend all the money that was 

voted for highway purposes because of the lack of equipment. However, we kept purchasing equipment 

as rapidly as we could buy it and the result is that today we have nine earth-moving construction crews 

of our own; we have two hard-surfacing crews and we have five bridge crews capable of going out and 

doing work in this province. I find that contractors have added to their equipment, knowing that they 

were assured of a constant programme of construction in this province. The result is today that we have 

a lot of good construction equipment in Saskatchewan and it is most fortunate that we did when we were 

struck with the catastrophe that hit this province last spring. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, might I ask the hon. member a question? Did you have much difficulty in 

getting equipment in 1944 due to the war being on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Oh, yes, we had some difficulty for two years. In fact, it is none too plentiful 

even yet, but at that we continue to build up our crews and from 1945 on we had construction crews for 

loan in the field doing construction work. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — The war was over then. 

 

Premier Douglas: — There was no difficulty before 1939 was there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — None at all. In fact, they tell me they used to pester the offices before that. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
585 

I might again just remind the hon. gentleman of what I said a moment ago, that the few pieces that they 

had purchased, I believe in the spring of 1944, some of them, they were not kept by the Department of 

Highways. There were sent to Northern Areas Branch. The hon. member was not in the House here a 

few years ago when the hon. Mr. Brockelbank laid on the table some correspondence that I think gave 

the reason why that was done. It was correspondence to show that the field men of Northern Areas 

Branches were brought into Regina not to consult with members of their staff, but with Mr. Douglas 

Munroe who was the Liberals organizer for this province, and I think that will constitute the answer. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — When was that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — We have gone out and we purchased the equipment. I also found, of course, 

there was a total lack of warehouse facilities in this province to house and to maintain our equipment. As 

the hon. members know, there has been a dearth of building material in this province throughout the 

years, but we did manage to buy a hangar at North Battleford which has been reconditioned for the 

purpose of a highway warehouse; we have been able to lease part of a hangar at Prince Albert; we have 

purchased a hangar at Yorkton and we are rebuilding a new warehouse in Regina which will take care of 

the housing and the repair of the equipment in the southern part of Saskatchewan. 

 

An hon. member said the other day that the only two ridings in this province where you could find any 

evidence of highway construction going on was in the constituencies of Weyburn and Rosetown. Well, 

if the man has traveled this province at all and if he has any powers of observation, he knows that is not 

correct. If he will even take the trouble of reading returns which I have tabled in this House from year to 

year, he will find that in 1946 the constituency of Lumsden had the highest expenditure for highway 

building of any constituency in the province. In 1947, the constituency of Souris-Estevan had the highest 

expenditure. That year we practically built a hard-surface road from the international border clean across 

the whole constituency. Last year, 1948, the highest expenditure was in the constituency of Milestone, 

and I find that Rosetown last year was 33 on the list. Now I know that to the hon. members across the 

way that is just not understandable, that in an election year the Minister of Highways should not spend a 

lot of money in his own riding, but we do not spend it on that basis. I want to say that I only rebuilt part 

of one highway in my riding in the time I have been here. I should not call it a highway — it was simply 

a mud trail because you know, Mr. Speaker, the western part of this province traveled through mud and 

Liberal promises for over 40 years, and not until the C.C.F. government got in power did we have decent 

highways on the western side of Saskatchewan. Just the other day the other member for 

Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. Wellbelove), outlined very well the amount of construction work that has 

been done on the western side of Saskatchewan. That was also mentioned today by my hon. friend from 

Elrose (Mr. Willis) which is just one part of a road, No. 44 highway, that we have completed from 

Mantario right through to the junction of highway No. 15. I noticed the other day again that the hon. 

member for Turtleford (Mr. Trippe) rose in this House and said that his constituency had received 

generous treatment form the Department of 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
586 

Highways in the construction of new roads. He could not say anything else, Mr. Speaker, because the 

constituency of Turtleford never had one mile of decent highway until this government took over. Today 

we are building first-class roads there. I notice that at that particular time the hon. member for 

Cannington (Mr. Patterson) said that we needed another Runnymede in Saskatchewan. He fails to 

remember that we had a Runnymede in Saskatchewan in 1944. 

 

An Hon. Member: — June 15, too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Well now, to be a little more specific, I would like to say that we have carried on 

in this province a certain amount of investigation work in regard to highways. We realize that we have 

reached a day when the old methods are obsolete. We realize that you have to, first of all have proper 

equipment, and we are getting proper equipment here in order to do the work. We also realize that there 

is a lot to be done — I believe I told this to the House four years ago, but I am going to repeat it again 

tonight — and that we have reached the state when we have to do a lot more with soils than we have 

done in the past. Our deposits of gravel are rapidly being depleted, and we also know that there is much 

you can do with soils. I remember, I think it was the first year we were in office, discussing this with the 

Dean of Engineering at the University of Saskatchewan, I found they were only giving two classes in 

soil mechanics in the civil engineering course, and I asked the Dean if he might not be able to extend 

that. He said he did not have the staff. His advice to me was that we should send some of our more 

promising young men down to some of the American universities to take up this particular line of work. 

Well, we had the sorry experience of seeing one or two of our boys do down there and never come back. 

We do not blame them for staying down there. As the hon. members know, the salaries we are paying 

here are not as high as they pay across the line, and I saw one or two of our most promising young men 

go across the line for post-graduate work and take position across the line. I would also like to remind 

this House that we have increased the salary range of those men, and we have particularly increased the 

range of the boys who are joining in to give them some inducement to take up work with the Department 

of Highways, and I am also glad to state again what I said a moment ago, we have a number of them 

each year joining our staff. 

 

When we took office here, in 1944, I found that our asphalt roads were showing signs of wear, and 

particularly after I had been in eastern Canada I noticed there was a vast difference between the asphalt 

roads in the east and those in the west. When I asked my staff why this was they said: “Well, there 

should be no difference because we are using exactly the same formula here that they used in Eastern 

Canada,” but when we put our chemist to work on this job and he went as far as he could, we then asked 

the University of Saskatchewan to assist us in this research work. The work that was done at that time 

brought out the fact that we had in the Lloydminster oil fields some of the best crude oil available for 

asphalt purposes. I believe it was on the result of those investigations that we carried on; in fact I know 

it was. We were able to induce one of the smaller firms in this province to rearrange his plant and 

commence the manufacture of asphalt from Lloydminster crude. Today, I am glad to inform this House 

that every gallon of asphalt that has been used in Saskatchewan this last two years has been made either 

in whole or in part from Lloydminster crude. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
587 

I want to say further that when we took office I remember almost every week certainly not less than 

once a month, I had men from the Lloydminster field in my office, pleading with me to do something to 

get markets for their produce that they might continue to expand drilling operations of that field. I know 

that the help this government gave those men in respect to asphalt and also in the promise that we could 

use some of that crude in some institutions here, encouraged the development to the extend . . . you all 

know the story after that. So that when the hon. members across the way criticize us for hindering 

development, there is just one case where this department alone gave material assistance in the 

development of that field at Lloydminster. 

 

Now, what is our record in construction since we took office. I find that we have constructed, since we 

took office in 1944, 2,250 miles of earth work; graveled 5,534 miles; and black-topped 416. That cannot 

be duplicated by any other government in a single term at any time in this province. This year, which 

was the most difficult one, one in which tied up the greater part of our construction crews — some of 

them up until near the end of June — we were able to build 578.73 miles of earth work, gravel 1,175 and 

black-top 175 in this province. Yet the hon. gentleman across the way tells us that we are not doing 

anything. I want to tell you that we are doing what we are doing on the second smallest highway 

appropriation of any province in Canada. I doubt if there is another province in Canada that can show 

the mileage that has been done by this province this year. I know that I can show you this: I can show 

you provinces with much larger appropriations that have not go nearly the results, favourably with 

anything in Canada or in any of the western states, and we are doing it at a cost per cubic yard that 

cannot be duplicated anywhere in the North American continent. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. gentleman a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I want to use up the rest of my time without answering questions. 

 

I want to say this: the reasons for the low cost in production I believe is this, that we have our own 

construction crews and in 1947 the government crew working on No. 44 highway placed dirt on that 

road for slightly over 11 cents a cubic yard. We haven‟t the figures for this year yet, but I believe that 

we will move dirt even cheaper on that particular project that we did a year ago. I say that is one of the 

main reasons, but on the other hand I want to pay tribute to the contractors in this province. They have 

done a good job by and large, and they have been very keenly on the job, and, I say, we are getting work 

done cheaper in Saskatchewan than in any other place on the North American continent. 

 

I should say a word about our hard-surfacing programme before I pass on. I find that a lot of people are 

of the opinion that hard-surfacing is being carried on to provide good roads for the tourist traffic. Well, I 

would not want in any way to discourage tourist traffic in this province. It is something that we should 

encourage. But I must point out to this House, as I said a moment ago, our supply of gravel is rapidly 

diminishing and in order to conserve that supply we are going to have to increase our programme of 

hard-surfacing 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
588 

as rapidly as the economy of this province will provide. We have, in the last two years, given 

Saskatchewan its first hard-surfacing programme, and in spite of all the criticism we have heard from 

across the House, let me tell you that before that tourist traffic starts coming this year we will have more 

than half of the road from the international border to the Prince Albert National Park hard-surfaced. In 

fact we are only lacking 10½ miles from Corinne north and 19 miles from Prince Albert Park south, 

therefore it is more than half hard-surfaced from the international border, that is by way of Moose Jaw. 

So that in the course of three years is an accomplishment in itself well worthwhile. In addition to that, 

we have carried on some experimental work on sandy soils with asphalt. We had some criticism; we had 

a little difficulty on a few miles here and there when we first started out, but we have now reached the 

stage where we can go out . . . (part cut out by double recording) . . .  

 

 . . . and by making those suggestions they waived the objections to some of these provinces. After Mr. 

McKinnon had placed before that conference Ottawa‟s position — by the way he said that in any 

agreement that was reached, they were prepared to take into consideration the amount of money spent 

on the proposal of the provinces — they asked us to get together and to select routes, suggest 

specifications and estimate of costs. Well, I thought, here is where the sticker comes in, but after each 

province had addressed the meeting I noticed that everyone of them . . . (part cut) . . . and in spite of the 

fact that we had the largest highway system of any province in Canada, in spite of the fact that the 

largest highway system of any province in Canada, in spite of the fact that more than half of it is worn 

out, we had traffic flowing over the highways of Saskatchewan last spring before either of our adjoining 

provinces. 

 

I want to pay tribute to the men who did this work. That did not just happen. We brought those men in 

here during the month of March and we discussed the problems that we might face at that time. I 

remember on one occasion traveling through two particular highway districts in this province, and well 

after dark those men were still out there and there were hundreds of them still out on the highway 

draining off the water into the ditches, taking care of a seemingly impossible situation. But the work that 

those men did saved this situation, and I can assure you had it not been for the equipment this 

government had seen fit to purchase, there would have been a tragic condition in this province last 

spring. If this had happened in 1944, when there was nothing but a limited amount of old and obsolete 

equipment, this province could not have possibly coped with the situation if it had exited then. 

 

Before this government came into office there was very little shown for work that was done. I find that 

in the four years previous to our taking over — years during which the snowfall was light — the best 

they could do was 1,500 miles in one season. Now, two years ago, which was the worst winter for 

drifting that this province every had, I find that we had 4,600 miles open in December, 1947, and 2,900 

miles in February, 1948. The present season, we had 5,760 miles open on December 31 and 4,980 open 

on November 8. So even in the worst years in this province, we have done four times as good as the best 

the Liberals every hoped to do in the years when there was a light snowfall. 

 

I want to say this in regard to snow removal: with the present condition of our highways it is impossible 

for us to keep all highways in this province open with our limited economy. We have, at the present 

time, I believe, purchased all the equipment that our economy will allow us to work for the full 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
589 

season, and we have proven that the only solution to snow removal in Saskatchewan is the rebuilding of 

our entire system to the standard of roads that we are now building in Saskatchewan; that is roads on a 

100 or 150-foot right-of-way, well above the ground level and with embankments and side ditches 

properly sloped so that there is no obstruction to the snow, and by so doing you let nature do the most of 

the snow removing for you. I can take you on any highway that we have built in this province since we 

have been in office, and there is no difficulty in keeping them open, even last winter, bad as it was. Also, 

last spring when we were faced with those flood conditions we had no major difficulty on any of the 

new roads built by this government. I find it would cost at least another $50 million to bring our present 

highway system up to that standard, that is for earth construction and gravelling alone without taking 

into consideration hard-surfacing or administration. The question is how long do the people of 

Saskatchewan want to wait for these roads because I believe that this government is spending all the 

money we can possibly spend on highways with a budget of the size that we have introduced at the 

present time. If we are to go faster than we are doing now, then other means of revenue will have to be 

found, and there is one source that I want to discuss with you today. We have been hammering away at 

it for many years. We have maintained that the federal government should be taking some part in the 

assistance of building highways in Canada. We believe that there should be developed in Canada a 

system somewhat similar to the one they have in the United States. There, commencing in 1916, the 

federal government set up what is known as the Highway Federal Assistance and commencing in 1917, 

with $5 million per year they have continued until 1946, 1947 and 1948, they were granting $500 

million per year to assist in highway construction. 

 

There are many changes taking place and if I have time I would like to deal with them. I would like to 

say that the outcome of their experience has been the setting up what is known as a Public Road 

Administration, a body whose duty it is to deal with the various states in the agreeing of a route and the 

agreeing as to the amount of money that they ought to give these states. The formula on which they 

based their grants in the United States is based on three main factors: area, population and miles of road. 

Most of the grants are on a 50-50 basis, but I find that the present grants are made on the basis, where in 

some states the population is sparse, they are paying as high as 82.5 percent of the total cost of 

construction. I mention that fact because at the present time negotiations have started with the federal 

government, and I want to deal with that a little later on here today, but before I do I would like to 

mention that during the past summer the three major political parties in this country have held national 

conventions; all three have mentioned federal aid to highways. The Liberals simply said they were in 

favour of the construction of a Trans-Canada Highway. The Conservatives went one better and said they 

were in favour of a hard-surface Trans-Canada Highway, but the C.C.F. I noticed was the only political 

party of the three who suggested a comprehensive plan of highway assistance from the federal 

government. They said that they were prepared to assist the provinces in the construction of roads of 

national and international points; roads to parks; and would include among other things the construction 

of a Trans-Canada Highway and this would become part of the first term programme of that party. 

 

In December we were called to Ottawa to discuss with the federal government the completion of the 

Trans-Canada Highway. At the outset I want to say that I was surprised in general with the result of that 

first conference. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
590 

When we first met, Mr. McKinnon, Minister of Mines and Resources, laid before us the principles upon 

which the federal government was prepared to negotiate with the provinces. He said, first of all, that 

they were not interested in having jurisdiction over this road. When he said that my mind went back to 

the resolution that was passed at the Liberals convention, here I believe, in 1946 when the hon. member 

opposite was elected Leader of the Liberal party. At that time in their platform they stated that they were 

going to turn over to the dominion for development some main highways through Saskatchewan. I 

would suggest that the Liberal party in Saskatchewan and the Liberals Party at Ottawa get together on 

this matter because when we went to Ottawa they said that they were not going to take over any 

highways. They did not want to. They said that they realized that highways and roads were the 

responsibility of the provinces and the municipalities and I agree with them; I think they are right. 

 

My greatest surprise came then, Mr. Speaker. That was that after we had presented Ottawa with that 

picture, Ottawa said: “We cannot do anything more just now. We have to have time to consider the 

information you have given us.” And they again asked us to go back home and to supply them with 

further information. As far as this province was concerned, I saw that no time was lost in getting that 

down to Ottawa. When I was in Toronto on January 15 I found that two of the provinces had complied 

with the demand, that is Manitoba and Saskatchewan, but the other provinces all agreed that this be done 

immediately; they all stated that they were busy compiling information and it was going forward at 

once. Since that time we have had no further word. 

 

If the Liberals party at Ottawa is sincere in bringing us together to discuss this matter, sincere in asking 

them to supply this information, and sincere in the statement which they made that they want to see the 

work start this year and that it should be completed in five years, then there is no time to be lost in 

calling the provinces together again to finally consummate an agreement if we are to start in 1949. I am 

beginning to wonder whether the Liberals government at Ottawa is more interesting in building a 

platform for this coming federal election than in building the Trans-Canada Highway. I hope I am 

wrong. 

 

Now while I am on this matter I think I should give this House a little summary of what the 

Trans-Canada Highway is going to mean in dollars and cents. I find that on the estimated cost which we 

gave that meeting, it amounts to approximately $266 million to complete the Trans-Canada Highway 

across Canada. That is broken down as follows: Prince Edward Island $4 million; Nova Scotia, $36.5 

million, New Brunswick, $7 million, Ontario, $103 million — there is more mileage to be constructed in 

Ontario than in any other province; Quebec, $27 million, Manitoba, $17 million; Saskatchewan $18 

million; Alberta, $13 million; and British Columbia $40 million. Now that is what the Trans-Canada 

Highway will mean. 

 

Since we left Ottawa I notice that the Minister of Mines and Resources for Ottawa would likely be 

prepared to meet the provinces on a 50-50 basis on this project. The other day he said that that would 

likely be the minimum. Well now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that as far as the province of 

Saskatchewan is concerned, if we are to take part in the building of a Trans-Canada Highway on the 

specifications agreed to at that conference, we would be money out of pocket on that basis because 50 

percent of the $18 million would 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
591 

be $9 million, but we can build a hard-surface highway all across Saskatchewan, ample to meet the 

needs of this province, for at the most $8 million. So is we were to go into a scheme such as this it 

would not only cost us $1 million more, but it would mean that the bulk of our revenue would be tied up 

for the next five years in the building of the Trans-Canada Highway. I say we cannot afford to do that. 

But I want to say that as far as the four western provinces are concerned, we were all agreed that Ottawa 

should assume the full cost of the construction of this road. I am hoping that Ottawa will consider this 

because, as I stated a moment ago . . .  

 

Mr. Tucker: — A real generous offer of yours, of course. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — That is a proper solution . . .  

 

Mr. Tucker: — Were they overwhelmed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: —  . . . because there were places across the line where the federal government took 

part in a programme of national road building that roads up to the Trans-Canada Highway were paid 100 

percent by the federal government, and particularly in a province such as ours where you have a sparse 

population. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I understood you to say before, 73 percent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — No. there was one state receiving as high as 80.5. I think that is correct. That is 

the overall picture in the states, but where you have a designated route called a national highway they 

sometimes paid the whole 100 percent cost. 

 

I want to assure this House that as far as this province is concerned we are prepared to do out utmost to 

see that work is started on that highway, and that we will co-operate to the fullest of our extent in having 

such a project brought under way as soon as possible. 

 

The hon. member for Elrose (Mr. Willis) has mentioned the fact that a contract has been let for the 

building of the bridge over the South Saskatchewan River, and I am very glad to inform the members of 

this House that the Bird Construction Company, who has undertaken the work, is one of the best firms in 

Canada, and the contract for the construction of that bridge, not in four years as was suggested across the 

way but in two. I am hoping that in the summer of 1950 you will all be present at the opening of the 

bridge at Saskatchewan Landing. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — What year did you say? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — 1950. I know the hon. member across the way will be glad to hear this news in 

spite of the fact that on January 8, 1948, while speaking in Swift Current, he threw quite a bit of cold 

water on it. Then he carried on a newspaper controversy trying to discourage people form subscribing to 

this bond issue. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Shame. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
592 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — In spite of that the people of that country have subscribed a lot of money. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — On a question of privilege. I did not try to discourage people from subscribing to that 

bond issue. I suggested that this was not the right way to go about financing this proposition. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — I was there and I heard him. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the hon. member withdraw that suggestion. I 

am not trying to lie out of anything. I am just trying to present the facts. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. gentleman must retract that. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — You could not understand me, I guess; that is the trouble. Your hearing is good but your 

understanding is not so good. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — It has become rather common for someone to get up here and read either items of 

newspaper or Hansard repudiating the hon. gentleman, but I have here a clipping form The Leader-Post, 

and I also have it from the Star Phoenix, where the hon. gentleman did criticize this scheme, and 

certainly did not do it any good in the vicinity of Swift Current. 

 

We had other difficulties in having this bridge built. We had a lot of difficulty in trying to get some 

definite information from Ottawa as to whether or not a dam would be built down here between Elbow 

and Outlook. Mr. Howe told us that it would only raise the water level at the bridge 18 feet. When I got 

the information, of course — I do not just go by newspaper clippings — I had my staff get in touch with 

the P.F.R.A. officials and the report, which we got from them showed that there would be a rise of 53 

feet, which, of course, meant that we could not proceed with the present low-level bridge. So I took the 

matter up with Mr. Howe, and I am not divulging any confidences when I make the statement because 

Mr. Howe has tabled his correspondence in the House at Ottawa, and a letter which I got back from Mr. 

Howe shoed that the site for the dam had not been picked and he could give me no information as to 

what the rise in the water level would be at that point. We have been carrying on correspondence ever 

since. I have interviewed him at Ottawa, but we have never been able to get anything definite from 

Ottawa as to what would be the exact position of this bridge. In fact some of the members down there 

tell me to go ahead and build it: “If it is every put up, we will pay for it.” 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, might I ask the hon. gentleman a question on that? Didn‟t Mr. Howe tell 

you himself to go ahead and build it, and if they build a damn high enough to flood it hey would pay for 

it. I understood you to say that yourself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — I have the correspondence with Mr. Howe here. I did not say that Mr. Howe told 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
593 

me that. This has all been tabled in the House, as the hon. gentleman knows, otherwise I would not give 

it to you. The first correspondence I have with Mr. Howe was when the statement was made in the 

House and I wrote him for definite information. Here is what he said: “I am under the impression that 

final selection of the proposed dam site to control the Saskatchewan River has not yet been made 

although the choice has been narrowed to a portion of that strip of river between Elbow and Outlook.” 

Now, according to a Saskatoon Star Phoenix release the hon. member across the way made the 

following statement: “Mr. Tucker said it is up to the Saskatchewan government to co-operate with the 

federal government in getting construction of the bridge started. He said that Mr. Howe, Minister of 

Reconstruction, had already assured the government of Saskatchewan that consideration would be given 

to the sharing of the costs of the Saskatchewan Landing bridge.” I saw that in the paper and I wrote Mr. 

Howe asking for confirmation, and here is Mr. Howe‟s reply: “I am not aware of any change in the 

situation affecting the Saskatchewan Landing bridge since we discussed the subject in my office. I am 

not able to state whether or not the proposed dam on the South Saskatchewan river will affect the plans 

which you have submitted to the Department of Public Works, since the site of the proposed dam has 

not yet been chosen.” That was on January 31, 1948. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — May I ask the hon. gentleman a question on that? Didn‟t you actually say yourself that 

Mr. Howe . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — No, no, Mr. Speaker. I made no such statement. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Just let me ask a question because I want to get this cleared up. Didn‟t you say that Mr. 

Howe had said go ahead and build the bridge and if we put the dam in and flood it we will pay for the 

damage done? Didn‟t you say that he told you that, because I understand that he did tell you that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I made no such statement but the man who has made the statement 

is the hon. gentleman across the way, unless the Star Phoenix and the Leader-Post misquoted him. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You were the man who made that statement not me. I read that you had made it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — He said it so many times he believes it himself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — But to get back to the subject, I want to say that there was some delay in getting 

this contract let because we are of the opinion that Ottawa should assume some responsibility in the 

construction of this bridge. If they are not going to build the dam at the site suggested, they should tell 

us so; and if they are, then they should be prepared to either assume part of the cost of building a 

high-level bridge, pay part of the added cost in building these piers sufficiently strong to carry a 

high-level bridge if one is found necessary in the years to come. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
594 

Mr. Tucker: — Have you asked them to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Yes, we have, and they have turned us down. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Repeatedly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — They are not quite sure about the dam yet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — I have talked quite a bit longer than I had intended to as there are a number of 

things that I want to discuss here and go over as aptly as I can. 

 

The other day the member for Cannington (Mr. Patterson) mentioned the fact that rural municipalities 

could not expect some assistance from year to year. That is true since this government took office, but I 

can assure you it was not true before this government took office so he is learning fast. I want to point 

out that in 1943 the rural municipalities — and that was the year before the election — received 

$142,199. This year the amount allocated to rural municipalities, and this does not include L.I.D.‟s, 

$735,966. They went on to tell about the difficulties that the municipalities were having and how taxes 

were higher in this province; how we were ruining the municipalities, I have here a letter from a 

gentleman who lived in Saskatchewan but had a quarter-section of land in Saskatchewan and another 

quarter-section right across the road in the province of Manitoba. He tells me that the land is practically 

identical, but I find that the quarter-section in Saskatchewan is assessed at $8,002 and the total tax is 

$88.80. The quarter-section in Manitoba is assessed at $2,000, his taxes there are $146. Now, where the 

municipal tax on the Saskatchewan quarter was $32, on the Manitoba quarter it is $66. The school tax on 

the Saskatchewan quarter was $48, on the Manitoba quarter $76. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Liberal government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Liberal government, yes. 

 

Now, if my hon. friends across the way are really perturbed about the taxes the farmers are paying, I 

would suggest they take a look at the income tax. I find that in 1947 that of the farmers in the province 

of Quebec there were only 9,902 who paid income tax. But in Saskatchewan we had 54,929 farmers who 

paid income tax. This just didn‟t happen in one year. When I go back over the records I find that even in 

the poor years the province of Saskatchewan has a reputation of more farmers paying income tax than in 

any other province in Canada. Mr. Speaker, the whole thing smells about as bad as a fish if they sent it 

up here in 1947. I am sorry that the hon. member for Rosthern is not in his seat because he was sitting in 

the House of Commons at that time, and to my knowledge he did nothing about this. If he did do 

anything, it certainly did not have any effect because we today find the farmers in this hard-pressed 

province, more of them paying income tax than in any other province in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

Then they shed some crocodile tears about the farmers of this province having to take leases from this 

government for crown lands. I looked over the records for this province from 1901 to the present date, 

and what do I find? I found that tenancy had increased in Saskatchewan from 1901 to 1940-41 from 3.9 

percent to 47 percent, but I find that form 1941 to 1946 there has been a decline in the number of 

farmers and tenant farmers so that there is a slight upswing 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
595 

there. A further investigation would reveal the fact that much of this went out throughout the lean years 

when farmers, through no fault of their own, found that interest costs had accumulated to such an extent 

that they could not possibly meet their expenses and in many cases were forced to sign Form A 

agreements which were virtually a release of the land to mortgage companies, and those men became 

tenants. Now, what did the Liberal government do about this thing? It was mentioned to you the other 

day one of the things they were able to do was to cancel taxes so that these mortgage companies might 

again have first claim against the land. Had that not been done the rural municipalities, who by the way 

suffered a loss because these taxes had been cancelled, could have taken title to this land and could have 

given the resident farmers a chance to re-buy the land and again to re-establish themselves. But thanks to 

the Liberal government in office at that time those taxes were cancelled; the mortgage companies again 

had clear right and were able to go out and report Form A agreements from many of the farmers at that 

time. So I am sure mortgage companies will be eternally grateful to the Liberal government for all they 

have done for them, but I think it ill behoves the men across the way to shed crocodile tears because we 

are giving 22-year leases to men who are taking up crown lands. 

 

I have only one other thing and then I will be through. I noticed that they tried to leave the impression 

the other day that we were not increasing the vote to the Department of Agriculture. Now I know the 

Minister of Agriculture will look after this himself, but I just want to mention it in passing. I find that in 

the Public Accounts for 1947-48, on page 464, the Lands Branch, which he said had just been 

transferred to the Department of Agriculture, was transferred at that time, and you will find in the Public 

Accounts at that time the cost of the Lands Branch in the Department of Agriculture. In 1947-48, while 

we spent $1,661,000 for agriculture, I noticed the vote today is $2,518,490 — an increase of over 

$800,000. We have used agriculture right in Saskatchewan. We are still looking after them and the vote 

last spring showed that the farmers of this province realized that and appreciated it, but just as we are 

looking after agriculture, so, also, are we looking after the industry in Saskatchewan. While the 

opposition is criticizing us for not starting up new industries in this province — if I had the time I could 

cite quite a few — I want to remind them that in the period of Canada‟s greatest industrial expansion, 

the years before the war, when you had a Liberals government in Ottawa and a Liberal government in 

Saskatchewan, we had absolutely no industrial development in this province, even though you had 

widespread industrial development in every other province in Canada. I was amazed the other day when 

the hon. gentleman asked us why we had not re-opened the mines at Goldfields. Well, did he not realize 

that those mines shut down while he was the Premier of this province? That was the time they should 

have been stopped. I know the reason for Goldfields was shut down, and I suppose the other gentlemen 

here know also that it was because it was not a paying proposition, and the Consolidated Mining and 

Smelting are a firm that is not in the habit of operating ventures that are not paying. They made a bad 

guess there and they closed it up. I am hoping, however, with the help that we are giving in this province 

in developing the north country that Goldfields will again be opened. I want to remind the hon. 

gentleman one of the things the Department of Highways did, if nothing else, we built that road right 

through to Lac la Ronge, right to the pre-Cambrian Shield making it possible to get into that area with 

all types of vehicles. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
596 

In Conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this government has nothing to be ashamed of in the help 

we have given people who are interested in development work in this province, and we will continue to 

do so, and because of those various things I intend to support the motion. 

 

Mr. J.G. Banks (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, before going on with the remarks I would like to make this 

afternoon, I believe I have to make amends to this House for something that happened about three weeks 

ago: a broken nut, bolt or spring in this chair disturbed a very good speech that was being given by the 

member for the Battlefords (Mr. Prince). As a matter of fact, it disturbed everybody. Our good friends, 

the press, did not overlook it. I want to assure them that I do not feel badly about what they said. I 

believe that it was probably justified because I may have looked a little bit sleepy that afternoon. 

 

I want to do honour to the Speaker, as all the other members have done, to his elevation to this office for 

the second time. Being new and making my maiden speech, I can only observe that I like his attitude of 

fair play; I like the way he will give and take, and I also like his firmness when he closes down. Those 

are very fine attributes in any man, and I want to assure him that I admire the way he has been carrying 

on here. 

 

Just let me congratulate the government on its success at the polls last summer. The way it looks to me 

from all these maiden speeches from this side of the House, they must have had a pretty bad shaking up. 

When those maiden speeches develop into full-fledged speakers, when they get the information, then 

they probably better be a little more alarmed. For the time being we new members here are not worried. 

We won Rosthern; we won Cannington; we won Gravelbourg; we won Arm River; we won Battleford; 

and we won Saltcoats. You know that brought all of these veterans into the House, and we new members 

are only going to follow the lead and try and live up to the traditions which they have stood for. I can 

only say that I am very pleased to be here. I do not want to pretend that I will make much of a speech 

this time. I believe it was suggested on one occasion here that one of the new members could not make 

much of a speech, but I am going to do my best. That is all I have been doing since I got old enough to 

be around, and I always feel that when I have done my best, everybody else feels satisfied. 

 

With respect to the election: I only have one incident stamped on my mind and I would like to tell the 

House about the incident. This happened on Sunday, June 20. The Leader of the C.C.F. party came to 

town and held a meeting. Well, we have an unwritten law in our town that not matter what is going on 

during the rest of the day — tennis, curling bonspiel or whatever you like — when church time comes, 

everything else stops. It is a good law. It has been that way for years and the people respect it. But on 

this particular 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
597 

evening our neighbour from Manitoba, Mr. Zaplitny, had been in my constituency for two weeks, we 

had 53 Manitoba cars there. Mr. Feeley was there and all were from the west. There wasn‟t much of a 

Kamsack audience. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — All good church men. 

 

Mr. J.G. Banks: — All the people were in church. That is the reason they weren‟t at the meeting. But in 

any event they had a new speaker, a little girl of 14 years of age and she got up and told the people how 

she loved school, how she loved it under the C.C.F. government, how successful she was in school and 

how easy it was to learn. All of these things were very well written down for her and she read them and 

that was the outstanding thing outside of the strange cars there. At any even, this thing backfired. The 

rest of the boys and girls in town did not think school was very much different under the C.C.F., and 

they gave her a nickname the next day. Do you know what it was? “Little Misrepresentation”: is what 

she was knows as after that. Their benevolent school teacher, a good C.C.F.'er, that very afternoon held 

a vote in the two rooms in the public school. Under those conditions you could naturally expect Little 

Misrepresentation to get elected. A timid little boy was chosen to present the Liberals, and do you know 

what the result was? Little Misrepresentation was defeated, badly defeated, and the Liberals won, the 

little timid lad, and it was under the C.C.F. management, I understand. 

 

You have a very good high school there that has been turning out boys and girls who are all over 

Canada. As a matter of fact we have had a Rhodes scholarship winner who spent three years in Oxford. 

These boys and girls between the ages of 14 to 19, having heard of the public school election, thought 

they would have a Gallup poll, but for some reason the principal of the high school stepped on it and 

would not allow any of that kind of thing around the high school. He wanted to keep his records clean, I 

suppose. But in any event they held a Gallup poll and they took all the parties in. The Labour 

Progressive got three votes and again the C.C.F. candidate hit the bottom. Our boys and girls did not 

stop there. They made 2,000 posters setting out the vote in the high school and the vote in the public 

school, and they added: “We understand that Canora is an important town, but it is not big enough for 

two members.” Our friend from Canora (Mr. Kuziak) who is representing that seat, and who you have 

heard from, had a mate who was running in Kamsack — I‟m going to tell you all about that after a while 

— and he said: “When Canora gets to be as big as Moose Jaw, Regina or Saskatoon then it will be 

entitled to two members, but in the meantime we are going to send this fellow home:, and they did send 

him home. I do want to say that these posters reached every poll in the constituencies and I believe they 

had a great effect. No one guided those boys and girls; they did it all themselves. Their ideas and their 

sense of fair play is what guided them in doing this. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — The C.C.F. won in Kamsack. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Banks: — I am going to say a few things about the constituency which I represent. It is right along 

the Manitoba boundary and in mentioning attending these meetings, I want to say that we Liberals had 

meetings too, we had many meetings . . .  



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
598 

Mr. Erb: — How many conventions did you have? 

 

Mr. Banks: —  . . . when this campaign was underway, and during that time I met many people from 

the dried out areas. I was very much struck with some of the things they said. They had not been having 

crops, we had. When they spoke of so many bushels to the acre of barley, I would think in the terms of 

what we got; and the same with the wheat. I came to think we were very favoured people. We were in 

that part of the constituency where they were having good crops; plenty of grain to sell, plenty of stock 

to sell and plenty of butter and milk, and I felt that we had a very good location. I have not been one of 

the fly-by-night kind. I had to wait 32 years to get a Liberals nomination, so I have. Not been one of the 

fly-by night kind. I have been waiting a long time for it and I have been qualifying, I hope, all of the 

time for this position. But I am going to tell you — and Mr. Patterson and Mr. Danielson and some of 

the other older members will remember, they used to send up to our area for vegetables for the dried out 

areas, and you know what happened: they ask for a carload in our town, and they brought in three 

carloads. I believe they did that all over that constituency. You know, gentlemen, that was the day, I 

believe, when that phrase was coined, that biblical phrase, “without money and without price” meant 

something — they gave it away. There was no trickery attached to it at all, because they gave it away. 

 

I want to say here that the hon. gentleman from Canora (Mr. Kuziak) lives in that area, the finest area 

you could find. The town of Canora has two good highways passing through it, built by the Liberal 

government. Now, Mr. Speaker, the statement here that his was a backwoods place was an insult to 

every voter in Canora constituency. It is not a backward part of the province. It is possibly more 

favoured, closer to the railroad, has more highways and closer to the city of Yorkton, and I suggest here 

that this gentleman who has the honour to represent that seat should be ashamed of himself for making 

the statement he did about his own seat, and his own people. I can possibly explain that. I am able to 

explain it in this way: it is not that he has not got everything that this province can give him but the 

constituency has not got that, but he has something else that is lacking. Twenty-five years ago the seat of 

Canora received its first baptism in socialism. We had a gentleman there by the name of Mr. Zannon. He 

came from Russia and he was a communist. He taught the young men and girls, and provincially they 

developed south of that town the Mazeppa Club. They had a lot of fine singers and formed the Mazeppa 

Choir. He was smart enough to do all of those things and the whole thing was permeated with the 

teaching of Mr. Zannon. I do not think that Mr. Zannon is there now, but these young people have 

grown up, and it is the result of these teachings that is the trouble in Canora today. It is not that the 

country is backward, it is because the spirit is backward. They have lived to ask fro alms all of the time. 

They think that the rich man should help them, instead of helping themselves. Let me tell you today this 

very spirit has prevented them from advancing in a great many ways. They have not got a curling rink or 

a skating rink. When they got their Power Commission formed they were in the first ones to offer their 

power plant for sale so that they could pay interest on the debts on these bonds. They took advantage of 

every statute that was passed in the province to cut interest, and they are still heavily in debt. On the 

other side, I want to take you down 30 miles east of Canora. You will find there a $17,000 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
599 

skating rink paid for; a curling rink worth $13,000, and not a dollar owing against it. That was not paid 

by any taxation; that was put up by the people. They subscribed the money and they paid for it. They 

have been in operation now fro four years. They have a power plant with five units paid for, and its 

earnings bring in $18,000 a year. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That‟s socialism, isn‟t it? 

 

Mr. Banks: — That is public ownership of things that the Liberal government brought into being. They 

have the power plant to keep the town running, to keep the wheels turning, and there is not one dollar of 

debt. The town of Kamsack does not owe one dollar. And you know, Mr. Speaker, during all those years 

that they were there they were under the control of the Liberal government, except for four years. That 

accounts for the spirit of Kamsack in contract with the spirit of Canora, that was so amply demonstrated 

here a while ago as if they were living in the backwoods. 

 

I have this to say further, and I want to tell you about our own town which we all love and have been 

living in. We had, as you know, a very, vary bad cyclone there five years ago, August 9, 1944. The 

buildings were badly smashed, four people were killed, 35 people put in the hospital injured quite 

severely, and many others who nursed their wounds at home, and so forth. I want to compliment the 

government on the steps they took at that time. They had just been recently elected to office and two of 

the Cabinet Ministers came up and helped the organizations. There is no doubt they did very well for us, 

and more than that, they laid $50,000 on the line. They asked everybody in Saskatchewan to contribute 

towards the rebuilding of our town. We are all glad of that. Everybody said that was splendid. They had 

a committee headed by the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan to whom all this money was sent, and it 

amounted to about $200,000. They went to work and I believe the last of the repairing was done in the 

fall of 1945 — that was the year afterwards. There was a gentleman named Mr. Greig who is in the 

employ of the provincial government and he was the chief potentate. He told the committees what to do, 

and he said: “This will have to be closed out.” There wasn‟t quite enough money to pay all the claims on 

Main Street, but most of the claims of private houses were paid. But you know, it was closed out and 

about 40 percent was paid on Main Street. Gentleman, we did not know or learn what had happened 

until the summer of 1946. We know now that when that thing was closed out there was just about 

$50,000 left in the funds. Mr. Greig saw that amount was left there. We also know now that Chapter 107 

of the Statute passed that year appropriated the balance of that fund without stating it to the provincial 

government. There is no question about that. Now, I am going to ask you what you think of a person 

who asks you to go into a speculative deal, possibly speculative or not, and he says: “I am investing 

dollar for dollar with you.” That is the way the government did. They said: “We put in $50,000, now 

you come along too. They closed that thing out just when there was about $50,000 in the fund and that 

was disposed of under Chapter 107 of the Statues of Saskatchewan, 1946. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask a question: 

 

Mr. Banks: — After a while. I am not used to these interruptions. I don‟t want to be thrown off just 

now. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
600 

Now this is the same thing as two men going into a speculative deal, or any other kind of deal, one with 

the knowledge that if the deal goes bad he is going to get his money back. I just wasn‟t to say in passing 

that that seems to be the situation there. The Statute was passed, and we did not know a thing about it. 

We had a member from Canora but apparently he held his hand up and voted for that Statute applying 

the balance of this cyclone money to something else. But I want to say this, and I have said it publicly 

many, many times, that in the city of Yorkton they took all the men off the streets, all the tractors and all 

the machinery in the town and they brought it into Kamsack and worked there two weeks, and the town 

of Kamsack never received a bill from them. Possibly the government is entitled to some little 

approbation about this thing. I do not know if this was like one of those mistakes of the umpire in a 

hockey or ball game, if they make a mistake when they gave it and they tried to rectify the mistake. Or 

was it that they went into the venture knowing they were safe because they were going to get it back 

anyway. That is the attitude of this government. But I want to tell you this much about it. They have 

been pretty good to us. I want to say that I made a great many trips down here in the summer of 1947, 

connected with the building of the hospital. I made the acquaintance of Dr. Mott, Dr. Kirk, and I do not 

think we could get any better treatment anywhere. As a result, this hospital is going to be in operation at 

the end of the year and the government has contributed $25,000 towards it. Everybody in my 

constituency appreciates that, and will be indeed glad to give it credit wherever it may be necessary to 

give it. 

 

I can also say that with respect to highways, we have done very well. Our constituency is about 45 miles 

across and we have two complete highways — one entering from the south going into Manitoba, and 

then about 25 miles north of that is another one; right down the centre of the constituency, running north 

and south, is another highway and the Department of Highways has just completed that to connect with 

No. 10 this year. We also have gravel roads. There is a farmers‟ road a little further west and it is all 

graveled. You can go 50 miles from one end of that constituency completely to the other end on good 

roads. I suggest here that that was all done by the farmers themselves. As a matter of fact, we have had 

three ventures of that kind in the last two years where the people did not wait for the Department of 

Highways. No, they could not wait. They went to work and they took up subscriptions. Some of them 

$100, $150, and they went to work and they graveled these roads. I want a deal with that a little later, 

but right now I want to say something about a little speech that I heard last summer on the radio and it 

was made by Mr. Coldwell. You know it fits in so well with the remarks . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — May I ask the hon. gentleman a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — He won‟t answer any questions. 

 

Mr. Banks: — I think possibly I had better finish up. It is getting on to six o‟clock and I want to be 

finished by then. 

 

Mr. Gibson: — Would the hon. member speak a little louder, we cannot hear more than one-third of 

what he is saying, over here. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
601 

Mr. Banks: — This is a matter which I want to read to you. I do not want to spoil it, and I do not think I 

could explain it as well as this writer explains it. It is a report on a radio broadcast by Mr. Coldwell 

which was held just about election time, and I quote: 

 

M.J. Coldwell, C.C.F. Leader, with that familiar air of deep concern, has painted with apparent alarm 

the increasing corporation profits. Speaking over the C.B.C., the top socialist in Canada was anything 

but pleased to find that since 1939 profits of the Canadian business had soared up to 50 percent. Since 

profits soar only when a community prospers, Mr. Coldwell presumably prefers a depression which is 

the sad state of affairs achieved when profits disappear. 

 

In the hungry thirties there was over 10 million people out of work in the United States. That was in 

1938, and it was the same in Canada only on a smaller scale, and for the same reasons. One American 

steel company had lost $8 million that year. Wages were only $20 for every ton of steel produced. The 

total payroll was $58 million. That was in 1938. In 1947 these payrolls had jumped from $58 million 

to $219 million. The company was making a profit; a record number of men were being employed, 

each getting much higher wages as well. The company had used profits to expand and make more 

jobs. In 1947, wages had jumped to $28 for every ton of steel produced; nearly half again as much as 

in 1938. When the company could make profits there were more jobs, better wages. When the 

company lost money, workers did not get more, they got fired or less money. But Mr. M.J. Coldwell 

does not like the Canadian companies making profits. In 1947, nearly every American company was 

making higher profits, and as a result unemployment reached an all-time high of 60 million. Mr. 

Coldwell, a socialist, doggedly dislikes profits. The C.C.F. Leader is presumably conscious of the fact 

that during the hungry thirties, while business went broke and people as a result went hungry, 

socialism got a stiff shot in the arm. Despairing people like drowning men clutched at any straw. 

 

Mr. Coldwell is a rip-roaring socialist. Nothing but his obsession with socialism could explain his 

disappointment at the signs of a profitable, prosperous Canada. 

 

A more lively part of the C.C.F. Leader‟s talk was that enriched with poetry. What an English poet 

knows about economics is something Mr. Coldwell failed to explain, but here are the lines as Mr. 

Coldwell, inaccurately by the way, quoted them: 

 

“Ill fares this land to every way 

When wealth accumulates and men decay.” 

 

Mr. Coldwell may not know it, but in Canada wealth or profit does not accumulate by gets turned back 

into business to buy more plants, machinery and good, which means employing more people and 

paying more wages. That is not accumulation; that is increased production and prosperity, which is 

what Mr. Coldwell is so sorry to see. Neither will men decay; they prosper, and then get the fine profit 

figures so objectional to the C.C.F. Leader. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
602 

As I said before, it worked in so well with the speech of the member for Canora (Mr. Kuziak) that I am 

certain he will appreciate particularly the poetry that was given here. 

 

Now I want to deal with one subject that I think is important here and that is with respect to the Timber 

Board. There has not been a great deal said about that yet, but it is a very important subject and in view 

of the great deal of publicity and propaganda that was put out in 1946, it seems to me that there should 

be a full discussion of the matter, and I am sorry to see that the Minister of Natural Resources, Hon. Mr. 

Brockelbank, is not in his seat, but I want to deal with the matter and give you some information which 

is taken from the reports of provinces from year to year. You will recall some of the things that were 

said at that time. 

 

We all know that the resources of Saskatchewan were under the control of the dominion government up 

to 1930, and we all know, too, that the dominion government had leased many berths for the cutting of 

timber in Saskatchewan, mostly white spruce and jack pine. These leases had been in effect for quite 

some time. As a matter of fact some areas had been cut over and the trees had grown up again. I am 

going to read to you from the report of 1940 which deals with this very thing, which became such an 

important question in 1946. That is the time when this Timber Board was formed. On page 20 of the 

Year Book for 1940 you will find this. 

 

During the past nine-year period, a total of 314.64 square miles of the most valuable timber and 

accessible, merchantable white spruce saw timber areas have been logged off and the berths cancelled. 

Only about one-fifth of the forested land originally disposed of by the dominion government prior to 

1930, under the Timber Berth Licence, now remains. Many of those logged over areas have been 

severely damaged by fire, recent surveys indicate that these acres have been so severely cut over that 

their residual stand has inadequate stalking, and that regeneration has not been satisfactory over most 

of those areas. For the working plan on a sustained yield basis, a smaller volume should have been cut 

in the initial logging operations. 

 

That was a very frank admission given by the government of the day, in 1940, as to that situation. They 

did not hide anything, and they had secured from these men all of the timber berths except one-quarter. I 

might say that they had then started the regeneration period, because in the year 1940 you will find that 

there was over 100,000 of these small cuttings, or whatever they are, planted out over these areas for 

generation purposes. 

 

Just to give you another idea about this, I want to deal again with a part of this report, and it says here: 

 

As a result of larger crop returns and generally because business conditions prevailed during the last 

half of the year under review, the purchasing power of the farmers in the urban centres was improved, 

creating a greater demand for lumber than in previous years. Increased construction of small buildings 

and government projects for war purposes created an active market for local lumber and other forest 

products; a definite increase in the number of small portable-type sawmills operating was evident 

during the winter. The Department of Co-operation with the Department of Labour 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
603 

undertook a census of sawmills in the province during January, which indicated that more than 400 

sawmills of all types were scattered throughout the forest area. (This was again in 1940) The number 

of Timber Sales disposed of during the year far exceeded any previous year and the volume of timber 

produced and revenue contracted was greater than any year since the transfer of natural resources to 

the province. 

 

I have also this information for the House, Mr. Speaker, and these are the cuts four years before this 

government went into power and four years afterwards: in 1940, 132 million feet; 1941, 136 million 

feet; 1942, 153 million; 1943, 89 million; 1944 and 1945 are grouped together, 136 million; 1946, 135 

million; 1947 30 million feet; 1948, 92 million feet. You can see by that that there was a little more 

lumber cut in the five years preceding the time when this government went into office, but not very 

much. This matter of conservation had at that time become recognized. There were forest rangers all 

over the north country; forest fires were guarded carefully; any many who cut timber in there knew very 

well that if he didn‟t use the greatest of care, he was done. This question of come in, cut and get out did 

not appear to be the case. That was some slogan established by the fire minister, but he created a very 

woeful picture in the year 1946 over this timber, and he said: “Well, we are done; we are losing it all.” 

“Somebody had destroyed all the timber” is what was said. Now, when you look at those figures, the 

thing is not so bad, particularly in war years. We had four war years, the first time when they needed 

lumber as they say here. I want to tell you just how that thing was handled from the year 1940 up. Every 

farmer was entitled, each year, to cut 3,000 feet of white spruce or jack pine if he had it. He could go in 

there and he could do that every year, and all he paid the government was $3 per thousand. Gentleman, 

there existed the greatest co-operatives that I have ever known at that time. In my constituency, and I 

have no doubt in Mr. Brockelbank‟s constituency, the farmers went to the bush to cut the timber down 

and they all worked together. They needed 7,000 feet for a little four-roomed house, about 11,000 for a 

big house, and every man in the country was able to get the timber for a granary. The cost of sawing it 

was $9 per thousand, and they had a little mobile planer which they moved from place to place. The cost 

of that lumber was $9 for sawing, $9 for planning and $3 for the government - $21. They hauled it by 

themselves. There weren‟t many trucks in those days. But that system went along and continued up until 

the year 1946. 

 

Let me tell you about another system they had which was known as the sales permit. Many of those 

farmers living up in the area of small farms uncleared, maybe just 35 or 40 acres cleared, worked in the 

bush during the winter. They could get a sales permit and still paid their $3. But they went to work and 

with their own efforts took this lumber out and hauled it home mostly. That was a fine thing because it 

enabled them to store up something in the winter to carry them through the summer by selling this 

lumber. Now, that was not cutting all the timber or depriving the province of any timber because when a 

spruce tree reaches a diameter of 22 to 25 inches it is mature, and after that time it starts to deteriorate 

and the top will come off. That is the time it must be cut, and conservation or no conservation, if it is not 

cut at that time the lumber is not as good afterwards. We had that system, and I suggest to the Minister 

of Co-operatives that if he wants a true co-operative. There it is: one which the farmers organized 

themselves. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
604 

We hear stories about the ruination of our forest, and the appointment of a Royal Commission. Mr. 

Frank Aliason of Regina was chairman of that Commission, and I know two of them that were on it: Mr. 

William Bayliss and a man named Irwin from Toronto. The Commission was all right. Its object was to 

enquire into the stocks of timber and, if possible, make suggestions as to what was needed in the timber 

trade to conserve it. One thing they were not asked to find was that the Timber Board was in need to be 

turned over to some Crown Corporation, which the C.C.F. might name or organize. But with the Timber 

Board they started out fairly well. The first man named to that Timber board was Mr. Norman Campbell. 

Now Mr. Campbell is not a Liberal, but he is an experienced lumber man. He is head of the Porcupine 

Lumber Company at Pelly, is a brother of Mr. M.N. Campbell, many years an associate of Mr. 

Woodward in the dominion House as C.C.F. member. Well, Mr. Campbell, while operating the 

Porcupine Lumber Company, gave the government the benefit of his experience. Mr. Campbell never 

had one charge laid against him for maladministration of the forest, and his choice was a good one, but 

not a Liberal choice. Here is what happened: in six months Mr. Campbell resigned. Of course he was too 

good a C.C.F.'er to say why he quit but we know pretty well because he could not get along with Mr. 

Phelps. I want to tell you that it was a sorry day for the Timber Board when Mr. Campbell did quit. 

 

Then they groped around for a while. The Royal Commission made its findings: 21 paragraphs turned 

up. But you know, the government of that day were not very brave. There were 47 members in this 

House with their Crown Corporation laws and they did not have the nerve to say that this was a 

government measure. And do you know how they got out the propaganda through that: here is section 

21 of the report of the Royal Commission and that Royal Commission, as constituted, never wrote 

section 21. It was not part of the findings of the Royal Commission, but it was inserted afterwards when 

Mr. Phelps started his Timber Board. He wanted to get control of the natural products of the forest, that 

is all the timber grown on farm lands. He wanted to be the absolute dictator of it. Well, if you want any 

evidence about it, two of the Commissioners refused to subscribe section 21, because he wanted this 

Royal Commission to say that they had advised establishing this Timber Board, and that is exactly what 

they refused to do. Here is what has been said about it, and it is in the words of one of the 

commissioners: 

 

Although we have received considerable evidence with respect to the marketing of lumber, and some 

that had to do with the fishing industry, I considered that not mention of either matter should be made 

in the report for a variety of reasons, the principle ones being that the Timber Board was still in a 

formative stage and another Royal Commission had been formed to give further evidence and prepare 

a report on the various aspects of the fishing industry. The other chief reason has already been referred 

to above. 

 

When the report was published I know that I was not the only member of the Commission who was 

definitely interested in Chapter 21. At no time during the length of the Commission can I recall that 

the members learned that the marketing of forest products and fish products and fur had, in the past, 

been unsatisfactory from the standpoint of the population in the forest areas, and the sellers have been 

at the mercy of a buyer‟s market. What often happens is that we are out of line with actual values. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
605 

This statement, no doubt, was true at times, but I cannot recall it being submitted in evidence. We did 

have considerable adverse criticism directed at the newly-formed Timber Board from all across the 

north of the province. We did not concur in it for another reason. We believed that a system of 

centralized marketing based upon recognized co-operative principles is the answer to the marketing 

problem, and that the appointment of timber boards is a step in the right direction. As a member of the 

Commission, I fail to find any record of evidence being placed before us to warrant our making such a 

statement in the report, and the various members of the Commission did not agree that any such 

sentiment should be expressed therein. It would not have been possible for the Commission to make 

such a statement in support of the formation of the Timber Board, as regardless of misleading 

statements made in the press, over the air, and from public platforms, the Timber Board of 

Saskatchewan is anything but a marketing board based on recognized co-operative principles. It is a 

state-owned monopoly — a timber contractor that sub-contracts the timber operations at the lowest 

figure it feels it can get away with, and sells the production of the sub-contractors at the highest 

possible wholesale price and at a retail figure based upon the Board of Directors of the Crown 

Corporation. I cannot reconcile such a system of operation with my own ideas of co-operative 

principles. 

 

As a member of the commission I must emphasize that we were not guided by any political 

consideration, but I have viewed with interest the stops the government have taken toward the 

implementation of many of our recommendations. However, I cannot whole-heartedly subscribe to 

Chapter 21 of the report any more than could all the other members when one considers the 

implications therein contained. After the report was published and distributed, one of my fellow 

members, John C.W. Irwin, B.S.F., F.E. wrote to me from Toronto suggesting that a note be inserted 

in the published book reports, advising that he, at least, did not subscribe to the sentiment expressed in 

Chapter 21, and that persons who had, at that time, already received copies should be so advised. 

Failing that, Mr. Irwin stated he would likely find it necessary to disassociate himself with that 

particular chapter. To those statements I wholly concur. Signed — William Bayliss. 

 

Now that does not make very much difference to the creation of the Timber Board. This government had 

a right to establish the Timber Board. The only thing that I am calling to the attention of the House is the 

manner in which the propaganda was put out. I believe we all like the truth when a statement comes 

form a public man or from the government. We like to rely upon it, and we like to believe it when we 

read it. Must we look around for further evidence to see if they are telling the truth or not? 

 

I am just going to deal with one further question in this matter, and that is: what will people think of it? 

What will those farmers where the timber has been removed from their control think of it? Well, the 

Timber Board proceeded to let contracts for cutting spruce, jack pin. I am not going to speak about the 

amount they paid them. I am just going to tell you the effects. We, being up against the boundary, make 

it a little more pertinent. Remember what the Niagara River used to do for the „niggers‟ in the States? 

Well, you know what, that boundary apparently has done just that for those woodcutters adjacent to it. I 

will tell you how I found out. I had heard that 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
606 

Mr. Daniels, M.L.A. at that time, and a couple of Timber Board men were going around to all these 

farmers that had permits and measuring their buildings. Well, the reason for that was they wanted to find 

out if they had used the lumber for building or what they had done with it. In any event; I met one of the 

higher officials who had flown into Kamsack from Prince Albert. He was a little perturbed, and you 

know what he said to me? He said: “Do you know that all Crown land in your constituency has been 

stripped of 7 million feet of spruce?” I told him I did not know that, but he said that was the case. He 

wanted to know if we weren‟t getting our contracts in, and I said: “No.” When he asked what we were 

paying I said it was $31 if we take off the permit. He said: “So you say you cannot find it. That is an 

awful lot of lumber,” and I said: “Are you sure it is that amount?” He said: “Well, our records show 

that.” Now, gentlemen, what would you have done? These men financed that cutting. They had to use 

their money to cut that timber; they had to pay out their cash for the hired man, for the sawmill, for the 

planer. I do not need to say any more about that. The Manitoba boundary was too close for Mr. Randall 

to enforce his Timber Board regulations. The people did not think very much of government contracts. 

 

I now want to say a few words about the Larger School units, and it is about a matter that has disturbed 

me considerably. First, on the question of equalization: I want to show you one school district just a few 

miles south of Kamsack, and very good land. They are charging 18 mills in the Larger Kamsack School 

Unit. With a $190,000 assessment there, this school district is paying about $1,600 more to a larger unit 

than they need for the operation of their own school, and they are not satisfied. They do not know what 

to do about it. They have been trying to do something all along, but this is caused by reason of the 

administration . . .  

 

Mr. Kuziak: — May I ask a question? 

 

Mr. Banks: — No, not just now. My time is short and I want to finish up. 

 

What is wrong that this assessment in the school district raises too much money? There are, too, other 

reasons that are, I think, a little worse. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Name the school district. 

 

Mr. Banks: — I will give you the three: there is Bonny Bank, Spring Valley and Poplar Point. 

 

I want to grant you that there are some school districts that do not raise enough money, but there aren‟t 

many. Even with a $100,000 assessment and the government grant that raises a lot of money, enough to 

operate the ordinary country school. Now I say these people are not satisfied, and I would like to know, 

at a later date, what this government intends to do about a matter of this kind. I just cited one, but I guess 

there are 20 in this Larger Kamsack Unit in this same position. You will probably say, well, where is the 

money gone? I can tell you where some of it has gone. Any school district that is lucky enough to get a 

new school gets it paid for, and if they vote themselves out of building that school, this school district is 

apparently that much ahead and I think it takes about $8,000 to build a school now, and, undoubtedly, 

when they build three or four of those, it certainly drains the treasury of the 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
607 

Larger School Unit. I do not know what the government policy is. Whether they exercise a restraining 

hand over those people, but, in any event, that is the situation, and I do not think that if these people vote 

themselves out next year or the year following, it should not be that maybe a dozen school districts that 

get new schools get them at the expense of the other people. 

 

One thing our district learned during hard times is this: they had to provide for one year ahead. That is, 

they had to have enough money ahead at the beginning of the year to pay their school expenses for the 

whole year in advance. They did it through bitter experience and by being threatened by banks. I 

understand that a lot of money was in the hands of these individual schools when the Larger Unit was 

proclaimed. I have been told that one district had $1,800, most of them had around $1,000, and some of 

them around $500. I know of one very poor district that had $300 in bonds. They were finally hounded 

to the extent that they had to turn this amount over. I am going to ask this government what they intend 

to do in the event of that school district being voted out, towards recouping the school district for that 

money. I will agree that maybe some of them had valuables in addition to running the school. But that is 

something that a lot of people are going to ask when there is a vote, and I can give notice today that we 

may not be able to say what is going to happen just now, but in one or two years, when you see taxes 

amounting up to $76, $77 and some of them, $92 a quarter-section for school taxes alone in areas like 

that, these people are going to vote it out because it is too expensive. It costs more than it is worth. They 

prefer the old system just from that standpoint of expense, and that will, at that time, become a very 

important question. The government will be asked about it; the Minister of Larger School Units Act is 

strictly trust money, many of the districts have money, and this government has either condoned or 

secretly approved it. I suggest to you that that has made them a party to this; that they must recoup these 

school districts, and I do not think this session should finish until the Minister of Education makes a full 

and complete statement of the policy of the government with respect to that. 

 

I have just one more thing. My good friend, the Minister of Highways, spoke this afternoon, but I have 

read this statement of revenue and I find the two items which were used for roads, gasoline tax $6 

million, licences $2.9 million, making a total of $8.9 million. Do you know what that would amount to, 

divided into constituencies? It would be $182,000 each. Now I know that we do not get anything like 

that. I do not think any constituency does unless it just happens to be on some highway. I want to tell 

this government that those people who pay 20 to 25 cents on the dollar in taxes for every dollar they 

spend in gasoline are not going to be satisfied with this treatment. We have an area 30 miles wide and 45 

miles long, running clean across the northern end of my constituency, where they are going to demand 

money for roads. They need $25,000 a year for five years, and as far as I can see they are entitled to that 

under the gasoline plan. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — What did the Liberals do? 

 

Mr. Banks: — I have here in this drawer resolutions from four of the municipalities, asking 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
608 

for a more equitable cut in the gasoline tax. What the Liberals do, my hon. friend, is not going to repair 

the roads today. That is your job and you cannot pan that off very much longer. 

 

Now, I am pleased to be able to stop at the hour . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: —  . . . and get out of answering questions. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines: — I do not wish to interrupt the hon. gentleman, but during his presentation he made 

a very serious charge which the Leader of the Government I do not think would allow to go 

unchallenged; that is in connection with the money collected for the Kamsack Cyclone Fund, the 

$50,000. The impression was that this money had been wrongfully spent. 

 

Mr. Banks: — You made that statement, I didn‟t. I did not intend to imply that. I think I gave your man 

credit for doing an excellent job, but they cut off all the Main Street property at 40 cents on the dollar 

and that is true. And the town of Kamsack did not receive the other $50,000. I do not suggest that there 

was $1 wasted of the money that was actually spent, but what I do suggest to you is that the balance of 

the money was not used for the purpose for which it was subscribed, but was taken by a special Act of 

parliament and used for some government purpose. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines: — Now, Mr. Speaker, that does not involve only the members of the government, but 

also the integrity of the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan. He was the man who was the Chairman of the 

committee administering the fund. 

 

Mr. Banks: — Now do not drag the Chief Justice in. He is in the clear. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines: — After the committee had spent all the money that could be reasonably expended in 

the rebuilding of the homes of the people who lost them, the balance of the money was unanimously, by 

the members of the Legislature and the committee, recommended that this money should be paid over to 

the trustees of the Saskatchewan Agricultural Research Foundation and formed part of the fund 

administered by them pursuant to the Agricultural Research Foundation Act. I would not want anyone to 

get away with the impression that there was any wrong usage of any of the money collected for this very 

worthy cause. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I would like to tell my hon. friend that if he feels at any time that the money 

which was collected and contributed by the people, or the people of Canada, was not spent for the 

purpose for which it was contributed, if he will get up and say so in this House, we will give him a 

Royal Commission and make a thorough investigation, and I would expect, of course, that he would 

replace his seat at the disposal of that Commission to substantiate any charges he cares to make. 

 

Mr. Banks: — I haven‟t the faintest intention of placing my seat at the disposal of any Commission that 

is created by this government. But I want to tell you that 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
609 

there is that sum that was not used for the rebuilding of Kamsack, and the Chief Justice told Mr. Parker 

and others in the district that he had to pay it over because it was a special Act of parliament requiring 

him to do so, and I think that is the case. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, that statement is absolutely untrue, and my hon. friend is either 

making it in ignorance or deliberately. 

 

Mr. Banks: — I got it from Mr. J. Johnson, and he is not a man who makes untrue statements. He 

attended with Mr. Parker before Mr. Martin came, and Mr. Martin will tell you that tomorrow. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Just the same, the statement is untrue. 

 

Mr. Banks: — It doesn‟t make it untrue because you say so. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Would the hon. gentleman withdraw that remark. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Were not the people of Kamsack very well satisfied with the treatment they had 

received at the hands of this government and from the people of Saskatchewan at large? 

 

Mr. Banks: — The people of Kamsack were delighted. They appreciated it. For a long time they said 

this government are a fine bunch of fellows. But when they found out . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! If the hon. member wants to make a further statement, he will have to 

make if after 8 o‟clock. It now being 6 o‟clock, the House will recess until 8 o‟clock. 

 

8 o‟clock p.m. 

 

Mr. Banks: — I would like to make a statement. Mr. Speaker, before dinner the hon. Premier and the 

hon. Provincial Treasurer charged that I had made statements respecting the Kamsack Cyclone Fund 

which suggested improper handling of the fund and which cast reflection upon the integrity of the 

members of that committee. I do not want my position misrepresented, and nothing could be more unfair 

than such charges. 

 

I stated that when the fund was started, the government announced a contribution of $50,000 and called 

upon the public to supplement this contribution by further gifts. The public‟s response was magnificent 

and over $200,000 was raised, including the government contribution. Much excellent work was done in 

repairing the damage. Buildings on Main Street were assisted 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
610 

to the extent of 40 percent of the cost of repair. While there was still approximately $50,000 in the fund, 

further assistance was discontinued, and an Act passed by the Legislature directing that the balance of 

the fund be used for other purposes. This made the practical effect of the policy that the government 

contribution was not used to assist those who had suffered cyclone damage as the assistance to some of 

those who suffered damage was limited to 40 percent. In my opinion, the government action was wrong, 

and the entire amount should have been used for the original purpose. In saying this, I am only 

expressing an opinion which I hold very firmly, and which is shared by most of the people in Kamsack. 

In expressing this opinion, however, I am not suggesting any improper administration of the funds by 

anyone, nor am I casting any reflection upon the members of the committee who served so well. I am 

simply saying that government policy was wrong. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, if I want to get into an argument about it we can carry on in debate 

later on, but I should make a statement immediately so that there will be no misunderstanding 

throughout the country. First, the administration of this Kamsack fund was carried on entirely by a 

committee headed by the Chief Justice. Secondly, when that committee had completed its work, they 

made a report to the government in which it stated that it had met all the obligations which it thought 

ought to be met, and it turned the surplus over to be disposed of. The surplus was disposed by an Act 

brought into this legislature and voted for unanimously by every member of the Legislature, turning that 

sum of money over to agriculture research at the university, because we had been assured by the 

committee, headed by the Chief Justice, that all the claims had been met insofar as that committee 

thought they ought to be met, and that this money therefore could no longer be used in the Kamsack area 

because the work for which the money had been contributed had been completed. As far as any 

documentary evidence to substantiate what I have said is concerned, I shall be glad to table it in the 

course of the next day or two. 

 

Mr. J.E. McCormack (Souris-Estevan): — This is the first opportunity I have had, Mr. Speaker, to 

congratulate you on your election as the presiding officer of this Assembly, and I wish to add my 

congratulations to those who have preceded me. 

 

Rising in this Legislature for the first time to take part in the budget debate as the member for the 

constituency of Souris-Estevan, I realize as previous speakers have pointed out, that with this great 

honour also goes a corresponding responsibility to be the elected representative in a legislative body 

which administers the affairs of over 800,000 people. 

 

Now, the province of Saskatchewan is part of the Dominion of Canada and of this great North American 

continent; and this North American continent in my opinion, and if I can express my opinion, is the last 

citadel of democracy and free enterprise, and generally what all of us consider to be freedom. We should 

realize, too, that today the eyes of the entire world are on the Dominion of Canada and the United States, 

and that millions of enslaved and impoverished persons in other parts of the world look to this continent 

for leadership. We should also realize that it is the free nations today who are making a substantial 

contribution towards the feeding and clothing of the rest of the world. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
611 

It is possibly strange to some people that it is in these free nations, the nations where there is the most 

freedom, that we have the most washing machines, automobiles, radios and all the things such as most 

opportunities, and in fact the most of everything that, to some of the people in other parts of the world, is 

actually out of the reach of even the most fortunate of them. Also here this evening, I wonder if we 

realize how few places there are left in the world today where the son of an Irish and Austrian immigrant 

can stand up, as during the previous election, and criticize the government in power and ask people to 

vote for him. There are very few countries left today where such a person as myself could stand up in 

the opposition to the government, and possibly criticize it at times, without the certainty of being 

relegated to a concentration camp, if they were that fortunate. 

 

I do not make any claim to having been born in a log cabin, which my friends across the line have told 

me was almost the prerequisite to being elected to office over there. Despite the fact that some of us 

have been smeared as tools of the vested interests and a lot of clap-trap like that, I was born in the town 

of Estevan, in a rather modest home, I might say; and I do not take any credit to myself that my parents 

managed to skimp and save a little and worked hard in order to give me a decent break in life. The credit 

for that all belongs to them; but they came out to this country, as many of the rest of these people did, 

because they wanted to won their own land. They wanted to get ahead, and possibly because they had 

the „guts‟ to grab hold of that opportunity and they knew that it was here fro them if they did, they 

weren‟t looking for something for nothing. To be able to stand here tonight as the elected representative 

of the constituency of Souris-Estevan, I can assure you, makes me feel very humble. 

 

One of the members of this Legislature, while speaking previously, made what I am sure on mature 

thought he will reconsider — a remark about a portion of the country being God-forsaken. I do not 

profess to be very religious, but I think that if the hon. gentleman had given mature consideration to that 

remark he might have realized that possibly one of the greatest reasons for many of our ills today is not 

so much that we are God-forsaken as, perhaps, that we have forsaken God or some of the principles of 

religion. I think that even in Canada, and possibly in many parts of Saskatchewan, today there are many 

evidences of the true Christian spirit, and I would like to refer to an incident illustrative of that. I am sure 

the Premier will agree with me, and I want it understood from the outset that this is no criticism at all 

upon the administration of the funds. 

 

On December 24, the day before Christmas, we had a very disastrous fire at the Estevan Airport. Four 

persons lost their lives and 16 families were made homeless. The fire was of unknown origin and was 

discovered in the early morning, about seven o‟clock. Most of the people got out only in their night 

attire, and there were many incidents of heroic rescues and a lot of people had been trapped in behind 

broken windows and under glass and debris generally. This was the day before Christmas, and I am sure 

that the spirit of Christmas in the province of Saskatchewan was certainly exemplified by the 

magnificent response from all over the resolution. Relief committees, in the town of Estevan, were 

immediately mobilized and tasks allocated, and the job of rehabilitating the families was begun within 

minutes, actually, after the blaze was well under way. Appeals were sent to three of the radio stations in 

the province, and they 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
612 

devoted their entire facilities to the broadcasting of the appeal for funds for these stricken families. And, 

as I said before, the response from Saskatchewan was magnificent; the response from the people of 

Estevan and surrounding district was unbelievable. Within a few hours after the first shock of this 

disaster had worn off, the contributions were coming in and arrangements had been made for the 

housing of all the families, and for their Christmas entertainment, and particularly for the children. They 

had lost everything, including their Christmas presents. It might be thought, perhaps, Mr. Speaker, that 

this could only happen the day before Christmas. Personally, I think it could happen any day of the year 

in Canada. 

 

I would like to thank the Premier publicly for his very kind assistance to our committee which was set 

up to cope with the emergency, and also the people of North Dakota who gave so generously out of their 

pockets. I would like to bring to the attention of the House the admirable work of the Sisters of St. 

Joseph and the staff of St. Joseph‟s Hospital, who did so much to relieve suffering and prevent suffering. 

The Red Cross, as always, had a very large share in the work. Radio Stations C.K.R.M., C.H.A.B., and 

C.K.C.K., as I said, devoted their entire day to the appeal for assistance. All the service clubs, the 

Legion and the Salvation Army gave very generously of their help, and the ordinary citizens responded 

magnificently. On behalf of the Estevan community, and particularly the poor unfortunates out as the 

Airport, I wish to thank all those who so unstintingly contributed their services and assistance. 

 

In passing I would like to say that a disastrous fire broke out at Alameda, a small town east of Estevan, 

and an entire family was made homeless there and the husband actually died later of burns. Another fire 

took place at Lampman in which several people were made homeless and provision was made out of the 

Estevan Disaster Fund for these people. I do not know exactly what the amounts were, but assistance 

was made available to them. I might say we received far more in clothes than, I think, would clothe the 

whole town of Estevan in the appeal. They were coming in by truck loads. 

 

Out at the Airport today — I do not mean this in any form of criticism; it is just a point that I would like 

to bring up at the present time — there are 49 families living in apartments. Thirty-four of these 

apartments are rented out and managed by the Department of Reconstruction, and the rest of the 

apartments are owned by the town and some by the dominion Department of National Defence. Recently 

I was sent a letter and some pictures showing that there are conditions there, still existing, which might 

possibly lead to another fire . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — May I ask the hon. gentleman a question? Will he state in which building these 

fire hazards continue to exist? Is it the buildings controlled by the Department of Social Welfare and 

Rehabilitation or by the Department of National Defence? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — I think there is a great fire hazard over the entire airport, Sir, but the building that 

has the largest number of families is controlled by the Department of Reconstruction. That is the one 

that I think has 34 apartments in it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Did you say you have picture relating to this building? 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
613 

Mr. McCormack: — Yes, that is correct. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I would request that those be tabled, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — I am quite willing to take it up with the Minister of Reconstruction and, as I said 

at the outset, I do not mean this in any way of criticism at all of the government. I mean this in the sense 

that there are conditions which still exist there and are bound to exist any place, but there are some 

dangerous practices still being carried out. I do not say that the Minister of Reconstruction can stay 

down there and see that everybody does not light a match around the place, but there are a few problems 

there, and if the Minister will give me his assurance that I may take this up with him, I certainly do not 

intend to take the time in this House to pursue it any farther, because I am not meaning it in the spirit of 

criticism. But I would like to point out that a fire in any one of those buildings can mean a very serious 

situation. There is a 40-bed hospital there, run by the Sisters of St. Joseph. Most of the people in it are 

aged and bed-ridden and unable to move themselves, and this risk of fire is very great. 

 

I have listened with a great deal of interest to the preceding debates, and just to set the minds of some of 

the gentlemen opposite at rest, I was supported and elected by both the Conservatives and the Liberals in 

the constituency of Souris-Estevan, and I am not ashamed of it at all. In fact I am rather proud of it. I 

also received the support of quite a few C.C.F. who apparently had seen the light since the last election, 

and, generally, all those opposed to socialism. I was nominated by both the Liberal and 

Progressive-Conservative nominating conventions, and they were both held independently of each other. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — When are you a Liberal and when are you a Conservative? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — I will answer that if the gentleman opposite will tell me when he is a Socialist and 

when he is a little farther to the left than that. 

 

I wish to thank my Progressive-Conservative friends in the Souris-Estevan constituency for their very 

generous gesture in placing, perhaps, their love of country a little farther ahead of party politics. At their 

convention the feeling was expressed that the world was divided into two camps: those who like the sort 

of country we have here, and those who thought that possibly a little farther east was a better place to 

live in than this country; and I am very proud indeed to have received their support. 

 

While I am on that point I would like to express my very strong exception to the remarks and jibes of 

some of the hon. members across the House towards my very good friend, the hon. member for 

Moosomin (Mr. McDonald). The member for Moosomin is a young man who served his country very 

well in the armed forces in the last war, and not only has he an admirable war record but he is well 

respected in his community. He is not a Socialist or a Communist. In regard to the fact that he and I 

possibly may disagree on many things at many times, I am only too proud to associate myself with him 

in his fight against totalitarianism which the socialist government in this province seems to attempt 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
614 

to force on the people. I think some of the remarks of the hon. gentlemen opposite are very ill-suited to 

the dignity of their high office. I am sure that the hon. member for Moosomin will contribute greatly to 

the deliberations of this Assembly, as did the previous member from that constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suppose the presentation of the budget is something like when we sit down at the end of 

the year — I was brought up in a store — and take stock; and stock-taking is when, at the end of the 

year, we figured out whether we were better off or worse off than we had been. I think, quite seriously, 

that in this first session of the Legislature it would be a good time for a lot of us to take a little stock of 

what is going on. We might also see where we stand with regard to an asset which does not show up on 

the balance sheet, but I think it is a very priceless one, and that is our democratic form of government 

and freedom. Despite the fact that some of the gentlemen opposite seem to think that interest is a very 

bad thing, I think perhaps that this is an asset we should pass on to people that come after us with a little 

accrued interest and not fritter it entirely away. 

 

On this continent — you can call our way of life capitalistic if you wish — when we look at what it has 

produced in the past year alone in the form of material goods, and we take stock of our possessions in 

contrast to the rest of the world, it is strange to find, really, that we have in Saskatchewan and anywhere 

in Canada people who believe that a change in this whole system would put something else in its place. 

It is very strange to find that we have a government which appears very much to be run by imported 

planners and so-called experts, and a government committed to a policy which, in the ultimate result, 

would be complete socialization; and the ultimate result, I think, would mean the loss of that asset I was 

speaking of a little while ago. It is strange to find that there are people who seem to be intent on taking 

the running of the country out of the hands of the people, whose avowed policy is state-ownership of all 

the means of production and distribution and who apparently have committed themselves to this policy 

of letting the Shumiatchers and Cadburys and all the rest of these gentlemen run the country: men whose 

belief would ultimately, in my opinion, take away our right to live where we want, eat what we like, 

speak what we like, vote as we like, and all the rest of it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — How about your right to chisel the poor miners? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — I think in many respects having democracy is something like having a motor car, 

electric lights, etc. It is only when you push the button and the lights will not come on that you realize 

you have lost something. We have enjoyed our freedom so long in this province that we cannot really 

imagine what it is like to live in a country where there is no freedom . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Your light has not come on yet. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — If the hon. gentleman has something to say I would be only too pleased to talk it 

over with him afterwards. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
615 

I think it is only when we take stock of what we have and what other people have not got that we begin 

to realize the privileges we, as Canadians, still enjoy. There are not many places left in the world today 

where a person can get up and speak without fear of reprisals, without fear of the secret police coming in 

and taking care of it, or go about your daily business without fear. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — And miners‟ wives, too, I suppose. 

 

=Mr. McCormack: — I will get around to that yet. 

 

Some other countries were once as free as we were, but they lost their freedom because they weren‟t 

vigilant, and the responsibility of each and every one of us in this Legislature is to see that it does not 

happen here., 

 

Despite what our socialist friends might tell us, freedom brings prosperity, and it seems to be the free 

nations who have the highest standard of living. It is the free enterprise nations today which are feeding 

the world, which are contributing most to the world‟s recovery. It must seem very strange to people 

coming from other parts of Europe to this country today, where we have so much freedom, that we 

should have anybody in this country who wants to change all this. I submit it must seem very strange to 

them that we have these people who do not think we are living under such a good system. I would 

submit, Mr. Speaker, that at the beginning of this year, not only from within but without, is the freedom 

of this country, our way of life, seriously endangered, but I think the economic security of this province 

is being very seriously jeopardized by the policies of the socialist government. 

 

We are situated here almost geographically in the centre of Canada, and in this province all of us depend 

directly or indirectly upon agriculture for a living. About 85 percent of the wealth comes from the farms 

of this province. I would like to remind some of the hon. members, when they talk about socializing all 

industries, eliminating all private trading for profit, that agriculture is a very basic industry. A true 

socialist must, of necessity, agree it has to be taken over eventually. 

 

In order to provide a more balanced economy in this province we need more industries. Lack of 

industries is one of the main reasons, in my opinion, why the population is not increasing in the 

proportion that it should. The Provincial Treasurer, in his budget address the other day, referred to the 

fact that in the first four years of the C.C.F. government the population in the provinces increased by 

approximately 9,000 persons. I think anyone would admit that the natural increase in population might 

take care of this, and when you subtract from that 9,000 all the imported civil servants and planners they 

have brought in here, the population figures would certainly show a substantial decrease. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer referred to the fact that in the years 1940 to 1944 there was a decrease in 

population in the province. I am very sure that the Provincial Treasurer did not mean to infer or leave the 

impression that there was no valid reason for this. I am quite sure he must realize that there were a lot of 

people employed in war industries out of the province, there were a lot of people, like the member for 

Moosomin, who were out of the province fighting a battle a little more important than the battle of 

socialism in 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
616 

Saskatchewan. I do not think there is any doubt in anybody‟s mind but that we are losing substantial 

numbers of our young people. That was referred to in the House today, and I think the situation is 

serious. We look around all our districts and there are large numbers of young people who are leaving 

the province because there are not the same possibilities for employment here that there are in other 

parts of Canada and the United States. We are losing this greatest asset that I think we have, the younger 

people, and we are in the unhappy position of having to bear the cost of their education and then deliver 

them to other parts of Canada because we cannot offer them the same opportunities here. I think it is a 

well-known fact that the young people from the farming communities take second place to none because 

of their training and their background and their initiative. 

 

I think one of the most serious problems that we have in the province of Saskatchewan is one which any 

government in office must accept full responsibility for, and that is the stagnation in industrial 

development there is in the province today. I wonder why we should have to take a back seat in 

Saskatchewan to all the other provinces, including Manitoba and Alberta, in the development of the 

industries. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That is after 35 years of Liberalism. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — I am not very much interested in what happened prior to 1944. I am interested in 

what is happening today though, and so you should be too. 

 

Premier Douglas: — We know what‟s happening today. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will the hon. members listen to what the speaker is saying instead of quarrelling 

across the floor, as they will have the opportunity of speaking later. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — I think the policies of this government in the province of Saskatchewan today are 

discouraging industrial development and I am quite sure that I have a right to stand up in this House and 

express that opinion. If I haven‟t, then there is something wrong with this country and the system. 

 

I do not think anyone is going to invest their savings in a business or any form of industrial enterprise 

when they are not sure the government might not step in, if it looks like a profitable one, and take over, 

or if they won‟t set up something and run in opposition to it. This leads to a feeling of insecurity 

amongst business people. No one knows when one of the planners isn‟t going to step in and set up 

something. Competition is not equal. How can anyone compete on an equal basis with a Crown 

Corporation which pays no business tax, no income tax, no provincial taxes, no interest, and is financed 

with the money of the general public of the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some of the statements that some of the Ministers in the province have made do not do anything to help 

the situation. We should be out trying to encourage people to come into the province, and yet there are 

so many conflicting statements that nobody knows where they are at. The Minister of Education, Hon. 

Mr. Lloyd, speaking in the House about a week ago, spent almost a half-hour talking about the big 

corporations, and the theme of his address seemed to be, 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
617 

“Let‟s put the blame on big business”. The Minister of Highways, Hon. J.T. Douglas, today had to take a 

crack at the big interests. At the same time, they are trying to induce people to come in here and invest 

some money. 

 

I would like to refer to a few of the statements that have been made by speakers on some of the policies 

of the government which, I submit, are definitely retarding the development of our industries. We go 

back tot the Regina Manifesto in 1932. 

 

Mr. Gibson: — I thought you did not want to go back beyond 1944. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Well, I happened to read what happened that year. If I had been old enough 

maybe it would have been different. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. McCormack: — 

 

We believe that these evils can be removed only in a planned and socialized economy in which our 

natural resources and the principal means of production and distribution are owned, controlled and 

operated by the people. 

 

I am glad to hear that applause from the other side. Now maybe they will clap on this one: 

 

No C.C.F. government will rest content until it has eradicated capitalism and put into operation a full 

programme of socialized planning which will lead to the establishment . . .  

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Well, I am glad to hear them clap. The hon. member fro Cumberland (Mr. L. 

Blanchard) the other night quoted that statement and not even the Premier pounded his desk for it. Then, 

when being interviewed by the Financial Post, September 23, 1944, the Premier gave the statement that 

only monopolies were going to be socialized. Apparently they were not going to put into effect the full 

programme. This is what he said that time: 

 

We intend to go into public ownership, but where it is not desirable to have this public ownership on a 

provincial basis, we will encourage municipal and co-operative ownership. Where it is better to have 

private ownership, we will encourage private ownership. 

 

Then a report in The Leader-Post, November 1, 1944, speaking on Second Reading of the Bill to amend 

the Department of Natural Resources Act, Mr. Danielson said: “why should the government pour public 

funds into failing enterprises? Why does the government not go to work and take over flour mills and oil 

refineries? Why not take over the Imperial Oil refinery? We will”, Natural Resources Minister Hon. Mr. 

Phelps interjected. “These are the people we 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
618 

are trying to encourage to come in here and do a little developing, and they are going to take them over. 

A pamphlet was put out by the Department of Natural Resources in 1945, and the forward was written 

by Mr. Phelps. Here is a sentence out of it: 

 

Eventually it is hoped to establish complete social ownership and management of key industries in the 

development of our resources. It is the intention of the government to effect an orderly change to 

social ownership in the industrial development of our natural resources. 

 

The Premier, speaking at Winnipeg, April 4, 1945, said: “Socialization in Saskatchewan has not yet 

begun, the government being too busy with basic legislation during its emergency session and its first 

regular session this year>‟ Then, April 3, 1946, the Premier said this in a debate on The Insurance Act: 

“We will not rest until capitalism has been eradicated from Saskatchewan. 

 

Then on April 1, 1947, there is a little different story that comes out. This is from The Leader-Post, and I 

quote: “Premier T.C. Douglas told the Legislature Monday that the C.C.F. government had no intention 

of eliminating private enterprise or private ownership in Saskatchewan.” 

 

Premier Douglas: — Does the hon. member not know the difference between free enterprise and 

eradicating capitalism? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — I am becoming very interested to know just who is a capitalist; what a capitalist is 

supposed to be. Is it somebody who owns as much land as some of the gentlemen opposite, or somebody 

with $1,000, $2,000 or $3,000. I would like to know where the dividing line comes. I am sure there are a 

lot of people in the province of Saskatchewan who would like to know whether they are capitalists or 

not. 

 

Premier Douglas: — There are a lot of things that you do not know. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Now, in the Commonwealth, August 7, 1946, in a report of the C.C.F. convention 

held in Moose Jaw in July, here is a resolution: 

 

Be it therefore resolved that we urge our government to take steps towards the implementation of the 

C.C.F. programme for the development and distribution of natural gas and oil under public ownership 

and control for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Then in The Leader-Post, on July 27: 

 

The provincial government is permitting private enterprise to develop northern oil resources because it 

does not feel ready to take that stop itself, but the government will move at the appropriate time, 

Natural Resources Minister Hon. J.L. Phelps told the Assembly of the Saskatchewan social party at its 

annual provincial convention Friday afternoon. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
619 

In The Leader Post of April 12, 1947 — the Premier was out in Vancouver then, and this is the Canadian 

Press report from Vancouver: 

 

The C.C.F. Premier of Saskatchewan said Friday that his government had no immediate plans for 

starting new socialized industries. Present plans were confined to extension and development of 

secondary industries now owned and operated by the province. 

 

I have an extract here from a statement which was prepared for the Associated Boards of Trade. 

Apparently there is something different when you speak to those people, and this is the statement that is 

attributed to the Premier: 

 

On the other hand, we believe that private enterprise properly run for the benefit of the people of 

Saskatchewan should be supported by our citizens and given every opportunity to serve our province. 

 

Premier Douglas: — May I ask the hon. gentleman if he has the date and the place that was supposed to 

have been said? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Doesn‟t he remember? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — As I said, it was attributed to the Premier. I got this from a Leader-Post editorial 

dated June 16, 1947, and the full text of it is this: “Thus in a statement prepared for the Associated 

Boards of Trade, earlier this year, Premier Douglas said . . . and the quote is in there. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You should extend your reading a little further. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — I had one from the Commonwealth which shows I get around a bit. Here is The 

Leader-Post, October 31, 1947, and I quote: 

 

At Rosetown on Friday night, Premier T.C. Douglas said: „As soon as the province gets a pulp mill, 

sodium sulphate now shipped from Saskatchewan to eastern Canada will be used in the manufacture 

of paper‟. 

 

He also said Saskatchewan would soon start making its own pottery. I haven‟t any objection to that. 

 

Mr. Bichan, who is the Director of the Department of Natural Resources and Industrial Development, 

made a statement which was also reported — I am very sorry that I also have to take this from The 

Leader-Post, but it was reported there on January 17, 1948: 

 

To encourage greater exploration and development, the government is prepared to enter into 

agreements with exploration companies offering them full protection of operation and the guarantee 

that dealings with the government will proceed on an accepted business basis. Continuity of activities 

started by private industry will be assured. 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
620 

On February 16, 1948, Hon. Mr. Phelps said: “The provincial government is interested in oil 

development and has some intention of going into the oil development field.” He also went on to say: “if 

a pipeline is built to carry natural gas from an Alberta field to Saskatchewan points, it should be a public 

utility or at least a public carrier.” This is the famous pipeline that we hope to get into the province. 

 

Premier Douglas: — May I ask my hon. friend if he disagrees with that statement? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — I would rather see us have the pipeline first and then we will discuss whether we 

will have it or somebody else will have it. This way we are not getting it. 

 

At the C.C.F. National Convention, that was in Winnipeg on August 19, 1948, and this was published in 

the Commonwealth, September 8, 1948, and I quote: 

 

For iron and steel, a policy of socialization, etc. For the agricultural implement industry, 

meat-packing, agricultural fertilizer and chemical industries, a policy of social ownership. Formulate a 

national fuel policy which will promote public ownership of coal, electricity, gas and oil in 

co-operation with the provinces. Development of natural resources such as minerals, oils, coal and 

forests can best be done by Crown companies or some other from of public ownership. 

 

Then by November 1, 1948, we are apparently getting interested again in getting capital into the 

province and the Premier, while he was in the Old Country, tried to interest British and Swedish capital. 

I have no objection to him trying to do that. I think we should have all the capital we can get into 

Saskatchewan to develop our industries. The Premier also went to New York, and this was reported in 

The Leader-Post on November 15, 1948: 

 

The Premier said he was particularly interested in having outside capital brought in for the 

development of oil, potash and other minerals. Discussions with the U.S. industrialists would also 

cover the possibility of developing Saskatchewan‟s pulp wood and uranium deposits. 

 

On November 29, 1948, the Minister of Agriculture was speaking at Regina People‟s Forum, and he 

said: 

 

It is my opinion that railways, packing houses and other concerns which are presently exploiting 

farmers will have to be socialized and operated for the benefit of agriculture. 

 

I notice there is no reference in there to the oil companies. 

 

The Premier, on January 10, 1948, said: “Our Capitalist system is through. The time has come to move 

into new waters; to build ourselves a new form of society.” And he also said: “The C.C.F. believes the 

people, through their government, should own and operate the means of production, distribution and 

exchange whereby they live.” 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
621 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. R. D. Bennet said capitalism was through 15 years ago. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Well, R. D. Bennett is through too, now. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Will the member for Moosomin agree with that. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Mr. Speaker, I believe in the encouragement and development of industry in 

Saskatchewan, and I think seriously that we should encourage investors to come in here and invest their 

money in the development of our coal, minerals, oil and everything else we have. I think these resources 

should be used; but I do think we should have some form of control overt them to see that they are not 

wasted. In order to encourage private capital to come into the province and get skilled technical 

personnel to live here, we have to remove the restrictions which, I submit, are on capital by this 

government and which so seriously handicap our industrial development. I believe we should put an end 

to this fear of confiscation and unfair competition from government industries. If we are going to be 

concerned — which all of us are — with good jobs and good pay, we have to have the investment of 

private capital in this province in new industries to develop our natural resources. The Premier himself 

in this House last week said that secondary industries in the province belonged to the co-operative and 

private enterprise fields, and I think that we should encourage them, and not try to hinder them. 

 

I submit that these are the main reasons why we cannot encourage private capital, or our own people in 

the province, to invest in the vast natural resources of the province. All other parts of Canada are having 

an upsurge in the development of many and varied industries. In the growth of these industries will be a 

greater certainty for full employment, continued employment for the people and a larger market for 

agriculture products. 

 

We look at the development in the Alberta field, and in the Lloydminster area alone tremendous strides 

have been taken on the Alberta side of the border compared with what has taken place in the 

Lloydminster field in Saskatchewan. Who is going to invest extensively here when you read all of these 

statements that have been made by these people? The former Minister of Natural Resources, Hon. Mr. 

Phelps, said that if the Saskatchewan wells succeed the government may move in and use the power of 

expropriation which the Legislature has given. In the north my friends tell me that private lumber 

operators have almost entirely disappeared, and that the government handles the major share of the fish 

production. All farmers, business and professional people are sort of sitting back wondering who is 

going to be next for the chopping block. When we look at the whole picture we find that the 

development of our mines and industries have lagged considerably behind the neighbouring provinces, 

and this after only four and one-half years of socialism in Saskatchewan. I submit seriously, -Mr. 

Speaker, that these irresponsible and possibly irreconcilable statements are one of the direct reasons why 

people with money to invest are fighting shy of the province. I know I would not like to go down and 

put a few dollars in a bank if the bank manager was running up and down the street saying one minute 

they were going to confiscate everything, and the next minute they would give you 20 percent interest, 

and the next day say they were going to close the bank. Nobody would 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
622 

The political philosophy of the Social Crediters in Alberta to me is as impractical as complete socialism. 

At least they are not wrecking the economy of their province. They are realistic and business-like, and 

their province is reaping the benefit. I think that the socialist ostrich in this province should pull its head 

out of the sand and have a look and see what is going on around in other parts of the country. 

 

I was very pleased to see that in the budget address the hon. Provincial Treasurer had this to say: 

“Despite the claims of its critics, this government is not concerned with regimenting our economy, but is 

rather concerned that the affairs of private enterprise be characterized by both justice and a sustained 

level of prosperity.” It is unfortunate that the Provincial Treasurer cannot control some of the people that 

are running around making these statements that are the direct reason, one of the main reasons anyway, 

why we are so far behind in industrial development. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — He should write the Premier‟s speeches. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — The Alberta government announced February 13, 1949, that it had received 

$5,198,078 for oil rights on two sections of land. To this must be added all the oil and gas royalties for 

the previous year collected by the government of Alberta, and according to a report I read in the paper 

the other day, the figures show there that in the past year that was nearly $6 million obtained form the 

sale of oil rights royalties on production and oil and gas fees, rental, and that conservative estimates of 

the government revenue from oil and gas and the sale of this land for the previous 12 months would be 

well over $12 million. 

 

Mr. Erb: — It wont‟ last forever. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Well, they have it and we haven‟t. It is a funny thing now that that has been 

brought up, I think it was the speech from the throne that said that the province of Saskatchewan‟s oil 

development comes to nearly $1 million. Now, in Alberta they are not talking about million dollars; they 

are talking about 10 to 20 billion barrels of oil. That was in the paper the other day. I submit that the 

direct responsibility for the industrial development in this province is on the shoulders of this 

government, and they should come out and state emphatically that they do not believe in the Regina 

Manifesto of 1932, and they should repudiate all the speakers who are chasing around the country 

making these nit-wit statements about the complete eradication of capitalism and condemning anybody 

who looks like a capitalist. I think the gentlemen are long on theory but very short on experience. 

Unfortunately, the guinea pig is always the one that suffers, and the guinea pig in this case is the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In the Souris-Estevan constituency one of the keys to our main industries down there is the production 

of coal, and a large number of people are dependent directly or indirectly on the production of coal for 

their living. In 1944 the Saskatchewan Reconstruction Council — I am not sure whether it was 

appointed by the Liberals government or the C.C.F. government — made several recommendations 

regarding power and electrification, and amongst others, that: “A study be undertaken to determine the 

relative merits of developing electric power from the coal fields of south-eastern Saskatchewan.” 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
623 

To date, in Saskatchewan the production of power has been pretty well confined to steam plants, and, in 

the Estevan-Bienfait area, there are large deposits of lignite coal. I submit that these are very potential 

reservoirs for power development, and this could be the basis for rural electrification in south-eastern 

Saskatchewan. I do not want to give credit to the present government. They have spent about $500,000 

down there quite recently, installing new equipment adapted to the burning of lignite, to increase the 

power plant‟s output. However, and I say this in all seriousness and fairness, I think possibly if the $6 

million that has been spent on the box factory, woolen mill, show factory, brick yard, Fish Board, and 

the tannery had been spent down there to produce power, the government would not have to come in 

that part of the country and apologize for its lack of rural electrification. 

 

I know for a fact that down in the lignite coal fields, with regard to production if it were not for the 

policies of the government here at the present time there could be considerably more money brought in 

to develop the fields. There are some smaller mines down there with a substantial investment of capital 

in them that could be brought into full operation. Expansion of the field is what is needed to provide for 

the employment of men who have been thrown out of work recently by the closing of the underground 

mines which cannot compete with the strip method of mining any longer. Over 180 men, last year alone, 

were affected by the closing of underground mines, and it is only by new development that there will be 

jobs available for them. 

 

Some mention was made about the coal industry down there. I think the Premier made suggestion about 

the „poor miners‟. I would like to draw to his attention that the Saskatchewan Government Industries 

and the Crown Corporations have nothing to pat themselves on the back for when it comes to wage 

rates. The brick yard last year, despite the fact that they do not pay any provincial, municipal, income or 

any other taxes, lost over $42,000. Now they cannot say that they paid out too much money in wages. 

The wage rate for a common labourer at the brick yard is 70 cents an hour, and the wage rate at the 

privately-owned mines for a common labourer is $1.10 an hour. The highest wages paid by the 

government for skilled labour at the brick yard is $1.05 an hour, and a shovel operator at one of the 

mines gets $1.63 an hour. If you go to the Power commission, a common labourer at the power plant 

gets 65 cents an hour, and the highest wage rate paid for skilled engineers is $215 a month. 

 

The wages paid by the government in these industries are far too low compared with other wages. We 

have a very, very high cost of living index in Estevan. I believe at one point last year it was the highest 

in the dominion due to the fact that a lot of the people working in the mines have high incomes, and the 

people working in these other industries operated by the government are put in the position of having to 

compete with these people in the purchase of goods. 

 

If the government had been paying decent wages at the brick yard, I would not like to venture what the 

loss would have been. If they are so interested in ameliorating the working conditions down in the 

constituency, I could very well suggest that they should start with conditions in the brick yard and the 

Power commission, and give the employees a better break than they are now getting. I would also like to 

point out that the brick yard was closed down two days before Christmas. Men were thrown out of work 

on December 23, and if 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
624 

any private concern did this I can imagine what a great howl would go up from some of the gentlemen 

on the government benches about the exploiters of labour throwing these poor people out in the cold. In 

fairness and decency, I submit, that these men might at least have been kept on over the Christmas 

season until the first of the year, so they could have had their Christmas in peace. 

 

I would like to refer for a few minutes to highways. The constituency of Souris-Estevan is bounded on 

the south by the United States of America, on the east by Manitoba, on the north by the constituency of 

the hon. member for Cannington (Mr. Patterson) and, fortunately, on the west by the Premier‟ 

constituency. Despite the fact that we are so close to the American boundary — I am not sure exactly 

who it was that made the statement in the House about some American soldiers up in North Battleford 

— we do no lose many nights‟ sleep worrying about an invasion from this great imperialistic monster, 

the United States, in our part of the country. I think some of the ill-advised statements that have been 

made about the United States have caused us a great deal of embarrassment with our North Dakota 

friends. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — That is not the only thing that caused you embarrassment. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — The highway situation in the Souris-Estevan constituency is one of particular 

concern to all the residents. We were very fortunate in having considerable amount of money spent on 

black-topping the highway which runs down from Corinne through Weyburn and Estevan and down to 

North Portal. I think that is a very worthy effort and, as I say, I will give credit any time credit is due. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — It should have been done 40 years ago. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — I wasn‟t here 40 years ago. You look like you may have been. 

 

This highway is of particular importance because North Portal is one of the principal ports of entry into 

Saskatchewan, and a great amount of tourist trade can be encouraged by black-top highways. I would 

submit, however, that this highway runs only through a very small portion of the constituency, and the 

people who are not fortunate enough to have highway No. 39 running by them are left almost without 

any provision being made fro decent highway construction whatsoever. 

 

The situation is particularly bad in the winter time. Under the present government‟s policy all the snow 

removal equipment and all maintenance equipment is stationed at the district office in Weyburn, and 

apart from keeping highway No. 39 open in our constituency, no effort whatsoever has been made to 

clear the roads in any part of the constituency. I think it is very essential that snow removal equipment 

be stationed in the eastern end of the constituency. The people down there are taxpayers, and some parts 

gave very substantial C.C.F. majorities at the polls. I think being taxpayers in any event, at Oxbow, 

Carnduff and those places along there, they should be entitled to the same consideration that some parts 

of the province get. The policy of the Department of Highways has been to keep the highways open 

which lead in and out of and not around the city of Weyburn. The highways engineer at Weyburn said 

the priority 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
625 

highways are No. 39 north and west. I have a newspaper report here, and can refer to it if necessary. It 

was a snow removal talk to the Board of Trade, and “Mr. Litzenberger also advised Mr. Burdy”, it was 

told at the meeting, “that certain highways in the area had priority in the matter of snow removal. These 

were highways No. 39 north-west and south-east of Weyburn, sections of highways No. 18 and 13 from 

Radville to Weyburn, and highway No. 35 north from Oungre into Weyburn. Opening of any other 

highways or portions of highways depended entirely on what funds were available after these priority 

jobs were done", it was said. 

 

I would like to draw the attention of the Department of Highways, the Minister and the government to 

the fact that there are people in the eastern part of these constituencies — I think the same applies in the 

constituency of Cannington — who, if there is nothing done to have decent highways and now clearance 

in the wintertime, will all be channelled into Winnipeg, Brandon and these places, and the money they 

spend on their purchases will not stay in Saskatchewan. 

 

While I am on this subject, I would like to mention that there is a village very close to Estevan — about 

nine miles east — and highway No. 39, which has been black-topped, goes within a mile of the village. 

It is a very progressive village, and I would just like to submit for the consideration of the Minister of 

Highways that some effort be made to extend that black-top into the village of Bienfait. The tonnage 

over the highway between Estevan and Bienfait is as great, I think, according to information I have 

received, as over any other in the province, and for that reason they are certainly entitled to 

consideration. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, may I refer to a statement that the Premier made with respect to the Royal 

Commission on Coal and I do submit this in all sincerity: it is of a very vital interest, and I do not want it 

construed as any criticism of the government or anything like that. I do want to make reference to it 

because I think it is of paramount importance. The Premier in the House made reference to the 

government‟s proposal to appoint a Royal Commission to investigate certain aspects of the coal industry 

in Saskatchewan as a result of the unfortunate strike that was in the coalfields last fall. It is about two 

months now since the statement was made, and the Premier, I think, will agree that the only real point of 

dispute, in the final analysis, between the union that was on strike and the operators, was whether there 

should be a levy on each ton of coal paid into the Welfare Fund — I think it worked down to that in the 

final analysis, or whether a contributory pension scheme should be set up. The union, naturally in 

accordance with its policy, wanted the contribution to the Welfare fund, and the operators wanted the 

contributory pension fund whereby the men and the company both paid in five percent of the wages. 

 

Recently it was reported in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix that in the negotiations in the Alberta field, an 

arrangement had been made whereby the Welfare Funds had gone up from five cents a ton to 15 cents a 

ton. It is very unfortunate — I am not criticizing at all — that there will be a similar increase requested 

this fall, and in view of the fact that possibly there may be a repetition of the strike conditions which 

brought so much hardship to these people and their families in the past year; in view of this fact that, in 

my opinion, possible the price of coal has reached the state where it cannot go any 



 

March 7, 1949 

 

 
626 

higher without the markets being seriously restricted, and in view of the fact that if they get this oil 

pipeline into Regina we do not know what the result might be with regard to the Estevan field, and there 

are a lot of people employed there, I think the government should set up this Royal Commission with all 

possible speed — an once of prevention is always worth a pound of cure. If I may suggest, I think the 

Commission should be composed of men who know something about the coal industry and men who are 

impartial and unbiased and not particularly concerned with white-washing any particular individuals or 

sides that had anything to do with the dispute. Their findings and deliberations should be based on what 

is the fair thing for the working men in that district. I would respectively suggest to this Assembly and to 

the Premier that possibly that Chief Justice of the Court of Appeal or a judge appointed by the Chief 

Justice of the King‟s Bench should be asked to appoint somebody, a judge preferably, to preside over 

the commission to insure its impartiality. 

 

I am not going to take up the time of the House any longer, Mr. Speaker. I am sure if I am incorrect the 

hon. Premier will correct me in this: listening to the debates in recent weeks, I was almost brought to the 

conclusion that the Holy Bible had been written, edited and published exclusively for the use of some of 

the gentlemen opposite, and the C.C.F. party generally. While I said I do not profess to be an authority 

on the Christian teachings, when I heard some of the gentlemen opposite saying that socialism is an 

exemplification of the teachings of Christ, I was wondering possibly if they did not overlook the passage 

that I remember from Sunday School days. It is from the Gospel of St. Matthew, Chapter 19, verse 20, 

and there it relates about the rich young man — I think the Premier might Illuminate on this; it is 

probably referred to some place else — I think he was a rich young lawyer which maybe makes it all the 

more apropos. Apparently this rich young man came to Christ, and he was told, “If thou wilt be perfect, 

go and sell that thou hast and give it to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in Heaven, and come and 

follow me.” By my standards, many of the C.C.F. members opposite are comparatively wealthy, and 

also by the standards of a lot of other people of Saskatchewan; and if they are true apostles of socialism, 

following their argument to its logical conclusion, I suggest that they show a better example than they 

are now. I would be very willing to take my changes on pooling my assets with some of the landed 

gentry that sit across the floor of the House. Unfortunately, I do not think they will agree to it, because 

socialists seem to want to apply their standards to everybody but themselves. 

 

I shall oppose the motion. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11 o‟clock p.m. 


