



















































Hansard: March 21, 1949


 

March 21, 1949 

 

817 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Eleventh Legislature 

 

Monday, March 21, 1949 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd moved second reading of Bill No. 49 – An Act to provide for Financial Assistance 

to Certain Students for the Pursuit of their Studies. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to move in the House second reading to the Bill regarding the 

providing of financial assistance to students in the province. Since the Bill is, in my opinion. Of more 

than mere passing importance, I should like to take some time this afternoon to discuss the background 

of the legislation, and to tell something of the plans that have been in operation in the province for some 

time with regard to financial assistance to students, as a basis to the new Bill. I think, in many ways, this 

Bill is quite a substantial milestone in the story of educational progress in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The matter of assistance to students for various purposes in the province is not a new matter for this 

House. For a number of years we have had in operation in the province a plan shared in by the dominion 

government, whereby assistance has been given to university students, to students in training at our 

normal schools in the province, and to a lesser extent, to nursing school students. Perhaps I can best 

explain the situation by taking these in turn and breaking them down. 

 

The assistance to the university students has been partly on the basis of a loan and partly on the basis of 

a grant. For purposes of selection we use a selection committee which is made up of representatives of 

the university, a representative of the dominion government and representatives of the Department of 

Education. 

 

With regard to teachers in training, the policy for some time has been that the assistance has been given 

by the way of a loan and not as an outright grant. In this particular filed the selection committee is made 

up of officials of the Department of Education. 

 

With regard to nurses, the policy has been that the assistance has been an outright grant, and the money 

is provided on the basis of recommendations of the committee made up of representatives of the Nursing 

Association, the Hospital Association, and the provincial and dominion government. 

 

In general, the regulations of the federal government have, of course, governed our procedure. For 

example, with regard to the assistance to the nurses, there has been an award rather than a loan, and it 

has been limited to the amount of $100 per person. The assistance to the university students may be 

either a grant or a loan, and is usually a combination of both. There has 



 

March 21, 1949 

 

 
818 

been a further regulation that the amount of assistance is governed, due to the fact that the average 

amount of assistance given to any university student is not to exceed $300 per academic year. I may say 

that we have provided, during recent years, additional money from the provincial government over and 

above the amount needed to share the federal government’s contribution, so that we have been able to 

exceed the average of $300 per student. 

 

When the money, which has been loaned, is repaid, then the federal government, of course, is repaid its 

share on the basis of the 50 percent contribution. That is roughly the plan that has been in operation in 

the province for a considerable number of years; but it would be in order to express a few hopes with 

regard to that plan. 

 

I would hope, first of all, that the federal government would see fit to continue with the agreement. The 

agreement has been renewed on previous occasions; at the moment it is due to expire in 1950. I would 

hope that they would not only renew it, but I would like to hope that they be persuaded to expand. We 

hear a great deal from both Canada and the United States about the desirability and necessity of 

receiving federal government assistance to education. This is one branch of assistance to education 

which they have already been operating in, and I think we should express the hope that they will 

continue and expand it. 

 

There is a second hope that I would express, and we have this under discussion with the federal 

government, and that is, with the establishment of this fund, they might see fit to turn into the fund the 

amount of the money which students, who have had loans previously, repay, and which would otherwise 

be paid to the federal government. This may seem like an odd suggestion but I think we have some right 

in asking it, due to the fact that in some of the provinces in Canada the money has been made available 

on a straight grant basis. The student has not been required to pay anything back and, consequently, in 

those provinces the federal government will not receive anything back from the money which they have 

already advanced, and we feel as some of the provinces have proceeded on a joint loan and grant basis 

that there would be some justification for the federal government turning over to us the proceeds of such 

loans. 

 

Since the year 1944, the province has seen fit to increase the amount of money made available for the 

purpose of assistance to students over and above the amount required to match the federal government 

contribution. The contribution of the federal government has each year been some $20,000. We have 

matched that any have increased the amount in several ways. We have increased it for the general 

purposes of scholarships; we have provided some special scholarships. For example, the number of 

research scholarships have been made available each year. These have been limited, I think, to four, and 

have been valued at some $700 each during each year. This enables certain research to be done by 

certain students at the university in lines of research which are useful in developing the economy of the 

province. We have also made available each year, for a number of years, scholarships to assist people to 

take training as librarians. Each year we have had a selection made by a committee of the Library 

Advisory Committee of the province, and three of our Saskatchewan people have gone away to the 

eastern universities where they have been able to obtain training as librarians, and have returned to the 

province for that work later on. 



 

March 21, 1949 

 

819 

 

We have also given assistance to teachers attending summer school. Generally speaking this assistance 

has been given in those particular lines in which we want to particularly interest teachers. With the 

beginning of the Saskatchewan Recreational Movement in the province, there was a need for people 

who were trained in that type of work to assume positions of leadership throughout the country, and 

each year a number of scholarships have been given to teachers to encourage them to attend summer 

school to take that type of training. 

 

A similar situation has prevailed with regard to the training of teachers for the technical work, shop 

work, in high schools throughout the province. We have tried to give them encouragement in that way. 

 

Perhaps I might put on the record, Mr. Speaker, a few figures which will indicate the extent to which 

financial assistance has been given in the province. I would like to give them in three groups; the years 

1940 to 1948; and then a breakdown for the years 1940 to 1944, and a further breakdown of the first 

figure again for the years 1944 to January 31 of 1948, to break these contributions into the provincial 

and dominion contributions for those periods. 

 

With regard to grants to university students, which excludes loans, I am speaking now of the out and out 

grants: in the years 1940 to 1948 the provincial government spent a total of $125,501, the dominion 

government a total of $67,779; 1940 to 1944 that figure breaks down as follows: the provincial 

contribution was $24,449, and the dominion contribution was the same; for the period 1944 to 1949, the 

provincial contribution was $101,051, and the dominion contribution was $43,330. The House will be 

able to see that we have not only matched the dominion contribution in recent years, but have doubled it 

and more. 

 

The second category is that of loans which have been advanced to university students for the same 

period: for the whole period, 1940 to 1948, the provincial share was $71,448, the dominion share was 

$43,772; for the first part of that period, from 1940 to 1944, the provincial share was $9,120, the 

dominion share $11,620; in other words, more than the provincial share as they made some special 

money available that year. For the latter half of the period, the province provided $62,327 in loans to the 

university students, and the dominion provided $32,152. 

 

With regard to Normal School students, as I mentioned before, the money has always been advanced as 

a loan rather than an outright grant. From 1940 – 1949 – January 31 again – the province advanced 

$88,074, the dominion in the same period $21,450; 1940 – 1944, the first half of the period, the province 

advanced $11,967 and the dominion the same amount of money; for the period 1944 10 1949 the 

province advanced to Normal School students, in loans, $76,107 and the dominion $9,483. I want to 

draw to the attention of the House, Mr. Speaker, the fact that after 1945 the dominion government 

withdrew from the field of giving assistance to teachers. I think this is rather to be regretted. We 

protested at the time but they have continued to take the stand that they were not going to make money 

available for the purpose of assistance in teacher training other than for assistance when those teachers 

are at the university, of course, I think perhaps I might mention too, that at the moment we are 

advancing something in the neighbourhood of $8,000 a month to 



 

March 21, 1949 

 

 
820 

teachers in training at the Normal Schools, in an effort to make it possible for everybody to get the 

training who wants it, and we are advancing that amount of money. 

 

The third phase of the grants has been that which assists nurses in training. The amounts of money here 

are comparatively small: from 1940 to 1949 the total provincial contribution has only been $5,205, and 

the dominion contribution has been the same; from 1940 to 1944 the amount was $860 for both; for 

1944 to 1948 the balance of $4,345 for both the province and the dominion. It has been true almost 

every year that the money which has been appropriated, for this purpose has never all been used up. We 

are somewhat at a loss to understand why that is, but that has been the situation. If it is due to the fact 

that people are not aware of it, then I trust the members of the House will do what they can to emphasize 

the fact that there is assistance available there, although it is a plan which has been advertised widely. 

 

Naturally, as a result of having loaded this amount of money over the years, there are fairly substantial 

sums of money still outstanding. The province’s share of the amount of money outstanding to date 

amounts to something like $117,740; the dominion’s share in the neighbourhood of $62,723. 

 

That is a rough statistical figure of the money that has been used up to the present for these purposes. I 

thought, too, it might be of interest to the House if we could examine just what happens to some of the 

graduates of some of the colleges at the university. We frequently hear that so many of our students 

leave the province and, indeed, leave the dominion, and I am afraid that some people sometimes 

question the value of the expenditure of money on people who do not return to employment in the 

immediate locality. I think we must remember that, after all, these people are our own citizens and have 

the right to expect assistance and that whether they serve in their own locality or not, they, very 

frequently, are serving the needs of the province quite as much as if they were serving in our own 

locality. 

 

I have not the information, nor should I take the time this afternoon to give a complete breakdown with 

regard to all the graduates of all the colleges at the university, but I do have the information with regard 

to two of the colleges, the College of Education, for a limited period, and the College of Agriculture, for 

a longer period and I felt that the House would be interested in knowing just what happens to our 

graduates from these two very important colleges. It is true, also, that we gain graduates from other 

universities. I must repeat that while many do leave the province, many of them when leaving the 

province do also serve the province in many categories. 

 

In the College of Education, from the years 1944 to 1948, there were some 349 graduates. Of these, 246 

are now teaching in the province of Saskatchewan, 14 others are doing graduate work in other 

educational work in the province; nine of them have marred; some 20 of them have transferred to the 

province of British Columbia and when last heard of they were teaching there; some four of them have 

transferred to Alberta; one to Manitoba; two to the United States; on 31 there is no information. In other 

words, 75 percent of the graduates, during that period, are teaching in Saskatchewan, and 79 percent are 

doing educational work or teaching in the province of Saskatchewan. I think 



 

March 21, 1949 

 

821 

 

we might point out that, as an offset against the 47 graduates who are teachers and have left the 

province, we have had some 26, to our knowledge, graduates of other universities from other provinces 

come in to the province. 

 

The College of Agriculture has been able to compile a record of 373 of its graduates from 1915 to 1946. 

Obviously there were more than that, but they have a record of this 373. Ninety of these, or 24 percent, 

are employed by the government of Canada within the work of the P.F.R.A., and in other related and 

similar activities. I think here again we might point to the basis for federal aid, as many of these people 

do go into service which affects the Dominion of Canada as a whole. Some 62, or 16 percent, of these 

graduates occupy commercial positions in Canada, and 47 of this group of 62 are in Saskatchewan; 54, 

or 14 percent, are employed by the provincial governments, and I am pleased to note among that figure 

of 54, 44 are employed by the province of Saskatchewan; 27, or 17 percent of them are on university 

staffs in various parts of Canada. Again it is gratifying to note that 12 or our own graduates are 

employed on the staff of our own university; and some six percent are taking post-graduate work in 

various places in Canada and the United States. I don’t think we need to go on to develop that any 

further; there are a few miscellaneous positions in addition. 

 

In the College of Arts and Science, among the graduates, the information they have indicates the 

breakdown as follows: five percent of them are engaged in research, and here again we have people who 

may not be working in the province of Saskatchewan but who will be doing work that is valuable to the 

province; 14 percent of them are doctors; 9 percent have gone into the clergy; some seven percent are 

engaged in business and two percent are journalists. A number of them have even gone into the 

profession of politics, and I hope that is the proper term to attach to it. In the federal House at least six of 

the graduates of the University of Saskatchewan are members. I am happy to note, too, that five of those 

six are representatives of the C.C.F., one of them is a Conservative. There may be other; I hope I have 

not missed any out. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — It does not speak well for the training. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — In the provincial House, sitting in these benches, you will find some ten or 12 of us 

who are either graduates of the university or who have had some training at the university. Some 16 of 

our graduates are on the staff of the National Research Council. That, again speaks very highly for the 

type of training that people get at our own University of Saskatchewan. 

 

The proposed Act provides for a fund of $1 million to be used throughout the years for the purpose of 

provincial financial assistance to the type of student about whom I have been talking. The fund will have 

certain sources of income. There will, of course, be the interest on the $1 million. I would hope that the 

Provincial Treasurer will be able to invest this at seven or eight percent in order that we might have a 

goodly interest from that stake; secondly the Act is written in such a way that the repayments of loads 

which have been made previously or which will be made hereafter will come into the fund as a part of 

the working capital of the money there; thirdly, there will be the money which the dominion government 

has been paying each year, to the extent of some $20,000. For purposes of administration, it is proposed 

that 



 

March 21, 1949 

 

 
822 

that there be a committee comprised of the Deputy Provincial Treasurer, the Deputy Minister of 

Education and one other appointee. It will be the duty of this group to administer the financial aspects of 

the fund. 

 

We propose that the policy with regard to selection will follow the policy which I have outlined earlier 

this afternoon. In other words, for the purposes of the university students we will continue to utilize a 

committee made up of the representatives of the university, our own Department of Education, and with 

a representative of the dominion government insofar as they are interested in it. 

 

The Act also provides that a limited portion of the capital may be used in any one year. It is our hope 

that eventually the fund will be self-sustaining, and with this amount of money provide a fund and an 

income whereby we will be able to guarantee the opportunity for our young people to get university 

training. 

 

I think there is not a great deal more that I need to say with regard to the Act, and to the policy under 

which we propose to operate. I might make mention of one item with regard to loans. The loans, up to 

date, have been non-interest bearing loans. We propose that that policy will be continued, but we think 

there should be a time limit and, consequently, it will be our expectation that the loans will be 

non-interest bearing for a period of years which will give the student, or the graduate as he will then be, 

an opportunity to repay it. If the loan is not repaid within a reasonable number of years, then we think 

there should be some interest attached to the residue of the loan. 

 

During the years we have been able to give assistance in one or two special ways to certain students who 

perhaps are not strictly university students, but I think the House would approve of the use of the money 

for such purposes. I want to mention just three who happen to be in the field of music. These three 

people are three of our highly talented young people. As a result of the assistance we have been able to 

give them, one of them is now studying composition of music in Boston, is very talented; the reports we 

get of him from the institution where he is studying are very promising. One young girl is now studying 

in London at the Guildhall; again one of our very promising and able Saskatchewan people who has this 

opportunity to proceed with her training there. Still another is doing advanced work at Chicago. While 

these do not fit exactly into the usual university or teacher training category, as I say, I would hope the 

House would approve that this is a proper way to use, in limited amounts at least, this particular money. 

 

I think that all who have been acquainted with the fund would agree that the dominion-provincial plan to 

date has been of great assistance to a number of students. I have heard the President of our university say 

on two different occasions, one of them being the occasion of the graduation exercises at the university, 

that in Saskatchewan no student who is qualified for university entrance has had to be barred during 

recent years because of financial difficulties. I think Mr. Speaker, that is a record of which the people of 

the province may well be proud; that students who have been academically qualified for university 

entrance have been assured of the fact that they way to the university was not barred because of any lack 

of ability to finance. This plan will continue that condition, we hope, and will also tend to make it a 

more permanent feature. Consequently, I am very pleased to move second reading to the Bill. 



 

March 21, 1949 

 

823 

 

Mr. Patterson: — You spoke of some provinces where the entire assistance was by way of grant. How 

is it determined whether assistance will be a loan or a grant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, it is left to the provincial committee as to whether or not they make it 

all a grant or whether they make it all a loan, or whether they make it a combination of either one. 

 

Mr. B. L. Korchinski (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to make a few 

remarks in connection with this Bill No. 49 which is before the House at the present. 

 

This Bill proposes to set up a committee of trustees to administer a fund to provide aid to students in 

university and the teaching and nursing professions. The trustees are to receive and administer the fund 

provided by the dominion and provincial governments for a student aid. Now, I may say, that I should 

congratulate . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! If the hon. member is going to make some comments, would you let me 

propose the Bill first, please. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I would like to congratulate the Minister of Education for giving credit to the 

federal government for their share of the fund that they have been providing. An initial fund of $1 

million is to be established. Reference to this particular legislation was made in the speech from the 

throne. The Minister of Education, while speaking on the speech from the throne, referred to the fact that 

a number of speeches from the throne under the Liberal government made no reference to education. 

What I want to point out is that the programme of student aid at present in effect, and a good part of the 

programme to be provided under this Bill, is merely a programme started by the Liberal government in 

the year 1940, and on. The Liberal government made no reference to this programme in the speech from 

the throne; they simply put the programme into effect. The C.C.F. government now refers to the same 

policy in the speech from the throne, and I wish to say that if they are trying to create an impression that 

they inaugurated this policy, I would like to have these kind of tactics exposed. 

 

For the fiscal year of 1942-43, the Liberal government spent the sum of $42,000 to assist students in 

university and normal schools. The amount I have referred to will be found on page 130 of the Public 

Accounts for that year. The following year this policy was discontinued, and assistance was extended to 

nurses in training. In the session of 1944, the last session held before the election, the Liberal 

government asked the legislature to authorize an appropriation of $50,000 to be used for student aid in 

the fall of 1945. We have notice, when the Minister of Education was dividing up the various grants, he 

used 1940 to 1944, when it should have been to 1945, because, I think, he was trying to take credit for 

this government for that particular grant that was provided in 1944 by the Liberal government, and 

subsequently used by the C.C.F. after 1945. For that year the dominion government decided to 

discontinue participating in the provision for aid for the first year of university. Before leaving office, 

and in order to make sure that the provision would be available 



 

March 21, 1949 

 

 
824 

for assisting this class of student, the Liberal government passed an Order in Council for $10,000. When 

the C.C.F. government took office they had, therefore, been provided the sum of $60,000 to assist 

students. However, in the first year the C.C.F. government expended only $34,000 for student aid. You 

will find this in the Public Accounts of 1944-45. This amount was considerably less than the Liberal 

government had passed the preceding years. I want to say, however, Mr. Speaker, that the amount 

expended this year by the C.C.F. government has been considerably increased. 

 

When this programme was started in the year 1942 – 43, the Department of Education at that time made 

every effort to see that all students who were eligible had the opportunity of making an application. 

Publicity was given to the proposal in the past over the radio, in our high schools, and a circular letter 

was sent out to every grade 12 graduate for the last two or three years. Every student who made 

application and was eligible, that is, had a fairly good academic record and needed assistance, received 

student aid, so that no worthy and capable student was barred from university because of economic 

circumstances of himself and his family. The reasons no more students were assisted, and the reason 

why the government could not assist more students in its first year of office was that so many of our 

young, eligible people, both men and women, enlisted in the armed forces, and were otherwise engaged 

in other services. 

 

I wish to point out that it is not necessary to enact legislation to provide aid to students. This policy has 

been in effect without any legislation since it was inaugurated by the Liberal government in 1942. 

 

The other provision of the Act, that for establishing an initial fund of $1 million is a proposal taken from 

the platform of the Liberal party, adopted at its convention in 1946. This plank in the platform is as 

follows: 

 

In order to ensure that family economic circumstances prevent no young person from procuring the 

education for which he or she is fitted, there be established an adequate scholarship and load fund of at 

least $500,000 to assist worthy students to attend nurses’ training schools, high school, normal school, 

vocational or technical school and university for post graduate courses. 

 

I am glad, Mr. Speaker, that the C.C.F. government has seen fit in its wisdom to do two things: first, to 

continue in effect the programme of student aid which was started by the Liberal government; and 

second, to adopt that section of the Liberal platform which called fro the establishment of a special fund 

for this purpose. 

 

Premier Douglas: — We are just implementing your platform. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — They are trying to create the impression that because the fund is for $1 million, it 

would be passed in a year. That is not what is going to be spent in a year. It is a different thing to create 

a fund, and a different thing to use a fund. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. gentleman a question? Was it the intention of the 

. . . 



 

March 21, 1949 

 

825 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Does the hon. gentleman wish to answer a question? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — If I may go on I will answer the questions later. 

 

It has been the custom of the C.C.F. and the C.C.F. propaganda machine to take on themselves credit for 

a large number of matters established by the Liberal government. They also have a special technique: 

they use a magnifying glass and they tell the electors to look through that magnifying glass at the things 

they have done. 

 

I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that the electors of Saskatchewan are quite intelligent and able to 

decide for themselves the merits of any party. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — If the facts are presented in such a way that the electors have no chance to examine 

the actual facts it is difficult for them to judge. The C.C.F. government circulated widely over the 

Dominion a little pamphlet which had 25 facts about Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I must ask the hon. member to kindly confine himself to the Bill. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I was going to continue and tell you why I mentioned this. This pamphlet created 

the impression that the C.C.F. government – in the words of the pamphlet – is the first and only 

government to provide a fund; the matter referred to in that pamphlet. Quite a number of those reforms 

were in effect before the C.C.F. had got into power. I want to ask the government to be kind enough not 

to publish or republish that pamphlet, and to say 26 facts of first in Saskatchewan, due to this particular 

Act and fund as if they were the first to establish that fund, because I know it was mentioned by the 

Minister of Education that there was not student in Saskatchewan that was debarred from the university 

on account of lack of finances, and all the members on the other side were very happy about it, and, by 

this, I think they were thinking they were the first, that there was not student kept out from the university 

because they had no finances. 

 

When he spoke at Crystal Lake on July 13, 1947, the Premier gave his government credit for 

inaugurating the student aid programme. The statement which I am going to quote was taken down 

immediately the Premier made it, and it is not exactly word for word as he used it: ―Due to the policies 

of this government (meaning C.C.F. government) and for the first time in the history of this province, no 

child need be without a university education because of lack of finances.‖ As I mentioned before, this 

was done by the Liberals before the C.C.F. were in power. Possibly the Premier does not know any 

better, perhaps he did not know about this; he was either ignorant of the fact or he was deliberately 

misleading the people. 



 

March 21, 1949 

 

 
826 

The Premier and the other Ministers in the government like to indulge in this kind of tactic far too often 

for the good of their own reputation and for the good of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can say I am fully in agreement with this Bill, and I hope that when the fund is created 

the administration will be very generous so that our young people who need the help will get it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: —May I ask the question now: What I should like to ask the hon. gentleman, Mr. 

Speaker, is: if the plank to the Liberal platform in 1946 intended that set up to be used similarly to the 

fund being set up today. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I suppose most of it was to be used annually. I don’t think it was to be set up so that 

the interest earned by that particular money would be used for education purposes. I don’t think this is 

the best place to invest your money; to set up a big fund and have it earn interest and with that interest 

educate the people. It is not whether it is a fund of $500,000 or $1 million, it is what is actually going to 

be used in helping our young people. The only difference it will make, perhaps, is the interest that will 

accrue on $1 million. I doubt they will use $1 million in any year for helping students. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I really think there is nothing more to be said in response to what the 

hon. member has just said. I think it is a little bit bad, perhaps, that he introduced the kind of note he did 

in this kind of a Bill, but nevertheless that is his privilege, and his business if he wishes to do so. 

 

I want to say again that there is not attempt on our part, as far as I am concerned there has never been 

any attempt to detract from the amount of the assistance which the federal government has provided in 

this way. I do think it is a field into which they might put more generous sums of money and really do 

an excellent service to the cause of education throughout Canada. I do hope they continue to put money 

into it. They have withdrawn, in one of two ways; I mentioned the fact that they no longer assist in 

regard to providing teachers’ loans or grants. I think it is unfortunate, and I hope that does not indicate 

they are progressively withdrawing from this particular field. 

 

I was rather interested in the hon. member’s answer to the question of the hon. Provincial Secretary. He 

was pointing out that – accusing this side of the House of attempting to mislead people and son on, and 

when asked if this $500,000 was to be an annual amount or if it would be spent over a period of years 

his reply was: ―Well, I think . . .‖ I just wonder how he explained that one when he was asked the 

question out in the hustings, as to whether or not that might not be misleading. I wonder why, if it was to 

be an annual amount as he thought it might be, if should be called an Education Fund? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — May I ask the hon. gentleman a question? You have not stated how much of this 

fund you are going to use, and I think I am privileged and entitled to think. 



 

March 21, 1949 

 

827 

 

An Hon. Member: — Correct. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — You have not said how much you are going to use. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — That . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Let us have something . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Just a moment. Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asked me how much of this fund we 

expected to use. The amount we expect to use is going to be determined by the amount of need. It is 

impossible to put it down on a dollar for dollar basis. That is an entirely different thing than going out to 

the people and saying: ―I think it is to be $500,000 spent each year‖, to $500,000 spent over a period. It 

is entirely different. 

 

As I say, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we should get into arguments and discussions of that kind on a Bill 

of this particular type. We are, on this side of the House, proud of passing it and presenting it to this 

Legislature, and I think justifiably proud. I am quite sure that the people of this province, and the 

university students in general, will receive this as being one additional guarantee of the fact that they 

will be able to exercise their right, when qualified, to obtain maximum education. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — May I ask the hon. gentleman a question before we vote on this? The interest accruing 

from this fund in the first year would not create a very large sum. Now, have we any assurance that the 

student aid in this province will not be any less than the average student aid provided to the students 

over, say the past four or five years? Can we have some absolute assurance along that line? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I think the best insurance there is is the record of what this 

government has done previous to this year. The income is not merely interest, but it is also the amount 

of the federal contribution and the repayment of loans, and the act does provide, as I said in speaking, 

for a portion of the capital to be used in any one year. 

 

The motion was carried. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd moved second reading of Bill No. 63 – An Act to establish the Saskatchewan Arts 

Board 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill to provide legislation for the establishment of a Saskatchewan Arts 

Board. As some of the member of the Legislature will be 



 

March 21, 1949 

 

 
828 

aware, a board similar to that which is proposed has been in operation in the province for the last year. 

The board has operated under a very modest grant from the government, and we feel that its 

performance during the year is such as to warrant giving it statutory basis, and giving it some powers 

and scope in addition to what it has in operating just as a branch of the government. 

 

The Act, in addition to making it possible for the board to receive assistance from the provincial 

government, also makes it possible for individuals in the province, or organizations in the province, to 

make contributions to it, these contributions to be used for the extension and support of cultural 

activities throughout the province. It is the opinion of the members of the board, and our opinion, that 

there are many people and there are organizations in the province who will be pleased to make such 

donations to further this very important phase of our provincial life. 

 

Here again I should like to give something of a review of the work that has been done during the year, in 

order that we may have some vision as to what the board may be expected to do in the future. The board 

was established early in 1948, I think it was, under the chairmanship of Dr. Stewart Basterfield of the 

University of Saskatchewan and Dean of Regina College. The vice-chairman of the board was Mr. 

Harmer of Meyronne who is a farmer, and the other members of the board were as follows: Mr. Lindner 

of Saskatoon, Professor Jones of the University of Saskatchewan Drama Department; Dr. Carlyle King 

of the English Department in the university; Mr. E.A. Moore of Regina, Mrs. Hugh McKenzie of 

Biggar; Miss Long of Melfort; Mr. B.T. Richardson of Saskatoon; Miss Anna McClenaghan of Swift 

Current; Mr. Kenneth Davey of Prince Albert; Dr. Kirkpatrick who was, at that time, in charge of the 

Saskatchewan Recreational Movement in the province; and Mr. David Smith, the Director of Adult 

Education. 

 

I would like to pay credit to the services of these people for the fine work which they have done during 

the year. We have been particularly fortunate in being able to obtain the services, as Executive Secretary 

of the board, of Miss Norah McCullough. Miss McCullough is a graduate of the Ontario College of Arts, 

graduating with honours from that institution in painting. She has travelled in Europe, studied in 

England at the University of London, has worked in Capetown, South Africa. She did organization work 

at the Art Gallery there, and latterly lectured at the National Gallery of Canada in Ottawa. I do want to 

pay tribute to Miss McCullough’s work in this field. We expect that she will be continuing to guide that 

very excellent service in the future. At the moment there are some vacancies on the board. Mr. B.T. 

Richardson has left the province as you know; Miss McClenaghan and Mr. Davey of Prince Albert has 

also left the province, so there are some vacancies on the board that will have to be filled. 

 

I would like to give some brief outline of some of the projects that have been undertaken during the 

year. First of all, in the field of art, the number of art exhibits have been arranged throughout the 

province, and we have been fortunate in receiving the co-operation of the National Gallery of Canada. 

Some prints have been purchased from the Canadian Federation of Artists, and at one time we gave 

some assistance to the Saskatoon Arts Centre in sending out travelling exhibits from Saskatchewan 

artists. The distribution of this work has been in the smaller towns of the province, towns such as 

Lashburn, Fillmore, 



 

March 21, 1949 

 

829 

 

Indian Head, and so on. The work has been available to summer school students, and it has been on 

display at the Farmer-Labour-Teacher institutes which meet each summer in the province, and prints 

have been available to rural schools on request. 

 

We have been able to increase, by bulk subscriptions, the number of subscriptions to magazines such as 

Canadian Art. Later in the year the board financed the visit of a notable lecturer on Art Education for a 

series of lectures in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I might just at this time pass on to the House and the people of the province in general, and more 

particularly to some of my colleagues in the government, the hope that the government organizations 

and other public or private organizations might make more use of the talents of our local artists. There is 

a place for their work in murals and various public buildings, and so on. It is worthwhile, and certainly 

we should encourage and assist our own people in that way whenever we can. 

 

In the field of literature, in co-operation with the Saskatchewan Library Association, a list of 

recommended books has been prepared and has been distributed widely. I think most of us are aware of 

the fact that a great many people buy books and read books, but do like to have some guidance before 

they buy or select. It is felt that such a list will promote more and better reading. 

 

In the field of music, one of the most successful types of organization has been evident. Just recently a 

concert tour, again of many of our smaller centres, has been arranged for one of our talented young 

Saskatchewan artists, Miss Thelma Johannes. The procedure here is that local committees sponsor the 

tour, sometimes there is assistance by the field representatives of the Adult Education of Saskatchewan 

Recreational Movement. Miss Johannes has gone out to a number of Saskatchewan communities, and 

we have had most enthusiastic letters with regard to her performances, and in a number of cases requests 

that she, or some other artist of similar ability return at the soonest possible point. 

 

I might be pardoned, perhaps, Mr. Speaker, for paying tribute at this point to a member of the Arts 

Board, Mrs. A.B. McKenzie of the town of Biggar, who has been responsible for organizing this 

particular aspect of the work. In paying tribute to Mrs. McKenzie I would like to pay tribute to people 

like her all over the province of Saskatchewan who have spent so much of their time and much of their 

energy in enriching the community life in the province. One of the merits of the Arts Board is that it 

does make it possible for other communities to share in the value of this talent and energy of people like 

Mrs. McKenzie and other members of the Arts Board. 

 

In the field of radio, a listening guide has been provided to help in the selective listening in the province. 

Three of the radio stations – Yorkton, Prince Albert and North Battleford – are making use of selected 

discs, selected by the Arts Board and made available through the co-operation of school broadcasts. 

Assistance is given in the preparation of radio plays in the vicinity of Prince Albert and were presented 

over the Prince Albert radio station at the time when Mr. Davey was in charge of that station. 



 

March 21, 1949 

 

 
830 

Some of you will have noticed just recently a conference held in the city on handicrafts. This was 

sponsored by the Arts Board. I don’t suppose many of the members of the Legislature had an 

opportunity to see the collection of handicrafts that was there. It was an excellent conference and people 

came from all over the provincial, people of all walks of life, and all were enthusiastic and went back 

home with a vision of something greater that could be done. 

 

A sixth field in which this group has been active is the field of drama. During the year some of the 

members of the Legislature will have had the opportunity of seeing the plays presented by the group of 

university students. Two plays were presented, one of them written by Moliere and one by Shakespeare. 

This was not altogether, not even majorly, an activity of the Arts Board. It was arranged by this group, 

an organization of students at the university, in the University College there, but they were having some 

difficulty in financing and an initial grant from the Arts Board made it possible for them to get going on 

the project. Had it not been for such an initial grant they would have had quite considerable difficulty, 

and perhaps might not have been able to proceed. It is gratifying to know, however, that the initial grant 

was made, and the initial grant was entirely repaid to the fund when the plays were finished. 

 

That, more or less, describes the type of work that has been undertaken during the year. This is perhaps 

sufficient to give some indication as to what can be done with a very small amount of money, and some 

central organization and some central direction. 

 

The board has a number of very worthy objects, and there are a number of very excellent possibilities. 

Here again I should like to mention one of the objects, which is to give an opportunity for our own 

Saskatchewan artists, in all fields, to have some practice in all the fields. We need to do more of that 

kind in order to encourage our local talent. 

 

The board is concerned primarily also with the smaller communities in the province. The larger city 

communities are able to provide this type of enrichment for themselves. Many of the smaller 

communities find some difficulty without some assistance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we might now pause and think for a moment as to what these sort of activities do 

mean. I should like, for example, to underwrite what better roads and rural electrification and the other 

various amenities of life mean to people in a rural community. We are all very concerned in keeping the 

people in the rural communities. One of the ways in which we can make a very real contribution towards 

keeping people in these smaller communities is to give them opportunities to see some of our better art, 

drama, and to have access to the best of literature and similar opportunities. 

 

I said in the beginning that the organization was planned with a view to extending the work performed 

during this year, and to making it possible to broaden the base of the support of that work. Provision is 

made in the Bill for the establishment of a board to be appointed by the government to continue this 

work. It will be our plan, in appointing the board, to make it as the board was last year, representative of 

the various groups in the province, who are interested in the advancement of this work both from the 

point of view of 



 

March 21, 1949 

 

831 

 

producing and from the point of view of consuming. The Act does make possible that certain people and 

certain organizations may make grants to the Arts Board to be spent for these purposes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. A.G. Egnatoff (Melfort): — Mr. Speaker, in speaking on this Bill, I would just like to say that 

personally I feel that it is definitely a stop in the right direction, and I do wish to congratulate the 

Minister of Education for introducing this Bill before the House. I am naturally interested in the work of 

the Arts Board, and I was glad that Melfort happened to be represented on this Board in the person of 

Miss Long, a collegiate teacher in that town. I would just like to take this opportunity of paying tribute 

to her. 

 

When I say that this is a step in the right direction, I am mindful of the general trend of the development 

of our Canadian way of life. It seems as if in the early stages of our development we have been primarily 

concerned with people who could o things, people who could produce the goods. It is now a time in our 

national development for us to focus more attention on the cultural side of our life, and it is very 

encouraging indeed to see that creative art and creative music and literature, drama, handicrafts, are now 

coming to the forefront in the public eye. It is necessary to have these cultural aspects of our 

development because, on the whole, we are spending fewer and fewer hours in our daily routine, and 

unless we can have the cultural side of our life developed, the time which we receive from shorter 

working hours would be ill-spent and, may I say, ill-advised. 

 

The work of the Arts Board in encouraging young artists, and when I say artists I am referring to the 

various phases of the fine arts, is very much needed. Anyone who has had any contract with young 

musicians, young painter, knows only too well that they have a very difficult row to hoe. It is difficult 

for them to become established in their particular filed because of the demand hitherto being so small, 

and, therefore, without any further remarks, Mr. Speaker, I want to pay this tribute to the work of the Art 

Board, and to say that this is a step definitely in the right direction. 

 

The motion was carried. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11 o’clock p.m. 


