



















































Hansard: March 14, 1949


753 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Eleventh Legislature 

 

Monday, March 14, 1949 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. Mr. Fines: 

 

That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday, before the House adjourned, I was just expressing my 

appreciation to the various members for their kind remarks in reply to the budget address, and I do 

appreciate them very much. I don’t take it as any great credit or honour to myself, but rather to the 

government for, after all, the budget document is simply the financial proposals, not of the Provincial 

Treasurer, but of the government as a whole. 

 

I cannot say, Mr. Speaker, that I agree with all the things that have been said on the other side; for 

example, the statement of the hon. gentleman who referred to me as being an “orthodox capitalist 

financier, introducing an orthodox capitalist budget”. I am not sure whether I can take it as a compliment 

or not. I think it was probably meant that way, but I certainly cannot agree with his description. Strange 

to say, the same gentleman, before he sat down, said that even though it was an orthodox capitalist 

budget, he was not going to vote for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say I am disappointed in the lack of criticism. During the debate, a number of 

members devoted a good deal of time on what was supposed to be criticism of the budget, and yet there 

was only one person who made any real criticism of the budget at all. I personally feel somewhat 

slighted as I put a great deal of time and energy into the preparations of this document. We started last 

September and worked at it constantly until it was tabled in the House the other day. It took a great deal 

of time; but I wonder, after having listened to all the various members, if it really was worthwhile. Is it 

really worthwhile to prepare a somewhat lengthy document, outlining the financial position of the 

province, and then find opposition on members talk about everything except what is contained in the 

budget address: 

 

There has been no constructive criticism, and there has been just one theme-song all through the week, 

and that is: “The budget is too large, and we must reduce it.” I apologize, Mr. Speaker, to my hon. friend 

from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) as he did suggest we should take the education tax off farm fuels. I 

want to thank him for that very constructive suggestion. Six months ago he was out on the platform 

suggesting we should wipe the education tax off everything; but now he has got it down to where he 

would be quite satisfied, and would be more inclined to support this budget, if we took it off just farm 

fuels. On the other hand, the chief contribution to the debate of his seat-mate, the hon. member for 

Cannington (Mr. Patterson) was that he would reduce the “frills”; he would wipe out the Budget bureau, 

the Planning Board, 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
754 

and would cut in two the amount expended on the Public Service Commission and the Bureau of 

Publications. If he couldn’t’ cut those in two, he would be willing to resign his seat. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

that is not a very big stake for him to have to put up when it is about three-quarters gone already. I might 

say in passing that what we would save by the suggestions made by the hon. member for Cannington 

would just about equal what it would cost if we carried out what was suggested by the hon. member for 

Arm River. Those two just about balance out. 

 

One of the things that has stood out in this debate is the lack of constructive criticism. The same old 

speeches we had in the election campaign were given over and over again here in this House, last week. 

I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the people throughout this province are getting awfully tired and 

fed-up on words. It is actions they want. The people throughout the province are getting tired of 

listening to long speeches. In this debate we had five speeches from the opposition members, each of 

which was over one hour, to say nothing of those in the previous debate. People are getting fed-up on 

arguments going on back and forward between members of the House as to who won the election. The 

people in the country know perfectly well who won the election. That was settled 'way back in June, and 

there are nor more brains in this Assembly than there are scattered throughout the province. The people 

are quite capable of reading the result of the elections for themselves. 

 

I think, too, the people are getting fed-up with all this talk about communism and about the failure of the 

government in business. They are getting fed-up about all these false rumours of people leaving the 

province, about driving business out of the province, of taking farms away, or usurping the authority of 

the Legislature, and of the terrible roads in Saskatchewan. The people can see the roads. If the roads are 

bad, my hon. friends don’t need to say anything about it, and if the roads are good the people in the 

country can appreciate it. I think, Mr. Speaker, we are wasting a lot of words in this House telling the 

people of Saskatchewan things they know a great deal more about than we do. 

 

The people are also getting tired of all such talk as we heard the other day from the hon. member for 

Humboldt (Mr. Loehr), to the effect that if a C.C.F. government were elected, it would be the last 

election. Such utter nonsense. We have listened to that kind of statement for so long the people are 

getting tired of it. People are getting fed-up on all this talk of how the Liberals could provide cheaper 

hospitalization in Saskatchewan, when they know that out in British Columbia they are charging, not 

$10 but $15, plus a three percent sales tax. 

 

They are getting fed-up on all this talk of communist propaganda in the schools. I am going to sincerely 

suggest to the hon. members in the opposition that they do this House and the people of Saskatchewan 

the courtesy of preparing a new speech; these are becoming shop-worn. We have heard them so often I 

think the people are getting fed-up. 

 

What is it we expect of an opposition? First of all, constructive criticism; secondly, alternative policies, 

clearly and forcefully expressed; thirdly, intelligent questions to keep the government on its toes, and 

intelligent questioning of all monies spent or to be spent. One of the things that has been very noticeable 

in this debate is the lack of discussion by opposition members of any alternative suggestions. 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
755 

The former Leader of the Opposition, the member for Cannington (Mr. Patterson), said that I introduced 

a political note into this debate, the first time a Provincial Treasurer had ever done so in a budget 

address. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that that was done deliberately, carefully, and after much thought. I 

introduced into that budget something that might be construed as political and something which I knew I 

might be severely censored for by my hon. friends opposite, but I did so because I wanted to get on the 

records of this House a statement from them of what they intended to do. I pointed out in my address 

that if we worked out the taxes proposed by the members of the opposition, and if we introduced the 

various services or some of the new services they proposed, there would be a deficit of $35 million. Mr. 

Speaker, not one single member in the opposition challenged that statement; and yet I have no doubt 

they will go out of this House, out on the public platforms and deny it. This is the place, in this 

Assembly, where there should be a constructive, alternative policy proposed. We were entitled to that 

courtesy. We did not get it. 

 

There is altogether too much talk on the other side about cutting taxes and, at the same time, reducing 

expenditures. I have no doubt that a great many of the hon. gentlemen attended the convention that was 

supposed to have been held the other evening. Mr. Reid, who was the guest speaker on that occasion, 

said: 

 

We have been accused of bribery by spending, but there is nothing worse than bribery by promises 

that cannot be fulfilled and must be forgotten after an election . . . You hear speeches in the country 

and the House of Commons, advocating greater expenditures for a variety of things, including social 

services. At the end of these speeches, these people advocate a reduction in taxes. Anyone who has 

experience in administration at any level of government knows that it just cannot be done. You can see 

proof of this in your own civic government. 

 

 

These are very wise words from the hon. gentleman, and yet the members of his party in this province 

have been guilty of going throughout the length and breadth of this province and building up the hopes 

of the people that they can have their taxes reduced, and at the same time they can spend these enormous 

millions of dollars. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — That is the way you got elected in the first place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — I want to say to the hon. Leader of the Opposition that he had ten days to get up on 

his feet and tell us how he was going to do it. Instead of that, he wants to sit in his seat this afternoon 

and yell across the way. He had his opportunity and filed to take it. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Go and lecture your own people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I would like now to deal with some of the statements made by the 

various members. First, I should like to start with the former Leader of the Opposition, the hon. member 

for Cannington (Mr. Patterson). I would like to congratulate 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
756 

him on his speech. I thought it was very good, but, after all, why should it not be a good speech as we 

have heard it now for the fourth time. After you have given a speech that often, it either should be good, 

or you should quit giving it. 

 

His criticisms, very general, were the same. I can take you back two years ago to the published speeches 

of the hon. gentleman, in which practically the same thing was said in practically the same way. I would 

like, first of all, to answer his statement about the government spending money without the vote of the 

Legislature. Mr. Speaker, there has never been a dollar spent without the vote of this Legislature. He 

referred, for example, to two Acts. The first was the Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Fund, under 

which he says money can be expended without this Legislature knowing the first thing about it, and 

without any reference to the representatives of the people, and that it is entirely within the control of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council. Then he went on about the Industrial Development Fund, which says: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may borrow on the credit of the province up to the sum of $2 

million, and when that money has been so borrowed the Industrial Development Fund has, subject to 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council, the authority to spend that money to pay expenses. 

 

In both those cases the government came before the Legislature. We said to the Legislature: “We want 

$5 million for the purpose of reconstruction and rehabilitation in this province.” We came to the 

Legislature and said: “We want $2 million for industrial development within this province.” The 

Legislature voted that money for us. Therefore, how can we spend money without a vote of the 

Legislature when we have already that vote? 

 

I would like to remind my hon. friend that other provinces, such as the neighbouring province of 

Manitoba, where they have a Liberal-Conservative Administration, and British Columbia, where they 

have a Liberal-Conservative Administration, when money is voted in this way in the ordinary estimates, 

the vote does not lapse at the end of the year. I think possibly that is one thing we should correct in our 

whole system of financing. When we undertake to provide a certain amount of money for capital 

expenditure, it is not always convenient to spend the money during that year, and yet we have to come 

back, year after year, and have that money re-voted. That is one of the reasons our proposed 

expenditures for capital development has been higher than the amounts actually spent. In these other 

provinces the vote does not lapse at the end of the fiscal year. So I think it is too bad that my hon. 

friends should try to give the impression to this House, and to the people of Saskatchewan, that the 

government is spending money that has not been voted by the Legislature when already the Legislature 

has voted that money and has given us the authority to spend it at any time we see fit. 

 

The hon. gentleman referred to what is good business practice. He stated that individuals engaged in 

business try to conduct their operations on what might be called a business basis. That is, in prosperous 

times, they endeavour, first, to retire debts, if they have them; second, to increase their assets; third, to 

lay aside reserves for the future. He then suggested the government should do the same thing. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I think we have qualified pretty well there as being operators of good business practices. We 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
757 

have reduced the debt by some $70 million – it is true a portion of it was my hon. friends’ reduction in 

the early part of 1944, but from the end of the fiscal year, 1944, to the end of December, 1948, the 

public debt has been reduced by $70 million, which is a very substantial reduction, considering that it is 

the first time in the history of the province there has ever been any substantial reduction in the public 

debt. 

 

The second good business practice was to increase the assets. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have in my hand 

Public Accounts for 1943-44; I also have the Public Accounts for 1947-48, and it is more interesting to 

notice the increase in the assets. For example, in 1943-44, “Public Buildings and Public Improvements” 

was $56 million; in 1947-48, this is up to $65 million, an increase of $9 million during that period of 

time. “Sinking Funds” have gone up from $24 million to $42 million, an increase of $18 million during 

the same time. “Cash in Banks and Investments”, 1943-44, $10 million; 1947-48, $15 million, an 

increase of $5 million in round figures. There, Mr. Speaker, taking three times alone, we have increased 

the assets by $32 million. Lay aside reserves? Yes. When I took over the “Sinking Fund” there was $24 

million in it in 1943-44; today there is $42 million, an increase of $18 million. If that isn’t setting aside 

reserves, I don’t know what is. 

 

We were told, also, during the discussion by the former Leader of the Opposition, that actually we have 

not reduced the debt at all, and that there was an actual increase of $4 million in the debt this year. I 

want to say again that while the gross debt is up by $4 million, the sinking funds have gone up by $5 

million, and therefore your debt is reduced by $1 million. If it would satisfy my hon. friend, I could 

arrange tomorrow to have that $4 million wiped out. It is held in debentures, issued to our own Sinking 

Fund, which will mature on March 31, 1949. There is a total of some $7,250,000 in that category. Then, 

the next year, there was some $6.4 million in that category, a total of over $13 million of debt which is 

owing to our selves. It has gone, on the one hand, to build up the gross debt but, on the other hand, it has 

also gone to build up the Sinking Fund and, therefore, your net debt is not affected thereby. If this had 

been some new member of the House I could forgive him for making statements like that’ but I cannot 

forgive a man who has been the Provincial Treasurer throughout these years, a man who understands 

and knows where that debt is, and who gives the impression, by making the definite statement, that the 

debt has not been reduced but is actually up $4 million when he knows the statement is not true at all. 

 

Then he points to the increase in interest of some $600,000. Again, Mr. Speaker, who gets that interest? 

That interest is coming back to ourselves. On this $13 million we have in the Sinking Fund, the entire 

amount of the interest comes right back to ourselves. I think my hon. friend should have known that. I 

point out, too, that a great deal of the debt that has been incurred is self-liquidating. Power, for example: 

in 1944, the total indebtedness was $7.7 million; in 1948 it was $18.7 million – an increase of $11 

million in the Power debt which is completely self-liquidating. 

 

My hon. friend went on to point out that each department shows an increase in expenditures. Yes, that is 

practically true: two departments I think had a reduction. But, Mr. Speaker, inflation is something which 

affects all departments. No one can escape it. When it hits a country it hits every 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
758 

individual in it. And so, not because of any policy of this government, but because of policies of the 

government at Ottawa, this inflationary policy has been allowed to go forward with the result we have to 

pay more for everything we buy. Whether it be labour, or supplies for the various institutions, it costs us 

more today than it did one year ago, because of the increase in the cost of living, and the decrease in the 

value of the dollar. 

 

I would like to point out that an increased budget is not something which is prevalent in Saskatchewan 

only. It is true in every province of Canada and every state of the Union. I am not going to quote them 

all. I could – I have them a yard long if my hon. friends would like to have them. Let us take some of 

our neighbours. In 1943-44, British Columbia’s expenditure was $30.35 million, this year it is $92 

million, an increase of 204 percent; Alberta, 1943-44, $21,654,000, this year $66,659,000, an increase of 

208 percent; Manitoba, $18,315,000 and now it is $36,213,000, an increase of 97 percent; 

Saskatchewan, in 1943-44, $29,799,000, this year $56,500,000, an increase of 89 percent. In the other 

western provinces, 204 percent, 208 percent, and 97 percent; yet in Saskatchewan, our increase during 

the same period of time is only 89 percent. So this is not something which affects Saskatchewan alone; it 

is something which affects people in all parts of the Dominion. 

 

I was interested in what the former Leader of the Opposition said about the frills. He said: “We have an 

Economic Advisory and Planning Board that is costing us $55,000; a Research Council – strange to say 

we have never heard anything about it; the Bureau of Publications jumped up from $34,000 to 

$120,000.” I would like to say just a little about these frills for a few moments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Economic Advisory and Planning Board: It is quite true the previous administration did not have 

one, but, after all, if you are not doing anything, why do you need to make any plans? Today, throughout 

the whole democratic world, planning boards are recognized as a very essential part of government. 

After all, we were spending large sums of money, and $55,000 to be spent on the future economic 

development of the province may prove to save millions. I would like to tell my hon. friends some of the 

things the Planning Board is studying at the present time: land tenure, land use, farm credit, power rates, 

federal highway aid, provincial revenues, consumer service, government statistics, rural electrification, 

natural gas, physical planning and superannuation. There, Mr. Speaker, is a list of 12 subjects the 

Planning Board is giving some thought to at the present time. 

 

The Planning Board is made up, partly of members of the government and partly of outsiders. One of the 

ways we study these is through setting up working committees on each of these subjects, to do research 

work and present any recommendations to the government. One thing I would like to emphasize is that 

the Planning Board has absolutely no executive authority whatever. They made no decisions. All they do 

is to advise the government. 

 

The next thing is the Research Council. My hon. friend has never heard of it. Well, he should have been 

watching his votes a little closer last year because this was included, and there was considerable 

discussion. We told the House the set-up. This Research Council consists of a number or people who are 

experts in various fields. The university is represented on it. We have no big research laboratories here 

so what we usually do is get the university to do the work. 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
759 

Might I take a moment to just mention some of the subjects which will be studies this year, on which 

research will be done. First of all, Briquetting, drying and the solvent extraction of lignite. I don’t know 

what will come of it; perhaps nothing, On the other hand, it may ultimately mean a big industry in the 

south-east part of the province, possibly a government industry and possibly a private industry. This 

information will be available for private industry some day. Secondly, Lloydminster asphalt airblowing, 

chemical nature of lignite, research on Saskatchewan clays, study of water hardness, utilization of 

volcanic ash, poultry nutrition, hereditary factors in egg quality, housing research, cellulose, fertilizers, 

animal nutrition and genetics. These are subjects with which, obviously, the members of the government 

are not competent to deal. They require trained chemists and scientists; and so this money, for the most 

par, will be spent in payment of fees, for services rendered, to the university or the Research Council: 

$32,000 for that, which my hon. friends refer to as a frill. I would say there is one thing wrong with this: 

it is not nearly large enough. If there is any place we should be spending more money, it is in the field of 

research. 

 

Then we come to the matter of the Bureau of Publications. The hon. gentleman suggests he could 

operate this with one-half the vote. Well, I notice in Manitoba, for example that last year they had 

$131,040 for their Bureau of Publicity and Travel. This year they have jumped it up to $204,140, an 

increase of some $70,000, while we in Saskatchewan are going to try to get along with what we had last 

year, $120,000. 

 

Then my hon. friend refers to the Civil Service Commission as a frill; that the expenditure is up 800 

percent from what it was in 1944-45. Well, what was the situation in 1944-45? We had one man, Mr. 

Turner, and three girls in the office. They received applications for jobs, and they interviewed those who 

came to the office. They kept records of any appointments made by the various departments. Now, one 

thing I would like to emphasize is that except for very minor positions, the appointments were made by 

the department, not by the Public Service Commission. 

 

What is the situation today? Today we have a classification system, the purpose of which is to analyze 

the duties and responsibilities of all positions in the service so that similar positions may be grouped 

together in various classes. Then there is a “pay plan”, which recognizes and ensures the principle that 

people doing similar types of work receive similar pay. 

 

When we made the survey we found some most interesting things. We found cases where two people 

were doing exactly the same work, one would be getting $110 a month, and the other would be getting 

$190 or $200 a month for doing exactly the same job. That is all cut out. I am very interested when the 

hon. gentleman suggests this is a frill, one of the things he would do without. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Civil Service Association will be very interested to know that this is one of the things his 

party feels they could get along without. They will be very interested in knowing that. 

 

There is some criticism of the number of civil servants. In June, 1944, without counting Power and 

Telephones, there were 3,099; today there are 4,735, an increase of 1,636. Two years ago I had the 

privilege of visiting a naval base out of Seattle. In that naval base there were a number of large 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
760 

warships – it was after the war was over. The man with whom I was, pointed to one large ship. He said: 

“You see this big ship? During wartime there were 2,000 people on it, today there is one man on it.” It 

was going places; it was fighting a battle and it took 2,000 men to operate it; but when it was lying at 

anchor it did not need anybody on it. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly the same. When you have a 

government doing nothing you do not need many people to operate it. In our mental institutes in 1944 

there were 720 employees; today there are 1,190 – 720 to 1,190; of course, that includes all the mental 

institution. I understand some of the hon. gentleman visited the institution in Weyburn last week. I am 

sure, after going through it, they would not want to put themselves in the position of the employees who 

worked there up to 1944-45, who had to work 12 hours a day, six days a week, in some instances seven 

days a week, as they had only every other Sunday off. I am sure, too, they wouldn’t want to see a 

situation where there was one attendant in some of those large wards. Yet my hon. friend suggested the 

other day that we should get rid of all these people who have been appointed by this government. The 

hon. Leader of the Opposition verified that when speaking last summer, during the campaign. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I did no such thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Oh yes you did. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I certainly did not. On a question of privilege, Mr. Speaker, I said no such thing. I never 

suggested we could get along with the same number of civil servants as we had in 1944. I say I never 

suggested any such thing, and the hon. member is stating something that is not correct. I ask that he 

accept my word on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I will accept the hon. gentleman’s word because I have no alternative; 

but I am going to suggest to him that when statements of such importance as that are published in the 

Regina Leader-Post, which purported to quote him, and they are not correct, he should issue a denial at 

the time. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, I deny such a statement was quoted in the Leader Post of anything I said. I 

challenge the hon. member to produce it. He is not accepting my word. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I will… 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member who is speaking did accept your statement. He is now 

referring to an article in The Leader Post. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — He is trying to say, Mr. Speaker, that I was quoted in The Leader-Post as having said 

that, and that I did not deny it. I say I challenge him to produce it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — I shall do so before I am finished. I will send out for it. 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
761 

Mr. Speaker, may I again point out that in the Department of Agriculture there were 162 employees, 

today there are 252; Natural Resources, up from 185 to 252; Health Department, up from 124 to 263. 

What would my hon. friends have us do? Go back to the days when we had probably 10 public health 

nurses in the province? Or in the Department of Social Welfare, go back to the position we found in 

1943-44 when there was not a single trained social welfare worker employed by the government? The 

hon. gentlemen criticize the increase in staff of the civil servants, and yet they have not the backbone to 

get up and say where they would cut the number of servants. They have not the backbone to get up and 

tell us that they would go back to the 72-hour week; or discharge these public health nurses, or fire all 

these trained social welfare workers. And yet my hon. friends would fire all these C.C.F. appointees. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — It is a different matter altogether. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — and I want to say, Mr. Speaker, he admits . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I did not admit it at all, Mr. Speaker. The hon. member cannot put words in my mouth. 

I did not say I would fire all the civil servants taken on. I repeat, I said I would fire all the C.C.F. 

workers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — No, I did not say . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — “All C.C.F. appointees”, and that means all people who have been appointed since 

this government came to office. I want to say here and now . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Appointees are . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — There is a lot of talk about political appointments. I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that there are political appointments. We have two types of appointments: those made by the Public 

Service Commission and those made by Order in Council through the Cabinet, which consist of very, 

very few. I want to tell my hon. friends that we have no intention of appointing people to responsible 

positions – Deputy Ministers, heads of board, heads of commissions, responsible positions of that kind – 

who are going to sabotage us and cut our throats. We have not intention of ding that at all. 

 

On the other hand, in the case of employees appointed by the Public Service Commission, the matter of 

politics never enters into it. If there is any one criticism I have had more than any other, it is that there 

have been too many people belonging to the Liberal party appointed to these positions. 

 

I would like to point out that the reason for the increase in civil servants is the increased activity. There 

is nor increase in the number of civil servants where the amount of work is the same. On the contrary, 

there is a very 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
762 

great reduction where we are carrying on routine work such as in my own department. For example, in 

the Taxation Branch, there were 142 in 1943-44, today there are 132; There were 61 in the Treasury, 

today there are 53; in Municipal Affairs, 55 in 1943-44, today there are 53; in the Attorney General’s 

Office there were 34, today there are 28; the Land Titles, notwithstanding a 50 percent increase in work, 

there were 136, today there are 141; Court House, there were 97, today there are 86. It is only where 

there are more activities being carried on that it was necessary for us to engage additional employees, or 

where we found employees were working an extremely long number of hours and we had to reduce 

them to comply with modern hours of work. 

 

Mr. Deshaye: — May I ask the hon. Minister a question? Did I understand you to say the number of 

employees in the Land Titles was reduced? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — No, I did not say that. I said the work has gone up 50 percent, and the increase is 

from 136 to 141. Those are the figures. 

 

Mr. Deshaye: — That is a very small increase, and I was wondering why there should be a substantial 

increase in Land Titles fees when there is that small increase in employees. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, the question of Land Titles’ fees has nothing to do with the number of 

employees. 

 

The other day the hon. member for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) referred to the number of inspectors found 

running around. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, he must have got mixed up with some of the federal inspectors 

like Unemployment Insurance inspectors, family allowance inspectors, radio inspectors, income tax 

inspectors, P.R.R.A. inspectors and so on an so forth. 

 

There was some talk here the other day about the 20 or 30 people who have been prosecuted under the 

Hospitalization Act, but there were 606 prosecutions in the province of Saskatchewan for radio licences. 

There were 63 prosecutions in Saskatchewan of people who had not paid their income tax. 

 

Another frill that was attacked by the hon. member for Cannington (Mr. Patterson) was the Budget 

Bureau, which is operating on a budget of $27,000. He may not know it, but I would like to tell him that 

a Budget Bureau is today to be found in practically every modern government organization on this 

continent. I am very proud of what we have done with such a very small staff. We have already won one 

international award – the first year we were in operation. The hon. gentleman suggests that we should 

leave the preparing of the budget to the Treasury. I would like him to know the Budget Bureau is part of 

the Treasury. It is attached to the Treasury. I have here a report from the Select Standing Committee on 

Estimates in Great Britain. It is a very interesting document, Mr. Speaker. It point out – I might say that 

the Budget Bureau over in England is referred to as “Organization and Methods” – “O. and M.” In 

Ottawa they are considering setting up such an organization, and have been making some enquiries as to 

what we are doing here. This is a very interesting report: 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
763 

The ideas behind ‘O. and M.’ are not new. Some were put forward by the Macdonnel Commission 33 

years ago. It was not until 1942 that the Treasury ‘O. and M.” Division was created. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the preparation of the budget is only part of the work of the budget bureau. The other 

is to deal with the organization and methods in the government’s executive machinery. They go into 

different departments, when asked by the different departments, to try and find ways and means of 

increasing the efficiency of operation and the mechanical operation of those departments. We have been 

able to make some very substantial savings. I can tell my hon. friend that they have already made 

sufficient saving in methods of operation that their salaries will be paid not only for this year, but for the 

next 20 years. 

 

Again, I would like to refer you to this Committee report from England, to show you the type of thing 

they do. For example: 

 

During the last year over 50 assignments have been undertaken by the Treasury Division at the request 

of Departments . . . . The reorganization of the system of issuing passports by using 1,600 Labour 

Exchanges spread all over the country, instead of concentrating the work in London, Liverpool and 

Glasgow. This, while providing a more convenient service for the public, enables a passport to be 

obtained in 48 hours and, as the same time, has resulted in a reduction of Passport Office staff from 

1,100 to 700, without causing an increase of staff in the Labour Exchanges. 

 

Reducing the staff by 400 people. I could go on and give you dozens of examples along the same line to 

show you the value of such an organization – and for a mere 20-odd thousand dollars. 

 

The hon. gentleman referred to the matter of debt reduction. Again it is the same explanation he gave a 

year ago. At that time I attempted to answer him, but evidently it did not sink in. The same old speech, 

Mr. Speaker, that the reason the debt had been reduced was because of monies repaid by the farmers on 

farm loans, because of monies repaid by the Wheat Pool, because of money returned by the Telephones 

and money returned by Power. I would again remind him that during the years his government was in 

office they were collecting these identical amounts, and yet, did he reduce the debt? No. In addition, this 

government has spent over $25 million on capital account. He talks about the money being paid by 

Power and Telephones, but it is not one-quarter of what we have given to them. Notwithstanding that 

fact, we have still been able to reduce the debt. 

 

General statements have been made to the effect that the C.C.F. and socialism will result in communism. 

I have no criticism of anybody who sincerely believe Arm River (Mr. Danielson) went on to criticize the 

League for Industrial Democracy, and referred to it as a communist organization. Such a reference as 

that shows a complete lack of understanding, and a tendency to brand any organization with which he 

disagrees as communist. The honorary president of this organization is John Dewey, a well-beloved 

educationalist of the United States, a man on whom one cannot cast any aspersion, a man 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
764 

who has devoted his life to the cause of building up democracy in education, a man who is opposed to 

everything with any dictatorial tendencies. This grand old man, who will be celebrating his 90th 

birthday this year, has been connected with this opposition and was one of the prime founders of it. The 

vice-president is Mr. M.J. Coldwell, and I want to say that anybody who accuses him of communism 

had better do it outside of this Chamber. One of the directors is Mr. Gordon King, who at present time is 

engaged by the C.B.C. In view of the statements made by the hon. Prime Minister, I am sure that if there 

was any communist blood in him, he would not be engaged by the C.B.C. at this time. 

 

The regrettable thing is that this is not confined to the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) 

alone; that same attitude is noticeable in the remarks of other hon. gentlemen. Take the hon. member for 

the Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) the other day, when referring to the U.F.C. The Leader-Post reported him as 

saying: “The U.F.C. was purely and simply a communist organization, organised by the Internationale.” 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that you, as one of the founders of the U.F.C., will not appreciate too much 

those remarks of the hon. gentleman; nor will hundreds of others appreciate them very much. The same 

gentleman said: “In 1929 the Wheat Pool held wheat back from the market because of communist 

influence, thereby losing the British market and causing the ruin of western Canadian farmers. Later the 

board of directors changed.” I am sure 75 or 80,000 members of the Wheat Pool will be very interested 

in that remark from the hon. member for Saltcoats, that their leaders were people of communist 

influence. I am sure the United Farmers and the members of the Wheat Pool will not appreciate very 

much that remark made by the hon. gentleman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to recommend to each of the members opposite, particularly the members for 

Arm River and Saltcoats – yes, and even their Leader, it will be good for him – that they invest $1.25 in 

the last issue of Fortune magazine. In this issue there is an article written by Eric Johnston, and all 

members know that Eric Johnston is no socialist. He was former president of the United States’ 

Chamber of Commerce, and now is president of the Motion Picture Association of America, so we do 

not need to tar him with being a communist because he utters these statements. The article is called 

“How America can avoid Socialism”. He said: 

 

If we ever get socialism here in America it will be, in large measure, the fault of the American 

businessmen. When British voters kicked out the Conservatives and put in the socialists three and a 

half years ago, they were not choosing between free enterprise and socialism. They didn’t have any 

such choice. Free enterprise, as we know it, didn’t exist in Britain. The voters had a choice between 

monopoly and cartelization versus nationalisation. 

 

And then there is another little bit which is very good: 

 

As a businessman, I am very proud of the growing social-mindedness of business, but I am thoroughly 

conscious, also, that business is still doing penance for its opposition to social-economic reforms. We 

didn’t find much of industry in the cheering section when one piece of social legislation after another 

dropped into the hoppers of Congress and the State Legislatures. We in business were against 

workmen’s compensation; we were against minimum wage legislation; against insurance of bank 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
765 

deposits, social security, parity prices, legalized collective bargaining. Social legislation, we insisted, 

would lead to socialism. 

 

I think that sums up only too well how we are going to avoid communism in this country; that is, by 

removing those things that will cause communism: removing insecurity; providing our people with 

jobs; providing our people with housing; providing them with a full dinner-pail. Those are the things 

that will keep communism out of Saskatchewan. That is why I pray to God that never again will we 

have a Liberal government in this province that will allow those conditions of insecurity, 

unemployment and poverty to exist; because that is the sort of thing that brings about communism. 

 

It is also stated, over and over again in this House, that we have lost money in our Crown 

Corporations. I want to say that these statements have been made not only in the House but outside the 

House. I have here a copy of the Kamsack Times for March 3rd, signed by John G. Banks, M.L.A., in 

which he says: 

 

Underneath the bravado of the government there is a definite uneasiness. The much-lauded Crown 

Corporations have not been doing well. The government is unable to hide this fact further from the 

people. Instead there is talk about ‘problem children’; the Fish Board, the woollen mill, the 

government tannery have already been closed. 

 

The Fish Board, the woollen mill, the government tannery have already been closed. 

 

The sodium sulphate plant at Chaplin, with an investment of $3 million, is closed for want of orders, 

and will not, in the opinion of those who know, be opened again. The bus lines are in distress, and 

the brick factory at Estevan, after an expenditure of $150,000 to winterize, has been closed, and is a 

white elephant that will be shortly be shelved. The people of Saskatchewan should be informed that 

over $6 million invested in the enterprises carried on by the government is lost, except for a little 

salvage on the sale of them; that as operating business or businesses they are a failure and cannot be 

operated at a profit under public ownership. Those great traits of leadership and misrepresentation 

possessed by the government leaders cannot keep that fact buried any longer. 

 

That is signed by John G. Banks, M.L.A., in a letter to the editor of the Kamsack Times. This 

gentleman owes us an apology to this House for such statements that are utterly ridiculous. He refers, 

for example, to the Fish Board, as already being closed; to the woollen mill being closed; the tannery, 

it is true, is closed at the moment, the only one of the three that is. The woollen mill is doing a 

tremendous business, operating at full capacity with a full staff, and disposing of the products as 

rapidly as they have been able to turn them out. That is the situation there, and yet he has the audacity 

to deliberately falsify the situation and make such a statement as that. 

 

Then he goes on: “The sodium sulphate plant is closed for want of orders and, in the opinion of those 

who know, will not be opened again.” 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
766 

Another utterly ridiculous statement. The sodium sulphate plant is going at full capacity with one or 

two carloads of sodium sulphate being shipped out every day. There is not a chance in the world of 

that industry being closed; and yet here he is saying it is closed and not going to be opened again. He 

refers to a $2 million investment, which is twice as much as the actual fact. 

 

Then too, “the bus lines are in distress”. Well, Mr. Speaker, the bus lines, are from being in distress, 

are operating, insofar as the roads allow them to, very satisfactorily. We never intended to make 

money on theses, and they are paying their own way. 

 

Then he says: “The brick factory, after an expenditure of $150,000 to winterize, has been closed, and 

is a white elephant that will shortly be shelved”. I want to say to the hon. gentleman that brick factory 

looks today as though it is going to be open for a long time to come. There are sufficient orders on 

hand to keep it going for two years. Never since we started have the prospects for that particular 

industry been as rosy as they are at the present time. That is the kind of stuff these gentlemen peddle 

around the country. If they are going to put that in the paper while the House is in session, what will 

they say when they get out to the backwoods, in the school houses? I think this hon. gentleman owes 

an apology to the House and if he has one decent spark of humanity in him he will get up and give it at 

once. 

 

It has also been stated by hon. gentlemen opposite that the larger school policy has resulted in reduced 

enrolment, and that the voters would turn it out. That is what the hon. gentleman for Humboldt (Mr. 

Loehr) said the other day. What ate the facts about enrolment? Let us look at facts and figures. In 1941 

to 1944, there was a decrease of 816 enrolled in Grade XI; from 1944 to 1948 there was an increase of 

236 enrolled in Grade XI. In Grade XII, in 1941 to 1944, there was a decrease of 1,077, and yet from 

1944 to 1948 there was actually an increase of 368. That does not look as though enrolment was going 

down in the high school grades. 

 

What about total rural enrolment for all grades? In 1941-1942, we had 111,026; 1944-1945, 93,000, a 

reduction in the last three years of Liberal administration of 17,979, or 1.6 percent. In 1947-48 this has 

gone down to 81,841, a reduction of 12,000 or 1.3 percent. In other words, Mr. Speaker, in the last 

three years of Liberal administration there was a 5,700 greater reduction in the number of youngsters 

in our rural schools than there were in the first three years of C.C.F. administration. 

 

What about closed schools? In 1941-41, there were 397 and after three years of Liberal administration 

there were 713; 316 closed in that three-year period. What about the last three years? 870 were closed 

in 1947-48. Actually a total of 157 schools were closed in the three years of C.C.F. administration, but 

316 under the Liberals or twice as many schools were closed in the three years the Liberals were in 

office. 

 

I wonder if the hon. gentleman for Humboldt really meant what he said the other day when he said: “If 

a vote were taken at this time it – the larger unit – would be defeated.” What does the Minister of 

Education in Manitoba say about the larger unit; a Liberal member, Hon. Rhodes Smith, the brightest 

man they have in the government, what does he say about it? This is what he says: 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
767 

The large school has been the source of many arguments in this province. We, in the department 

believe the large school area has definite advantages over the small school districts operating as a 

completely separate unit. These advantages are more apparent in the high school level. My own 

opinion in this regard is based partly upon the studies made by and briefs submitted to the 

Legislative Committee on Education some four or five years ago, the great majority of which 

support the large area, apparently on the grounds that every brief submitted also strongly supported 

the large area. Partly, also, on the more practical ground that in the provinces of Alberta and 

Saskatchewan, where the large area has been introduced and has been operating for some years, 

there seems to be no disposition to revert to the old independent small district. 

 

That is what the Minister of Education for Manitoba said. Of course, my hon. friend from Humboldt 

(Mr. Loehr) may know more about it than the Minister of Education of Manitoba. 

 

Take a look at something else then. Here I have, in the issue of The School Trustee for January of 

1949, an article by Mr. L.A. Dowling of Engelfeld, on the larger unit. It says: “Humboldt, a Larger 

Unit in action.” I wish I had time to read the whole article, Mr. Speaker. He points out in this how 

conditions have improved; how there is a new spirit abroad, a spirit of hope and optimism and 

geniality; and he goes on to talk about the improvement in sanitary conditions in the schools; for 

teachers – the application of a schedule, professional books and pamphlets that are provided, and the 

helping teacher engaged to assist those persons starting out in life; how they have a circulation library 

there, which has proved to be very popular, and how they are building up a professional library for 

teachers. Then, too, about the great improvement in buildings; how 14 percent of all classrooms have 

either been replaced or remodelled since 1946. 

 

Reading this article, by someone who knows something about the larger unit in Humboldt, would not 

give much indication that there is very much danger. I am going to suggest to these hon. gentlemen 

that instead of criticisms like this, let us get behind this thing. We all recognize the larger unit to be 

something which is in the best interests of education. Let us make it work. I had a letter today from a 

gentleman, commenting on these radio broadcasts. He said: “I wish you had told the people in the 

House how one of the larger units in my district has been a failure. I enquired what kind of trustees 

they had and they were all Liberals. They are doing everything they can to sabotage it. In the next 

district where they have all C.C.F. trustees, the district is going ahead.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to suggest to these gentlemen that they forget their politics. Politics is 

all right with adults, but when you start using politics to destroy something for the benefit of the 

children, then I am sure my hon. friend for Qu’Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Dundas) agrees that it should 

not be done. I would say that the attitude of the Liberal party, while they have not the courage to come 

out and say they are against the larger unit, is that they would destroy it, and they are seeking to 

destroy it today. I am confident that the people of this province will be able to see the advantages and, 

notwithstanding all the political propaganda, will reject any suggestions that we should change our 

method of school administration. 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
768 

It has been said here, very frequently, that we are spending a lot more money on education. Well, we 

are, and thank God for that. It is time we were spending more money on education. No longer are 

teachers working for four, five or six hundred dollars a year. Today they are getting decent salaries. 

This inflation has hit education just as it has hit everything else. I would like to point out that in 1927 

five percent of the net farm income was used to pay the schools in the rural municipalities; in 1930, 

seven percent; in 1947, only three percent. Recently a 20 cent per bushel bonus for wheat marketed 

from 1945 to 1948 was distributed which will amount to around $115 million. Mr. Speaker, on the 

basis of the amount of money spent in rural schools in Saskatchewan over the last four years, that 

additional payment will be sufficient to cover all the school taxes for 15 years. 

 

We talk a lot about the increase in school taxes. I have not heard these gentlemen talk about the 

increase in the price of farm fuels. In 1945, using 100 as an index for 1939, the price of farm fuel was 

105.6; for 1946, it jumped to 110; for 1947 to 117; for 1948 to 133: an increase of 27.9 percent. We 

spent on farm fuel, oil and grease in 1945, 17 million. The increase in the cost of farm fuel is 

approximately $5 million, but the increase in school taxes, in the same period, was only $2 million – 

less than half as much. Yet we do not hear much talk about the increase in farm fuels. 

 

I am sorry the hon. gentleman for Athabaska (Mr. Marion) is not here. I was leaving some of this until 

he came back, but he has evidently gone for the day. He said that the north had voted against 

compulsion. Well, I do not know. I often think back to those years prior to 1944, and think of the 

compulsion there was at that time, and I think of the freedoms there were. Yes, there was freedom all 

right. There was freedom for the children of that great north country to go without an education. The 

trappers of the north were free to the extent that they had little choice in selling of their furs other than 

selling them to the trader, the unscrupulous trader who took a very large share of the profits. Likewise, 

the people of the north had little or no choice as to where they bought their supplies. They had 

absolutely no control whatever of the prices they had to pay for them. The hon. gentleman spoke of the 

closing of Canoe Lake. Well, this lake was ‘frozen’ insofar as frozen fishing was concerned, by the 

normal regulations. It was closed for fresh fishing by special permission. After two and one-half 

months of fishing, with 26 fishermen, the catch amounted to only 1,000 lbs. per fisherman for the two 

and one-half months. This is a clear indication that the fish in the lake be been depleted, and it has 

been recommended that the lake should be closed for at least three years in order to get the fish supply 

built up again so that we can go ahead with commercial fishing in that particular lake. 

 

May I point out that the situation in Saskatchewan with regard to fishing is apparently a great deal 

better than it is in Manitoba. Our fishermen in Saskatchewan have very little fish left on their hands. I 

would like you to compare this situation with the one in Manitoba, pictured in the Winnipeg Tribune 

of March 8th. Here we have: “Lake fishermen face ruin.” I am sure the Leader of the Opposition is 

very interested in this. A wire was sent: “Manitoba fishermen face disaster. Cannot dispose of winter’s 

catch at any price”. They sent a delegation to the provincial government asking for financial 

assistance. “Majority of winter catch, according to fishermen, has been turned over to packers who are 

keeping it in storage at the fishermen’s expense until a price 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
769 

is set. They can’t get credit at the stores; they can’t get money fro their fish: they owe the company for 

advances. ‘We are broke’, they say. One of the men estimated his winter operations had cost $1,768: ‘I 

have 40,000 lbs of fish, which was an exceptionally good catch. If I get five cents, I will break even.’ 

They are looking for new jobs.” A very heart-rending story, much worse than anything that has been 

given in this House about the conditions in our Saskatchewan fishing. The only difference is, Mr. 

Speaker, that these statements were made in Manitoba with a view to doing something to try to help 

the fishermen, while statements are made in Saskatchewan with a view to embarrassing the people 

who try to do something to help the fishermen. 

 

The Saskatchewan Fish Board has taken the matter up with the dominion, through the Federal 

Fisheries Support Board, and at last they have taken action, but it is not going to help us much. The 

price which they are going to pay, F.O.B. Winnipeg, is so low that when transportation and other costs 

are deducted there will be nothing left for the fishermen on the lakes of northern Saskatchewan. It is 

becoming evident that the Saskatchewan Fish Board, although it lost money, has served the fishermen 

of Saskatchewan very, very well. When the figures are all added up and the truth is known, it will 

probably be found that a great deal more has been spent to look after the situation in Manitoba than we 

will lose on our Fish Board here in Saskatchewan. 

 

There has been a great deal of talk, too, during the debate, about the lack of mineral development in 

Saskatchewan. It is always a great thing, if you do not do anything yourself, to shout so loud you will 

take the attention off that lack of doing anything. That is about the situation here. The records show 

that in 1932, when we had a Conservative government, a few students were sent out with field officers 

of the department. There is only one report, of some investigation on oil seepage, on record. Only one 

report throughout all these years. In 1933 the government did give some assistance to drilling. In 1934 

some assistance was given to a dominion survey party; but from that time right through until the 

present government came into office nothing was done to try to help the mining industry of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Yet today we find we are getting for the people of Saskatchewan something out of the mineral 

development. The previous administration gave practically everything to the companies that drilled it. 

For instance, $205,000 was the largest amount of royalties taken by the previous government from the 

Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company; today we are getting bout $1.5 million. 

 

Compare that with what was done in 1948. We sent three geological parties out to work in the 

pre-Cambrian area. Their reports will be published and will be available to prospectors and others 

interested in mining development. The one geologist is located at Flin Flon; another party worked on 

the plains, and there are more university students out than have ever been out before. 

 

All this talk of driving business out. Here we have the Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company 

putting up a new $6 million plant at Flin Flon. More claims were staked in 1948 than in any previous 

year in the history of Saskatchewan. Several companies took out mining concessions and, by so doing, 

are committed to spend nearly $500,000 on exploration and development. Since 1944 the total mineral 

development of this province has increased by over 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
770 

50 percent. The same is true in oil exploration: real progress has been made. I was very interested in 

the chart shown the other day by the Minister of Natural Resources. This shows the natural gas permits 

in 1943-44, and you will notice it is just Imperial Oil and a very few other companies. But at the 

present time you can see the whole western part of the province is staked out, not by one company but 

by dozens of smaller companies. It is a very interesting chart which shows quite clearly that the 

department is doing something to get development going here in Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1944 the total value of oil produced was about $1,000, while today it is about $1,250,000. In 

uranium, greater progress has been made in Saskatchewan than in any other province in Canada. If my 

hon. friends doubt that let them read the Quebec Miner for January 7, 1949, which says: 

“Saskatchewan is advertising itself as the uranium province, and rightly so. During 1948 more 

discoveries of uranium were made in the northern part of Saskatchewan than anywhere else in the 

Dominion.” 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Are you taking credit for that too, that uranium is in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Certainly, we are going to take credit for assisting these people in exploration work. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — God put it there, not you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — The exploration parties were organized by our department, and were the ones who 

discovered it, not the ones organized by the Dominion at all, as my hon. friend is suggesting. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — It was there when the Liberals were in. He thinks we put it there. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Your minister is taking credit for it being there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I have spoken altogether too long. I have criticized others for speaking 

at some length, and I have done even worse myself. 

 

There has been a great deal said by speakers discussing the budget about its size, and about the very 

considerable sums of money which are being spent by the government to carry out its programme. 

Emphasis has been on the budget only in monetary terms. That is absolutely necessary; yet I believe 

emphasis should not be placed so much on the dollars and cents involved in the budget as upon what we 

are going to achieve as a result. After all, a budget is simply a monetary interpretation of a designed 

policy, and a discussion of budget in money terms alone is meaningless unless it is coupled with an 

understanding of the policies it is designed to achieve. 

 

I would like to emphasize that there is no inherent virtue to be found in a large budget, and not criticism 

can be levelled against a large budget as such. Similarly, there is no particular vice in a small budget or, 

for that 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
771 

matter, is there any special virtue in a small budget. It is no irrefutable quality of efficiency in a budget 

that it is small, for there can be waste and unwise management in the very smallest expenditures; nor is 

it a sign of efficiency simply because a budget is large. 

 

Criticism of the opposition that the budget is too large – and remember that has been the refrain for the 

last four years – is about as meaningful as that there are too many children receiving and education in 

our schools; or that there are too many automobiles owned by the people of the province; or that 

Canada, with 12 million people, is overcrowded. What the Liberal party and its members have never 

been able to recognize is that changing times demand changes in the needs of our people, and the 

changing needs require extended services and additional care. To rail and rant against the size of a 

budget is to criticize the needs of the people, or at least to ignore them, and that is something this 

government will never do. 

 

We should view the budget not only in monetary terms but also in human terms and their satisfaction. 

That is the test this government will always apply to its budgets, because it is a government committed 

to a principle that human beings are more valuable than good and chattels; that man’s health is more 

important than money, and that the nation’s welfare is rooted not in its banks and its industries and 

corporations, but in its men, women and children who build the future. It is the needs of our people 

which have received first priority in this budget, and it will be with the object of continued improvement 

in the health, well-being and happiness of our people as a whole that our succeeding budgets will be 

presented by this government. 

 

It is not of first-rate significance that we are spending $570,000 on cancer treatment, or $1.4 million on 

hospitalization, or $12 million in welfare work. That is not the important thing. What is of importance is 

that a humanitarian approach is now being taken to meet the ordinary, everyday problems of John Jones 

and Mary Smith, the former on his quarter-section of land and the latter in her office, because in our 

view the principal purpose of government is to help to make life just a little more liveable, a little 

happier and a little fuller than in the days of laissez-faire to which the Liberals would have us return. 

Interpreted in these terms, the budget moves some distance in fulfilling the government’s objective, and 

the people’s as a whole. 

 

Ten years ago, this country was shocked in September when we heard of a great war. At that time the 

leader of the government at Ottawa called upon all the people of Canada to rise up to fight against the 

forces of aggression. People responded to that call. It made no difference what their politics were, 

whether they were C.C.F., Liberal or Conservative or Social Credit; they all responded to the call – and, 

according to the votes, more C.C.F. than any other party. Be that as it may, the records are there to speak 

for themselves. What I am trying to point out is: we rallied to that call of the dominion government. 

When it came to putting up money for Victory Bonds, people of all shades of political opinion 

responded; when it came to doing war work of any kind, people of all shades of political opinion 

responded. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan another war is being waged, a war against insecurity, and it is a war that is not 

made up only on one battlefront; it is a war that is extending over many different fronts. The battle is 

being fought 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
772 

on many fronts and we are going to have to win many battles before we finally win that war. What are 

some of those battles we are fighting today? We are fighting a battle to try to get our economy 

diversified; we are trying to get our oils and mines developed. It is a battle to try to develop irrigation in 

this province; to try to get the agriculture industry stabilized; a battle to try to increase production; a 

battle to try to fight off the grasshopper menace; a battle to try to overcome these drought conditions due 

to which this province at the present moment is facing a very grave situation; to try to overcome 

fluctuating prices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is important, far more important than the fortunes of any political party. I want to 

appeal today to the members opposite to join with us in this battle, and just as people of all shade of 

political opinion responded to their call to battle in 1939, so in 1949 I am going to urge that they get 

behind us to try to build a bigger and better Saskatchewan. Let us have an end to all this talk about 

people leaving the province in hordes. Let us have an end to all this talk about government confiscating 

industry. Let us have an end to all this talk about taxing industry out of business. Let us have an end to 

all this talk about dictatorship, communism and all that stuff. Let us get together and try and see if, 

instead of doing those things which are keeping business out of the province, which are keeping the 

people from coming in here and helping us to develop it; instead of hindering this development, let us 

try to see if we cannot work together to build up the province. Now, I am sure if the hon. gentlemen 

would do that – forget their politics, forget the fortunes of their political party for the time being, and 

think of the good of Saskatchewan – it will be a better province for all of us. 

 

I now have the clipping referred to earlier, the hon. Leader of the Opposition was outlining the platform 

at Ituna, and he concludes that he would bring about the ‘saving of between $4 million and $5 million by 

dismissal of C.C.F. hirelings and their retinue from the civil service and restoring it to its previous 

members.” 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what I said. I claim the right to explain what I said. The 

hon. member said that I would dismiss all the people the C.C.F. had hired. I said I would dismiss the 

C.C.F. appointees of this government; in other words, the C.C.F. hirelings. That is not all the people 

appointed by the C.C.F. What I said was correct, and the hon. member should withdraw what he said 

against me. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. member how he could go back to the former 

figure without firing all the people hired by the C.C.F.? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — The hon. gentleman has just confirmed what I said. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You can’t wiggle out of that one. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — There is no greater wiggler in Saskatchewan than the hon. Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 



 

March 14, 1949 

 

 
773 

The question being put, it was agreed to on the following division: 

 

YEAS — 28 

 

Douglas (Weyburn) Murray Dewhurst 

Wellbelove Thair Stone 

Benson Darling Erb 

McIntosh Howe Kusiak 

Brockelbank Douglas (Rosetown) Denike 

Fines Williams Swallow 

Corman Gibbs Willis 

Lloyd Heming Buchanan 

Brown  Walker 

Gibson  Larsen 

 

 

NAYS — 19 

 

Tucker Dundas Loehr 

Marion Woods Banks 

Loptson Trippe McDonald 

Prince Egnatoff Deshaye 

Culliton Korchinski McCormack 

Patterson  Blanchard 

Danielson  Lofts 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11 o’clock p.m. 


