



















































Hansard: March 09, 1949


656 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Eleventh Legislature 

 

Wednesday, March 9, 1949 
 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o‘clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. Mr. Fines: 

 

That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair. 

 

Mr. L.M. Marion (Athabaska): — Mr. Speaker, I am certainly proud of being here, representing the 

people of Athabaska. I am also proud of speaking to you, Sire, in your second term in this Legislature. I 

intend to take you on a little trip. We will start in at Meadow Lake and go down river, and eventually 

land where I believe some of our greatest lakes are, and that is in the Athabaska constituency. If you 

should happen to be in Meadow Lake sometime, I certainly would think it a great pleasure, or any 

member of the government, to take them down the river. I imagine, as far as bringing them back is 

concerned, the air service would do that. 

 

We would, first of all, arrive at a settlement called Beauval, on the Beaver River. Not far from there is 

quite a lake. We call it La Plonge Lake, on the map. A little bit south of there, about 20 miles, we would 

land at Dore Lake, and to go back down the river, we would eventually be at Ile a la Crosse Lake. From 

Ile a la Crosse Lake we would go down to Deep River; Deep River to Clare Lake; Clare Lake to Buffalo 

Narrows; Buffalo Narrows to Large Beaverpond Lake; Large Beaverpond Lake to Portage la Loche. 

This would be heading north-west. If you were going straight north you would land at Cree Lake, and, 

eventually, Athabaska. 

 

I have explained to you what lakes we have on our route. I intend to go into the fish business. First of 

all, we will stop at Dore Lake. There is quite a filleting plant there. At one time, I believe, the 

government was negotiating to buy that filleting plant at Dore Lake. I think they have changed their 

minds; I am not sure. However, this Dore Lake is not a small lake, and the people of Beauval and La 

Plonge used to go fishing on that lake. The last five years there has been what you would call a 

monopoly on Dore Lake. The White Fisheries have a filleting plant there. They take out all the fish they 

can in the summer, consequently there is very little limits left for winter fishing. The same thing applies 

in Buffalo Narrows. I don‘t know why any one company should have, what I call in my language, a 

monopoly. This company buys this fish at a very cheap price in the summer, and when it has gathered 

approximately two-thirds of the limits in the summer, they can afford, in the winter, to raise the price of 

fish, and that is what has been going on. 

 

In regard to the Fish Board, the Fish Board has not operated extensively in my country, Athabaska. It 

has to a certain extent at Canoe Lake. While I am speaking of Canoe Lake, here are some of the prices 

the Fish Board has paid for fish: January 4, for large ―A‖ whitefish, ten cents a pound; for pickerel, nine 

cents a pound; jacks, three cents a pound. This is frozen fish. The other companies, at that time, were 

paying 12 cents for an ordinary 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
657 

―DW‖ whitefish, and 16 cents for a large whitefish. In other words, six cents more. As far as the pickerel 

is concerned, there was a spread of three cents, which the private enterprise was paying over the Fish 

Board. The jack, three cents more than what the Fish Board was paying. While on the subject of Canoe 

Lake, Mr. Speaker, while these people have not realized the price they should have had for that fish, 

here is the best I have heard. Here is a letter, and if you will allow me I will read it. It is dated February 

19: 

 

A delegation of Canoe Lake Indians and Metis called here for the purpose of voicing their objection 

to the closing of commercial fishing on Canoe Lake. It would appear that only a small portion of the 

limit has been taken. The licenced fishermen must certainly want to continue fishing until the full 

limit has been reached. Many add that this fishing is a vital issue to their economy. The winter fur 

season is about over, and there will be no income until April 1, when the muskrat season starts. I 

presume the reasons for closing the lake is that the Fish Board representative operating there finds he 

cannot handle the fish to his satisfaction. Canoe Lake is one of the category ―A‖ lakes, and those 

holding licences certainly should have the privilege of continual production until the limit is taken. 

Should it be that the Fish Board finds it cannot handle the fish, they should not object to other 

dealers operating. As mentioned above, the income from fishing is so vital to the Canoe Lake 

residents. Kindly look into the matter and advise at your earliest convenience, as these fishermen 

wish a reply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is not enough that this socialist government has trimmed my people, and then they will 

not let anyone else buy fish when they will not buy the fish. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Was that letter addressed to the hon. member for Athabaska? 

 

Mr. Marion: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — What did you do about it? 

 

Mr. Marion: — I am telling you now. I have found out in my time it is no use to talk to you. I think, 

Mr. Speaker, the gentleman there asking me that question should take a note of this letter, and see that 

Canoe Lake is opened for anyone to buy there, or any other lake in the province. We all know that the 

Fish Board has operated under a $94,000 loss. 

 

We will now go down to Buffalo Narrows. As I stated before, I am here because the people wanted me 

to be here to tell the government that what they have been doing in regard to fish is not the wish of the 

people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — In fillets? 

 

Mr. Marion: — The Hon. Minister of Natural Resources said in my constituency where fish filleting 

plants are located, the C.C.F. holds a heavy vote. Is that not right – Buffalo Narrows? 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
658 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, that is not what I said. 

 

Mr. Marion: — One such plant, the fish filleting plant of the White Fisheries, is situated in my 

constituency, located at Buffalo Narrows. A few days before the election the government decided to 

build airstrip, and do a little improvement in the village of Buffalo Narrows. I don‘t know the exact 

number of bulldozers and B.G.‘s and what have you, they had, but I know this much, that 90 percent of 

the people capable of working were on the payroll of this government scheme at the time just before the 

elections. I told these people: ―you boys get everything you can out of this government, and get here 

while the gettings good, because it will not last. About three or four days after the election, Buffalo 

Narrows will be as dead as it has been.‖ And it is today. I do not know why, just before an election, the 

government should make such a fuss over Buffalo Narrows. I don‘t know; I cannot figure it out. 

 

But I can tell you of another little story, and this has nothing to do with fish. The government may have 

thought we were all fish. I had an old friend of mine come to me and tell me that he was being bothered 

by everyone around there – by ‗everyone‘ he meant the C.C.F. It was an invasion we had in Athabaska, 

and they were after him. I said: ―Bill, how many vote have you that you control. We will get down to a 

business based to this.‖ He said: ―I control 30 votes.‖ I said: ―How much are they worth apiece?‖ He 

said: ―I don‘t know.‖ ―Well, I said, do you need a road any place? I can‘t get a road for anybody up here. 

Do you need a road?‖ ―Yes, Marcien, he said, I need a road to my hay meadow.‖ Well, I said, you go up 

there and you will find, I think, that you will get your road to your hay meadow.‖ I told him where to go, 

and who to go and see, and he did. Mr. Speaker, he got the job as foreman on a road from his house to 

his hay meadow, and had the sum of $250 to spend. Just the other day he told me that the road was not 

finished, and he needed a bridge. Well, I said, he‘d have to wait until the next election as far as I was 

concerned. I don‘t think it is as large as the Saskatchewan Bridge we were listening to a little while ago. 

However, we had a lot of fun in that campaign, a lot of fun. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I‘ll say you did. 

 

Mr. Marion: — I sure did, and I enjoyed every bit of it. 

 

I am going to speak now for a little while on the Fur Marketing Service. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Did we build your hospital just before the election too? 

 

Mr. Marion: — I don‘t know. I believe the hospital at Ile a la Crosse was there before the hon. 

gentleman was Premier. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Buffalo Narrows too? 

 

Mr. Marion: — I believe there is now a hospital at Buffalo Narrows. Is it not a dispensary? 

 

In regards to fur, you know it is a funny thing, but every time we open our mouths up north, with regard 

to this Fur Marketing Service – the compulsory 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
659 

service they impose on us – they mention the Wheat Board. Well, I don‘t know more about wheat than 

. . . I never grew a bushel of wheat in my life. I do know, as I have here the cost of, the operation cost of 

the wheat Pool boards and, as far as I can make out, it costs the farmer 1.4 cents per bushel for the 

Wheat Board to handle their wheat. That is not too much. Another thing, anytime the farmers did not 

want the Wheat Board they could just walk out of it, they would not have to pay any attention to it. They 

just need to ask for it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He is trying to kid you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Marion: — Now, we have come down to a few facts. I have a list here of 66 muskrats sold by 

Alphonse Canning, a trapper of Ile a la Crosse. Here is the deductions: 25 cents for lotting fees, express 

$1.30, advance, so forth and so on, $9.14, and here is a beauty, deduction for Department of Natural 

Resources, share of proceeds, $60.91 out of $182. Mr. Speaker, that is 39 percent. I can inform the 

Minister of Natural Resources that this is Saskatchewan Fur Marketing receipt 09229. Here is another 

one that is just as bad, and I have a lot more: 09228. It seems funny to me that the government has to 

take so much out of our ―rats. 

 

Another thing is: I was very fortunate in getting a copy of the agreement between Ottawa and the 

government in regard to fur conservation projects for the north, and I read the thing from one end to the 

other, and there is not one paragraph or clause where it says that it is compulsory for us to sell our ‗rats 

to the province of Saskatchewan through the Fur Marketing. And this is what has been going on. 

 

I sincerely hope, Mr. Speaker, that what I have said to the government will help to make them find a 

different policy for the people of the north. We voted against compulsion, and, surely, I sincerely hope 

that we will not have to put up with it again, or keep on having it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not support the budget. 

 

Mr. A. F. Swallow (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, in making a trip one to my own constituency over the 

weekend, I find that more people are listening to these broadcasts than ever before. They express 

themselves as appreciating these broadcasts as they have the opportunity to listen to the speeches on 

both sides of the House, and then they can arrive at their own conclusions, and I am sure they are 

arriving at conclusions. They seem to feel that, although the opposition has increased greatly in 

numbers, the constructive criticism has not increased, only in volume. I was asked who was the member 

with the very loud voice who interrupts very often, and who does not seem to know the rules of the 

House. I had to tell them that it was the hon. Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Tucker. 

 

I believer that the people, as we are here in this House, are coming to the conclusion that many of the 

services they are having and have received from this government over the last four years would be 

discontinued if we had a Liberal government. I think the different members express themselves, and 

they are expressing Liberals policies and liberal views, and I noticed yesterday in the speech of the hon. 

member for Humboldt (Mr. Loehr) that he was very much 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
660 

worried at how many people we had in our hospitals. He stated that under the long municipal scheme 

they found that too many people were going in when it when it was made fairly free, so they changed 

the system so that the bulk of the charge was placed back on the patient, and he is very proud of the fact 

that they reduced the hospital days in a year from 3,400 to 1,725. Now, I don‘t think that is anything to 

be proud of. I think the principle of the present hospitalization, as I see it, is to encourage people who 

need hospitalization to go there whether they have money or not. I am sure the older people of this 

province would be very much interested to know that he is also worried that they are being treated too 

well, worried that they are in our hospitals. I noticed he things that we put too much – his words – ―put it 

into the lap of the doctors‖, the power to say who should go to the hospitals. I have no doubt the hon. 

member was a very good reeve, but I do not think a reeve of a municipality or any other person, is 

qualified to say who is going to the hospital. I think it is the job of the doctor, and I have a very great 

confidence that the doctors are doing a good job, and can be depended on not to send people to the 

hospital unless they are sick. That is the condition in my constituency. 

 

So I believe they are coming to the conclusion that we would lose many of these services. I believe they 

think we would lose our Health Regions, our School Units, that our hospital plan would be discontinued. 

I might say they have criticized this in many ways, but they have never suggested an alternative only the 

municipal principles and schemes, which they know that only a small percentage of this province could 

finance, and the rest of the province, in areas like we have, could not finance a complete hospital 

scheme, or medical scheme. We would be going back to the old idea where the wealthy municipalities 

have it and the poorer ones would not. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Sixty percent had it. 

 

Mr. Swallow: — They believe, too, the people believe that our Fur Marketing Service would be 

discontinued, and this would be handed back to the people who have exploited the trappers for so long. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Aren‘t you exploiting them? 

 

Mr. Swallow: — I am quite sure that our automobile accident insurance would be discontinued, judging 

from the criticism we have had, and I do know that Labour feel they would lose most of the ground they 

have gained in the last four years. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You have done some good propaganda work all right. 

 

Mr. Swallow: — I think it was the hon. member for Saskatoon (Mr. Stone) stated that if all members of 

this House would honestly tell of the services that have been increased in our constituencies we would 

have a lot to talk about. 

 

Before I go into that I want to mention two very interesting events we have had in the Yorkton 

constituency. It was the centre for a debate, not so long ago, when the Yorkton Rotary Club put one on 

the other day and decided 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
661 

To invite the leaders of the three political parties to attend and give their policies. I think they had half 

an hour each. I am not going into the full details of it, but it was very interesting. We had the Premier, 

we had the Leader of the Opposition, and we had Mr. Ramsay. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — And C.C.F. storekeepers. 

 

Mr. Swallow: — I want to make it plain that they were invited there by the Rotary Club. When it was 

all over I am sure the people of Yorkton decided that if the people in Yorkton decided that if the people 

in the Liberal party were elected it would really be ‗Tucker and Tyranny‘. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — If it had not bee for the Social Credit you would have been licked. 

 

Mr. Swallow: — I might say that it was one of the many obstacles that the Liberal candidate could not 

overcome. We had a very interesting election. We had the Leader of the Social Credit party in Yorkton, 

with his big car and his aeroplane. He told the Yorkton constituents that if they voted either Liberal or 

C.C.F., they would get socialism. They did not believe it and the result was that the hon. gentleman lost 

his deposit. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — The Liberals didn‘t lose theirs, though. 

 

Mr. Swallow: — Now, I am just going to say something about my constituency. The Yorkton 

constituency, as you know, is in the best mixed-farming area of this province, I believe. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Oh, no. 

 

Mr. Swallow: — It has been recognized by the Saskatchewan Pool that it is a very important centre, and 

they built a very fine, up-to-date stockyard thee last fall. As a result, cattle are being trucked in for as far 

as 100 miles in various directions. Yorkton, I would like to say, is a very important centre in this 

province, whether you know it or not. I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that it is almost like a different 

part of the country to go from the southern part where we have the large fields, hundred of acres, section 

after section of open country. I think you would realize it more if you were to fly from here where you 

would see the vast grain lands, and then when you get further north you start to get into the bushy 

country, and you realize there is a different type of farming altogether. Our farmers work harder, I 

believe, than the grain farmer. First of all, they had the land to clear. If you fly over, you will see we 

have small fields, with quite a dense population. We have more difficulty building roads. We have the 

ordinary mixed farming work. In the summer the farmers in the southern area put in their grain, and a lot 

of them in the winter move into the cities. We don‘t do that up there. We have our work in the summer, 

and besides our grain we have our hay, cows to milk. In the winter the farmers have feed to haul to their 

cattle, and the ordinary chores to do, milking, and we still feed some pigs, and barns to clean out. All 

these ordinary jobs are being done today in the Yorkton constituency, and I want to 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
662 

make it plain that I believe it is one of the best parts of the province. I also want to point out that the 

farmers have had to work harder, and in the past they could not supply themselves with the services they 

had in other parts. 

 

I want to speak of hospitalization, first of all. When this government was elected, in that whole area we 

had about two beds for every 1,000 population. To give you a picture of what it is today, I am going to 

start back in the Saltcoats constituency, taking in an area of 100 miles from the Manitoba border, 75 

miles in width. In Saltcoats we had a small hospital with eight beds; today we have 13, assisted by a 

grant from the government. In Yorkton we had in 1944 117 beds; today there are 177. I believe if proper 

co-operation had been coming in this connection we would have had a large Union Hospital there. 

Anyhow, this government assisted them to get the airport hospital, and today they have 177 beds, and 

they receive a grant. Kamsack, the home of the hon. member fro Kamsack (Mr. Banks) had 26 beds, in 

the eastern part; today they will have, or will open very soon, a 40-bed hospital, and they received a 

grant. Canora had 40 beds – 30 miles out of Yorkton – and they will have 75 beds when that modern 

hospital is opened this spring. Norquay had no hospital; they have 12 now. Invermay had no hospital; 

they have ten now. Preeceville had 17 and they now have 25. Kelvington, in the Kelvington 

constituency, had 16, and they now have 29 beds. Theodore, my home town, we were 50 miles from the 

nearest doctor and hospital; today we have a 27-bed hospital; these are set-up bed capacity. We have a 

good doctor and the people come in for miles to that as a centre now. Ituna had no hospital; they will 

have a hospital opened there this summer. Foam Lake, in the Kelvington constituency, had 16 beds in a 

rebuilt house; today, I understand from the hon. member for Kelvington (Mr. Howe) that they had last 

week 44 patients in their new hospital. When this government was elected in 1944 there were 240 beds 

only in this whole area; and today there are 550 beds and the grants amounted to $141,000 – pretty near 

$142,000 – to assist in the building of these hospitals. 

 

I notice when we mention these facts that people could not get into a hospital, the members on the 

opposite side will often smile. I often wonder how many of the members across the way have lived 50 or 

60 miles away from a hospital and doctor, and had patients come in very sick. We have not forgotten 

three cases that happened within 12 months in that area, when a little girl was scalded. There was no 

hospital and that little girl died. A boy was accidentally shot and lay in that town all day waiting for a 

train to come. We never had any highways opened up in those days, Mr. Speaker. We never knew what 

it was to have a snowplow come through, even where we had no hospitals. That boy died because he 

could not get to a hospital. There was a maternity case where there was no necessity, if there had been 

any care – money was scared and no hospital. We don‘t forget those thing, they are not a laughing 

matter. 

 

I want to say that there has been a lot said about the Larger School Units; we have been criticized from 

every angle. There are two Larger Units in part of my constituency, and on the eastern part there are two 

inspectors. I believe that when the vote is taken, those two will become Larger Units. I noticed the 

opposition brought up several cases where the taxes have been raised. I just wonder if they have ever 

gone out into these areas, from school to school, and have seen the improved conditions, the improved 

libraries, the equipment that has been built in these larger units at the centres, and the new schools. I 

head an inspector in the South Melville Unit say that he never knew that children went to school in a 

basement in these modern times, until he moved 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
663 

to that area. I don‘t think people realize that these things have been going on, that there are poor schools, 

and if they would go around and see the improvements and the new schools, that have been built, and 

they compare the taxes – for every one that has been doubled, I think they will find many more that have 

been reduced by half. We had school districts where the tax rate was 32 mills. When the Larger Unit 

was brought in they were brought down to 14 mills. They are gradually going up, as the costs go up, but 

we have individual schools today, within a few miles of the border of our Larger Units that are still 

paying 30 mills school tax. So the taxes have gone up much greater, I believe, in the individual or local 

schools. You never hear that; they just bring out a few individual cases where taxes were doubled, but 

they realize that individual cases where taxes have gone up. I can think of one area in my constituency 

where, I believe, the taxes were doubled, but they realize that their land was better, and they were 

willing to contribute more. I could tell the hon. members that in the last election they voted stronger than 

ever C.C.F. because they believe in that principle. 

 

I want to say something about roads. The Yorkton constituency did have quite a lot of roads – a better 

percentage of roads – when this government was elected. As a result, for the first three years we did not 

get any new roads because there were places in the province that needed roads very much more, and I 

think that is the principle we were in favour of: those who had no roads should get them first. Last year 

the Department of Highways built roads into Yorkton. There is a very dense traffic in that south-eastern 

part coming into Regina and through to Yorkton. They built roads, and they are the highest standard 

roads that have ever been built in this province. I have a letter on file from the Yorkton Board of Trade, 

congratulating the government on the high standard, not only on the number of roads but on the high 

standard of these roads. Often when roads are mentioned, the members of the opposition start to laugh. I 

wonder if they think we have forgotten the roads we traveled over before 1944. We are not fortunate 

enough to be like the hon. member for Estevan (Mr. McCormack) and we cannot forget those days, the 

days when we broke springs on highways. We have not forgotten those roads, and if they go around the 

province they would see, all over the province, a much higher standard of roads than was every built 

before, and many more roads. You cannot go any place that you don‘t see new roads built to a very high 

standard. 

 

We are receiving higher grants for road construction in the municipalities that we did before. As you 

know, before there seemed to be no system on giving out grants. The wealthy municipalities seemed to 

get a lot more than the poorer ones. Now, through our equalization basis, the formula that gives the 

poorer municipalities lower assessments, larger populations, the conditions that cost more to build roads, 

are getting very much better grants. There are nine municipalities partly in the Yorkton constituency. In 

1943-44, the average grant given to those nine municipalities was $864. the first year that the 

equalization grant came into effect it increased to $1,563 in the first year. Last year, you will remember, 

the formula was changed, and the poorer municipalities again received a little more and the wealthy 

municipalities were not given quite so much, with the result that the average grant given to those 

municipalities in 1948 was $2,477. I think I pointed out that the ability of the municipalities with greater 

responsibility, larger populations, could not build good roads with the grants received before. It is hard 

enough now, but that is a wonderful increase, and appreciated very much by the municipalities in that 

part of the country. 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
664 

I want to mention the automobile accident insurance. I remember quite well, in this House, when that 

was introduced, that the main critic in the opposition, to use his own words, claimed it was the greatest 

hoax every perpetrated on the people of this province, and we naturally believe that they would scrap 

that. I want to tell you that it is now considered a hoax by the people of my constituency. In the last year, 

from July, 1947, to June 30, 1948, there has been 55 claims in the Yorkton constituency. Thirty-three 

were collisions, and they were paid $6,746. There were 22 personal injuries, and they were paid $5,813. 

There were 22 persons who would not have received a five-cent piece under ordinary car insurance, 

even if they owned a car, and most of these people had never owned a car. The parents of a boy who was 

killed, a young boy who contributed to the income of that family, received $1,150. Those people don‘t 

consider this insurance a hoax; or the old lady who was going across the street and was hit by a car. 

They had not car, and she received $300 and all her hospitalization. A dependent of another party who 

was killed received $2,155. Almost half of the people who received benefits in this constituency would 

not have received a five-cent piece under any other insurance policy. I want to just mention two cases 

that were not in my constituency. There were three people killed in this family, and the total amount 

paid to them was $9,061. Out of that, $7,618 was for injury along, which again I say they would never 

have received under any policy, and then the opposition ridiculed and criticize this, and I honestly 

believe they would hand it back to the insurance companies. I have another case of $4,475, and the bulk 

of that was injuries; another one for $9,000, and the bulk of that was for injuries. This has been going on 

every day; if the hon. members would just take the time to find out what is going on in their own 

constituency, they will find that these things are services that the people would not have discontinued. 

 

Coming again to electricity. It certainly makes one laugh – the attitude of the opposition regarding 

electricity. They talk about bringing electricity to the farmers and of extending it in every way. I 

remember quite well, when the deal regarding the Dominion Electric was brought up in the House, that 

the opposition were opposed to it. I believe that the hon. member for Estevan (Mr. McCormack) stated 

that his area was a great potential area for power, and the government realized that when they purchased 

the Dominion Electric. Today that has been extended, I believe, three times and it is still far too small. 

The result is that we, in 1949 I hope, will have electric power from the Estevan plant, the cheapest 

source possibly in the province. As I came back to the city on Monday I saw the poles that are going up 

on that route, taking that high-power, 66 volt line to the Yorkton area, and will eventually include the 

whole north-eastern part with cheap power that this opposition actually opposed when the deal went 

through. How could they expect we could expand our services unless we expanded the sources of 

supply. They voted against it, and ridiculed it in every way when it went through House. They are 

certainly not consistent. 

 

In that connection, last year the government purchased the Canadian Utilities and Yorkton was one of 

their centres. They had a plant there – quite and old plant – and the while system was fairly worn out. 

This is what the Yorkton Enterprise said about that deal. It said: 

 

In these days of increasing cost, of the cost of living index soaring to new all-time records, it is 

refreshing to be able to publish news affecting our whole community, and which indicates to them a 

better service at lower 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
665 

cost, because this sums up the new agreement between the Saskatchewan Power Commission and the 

City of Yorkton. It assures the city of an increased supply of power and lighting at a lower cost. The 

production varies in certain blocks from 12½ to 30 percent increase. The over all average is about 15 

percent. According to the terms of the agreement a surcharge of 5 percent is added to the bill, which 

will be turned over to the city semi-annually in lieu of taxes. 

 

That is the true report of the figures. The people of Yorkton are receiving power today very much 

cheaper than they would if we had had a Liberal government in power who did not believe in taking 

over the main sources of supply. I don‘t think the Yorkton Enterprise would support the C.C.F., but that 

is their viewpoint. They are very fair. We would not have these services if the opposition had had their 

way since this government was elected. 

 

I just want to mention one other thing in connection with the Yorkton constituency. When this 

government was elected we had a group of people about 15 miles south of Yorkton, who for many, 

many years had been promised assistance. They had fifty-some children who had never been in school. 

That was the Metis group of people in the Crescent Lake area. Every election they had been promised a 

school, as long as I can remember, for years. We also promised them a school, but the only difference is 

that we fulfilled our promise within two years, although material was scarce, with the result there are 

over 50 children in that school now. It is doing a wonderful work, and we have a very good teacher, and 

exceptional teacher. He is becoming an adviser of those people he has organized them into a community, 

or a co-operative. He had got them to find their places – they have not got land, just and acre or two, and 

he has got them to fence them. The homes are already showing results of this education, and the homes 

are beginning to be cleaner, and they are very much better. The government is experimenting in another 

way, in assisting them to get some cattle, and they find that is working out well. In every way they are 

assisting these people to become useful citizens, a thing that was promised to them for years and years, 

and has only been fulfilled under this government. Those children – I have seen them – some of them 

have only been in school for a year and a half, and it is wonderful what they can do. They are very 

clever, and if they have an opportunity, which I hope this government will give them, to continue further 

on in school, they will show that those people have ability equal to any other group of people. 

 

This budget expresses to the people of Saskatchewan that these services being extended by this 

government will be continued in the future. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I support the motion. 

 

Mr. L.A. Trippe (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to voice my few, limited comments on the 

budget, I must first of all, congratulate the Provincial Treasurer on the very extensive and informative 

budget he has presented to this House. We like him over here; he always has a good, genial smile for us, 

and he seems to be able to take it, so to speak, a little bit better than most of them over on the other side. 

I hope, when full socialization takes place that this learned gentleman does not suffer the fate of some of 

the other people in full socialized states, and end up with a glorious government-sponsored funeral. 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
666 

The budget, Mr. Speaker, is certainly a masterpiece at whitewashing the record of an extravagant, loose 

and inefficient administration. We have something of the record on the government in business, but up 

to the present time we have not found out anything. All the questions that we have asked about it have 

been sent off to the Crown Corporations, and today is the first meeting of the committee on Crown 

Corporations, so that it looks very much, Sire, as though we were not going to get any great amount of 

information on the activities of this government in business from an authoritative source. 

 

I have definite instructions from the people of the provincial constituency of Turtleford, which I am 

privileged to represent, to probe the operations of the government in the school system, the health 

services, the fish, fur and timber activities, and I hope I will be able to do that before the session is over. 

 

With regard to what we hear a great deal about these days, the federal government‘s proposals at the 

1945 conference. The hon. Provincial Treasurer calls them proposals, another Minister called them 

promises, and most of the socialist workers throughout the province go around spreading the idea that 

they are promises when, as a matter of fact, there was no proposal or promise made whatsoever, unless 

the people of Ontario and Quebec agreed to the nature of this agreement. The people of Ontario and 

Quebec represent the greatest amount of the population of this dominion, and also the greatest amount of 

wealth in the dominion, and, as everyone in this House knows, and most everyone every place else, this 

dominion-provincial agreement could not go forward without their participation. The Saskatchewan 

government, seeking to find a goat on which to place the failure of their extravagant administration, 

looks naturally, to Ottawa, and leads the people to believe that these ideas were proposals or promises 

that we should be getting today, when as a matter of fact, there was nothing of the sort. This province 

made a deal, and we have never heard any kick about it. They were very well satisfied with the deal at 

the time, and I am sure we should be very well satisfied with the deal we are getting today from the 

federal government. They receive very much more money than they could have realized from the taxes 

had they collected them themselves, and they got out of the business of being the tax collector, which is 

never very popular with the people under any conditions. It looks to me that we, in this province, do 

something like bit the hand that feeds us when we criticize a very favourable deal as we have had from 

the federal government with regard to subsidies. 

 

The inferences and statements about promises or proposals are absolutely untrue, and they seem to me to 

be made purposely for political purposes and to mislead the citizens of this province. There is no 

condemnation that I know of that would be too strong for people who go around and spread these false 

ideas and, in the most strong parliamentary language that is permitted in this House, I would say that the 

socialists and others who would criticize such honourable and good men as the Hon. Paul Martin and his 

associates are not really fit to loose their boot laces. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Very original. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — As original as yours. 

 

Mr. Trippe: — With regard to the schools, Mr. Speaker, I do not wish to say anything that would 

jeopardize a child‘s education . . . 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
667 

Premier Douglas: — No. 

 

Mr. Trippe: — . . . but I do believe that every cent we get for school purposes should be used directly to 

give a child a better education, and this is not what is taking place today. There is waste and 

extravagance in the administration, especially in the Larger School Units, and I have a case in my mind 

where it cost $17 to put in a 50-cent window glass, and that is only just a fair sample. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — With Liberal trustees. 

 

Mr. Trippe: — I object, Sire, to the teaching of socialism, or any other doctrines that are controversial, 

in the schools, such as is done is ―The World of Today‖, and to the use of the cumulative record by 

which they seek to obtain, secretly, a record of all persons living in a house from a child who attends 

school from that house, and I will never be satisfied as long as these methods are used. With regard to 

―The World of Today‖, there has been controversy about whether it did or did not teach socialism. Many 

people think it does teach it, by inference at least, but it does teach in one place – I haven‘t studied it 

very much – I find that it teaches something that is absolutely false. If we find a textbook that teaches 

something absolutely false, I submit, Sir, it should be banned from the schools. On page 31 we find this, 

speaking about immigration to this country, the United States and Australia, and they say: ―Canada 

wants only European farmers with money, or citizens of Britain and the United States, also with money, 

and shuts out everybody else.‖ Well, every person in this House knows that that is absolutely false. We 

don‘t require people with money and we don‘t shut out anybody who has not got money. They are 

arriving here every day, boat loads of them, and we welcome them and give them all the privileges of 

Canadian citizenship in this country. There is something that is false. It is enough to ban the book from 

the schools, and I would suggest that it be done. The fact that someone has discovered, or think they 

have discovered, books in the schools similar to this, which they say were in during the Liberal regime, 

as members on the other side of the House know very well, there was considerable worming in the 

Liberal party by socialists and communists previous to 1944, and they might have got some of that stuff 

in; but we are perfectly content that you throw it out, along with the rest of it, and if we are at all to 

blame for that, we are very sorry and we will not shun our responsibility. 

 

The hospital plan has planned itself into very deep water. It has planned itself to a point where it is very 

expensive, and the tax has been doubled just lately, without any corresponding benefit, but it was 

conveniently left until after the Alberta and Saskatchewan elections; in fact some of the members of this 

House were out telling them in Alberta, just before their election, how much they got in Saskatchewan 

for $5. They did not tell them that just as soon as they got home it was going to be $10. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — It didn‘t do them much good though. 

 

Mr. Trippe: — The method of collection of this hospital tax takes us back absolutely to the time of the 

debtor prisons of Charles Dicken‘s time he wrote about. If a man does not pay his tax, he can be fined, 

and if he has not got the money he can be 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
668 

jailed. I have sought the advice of very eminent counsel in this province and elsewhere as to whether 

there was any other similar law in the Dominion of Canada whereby you could put a man in jail because 

he did not have money in his pocket, and I find out that there is not. Someone is going to say, what 

about income tax. The income tax is not the same. The income tax you have had the money in your 

pocket, and a certain portion of it belongs to the dominion, and you have spent it, but in the hospital tax, 

they do not make any provision as to whether you have had the money or not. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Might I ask the hon. gentleman . . . 

 

Mr. Trippe: — No, you can‘t. You are just seeking to take my time. I have a very limited time and if 

you want it, you cannot have it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Not only limited time, limited knowledge. 

 

Mr. Trippe: — The member across the way had one hour and a half yesterday, and he did not answer 

any questions, so I have 30 minutes and I don‘t feel that I should. 

 

We had a case of a man who was brought up. We hear that three investigations are made. Perhaps they 

are, and I am sure the hon. Minister of Health would not do anything wrong as an individual, if he knew 

it, but there are thousands of cases where the tax has not been paid this year, and if they are all 

prosecuted, they cannot all possibly come to his attention. 

 

Premier Douglas: — They are not all being prosecuted. 

 

Mr. Trippe: — In this case, the man was brought up. He owed them $30, but by the time the case got 

over, the fines and everything totaled $61, and he was fined $61 or 40 days in jail. By some word that 

was dropped after he had been convicted, it was found out that he was a pensioner. He said: ―I don‘t 

know why this thing should be this way because I have had operations before and I never paid for 

them.‖ One thing let to another until it was found out he was a pensioner. Well, the thing was up in the 

air right away, and they wondered what they were going to do. Here was a man who had hospitalization 

form the federal government and he had been brought into court and sentenced for not paying 

hospitalization. It seems that if three investigations were made, I do not know just how they were made. 

 

Premier Douglas: — On a question of privilege, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — No, no. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — On a question of privilege. Mr. Speaker, I know the case to which the hon. 

gentleman is referring, and it was no hospitalization case at all. It was one of the Health Regions. The 

hon. gentleman is making a totally false statement. 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
669 

Mr. Tucker: — That is not a question of privilege. 

 

Premier Douglas: — A person cannot get up here and make a false statement deliberately. He cannot 

get away with it. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the Premier should be asked to withdraw that. The 

suggestion is that a false statement has been made deliberately. The hon. Premier even if he is the 

Premier cannot make statements like that and get away with it in this House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Trippe: — Anyway . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Do I understand that the Leader of the Opposition is raising a point of order 

that the hon. Premier is accusing the hon. speaker of making a false statement? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — And making it deliberately. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I did not. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You certainly did. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I said it was not a point of order as no member can get up and make a false 

statement deliberately, and no member can. It is a question of privilege at any time to get up when a 

false statement is being made, whether deliberately or in ignorance. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The point of order is not well taken. 

 

Mr. Trippe: — In any case, Sire, he succeeded in taking a few minutes of my time. 

 

The amount of $30 was owed for hospital tax, if that set the matter straight. The rest of it is all correct. 

 

With regard to fish: the Fish Board, as we find it operating in our constituency, is the most cumbersome, 

inefficient and extravagant enterprise that this government indulges in, or one of them surely. There is 

certainly no thought of humanity first. If anyone has any sympathy for these poor fishermen that go out 

in very much below zero weather and operate on the ice, with their bare hands pulling fish out of the net, 

I am sure that no one would want to clamp on them and take their fish for half price. But they do it. Here 

we have a case up there on Lac des Isles where these people are fishing and they are paid eight cents for 

the fish. There is a receiver there for the government, but if anyone wants to get any of those fish before 

any service is performed at all, he pays 14 to 16 cents a pound for it. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Profiteering of the government. 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
670 

Mr. Trippe: — That is 100 percent mark-up, and certainly they should make money, but apparently 

they don‘t because they lose $94,000, and still take 100 percent mark-up on the fish. Down there we 

have a case of where you see how you socialize the fish. They run a line across the lake between the 

province of Alberta and the province of Saskatchewan, and the fish on our side are worth only half the 

price they get on the other side. The fish on our side are worth eight cents for a certain grade, while they 

are worth 16 cents if they happen to get on the Alberta side. In certain cases jackfish, last week at least, 

were piled up on the ice, and there was no market for them. The government would not buy them, and 

they would not let anybody else buy then. I hope they will pick them up before spring. If they do not 

pick these jackfish up, they will pay three cents for them, where the private buyers, if they were allowed 

to come in there, would give five for them, and I don‘t see why they should take these fish at a low price 

and still lose money on them. 

 

Premier Douglas: — There are 12 million pounds going begging in Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Trippe: — As far as that is concerned, they squander other people‘s money, and I don‘t understand 

why in the world they don‘t fold up. We have a hard time to get ordinary services that we require. Of 

course, it is a wonderful refuge for discredited politicians up there, and I suppose as long as it performs 

that service it will be doing something anyway. 

 

They do not have an absolute full monopoly as required by socialism and, for that reason, they will 

never succeed. If the price declines a little bit, a very small amount, they will certainly be out of business 

in quick order. I don‘t know whether they are going to be out of business but they are going to lose this 

province an awful lot more money. I would like to ask the government how much longer they are going 

to stay in the fish business, and oppress the producers and lose the province‘s money, such as they are 

doing today. Is there absolutely no retreat at all in socialism? Don‘t we ever find if we are doing wrong 

that we can stop the thing? 

 

Where I live, in the hamlet of Spruce Lake, the Continental Oil Company came in, around a year and 

one-half ago – this is a company registered in the province of Alberta where they have a number of 

wells. They sold considerable stock around the immediate vicinity on the promise that they would drill 

an oil well there. In fact, they even told the people where they were going to drill the well, and the 

salesman told me they sold enough stock that they were satisfied to go ahead and drill the well. I said to 

him: ―Did you ever see what kind of deal you could make with them to protect yourself if you do find 

oil?‖ He said: ―Well, we are going to see about that, but we come from Alberta and we would expect we 

would get about the same consideration.‖ I said: ―You had better find out about that first, because maybe 

you won‘t.‖ He came down here to Regina, and returned and said: ―I can‘t do anything with them. I 

can‘t get anything that would suit us at all. I will tell you what we will do. We will wait until after the 

election and see if we can‘t get rid of them.‖ he did wait until after the election, but they did not get rid 

of them so now the gentleman informs the contributors to this well that he has to take their money and 

go to Alberta with it. He cannot drill a well in our 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
671 

district, so he is going to take the money which was subscribed, and take their luck in Alberta where 

they will get a bit of protection. 

 

With regard to the fur, the people of my district are sure a long way from being satisfied. They get 

instances of where a portion of their fur is practically confiscated from them, and some of them have had 

fur which has come down here and been marked ‗rejected, no value‘, and they have asked for that fur to 

be returned, and they have not got it. I have here a return to a gentleman for 25 ‗rats. He got a very good 

price for them, a top price of $3.55, and one, which was practically no good at all, he got $1.92. He 

received, as a gross return, $72.72, before they charged him for lotting and sales commission, and 

apparently they sold them on the open, competitive market, but they nicked him for one-third of what 

they brought, so that a $3 ‗rat would bring this man only $2, with something off for the marketing 

services as well. All it said, stamped on there with a stamp ―Department of Natural Resources share of 

proceeds‖. He did not know whether they had any share of his catch, but apparently they take one-third. 

He said: ―What do they do with this?‖ I said: ―I think they do some fur conservation work.‖ He said: 

―they never spend a nickel any place around where I ever saw, around here. Maybe they do it some 

place, but not here.‖ So that if this man and other trappers were let alone and left to market their furs on 

any other fur market, it is apparent those same buyers would have been there, and they would have paid 

the same price, and instead of getting one-third of his money taken away from him, he would have got 

the full value. 

 

With regard to timber: well, timber has just about folded up, up there. The operators have all gone over 

to Alberta, the small ones, because they get a square deal and if they make a deal with the government, 

they pay them a stumpage and they do what they want to with their timber. They have a much better 

grade of timber to operate in too, and the government will stank back of the price, whatever they give 

them. We hear that the policy is calculated to preserve the stands of timber, and, in this connection, as 

far as they are going, they are following the same policy as was followed by the Liberal government, of 

going around and marking the trees fit to cut and permitting those trees to be cut, and that is as far as 

they go. An operator up there told me that you could cut every tree in Saskatchewan if you would just 

sell the lumber to the Timber Board, and it looks like that is about true. The net profit of all their sales, 

according to anything I have been able to figure out, is around 10 percent, but as they grab this lumber 

from the producer they double the price of it, or more, right away, and so a return of ten percent that is 

boosted up 100 percent is not a very great return. If this market declines a very small amount, this 

operation will fold up also. 

 

The forest fires – we have heard, or seen in the moving pictures, something about the parachutists 

coming down there to fight these fires, and one thing and another, but last year between St. Walburg and 

Loon Lake the fires burned vigorously and almost unchecked, burning valuable stands of young timber 

and some stands of mature timber too. When I went out there to see what they were doing about it, I 

found there was a Forest Ranger there, a Natural Resources employee, a very efficient man too, but he 

had no help, just a few boys out of school, and what could he do with thousands of acres of fire burning 

in all directions. There were telephone poles burning and the thing looked like it was out of hand 

entirely. Finally the wind shifted, the rain came, and 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
672 

they got in there in a few weeks with some bulldozers and managed to stop the fire; but a very large area 

was burned over and ruined, on a class of land that does not grow anything but timer anyway. I have 

often wondered and looked around, and if you are going to promote the growth of timber I would 

suggest that someplace or other you plant a tree, but nobody has every show me yet where they have 

planted a tree in the Turtleford constituency, and I don‘t think they have done it. 

 

With regard to some of the social services, Sir, this is a case where the humanity first idea could be 

shown quite clearly if it was in effect, but we wonder just how works in some cases. We know that there 

is considerable quantities of spoiled and rejected fish around the country, and we sometimes wonder 

what happens to them. By the reports of some of the people who have been in some of the provincial 

institutions, they say that the fish they get there seems something like it must be this fish. We do have 

here, in the report of the Department of Social Welfare, that it costs very little to keep these people. The 

Industrial School for Boys, in the vicinity of Regina, I believe, costs them $6.19 to keep one of these 

boys fro a day, but the cost of their food is only 36 cents. In this particular case we do know what 

happens. We do know, and we do know for sure, that they feed them spoiled vegetables anyway, 

whether they feed them spoiled fish or not, and we can prove that without the aid of a Royal 

Commission. Turning to page 100 of the report of the Department of Social Welfare, we find this, 

speaking about the activities of the women in the Women‘s Jail at Prince Albert. They say: ―they also 

made some pickles from vegetables being spoiled in the garden. These were served to the girls at meal 

times on several occasions.‖ So no wonder they can feed them for 36 cents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have no confidence in this budget, and I will not support it. 

 

Mr. A.G. Kuziak (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to make my speech on the budget debate, I would 

first like to congratulate the hon. Provincial Treasurer for the very fine budget he has brought down in 

this Legislature. That is the fifth humanitarian budget in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to point out some of the things that have impressed me especially, in the Legislature, during 

the past 29 or 30 days that we have been in the city. If I was an absolute newcomer to the province and 

had dropped in here and had sat for the last 30 days, I would have come to the conclusion that the 

government, the C.C.F., has been the government for the past four years in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Members on this side of the House have risen over and over again and boasted about the 

C.C.F. record over the past four years. Going over to the opposition side, as far as I am concerned, the 

record of the Liberal party is a closed book. We don‘t talk about it because they are ashamed of it. If I 

did not know the history of the province, I would certainly have come to the conclusion that the Liberal 

party is a brand-new party and elected some 20 members in the 1948 election for the first time. In fact, 

when the government speakers rise and point to the record of the Liberal party of the past 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
673 

one member especially is very fidgety in his seat and he rises over and over again, one time to a point of 

privilege and another time to a point of order. It seems to me that the record hurts them. They seem to 

have been definitely ashamed of the record, never do they refer back to it. We are proud, on this side of 

the House, to refer to our record of the past four years. 

 

The hon. member for Cannington (Mr. Patterson), in rising to criticize the budget, criticized, for 

example, the roads in the province of Saskatchewan, and he pointed out – some of the other members 

had pointed out the same thing – that the roads were built mainly in the Weyburn and one other 

constituency in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I am going to give you a record of the 

highway building in the constituency of Canora. I remember addressing a meeting in the village of 

Stenen last year. After the meeting was over, some of the lads from the back rose and asked questions. 

One was regard to the education tax and why we did not keep the promise which we, of course, did not 

make. But I remember a farmer getting up in the middle of the hall and he turned right around and he 

said: ―Now, look here, I will show you pamphlets delivered to me by some Hon. Mr. Hamilton who used 

to be Minister of Highways in the province back in 1926‖, and he said, ―I could show you gentleman 

that No. 9 highway from Canora to Sturgis was definitely promised and was to be built in 1926; but it 

took the C.C.F. to complete it in 1944.‖ I am telling you those gentlemen kept quiet. That is the record 

of highway building. May I say that in our portion of the province there were very few highways. For 

example in the Canora constituency alone, we had some eight miles of gravelled highways. Today we 

have some 126 miles of gravelled highways. They are not going to fool the private members on the back 

benches over here that our government only built highways in two or three constituencies of the 

province of Saskatchewan. I know that the Canora constituency, for the first time, got some highways 

built. I remember the hon. member for Pelly (Mr. Banks) was speaking about Canora and he mentioned 

two good highways coming in and out of the town of Canora. I don‘t know whether I would say they are 

good, I know that one was completely worn out, and that this government started last year to completely 

rebuild that highway. That is No. 9 from Yorkton to Canora. 

 

One other thing I would like to point out too, there has been considerable criticism with regard to rural 

electrification plans. Again, may I say that it is a laugh for the members of the opposition to rise and 

criticize our record and our plan for the next four years. I always believe in judging a man for his actions 

and not by his words. I believe in judging a government or a governmental body by its records and not 

by what they say, and so with regard to rural electrification, I want to point out that the previous 

administration during 1943-44, in two years, electrified 13 farm homes in the province of Saskatchewan. 

What a record. This government, in 1947 alone, provided 690 farmers with electricity; in 1948, 985 

farms, and we certainly look forward to greater electrification in the province of Saskatchewan. I assure 

you that if it was a Liberal government, they would carry on with the same record that they carried on in 

this province for the past 30 years. May I point out that Canora constituency had not one farm home 

electrified until 1947-48, and we have at the present time 58 miles of rural electrification lines. A 

contract handed out on 18 more miles now under construction. I cannot see how the opposition, one that 

has been a government of this province for 26 years, could ever dare criticize the work we have done in 

that line. 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
674 

One other point that the hon. member for Cannington and the ex-Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Patterson) criticized was the contributions to the rural municipalities by this government. I want to quote 

from the Liberal Bible, The Leader-Post – even they know better. Here is what they say: ―It must be 

admitted, of course, that in the period under consideration the dominion and provincial governments 

assumed heavy social security and welfare obligations and assisted the municipalities in various other 

directions.‖ But, of course, the member for Cannington makes the statement that we did not help the 

municipalities and did not increase aid to the municipalities. 

 

Another point that was criticized by the hon. member for Cannington was that the municipal taxes have 

risen considerable in the province. Again I wasn‘t to quote form The Leader-Post, the Liberal Bible, and 

here is what they say: ―the municipalities which in pre-war years collected and claimed 30 percent of the 

total taxation in Canada, in 1947 get only 10.8 percent. The pre-war breakdown was 51.2 for the federal 

government, 18.8 percent for the provinces, a total taxation collection in Canada of $915 million. By 

1947 total taxation revenue had multiplied to $2,452 million, of which 76.7 percent went to the 

dominion government, 12.5 percent to the province – down – leaving the municipalities only 10.8 

percent.: If we are going to criticize excessive taxation, then the excessive taxation is done in Canada by 

the dominion government, a Liberal government. 

 

I want to go back to my hon. friend and neighbour, the hon. member for Pelly (Mr. Banks). He made 

certain statements – I will admit that it was very hard for me to hear him and I did not get all the details, 

but I had an extract of his speech made, and here are some of the statements he made: ―I want to say 

here that the gentleman who has just interrupted me, the gentleman from Canora (Mr. Kuziak) lives in 

that area, the finest area you could get, and his town of Canora has two good highways passing through 

it, built by the Liberal government. I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the statement here that this was a 

backwoods was an insult to very voter in the Canora constituency.‖ May I point out to the hon. member 

that the word backwoods was not stated by me, but stated by his colleague, the hon. member for 

Melville (Mr. Deshaye), and if this was a shame, then I would say that the hon. member for Pelly 

probably had again fallen asleep, and it was lucky that he did not tumble out of his chair again. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Very funny. I don‘t know how you can contain yourselves. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — He went on ―Possibly, Mr. Speaker, I can explain that. I may be able to explain in this 

way. It is not that it has anything this province can give them the constituency has not got, but he had 

got something else that is lacking. Twenty-five years ago the seat of Canora received its first baptism in 

socialism when a man there by the name of Zannon . . .‖ There is one thing I would say, if we took the 

words socialism, Russia and communism from the vocabulary of the members of the opposition, I am 

sure that their speeches would be reduced by half. 

 

Mr. Banks: — You say he did not go there? 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
675 

Mr. Kuziak: — Yes, this gentleman came there, and the hon. member for Pelly (Mr. Banks) made 

certain insinuations with regard to the people of the town of Canora. He pointed out that they were poor 

and in debt. May I point out, Mr. Speaker, that the town of Canora is not in debt and at that time the hon. 

member refers us to the leading officials of the town of Canora were staunch Liberals, later driven out of 

office, and the town of Canora was improved. It is completely out of debt. I met one of the councillors 

and the clerk of the town of Canora the other day then they were in these buildings, and one of the 

gentlemen said: ―We were complimented in the Local Government Board that there are no difficulties in 

Canora.‖ Tat was after we got rid of the Liberal officials that were in there. 

 

Now I wan to refer to another part: ―I don‘t think Mr. Zannon is there, but many of his people have 

grown up, and what is wrong with that seat today is this: not that the country is backward, it is because 

the spirit is backward.‖ Mr. Speaker, I am going to point out the spirit of the people of Canora. The hon. 

member for Pelly lives in the town of Kamsack, and when that cyclone hit the city of Kamsack, I want 

to report we immediately organized a committee and it collected most of the money. One was George 

Stratychuk, and myself. Between 3 o‘clock in the afternoon and 8 o‘clock in the evening we collected 

from these backward-spirited people $1,450 and we remitted it to help Kamsack out. Now, mind you, I 

hope that you do not think I am running down the people of Kamsack. They are fine people, but I 

believe that the hon. member for Pelly, when he touched on the people of Canora, then I am certainly 

going to come to their defence. I say they are fine people, as any within the province of Saskatchewan. 

One other thing I would like to point out with regard to my home town, and that is with regard to Red 

Cross donations during the years 1941, 1942, 1943, 1944, to show their spirit. In 1940 the people of 

Canora donated $2,048, the people of Kamsack, $1,718; in 1941 we donated $1,082, the people of 

Kamsack, $627; in 1942 we raised $3,507, the people of Kamsack, $2,599; in 1943 we donated $4,130, 

Kamsack, $2,587; in 1944, we contributed $4,200, Kamsack, $2,426. I will let you be the judges of the 

people of the town of Canora. 

 

There has been some criticism made by the hon. member for Pelly with regard to the Larger School 

Unit. He made the statement that if the Larger Unit had not been formed, the schools would have saved 

$1,800, $1,600, $1,000, $500. Well, that is only making statements, Mr. Speaker; let us get down to 

facts. I have here before me a list of every school in the Kamsack Larger School Unit. He made the 

statement that a school could save $1,800. Checking over, I find out that 56 of these schools were 

assessed below $100,000, and he mentioned the mill rate was 18 mills. Therefore, 56 of these schools 

would have saved their levy completely; it would not have cost them a cent. Why make statements like 

that? I met the chairman of this very same school downtown this afternoon, had a chat with him, and he 

reports to me that 15 of these schools could have operated below 18 mills, 68 of them would have had to 

have a mill rate higher than 18 mills, than it in the Larger Units. Of Course, making wild statements is 

quite all right. 

 

I would now like to say a word or two with regard to insurance. I have been, for some years, an 

insurance agent, and I know that the hon. members in the opposition always come to the rescue of the 

insurance companies. I would like to point out, for example, some of the policies written by this 

government 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
676 

through my agency. In 1948 the Buchanan Flour Mill was written up and they paid a premium of $807. 

We changed that to the Saskatchewan government, and for the same amount of insurance they paid the 

sum of $439, a saving on one policy of $368. We have a record that we can boast about. 

 

The insurance rates in the town of Canora, the fire insurance rates in the town of Canora were $14 per 

thousand for three years. The government has written them from $5 to $7.50, half the amount. I am 

wondering why it is that the members of the opposition, who claim they have the support of the rural 

population of this country, insist on supporting the large insurance companies. One other thing I would 

like to point out with regard to insurance: back in 1936, as an insurance agent, I found 66 schools 

scattered through the Pelly and Canora constituencies that were written at the exorbitant rate of $2.50 

per 100. I have heard some remarks across the House, and if they want proof of that I will give you 

definite proof. Sixty-six schools at $2.50 per 100. I went after that business, not with the Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance, but with the Gore District Mutual, and after I had seen and turned over five or 

six of these schools to the Gore District Mutual at $1 per 100, this particular agency in the city of Regina 

dropped the balance of the 60 schools to $1. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan government going into the 

insurance business has cut some of that racket out. 

 

The hon. member for Athabaska (Mr. Marion) was really impressive in criticizing our programme in the 

north, and he made the statement that this government ‗skinned‘ the people of his constituency. Well, I 

am going to read a letter form one of the trappers, and here is what he says: 

 

I recently read an article in your paper about a certain many not getting much for his skunk skins, 

according to the Liberal spokesman. I do not know about him, but I would like to tell you about an 

experience I had last winter with a well-known fur company in Regina. I shipped two wild mink skins 

to the firm, and being cautious I asked them to hold the skins for ten days. I received a cheque for $29. 

I was not satisfied so I returned it and got my skins back. I shipped the same skins to the government 

for sale, and receive $70 for them. Anybody can plainly see why the trappers of Saskatchewan laugh 

at the Liberals efforts to belittle the government sales. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — They voted against the C.C.F. though. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — The hon. member for Athabaska made a statement that we had certain deductions; 25 

cents, 30 percent. Mr. Speaker, this deduction amounts to 180 percent by a private company. That is 

really high-class ‗skinning‘. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Government inspector, I guess. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — I want to quote another trapper. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Another inspector. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — Another trapper. I will give his name if you want it. He says in his letter: 



 

March 9, 1949 

 

 
677 

So in spite of an odd slam and slur handed out from some quarters about the bum deal the trapper is 

getting, and the noisy hue an cry about depleting the fur, this system of conservation, so recently 

introduced by the Saskatchewan government, is certain to endure, regardless of which political party 

wins elections, because the trapper recognizes he has all the advantages of the individual registered 

trap line and he has the advantages of community trapping. Believe me, the trapper will never permit 

the scuttling of this new system. To my mind, the trapper has made more progress towards his 

emancipation during the past year, than was made during the previous 400 years of his existence on 

this continent, although he was under capitalism and free enterprise. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You would not dare read that one up north. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Doesn‘t sound like a trapper‘s letter to me. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — The hon. member for Athabaska also had a certain amount to say with regard to fish, 

and some gentleman from the other side remarked that Manitoba was paying twice as much as the 

government in the province of Saskatchewan. I have the Winnipeg Tribune, March 8, 1949: ―Lake 

fishermen face ruin. Frozen fish markets gone in Manitoba.‖ And here is what the reporter has to say: 

―An estimated 2,000 Manitoba fishermen today face financial ruin, unable to find a market for hundreds 

of tons of frozen fish taken in the past winter. The fishermen in many towns are without funds, and some 

storekeepers have stopped advancing them credit.‖ Then there is a picture of one of these Manitoba 

fishermen, the prosperous ones, and it says: ―Leif Paulson, above, took 37,000 pounds of frozen fish 

from Lake Winnipeg during the past winter. He stored 17,000 pounds with the packers, and he believes 

he will have to destroy the other 20,000 pounds now piled in the open beside his home.‖ 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Sounds like the Fish Board. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — The Fish Board must have been making a big profit in the past few years. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Get up and make a speech. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Why don‘t you do the same. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — I don‘t intend to make any long speeches, but I definitely will be one supporting the 

budget. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:55 o‘clock p.m. 


