



















































Hansard: March 24, 1949


890 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Eleventh Legislature 

 

Thursday, March 24, 1949 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o‘clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Buchanan: 

 

That the Dominion Government be requested to amend the Veterans‘ Land Act so as to enable large 

agricultural holdings to be bought as units and resold to groups of veterans incorporated as 

co-operative farming associations, in order to provide for the rehabilitation of veterans who desire to 

farm co-operatively under the purchase agreement. 

 

Hon. J. H. Sturdy: — Mr. Speaker, in order to refresh the memory of the members of the House, I 

would like to again read this motion: it is to the effect that the dominion government be requested to 

amend the Veterans‘ Land Act so as to obtain large agricultural holdings to be bought as units and resold 

to groups of veterans incorporated as co-operative farming associations, in order to provide for the 

rehabilitation of veterans who desire to farm co-operatively under the purchase agreement. 

 

I realize that there is no need for me to impress upon the hon. members of this House the importance of 

this resolution. It affects a large number of veterans whose re-establishment has been retarded or 

prevented altogether. Furthermore, the implementation of the request contained in this resolution would 

provide an impetus to co-operative farming, and I do maintain that co-operative farming is here to stay 

in this province. 

 

The hon. Leader of the Opposition, in speaking to this resolution in the House, to use his own words, 

had this to say: ―The time will come when these co-operative farms will fail.‖ May I also be permitted to 

make a prophesy? It is this: co-operative farming in this province is here to stay, and it will succeed, and 

it will one day provide the pattern for successful and happy rural like in this and all countries. The 

Rochdale pioneers of England, who founded modern co-operative organizations 100 years ago, and 

which now boasts a membership of 10 million people in that country, those pioneers are remembered 

with reverence and gratitude today, while those who bitterly opposed them are forgotten people, unwept 

un-honoured and unsung. And if I may be permitted a further prophesy, it is this: those who are 

pioneering in co-operative farming in this province today will be remembered and honoured in history in 

this province and in the Dominion when those who oppose them, as the opposition is doing, will have 

long-since passed into the limbo of forgotten things. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — What a prophesy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition, who is a lawyer and not a farmer, and is 

interested in farming as an investment and not as a way of life, has had the temerity to inform this House 

that the matador is not a properly organized co-operative. 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
891 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I inform him from the authority of scores of bona fide farmers and co-operators 

that the Matador and other veteran co-operative farms are true co-operatives, and I think that the hon. 

members in this House will accept the opinion of practical farmers and scientific farmers, and those 

skilled in co-operative organization, rather than the opinion of the hon. Leader of the Opposition who 

has shown himself opposed to co-operatives, not only on this, but on other occasions. 

 

Neither the hon. Leader of the Opposition nor I can claim to be authorities on co-operative farming, or 

any kind of farming for that matter. I know that the hon. Leader of the Opposition claims to be a 

member of the Wheat Pool. I assume that he has acquired farms, and it is no business of mine how he 

acquired them, or how many he has got, but the fact remains that he is not an active farmer in this 

province. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You are not a farmer, and know nothing about farming. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Along with the hon. Leader of the Opposition, I, too, was born and brought up on 

a farm . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You sure look it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A long time ago. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — . . . and I also farmed in this province after the First World War, and I have 

associated myself wherever opportunity afforded with the progressive farm movement and co-operatives 

in this province ever since I was old enough to think for myself. Nevertheless, I would not dare to trust 

my own judgement on farming or co-operative matters, and that is why, as far back as August, 1944, 

when we were anticipating the end of the war and the return of veterans, many of them to farming, that I 

requested a conference of farming experts and members of those organizations interested in veteran 

re-establishment. Now, this conference was help in Regina, August 25, 1944, and here is the complete 

report of the conference. It comprised 63 delegates or members of co-operatives; there were 11 

representatives from the government of Canada, including such men as J. McPhail of the Experimental 

Station, Melfort, George Spence, P.F.R.A., Ralph Stutt of the Economics division of the University of 

Saskatchewan, L.B. Thompson, the present P.F.R.A. administrator, and so on. There were five from the 

University of Saskatchewan, including Dr. Kirk, the Dean of the College at that time, J. Mitchell of the 

Soils Department, Professor Van Vliet. It included five from the Saskatchewan Co-operative Producers 

Limited; nine from the United Farmers of Canada; three from the Co-operative Union of Saskatchewan; 

15 from the government, largely from the Department of Agriculture and from the Department of 

Co-operatives; and 17 other experts in their various fields. Incidentally, there were three representative 

farm women present at that conference. 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
892 

After very careful consideration that conference on co-operative farming passed the following 

resolution: 

 

Therefore be it resolved that several alternative plans for the application of co-operative principles to 

the problem of agricultural production and ways and means of providing facilities for the improvement 

of rural living conditions be prepared by a representative committee appointed by this conference, 

with special reference to the needs of veterans; but the said plans be drafted in such a way as to be 

applicable to the needs of interested farmers generally, and in order to implement this recommendation 

that negotiations be undertaken with Dominion officials responsible for the administration of the 

Veterans‘ Land Act, in order that such amendments to the Act, or regulations there under, be enacted 

as may be necessary to facilitate the preparation and carrying out of suitable plans; and it is further 

recommended that the objective of any co-operative farming scheme, whether limited or 

comprehensive in scope, should be to encourage those participating to assume full responsibility as 

soon as possible in administrating such a scheme on a co-operative basis. 

 

Now that was the resolution passed by the 63 delegate farmers and agricultural experts to this 

conference. They further set up a consultative committee of 17 members, and under that consultative 

committee, which has continued to remain in existence down to the present time, they set up a research 

committee, and the purpose of the research committee was to investigate co-operative farming in 

Saskatchewan, the Dominion of Canada and elsewhere, and bring in their recommendations. Now, who 

comprised the members of that research committee: A.H. Turner, convenor, E.E. Eisenhauer, L.B. 

Thompson, Professor Van Vliet of the University of Saskatchewan, R.A. Stutt of the University, G.B. 

Harrison, J. Harrison, J. Mitchell, Dr. Hardy of the University and H. B. Mott. 

 

This research committee conducted an exhaustive research and personal investigation into all types of 

co-operatives, and a great deal of thought and time and effort went into the reports which they prepared. 

This is the first report, and I doubt whether any member of the opposition has read a single line of it. 

This was prepared in 1946, and submitted in that year. In the following year a further report on 

co-operative farming was submitted, and here is the report, and again, I would state that I doubt very 

much whether a single member of the opposition, including the Leader, has interested himself to the 

extent of reading a single line of those recommendations. I ask the people of this House, and the people 

of Saskatchewan, to decide: are the farming co-operatives set up in accordance with the 

recommendations in these reports true co-operatives or not? Is the hon. Leader of the Opposition right, 

and all these practical farmers and agricultural experts wrong? I think no, Mr. Speaker, and personally I 

accept the opinion of these practical farmers and these experts on constituencies organizations, rather 

than the opinion of one who has shown himself to be unfavourable to co-operatives, not only on this but 

on many other occasions. 

 

On the basis of these recommendations, contained in these reports, six veteran co-operative farms have 

already been organized, and three additional co-operative farms will undoubtedly be organized in 1949. 

The co-operative farm schools are being held at the present time; the first one is already in 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
893 

operation in Saskatoon and there are requests for enrolment of 85 veteran students in those co-operative 

schools. It is rather amazing that a short time ago it became known that the Matador Co-operative Farm 

was taking on one additional man, and 40 applications from veterans were received although it was not 

advertised in any way. And so you see, Mr. Speaker, in spite of misrepresentations and propaganda to 

the effect that these are collective farms, and not true co-operatives, the popularity of co-operative 

farming is growing rapidly in this province, and not all the forces of reaction and politically motivated 

saboteurs will prevail against them. 

 

In accordance with the request of this conference of which I speak, I went to Ottawa in the fall of 1944 

and entered into negotiations with the Department of Veterans Affairs there, particularly under the 

Veterans‘ Land Act, to have some of their recommendations implemented. Well, I did succeed in getting 

an agreement with the federal Department of Veterans‘ Affairs to advance rehabilitation grants in the 

amount of $2,320 to individuals who were on provincial Crown lands. I also endeavoured, over a term 

of years, to have permission granted so that these rehabilitation grants could be pooled and used by 

veterans who wished to settle on a co-operative farm basis. I did not get very far, but eventually, in 

desperation, I applied for permission to appear before the parliamentary committee on Veterans‘ Affairs. 

I did appear before that committee on June 10, 1948. Now, the hon. Leader of the Opposition claims that 

he was very much in evidence during the first year. He was present, and believe me, he was not helpful 

on any occasion. His position, I imagine, was that of observer to perceive that we did not get grants for 

the veterans who wished to settle farms. He was Parliamentary Assistant to the Minister of the time. 

 

I had thought that I had created a pretty fair impression on that first parliamentary committee. The hon. 

Leader of the Opposition smiles. He seems to doubt that such was the case. Well, here are the 

concluding remarks of the chairman of the committee: 

 

If there are no more questions, I think we will bring this meeting to a close. Before I do that I certainly 

want to express the thanks of the sub-committee to Mr. Sturdy for coming here this morning. If I may 

say so, and I am sure this will meet with the approval of all the members, Mr. Sturdy is one of the best 

witnesses that we have had in committee. As a matter of fact, after listening to many witnesses in 

committee, I would say that it is a knack that is not given to everybody. I might say that Mr. Sturdy 

qualifies very highly in that respect. His evidence has been most useful, and I am sure we are all very 

grateful for it. 

 

Naturally, after that I expected a rather favourable report from that committee but I am sure it was the 

Leader of the Opposition who say to it that such a recommendation as this went before the parliamentary 

committee, and it was along this line: they objected to making these grants available to veterans settling 

on co-operative farms, for the reason that these were experimental venture of a different philosophy, of a 

new social order. What in the world that meant, I really don‘t know, but it served its purpose, and so we 

did not get co-operative grants for our veterans. 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
894 

I was dissatisfied, naturally, so I asked permission, in correspondence with the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition, and permission was granted for me to appear before the special committee on veterans‘ 

affairs on July 16, 1946. The hon. Leader of the Opposition was chairman of that committee, but he saw 

to it, on this particular day, that he relinquished his chairmanship to the vice-chairman in order that he 

could sit among the members and make it very hot for the representative from Saskatchewan indeed. He 

proceeded to do so, and he muddied the waters, got us off the business of discussing co-operatives, and 

with what was going to happen to veterans in ten or 15 years time – an I will have more to say about that 

presently – with the result that grants were not recommended. I am sure, however, Mr. Speaker, that if 

the vote had been taken that day, when 25 members of that parliamentary committee were present, that it 

would have recommended that these rehabilitation grants be given to veterans who wished to settle 

co-operatively. But no, the vote was not held on that day but it was held on a subsequent date when all 

the other members, who had never heard the arguments, were present and, of course, it was voted down. 

 

I am usually a good-natured type of individual, so good-natured that I am sure many of my colleagues 

think I am soft . . . 

 

Some Hon. Member: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — . . .but I can be stubborn, and I was determined not to let this matter drop. I 

returned to the fray, and from July 16, 1946 until June, 1948, I tried every device known, in my limited 

powers, to get these grants through. It is significant that it was only after the Hon. Ian McKenzie became 

Minister of the Department of Veterans‘ Affairs, and the hon. Leader of the Opposition returned to 

Saskatchewan, that I got those grants through in June, 1948. I came to the conclusion that when the hon. 

Leader of the Opposition left Ottawa, what was Ottawa‘s gain was certainly Saskatchewan loss. 

 

So much for those rehabilitation grants. I want to say that these rehabilitation grants were earned by our 

veterans by virtue of their services to this country in time of war, and they should not be the subject of 

political skulduggery, and so on, in having them withheld these several years. 

 

I am sure that we are all alarmed at the relatively few numbers of our returned veterans who have been 

settled in agriculture, rehabilitated in agriculture, since their return at the end of the war; I mean 

relatively few veterans in comparison to the large numbers who wish to be rehabilitated in farming. I 

have come to the conclusion that veteran settlement on farms in the Dominion, and in this province, is 

slowing down to a snail‘s pace, and for very obvious reasons which I shall explain later. 

 

After the First Great War, 27,000 veterans settled under the Soldiers‘ Settlement Board. According to 

the December issue of the Country Guide, less than 17,000 veterans have been settled on the land in this 

country since the end of the present war. And remember that there are a great many more enlisted men 

in the World War II than there were in World War I. We have some 4,000 veteran applications for 

settlement under our provincial settlement scheme that we have been unable to satisfy. The Veterans‘ 

Land Act probably have an equal, or a 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
895 

still greater number, but according to The Leader-Post of March 8, only 6,470 loans have been approved 

up to the present time in this province, and if we subtract the 1,200 grants advanced to veterans on 

provincial lands up to that time, and loans advanced to veterans who already owned their farms, the 

number of veterans settled on farms purchased on their behalf by V.L.A. is not very imposing. 

 

Under the federal Veterans‘ Land Act, $6,000 may be expended on the purchase of a farm. Anything in 

excess of this amount must be provided by the veterans, together with ten percent of the $6,000, or $600. 

An economic farm unit cannot be purchased in this province today for $6,000 or for anything like it. 

You can scan the advertisement section in any issue of The Leader-Post, and you will find this sort of 

thing that I am reading to you now. Here is one recent issue: farms advertised, three of them in the 

Regina district; one at $50 per acre, another at $60 per acre, another at $65 per acre, with the notation 

that it is not high priced; another at Adams $50 an acre; one at Grand Coulee for $60 an acre; and so on. 

Well, let us examine this economic farm unit of 320 acres at Grand Coulee: 320 acres at $60 per acre, 

$19.200. Of this, V.L.A. would be prepared to advance $5,400, which would leave the veteran $13,800 

to put in himself, together with supplying himself with a full line of arm equipment. These are some of 

the reasons why so few veterans who wish to farm are being placed on farms today. 

 

Here is something else revealed in any advertising section of the daily newspapers, such as the one I 

have before me. Many of the farms for sale are of very high acreage. Here is one at Regina: 1,120 acres 

at $65 per acre. Certainly no veteran could buy that. Another one: 960 acres; another: 800 acres; one at 

Fillmore: 800 acres; one at Froude: 800 acres; and so on through the list. I am informed that there is a 21 

section farm near Rouleau. Now, if that is owned and operated by one, large, individual owner, and I 

venture to say he is a bachelor, that farm of 21-sections would support on a co-operative basis, 42 

families without any trouble whatsoever. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why don‘t you try it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Today, as I said, it supports only one family. Under co-operative farming it could 

readily support 42 families. 

 

Let me give you another classic example. This was brought so forcibly to my attention because it is 

located very close to the Matador Co-operative Farm, north of Swift Current. This is another example of 

the trend in this province toward larger and larger individually owned, and highly mechanized farms. 

This farm, very close to the Matador, comprises 8,000 acres. It happens to be farmed by a bachelor. 

Originally there were many farms comprising that large, individual farm. There were actually two 

schools located on that farm, and there were 18 individual farms on that farm that is now occupied by 

one farmer. That is not good for the district and it is not good for the province. I would like to contrast 

that situation with the Matador Co-operative Farm on which, at the present time, there are 17 families, 

between 40 and 50 people living in security and happiness, with many of the amenities of life that we 

want tot see them enjoy, providing for the development of the community, and that is the situation. The 

Matador Co-operative Farm will 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
896 

presently have a membership of over 35 and within a few years there will be from 150 to 200 souls 

being supported on that one farm. 

 

Unless this trend of large, individually-owned farms is replaced by co-operative farms, we will have a 

sparsely populated province of very large individually-owned, grain-producing farms. If the federal 

Veterans‘ Land Act will permit veterans to pool the $6,000 purchase loads, thousands of landless 

veterans can be settled co-operatively and this will be a much healthier, happier and secure province. 

 

I say healthier because, in my humble opinion, no agricultural economy can be healthy under large, 

single-purpose farms. There must be mixed farming and as wide a diversification as the farm will 

economically permit. 

 

I say happier because people will not longer tolerate isolation of the individual farm, and I don‘t blame 

them. Co-operative farms banish isolation, and make possible the amenities associated with community 

living: electric power, plumbing, running water, community centres, schools, and so on. 

 

Women are particularly enthusiastic about the co-operative farm organization. I listened to the Leader of 

the Opposition shedding crocodile tears yesterday over the fate of the farm women who are deprived of 

the benefits of such an amenity as electricity. Well, you know, if he will join with us and we can secure 

the rapid expansion of co-operative farms in this province. I will guarantee to him that every decently 

sized co-operative farm in this province will have electricity as well as many other amenities. 

 

I am sure he must have been very impressed when he went to Carrot River, not to investigate 

co-operative farming but to find out what he could for election purposes – this was prior to June last 

year. He would have found, out in the sticks, 23 miles from the nearest town . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, I sat here and wondered just how long you would let the hon. member 

proceed. He has undertaken to say why I went to that farm. He has not right to impute the reason why I 

went to that farm. On a question of privilege he had no right to say that. Were it that I have nothing but 

contempt for his opinion when he starts abusing me, I would have raised the point long ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member is expressing an opinion, which is often done in this House. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, do you suggest that if a person expresses an opinion, they can express the 

idea such as to mention that I went to that farm to have a look at the co-operative farming. He said I 

went there just for political purposes. He imputed motives to me. If your Honour rules that that is 

correct, well, then, I assure you that what is applied to that side, we will also make use of on this side, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If the hon. member who has just spoken disclaims he went for any other purpose than 

to find out how it was going, I am sure the hon. member will retract. 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
897 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to do that, but I must accept facts as I find them, and I 

was informed – because I was there two or three days after he was – that the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition did not call on the co-operative farm, either at River Bend or on the Sunningdale farm, other 

than to get directions. He never talked to a man, woman or child on those two co-operative farms, but he 

went on to the headquarters where the land clearance was under operation. Then too, he had a 

photographer from the Star-Phoenix with him, and he was not interested in taking photographs of the 

very large and efficient type of land clearance equipment we have there, but he would run across a bit of 

broken down machinery and say: ―Take a picture of this.‖ And one of our buildings which happened to 

be a bit dilapidated – he would tell him to take a picture of that. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend was not there, and what he had retailed to the House is not 

correct. I did not take the Star Phoenix photographer along; he road along in the same vehicle; he was 

interested in my movements, that is all. I had nothing to do with the pictures he took. My hon. friend, 

after all, is a Minister of the Crown; he should not engage in fiction on the floor of the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Mr. Speaker, I was almost moved to tears myself yesterday over the sad plight he 

pictured of the women of this province who were deprived of electricity. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I know, you don‘t care. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition would find in the project up there, which has 

just been operating for a year or so, there was electric light and electric power provided for those people. 

If he had gone into some of the pioneer farms that had been established under the Liberals 30 or 40 years 

ago, and had been existing there under 35 years of Liberal administration, he would not have found any 

electricity. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, might I ask the hon. gentleman a question? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Do you wish the hon. gentleman to ask a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I am prepared to accept a question, and I can assure the hon. gentleman of a 

sensible answer, something I cannot get from the opposition. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — My hon. friend suggests that, with respect to rural electrification in the province, that 

co-operative farms is the answer. Is he in favour of having this whole province brought under a system 

of so-called co-operative farming? 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
898 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I am just advocating the very large, individual farms being brought under 

co-operative farming for the benefit of the land hungry veterans of this province/ 

 

Years ago I had the very great privilege of living at Fort Qu‘Appelle for a number of years, in the 

Qu‘Appelle Valley, and that was in the vicinity of Mr. Gardiner‘s farm at Lemberg. On one occasion I 

visited him on his farm, and he has every reason to be proud of that very fine farm of his; but on thing 

struck me – that the electric power ran by his very door, 50 yards away from the house, an yet he had a 

wind electric. I called this to his attention and he informed me, and gave me a lot of arguments as to why 

people preferred the wind electric to the electric power. He ended up his argument by saying, and I can 

remember it so distinctly: ―It is so very much cheaper, you know.‖ 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Were you a Liberal then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — He said: ―There is a lot of wind in this province, and it is so very cheap.‖ After 

listening to the Leader of the Opposition for the past six weeks, I can only say how right Mr. Gardiner 

was. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Do you think that is funny? Were you there to be a candidate of his? 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I would suggest a slogan for the rural =electrification programme . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — On a point of order, is that dealing with the resolution? 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Yes, it is. It is just a suggestion. I have a suggestion, and I offer it in all kindness 

. . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — If it is about wind, it isn‘t necessary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I suggest that in their rural electrification programme they might have a slogan 

something along this line: ―Buy wind electrics, we will supply wind.‖ 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You mean the government? Is that what you favour? You should put that in the Bill. 

 

Mr. Dundas: — Are you going to put golf courses on these farms? 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I would like to ask my friend for Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Dundas) why a 

farmer should not play golf? 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
899 

Mr. Tucker: — Sure, that‘s what he wants. Especially if it is free. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition has been invited to visit the co-operative 

farms. He has been invited on more than one occasion to visit the Matador Co-operative Farm, but he 

has never seen fit to do so. 

 

You know, the people who are most enthusiastic about the co-operative farms are the women, and I 

think they would not advise the hon. Leader of the Opposition to attempt to persuade the women that 

co-operative farmers were not good farmers. He might find himself in an even more embarrassing 

position, and a more dangerous position, than the hon. member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. McCormack) 

who interfered with some ladies whose homes and livelihood were in jeopardy. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — He said I interfered with some ladies. I will ask the gentleman to retract that 

statement. After all, he is a Minister of the Crown, and there must be some restrictions upon what he can 

say. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I withdraw, Mr. Speaker. I understand it was the women who did the interfering 

with the hon. gentleman. 

 

I say that co-operative farming affords greater security because of a greater diversity in farming. Already 

the Matador, as an example in farming, has made a beginning in beef cattle, dairy cattle, pigs, chickens, 

irrigated gardens and the irrigation of 320 acres for crop. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Who did that for them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Come depression, or any other economic disaster, they will have the security of 

their homes, of food, and of a happy, well-adjusted community life. You know, my friend, the Leader of 

the Opposition disregards history completely when he prophesies the failure of co-operative farming. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tell us about Russia. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: —The fact is that co-operative farming is centuries old, leading back to the very 

beginning of agricultural history, and I doubt whether he knows that. The co-operative farming of today, 

as of tomorrow, will be the adoption of modern, scientific agricultural methods to the social instinct for 

mutual aid. That is co-operation . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — It sounds like Karl Marx to me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — My hon. friend makes a play upon words; tries to confuse people with words, 

calling them communal farms, collective farms. He uses words for propaganda purposes, but he does not 

impress anybody except himself and his willing cohorts. 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
900 

An Hon. Member: — He does not know what they are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — You know, in the villages of the old country is the most permanent organization in 

history. Does my hon. friend know that? Yet the long history of working together of the village 

community, in the lands of our forefathers – from whatever country we originate – that is one of the 

most astonishing facts of history. History repeats itself, Mr. Speaker, and we are gradually, painfully, 

and against great odds, reasserting the co-operative way of life. The individualism, the competitive 

system with its mad scramble for wealth, for personal aggrandizement and privilege, is on its way out, 

and its passing cannot be too soon for the peace, prosperity and happiness of the world. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, what is the hon. gentleman reading from – the Karl Marx Manifesto? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Shumiatcher. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — You wouldn‘t know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. Leader of the Opposition, when he cannot find any logical 

refutation of argument, he trots out communism and Karl Marx. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, what are you reading from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition has certainly had a lot to say, not only on our 

veteran co-operatives but on our veterans land settlement generally. The facts are that this government 

has settled more veterans on farms than has any other provincial government across the dominion of 

Canada. Here is a statement from the Country Guide, December, 1948. It is this: ―2,625 veterans have 

been settled on provincial lands in the four western provinces, 90 percent of these in the provinces of 

Alberta and Saskatchewan.‖ In Saskatchewan, this government has allocated farms to some 1,700 

veterans, so it appears that Saskatchewan has settled some 800 more veterans than the other three 

western provinces put together. 

 

Now the members on your left, Mr. Speaker, and their political cohorts, have endeavoured to stir up 

dissatisfaction amongst our veteran settlers, stating that they should be granted ownership of their land, 

deeds to their lands, and so on. The hon. Leader of the Opposition has set himself up as the great 

champion of the veteran. Well, what is his record in getting ownership to veterans in this province and in 

the Dominion of Canada? You know, I am quoting from a press dispatch, Ottawa, dated June 18, 1948, 

just last year; ―commons committee on Veterans‘ Affairs heard a delegation ask clear title for the 2,879 

veterans of the First World War who still owe the government a total of $3,124,000 for lands on which 

they were established as soldier settlers nearly three decades ago.‖ What is the story? That almost three 

. . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member is going to go into this question, which is out of order 

on this debate, I must ask your Honour to have the right to reply to it. 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
901 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Mr. Speaker, this matter is dealing with veterans . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member, as I understand it, has not spoken on this resolution yet, 

have you? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Then someone else on your side can reply. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — But, Mr. Speaker, I am just rising to a question of order. The hon. member is proposing 

now to deal with the question of giving clear title to veterans under the Soldiers‘ Settlement Act. I 

submit that this is not in order in this debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member who is speaking is relating this to his appeal for co-operative farms, 

and I think it is perfectly in order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I am endeavouring, under considerable difficulty, to prove to the satisfaction of 

this House that our veterans have greater security, a greater degree of security in the tenure of their land 

that they ever had under the old system. It is an amazing thing, is it not, Mr. Speaker, that of the 27,000 

veterans who settled on farms after the last war, that 16,000 were compelled to abandon their homes 

through debts, mortgages, and so on. That is a very bad record indeed, and that is the sort of thing we 

want to avoid under any policy which this province inaugurates. If the hon. Leader of the Opposition 

had been concerned about title to land for veterans, surely he would have seen to it that these 3,000-odd 

veterans, who had slaved on their farms for a period of 30 years, would have been granted title to those 

farms. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think the hon. member is out of order now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Continuing with this article, Mr. Speaker. The President and the Secretary of the 

Soldier Settlers Association . . . 

 

Some Hon. Member: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Mr. Speaker, am I going to be subjected to this type of interruption? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You have just been ruled out of order, that‘s all. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, no I was just . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — On a point of order. First of all, I think you are quite able, your Honour, to keep 

order without the hon. gentleman opposite shouting order. I understood 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
902 

your Honour to say that the reference to the question of the 2,700 veterans was departing from this, but 

the reading of this article, and the whole question of relative value and security under a co-operative, as 

compared with the Soldier Settlement Board, is a matter for proper discussion. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That was my ruling. My ruling was that what he was dealing with just at that moment 

was out of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I shall proceed. 

 

―These two gentleman, officers of the Soldier Settlers Association, presented their case to the 

parliamentary committee and recalled droughts, depression, plague, financial vicissitudes, said that the 

settlers had been pursued with savage vindictiveness by the Soldiers‘ Settlement Board.‖ And they went 

on to state: ―At no time should the Board have been empowered to collect from the settlers until his 

food, shelter, fuel and other necessities had been provided for.‖ But it was so empowered, and left 

behind a trail of destruction, broken homes, hearts and untimely deaths. When these old veterans were 

endeavouring to get titles to their farms, after 30 years of effort, and a resolution was brought up in the 

House of Commons, who was the filibusterer on that particular occasion? It was determined that that 

resolution would be ‗talked out‘, and the hon. Leader of the Opposition was selected as the filibusterer, 

and he carried on during the entire period of the debate, not providing for any vote whatsoever. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has again made a charge which he cannot substantiate. 

He could not make it in the House of Commons. Surely he has no right to make it against me here. That 

could have been brought up later. Mr. Speaker, on that question – I am speaking on a question of 

privilege – the hon. member has now made a statement that I engaged in a filibuster in the House of 

Commons. I spoke on that resolution and pointed out that the matter had been referred to a standing 

committee and would be dealt with there. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I am speaking on a point of privilege. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I am speaking on a question of privilege, and I have the floor, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You are speaking on a point of privilege, and the hon. Premier rose on a point of order. 

Will you state your point of order? 

 

Premier Douglas: — I am stating, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member now is seeking to enter into an 

argument rather than to state a question of privilege. The question has to be stated, and not debated. 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
903 

An Hon. Member: — What are you doing? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the hon. Leader of the Opposition is quite right if he is denying what the 

speaker has quoted. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The hon. Minister said that I engaged in a filibuster in the House of Commons and prevented a vote on 

this question. I was asked, on behalf of the government, to speak on this question and to explain that this 

matter was going to go before a committee where it would be dealt with by the committee. There was 

nothing to prevent that matter being brought up again and ultimately reaching a vote had it been the 

desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Do I understand that your point of privilege is that you were not guilty of a filibuster? 

If so, the hon. member will have to withdraw. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Hansard proves the opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You‘ve no right to say that. The hon. Premier must withdraw that. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member stated on his own responsibility and if so we must accept his 

responsibility. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I withdraw, Mr. Speaker, at your behest. The fact remains that the hon. Leader of 

the Opposition spoke on this resolution, and he spoke at great length . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Not as long as your are speaking now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: —In order to ‗talk out‘ a resolution, they always select someone who is capable of 

speaking at great length without saying anything, and that is exactly what happened in this case. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — It is happening now, too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — When the hon. members of the House of Commons were asking for the hon. 

member to sit down and quit speaking, in order that a vote would be taken, he continued to speak until 

the bell rang, and so a vote was prevented, with the result that 3,000 ‗old sweats‘ continue without the 

deed to their land. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — That is not right. Mr. Speaker, again that is not right. Had a vote been reached it would 

have just asked that the government give consideration to giving title, and they were giving that 

consideration anyway. 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
904 

Premier Douglas: — That is all they‘ll ever get – consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Yes, it has been under consideration for some 30 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am not going to belabour the question further. I think I have made my position clear, and I want to 

warn the members of the opposition that it will avail them little to try to undermine confidence in the 

policy under which veterans are settled in this province, because these young veterans are the sons of 

veterans who settled on farms after the First Great War. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take advantage of this occasion to express my appreciation to the present 

Minister of the federal Department of Veterans‘ Affairs, and to Brigadier Rutherford who is 

administering the Veterans‘ Land Act. They are very fine administrators and are doing an excellent job, 

and I really do like doing business with them. I am confident that if this resolution receives the support 

of the hon. members of the opposition we will have many of these very large, individually-owned farms 

taken over on a co-operative basis by the young veterans of our province. 

 

I would like to sum up with these remarks: that the full implementation of the recommendations 

contained in this resolution would accomplish, first, the settlement of thousands of land-hungry veterans 

over a term of years in this province; secondly, it would provide for the gradual replacement of very 

large, individually-owned, highly-mechanized, highly-diversified co-operative farms, owned by our 

young veterans. And this would provide for a much larger rural population, a much happier and much 

more secure rural population. I don‘t know of anything that would serve to stimulate rural life than the 

establishment of a large number of co-operative farms in this province, and may I again emphasize, Mr. 

Speaker, that co-operative farming today is the application of modern, scientific agricultural methods to 

the age-old social instinct of mutual aid, for mutual well-being. I would like to express my gratitude and 

admiration to these young Saskatchewan veterans who are pioneering in this co-operative field. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. Minister a question? You said that the members of 

the opposition did not read any of the reports that were issued and did not go into the history of 

co-operatives, or the kind of co-operative that you are trying to set up in the province. There is a report 

here . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — What is the question? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I am going to ask the question right away. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Are you speaking to the motion? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Yes, I will speak to the motion. 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
905 

I have a report here on the research on co-operative and group farming, and this was conducted in the 

United States, and in quite a few other countries outside of the United States. As you said, co-operative 

farming, or communal farming as you are trying to start in Saskatchewan, is not a new thing. This report 

gives a history of communal farming in the United States, and the hundreds of attempts that were made 

in communal farming. Here are some of the examples. These are the names of some of the farms which 

were started in the United States, which later turned out to be failure: Friedham Farm lasted for one 

year; Fountain Grove Community Farm lasted for 25 years; Harris Spiritualistic Community Farm 49 

years; Hopedale communities 17 years; House of Israel Community Farm 3 years. All these farms, and 

there are hundred of these, failed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: —Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. This entire debate has been on co-operative farms 

and not communal farms. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — As was pointed out by the Leader of the Opposition, there is quite a difference 

between a co-operative farm and a communal farm. Co-operative farms are those where individuals own 

their own property and enter freely into an agreement to farm co-operatively; the kind of farm, as I 

understand it, you start is where the land is not owned individually but co-operatively, and the profits are 

shared so it is a communal farm. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Oh, no. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — In the United States they tried this on a large scale. I would like to read from the 

Congressional Record of something that happened in the United States when they finally wound up 

some of these communal farms. This was by the Hon. J. Harry McGregor, and here is what he said: ―Not 

even a whimper is heard from Washington as one of the New Deal‘s . . . 

 

Mr. Buchanan: — Mr. Speaker, I understood that the gentleman now speaking is speaking to a point of 

order and asking questions. After he got to his feet he started to make a speech. I was exercising my 

privilege as the mover of this motion to close the debate. After asking the question he proceeds to make 

a speech. I would like to know what his question is. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Your point of order is not well taken. I was just warning the House, and the hon. 

member had the opportunity and privilege to change his mind until you started your address. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I would like to continue, Mr. Speaker, from the Congressional Record: ―. . .free 

spending experiment into a more abundant life goes by the board with the auctioning off in Indiana of 

the remnants of the 600,000 experiment in co-operative communal farming. Deshee Farm was started in 

1937 by the Farm Security Administration, which invested $500,000 plus, and then $100,000 more. It 

may get back now about 50 percent of the investment. The whistle blew . . . 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
906 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — May I ask a question, Mr. Speaker 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — . . . for Deshee farms when Congress cut off further outlay, which was nit 

surprising in view of the report of the Coolidge Committee to the House describing some of the Deshee 

goings on that marked this effort to amend the folkways of a few handfuls of American farm families.‖ 

This is what the Committee said: ―The co-operative or communal farm projects which were created, 

financed and operated by F.S.A., the committee said, had all been dismal failures. Any single witness 

familiar with the record admitted that such undertakings had been a great financial disappointment.‖ 

 

Well, it did not work. Mr. Baldwin, who used to run the farm, is now Sidney Hillmans‘ No. 1 boy in the 

C.I.O.‘s Political Action Committee. I wonder if our Minister of Co-operatives will also be some No., 1 

boy for a political action committee after this thing is over. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I will be very happy to answer that question, Mr. Speaker. In the first place the 

hon. member was not dealing with co-operative farms, he was dealing with communal farms. He said 

there were 600,000 of such farms. I would like to see that record of 600,000 farms. I challenge that 

statement. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He meant $600,000. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I did not say 600,000 farms. I said $600,000. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! You weren‘t listening. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — He is now correcting himself. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Mr. Speaker, it will be necessary for me to read over the report: ―Not even a 

whimper is heard from Washington as one of the New Deal‘s free-spending experiment in a more 

abundant life goes by the board by auctioning off the Indiana remnant of a $600,000 experiment in 

co-operative farming. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: —$600,000 is not 600,000 farms. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — ―Deshee Farm, which cost $600,000, was started in 1947 under the Farm Security 

Administration which invested half a million dollars plus, and $100,000 more. It may get back now 

about 50 percent of the investment. The whistle blew for Deshee Farm when Congress cut off further 

outlay, which is not surprising in view of the report of the Coolidge Committee to the House describing 

some of the bizarre goings on that marked this effort to amend the folkways of a few hundred handfuls 

of American farm families. The co-operative farms, which were credited, financed and operated by 

F.S.A., have all been dismal failures. Every single witness familiar with the record admitted that such 

undertakings had been great financial disappointments. Well, it did not work, and Mr. Baldwin who 

used to run the F.S.A. is now Sidney Hillman‘s No. 1 boy in the C.I.O.‖ 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
907 

I may say that if Karl Marx had heard the remarks made by the Minister of Co-operatives, I think his 

bones would have turned in his grave, they would have been so happy. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — The whole speech was nothing else but a further explanation of socialist and 

communistic propaganda, introducing collective farms into Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I would ask that those statements be withdrawn, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — They are his opinions and he ahs a right to them. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Mr. Speaker, I am expressing my own opinion, that what the Minister is now 

proposing to do is to introduce collective farms into Saskatchewan on a large scale, and he is praising 

their merits, saying that life would be much more abundant in Saskatchewan if such was the case in 

Saskatchewan. We know what happened in Russia: millions of people starved when the Russian 

government introduced communal farms. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You mean that that is your opinion? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — That is true. It is a record of history. The Minister has not made the point clear of 

the difference between co-operative farms and communal farms. We advance the point that the farms he 

is trying to organize are communal farms, and he has not dealt with that subject at all. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — He can‘t. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Where the people own their own parcels of land and enter on a voluntary basis to 

co-operate to produce, that is a co-operative farm, but when the whole parcel is owned by the 

co-operative farm, it is a communal farm, similar to those now run in Russia. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Will the hon. gentleman permit a question? Would the hon. member tell the House 

what percentage of the farmers in Saskatchewan, at the present time, own their farms? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I think nearly all of them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You think. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — What about the mortgage companies? 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
908 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Let the hon. gentleman continue. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — In his speech, the Minister made attacks on the Liberal opposition. He spoke about 

things that had no reference at all to the resolution before the House. I think it is quite improper. Besides 

that, I wonder why there are so many resolutions introduced by the members on the opposite side on this 

type of legislation? I believe it is always the custom of the opposition to introduce resolutions, and for 

the other side to introduce Bills. Seeing that the federal election is likely to be held this year, the C.C.F. 

group is trying to make political hay by introducing all kinds of impertinent resolutions so that they 

would have something to bellyache about when the election comes around. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think you had better keep to the resolution. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, has the hon. member introduced a regulation? There is nothing to 

stop him. He has been here six weeks. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I may tell the Premier there was one sensible regulation introduced by the hon. 

member for Turtleford (Mr. Trippe). 

 

Premier Douglas: — Why couldn‘t you think up a sensible one? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Please allow the hon. gentleman to continue. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I don‘t think Mr. Speaker, there is very much to criticize in the speech of the 

Minister of Co-operatives because very little was said about co-operatives. It was mostly a political 

speech that he should have made under the speech from the throne, but he was late, and tried to do it 

right here. 

 

Mr. N. L. Buchanan (Notekeu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, I had no idea, when I introduced this 

regulation that it was going to cause such a controversy. I felt that the idea of co-operation had been so 

well expressed by the people of Saskatchewan that the opposition, regardless of what political stripe it 

might be in this province, would support any co-operative idea, but the first speaker in the opposition, 

the hon. Leader of the Opposition at the very first, and throughout his entire speech, tried to confuse the 

issue, and possibly I did not express myself as well as I might have in trying to illustrate what I wanted 

in this resolution. He tried to confuse the issue, and he tried to suggest that what I was asking for in the 

regulation was the same thing as what had already been granted by the Department of Veterans‘ Affairs, 

under the V.L.A. 

 

Let me reiterate what I said then, in order to verify what I intended to say at that particular time when I 

introduced that regulation. Under the present set-up of the Veterans‘ Land Act we have been able, since 

the Leader of the Opposition has no longer been the chairman of the Veterans‘ Affairs 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
909 

Committee at Ottawa, to get the grant of $2,320, given to veterans settling on Crown lands in the 

province of Saskatchewan, under the co-operative set-up. My resolution, as it was worded, was to so 

amend the Veterans‘ Land Act that by purchase agreements veterans who wanted to enter or form a 

co-operative farm could have the V.L.A. purchase this farm under purchase agreement and buy it from 

the V.L.A. under a co-operative organization. The two things are totally different. The $2,320 is the 

amount which the federal government, under the Veterans‘ Land Act, forgives the veteran after ten years 

of farming under purchase agreement. Our Department of Reconstruction convinced the Department of 

Veteran‘s affairs that, if their idea was good, then this $2,320 should be forgiven to the veterans settling 

on Crown lands in the province of Saskatchewan. Eventually, after the Leader of the Opposition 

relinquished his post of chairman of the Veterans‘ Affairs Committee at Ottawa, V.L.A. agreed to do 

this in the province of Saskatchewan on Crown lands. 

 

This resolution asks that this principle be extended further, and that veterans desirous of forming 

co-operatives be given the same consideration on co-operative farms that they were given under the 

purchase agreement, on co-operative farms that were owned by the Crown in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition refers to these farms as communal enterprises, and he tries to draw a 

comparison between them and different religious sects. Now, these religious organizations that set up 

either communal or collective farms in western Canada were sects that had the idea that the entire world 

was opposed to them, and they were going to form a community, a province or a state apart from all the 

ills of the rest of the world. These veterans, on the other hand, realize the ills of the world, and they 

realize the type of country, the type of economic condition they are going to have to deal with. They 

approach things from a far different angle. They approach the thing from the fact that they have to sell 

their products the same as anyone else, and they have to buy the things they need in the same manner 

that everybody else in this country has to buy their things. In other words, they approach it in an 

intelligent manner. Who are we to decide whether they are right or whether they are wrong. If they want 

something in this way; if they have signified their desire, as I pointed out in no uncertain terms when I 

introduced this resolution, who are we to decide whether they shall have it or shall not have it? It is up to 

us to provide the way for them to achieve the things that they believe will work to the advantage of 

themselves and their families, so I introduced this resolution, being a veteran myself, and having worked 

with men who believed in collective work, who believed that in co-operation lay the answer to the things 

that they desire. 

 

I introduced this resolution for another reason. I was born on a farm in the United States. I was raised on 

a farm only 40 miles south of Moose Jaw. I saw my parents struggle with conditions just the same as 

any other farmer in Saskatchewan. I saw them try to get ahead, to build a home for themselves, to 

educate their children, to build security for the future, and I saw in farming, such as we know it today, 

the difficulties that we have in building for the present and in planning for the future. From 

correspondence and contacts that I have had from men and women, not only veterans but civilians as 

well, I see in co-operative farming a possibility that we may be able to build a better life in that way on 

the farms of Saskatchewan; a more secure life than we have had in the past; and so I would like to see 

established at different points in 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
910 

the province of Saskatchewan, co-operative farms that would serve as a lesson, whether it is good or 

bad, to the other people of Saskatchewan. I believe it will be good. The hon. Leader of the Opposition 

thinks it will be bad, but who are we to judge. Let us provide the opportunity for individuals, and if they 

want to try it, let us provide the opportunity to try it. Let us not forejudge the scheme to failure. Let us 

give them all the opportunity in the world, and make provision that if the thing is a failure they will have 

lost nothing by it. That is all this resolution asks for; that is all the by-laws of the various co-operative 

enterprises established under the Department of Rehabilitation in this province has provided for. 

 

A co-operative farm, as we have established them in various parts, is not enough. I would like to see 

co-operative farms established in the various soil areas in the province of Saskatchewan. We have 

proven in this province that co-operatives in the various fields of endeavour have proven to be a success. 

Since making my initial speech on this resolution in the legislature I have received a number of letters, 

some of them from veterans and some of them from civilians. I would like to read one of these typical 

letters, for the record of the House: 

 

Dear Mr. Buchanan: 

 

I have listened to your broadcast today, and was very interested in your speech. Why just veterans in 

your co-operative farms? We were blown up in 1934 and have had nothing but poverty and hard work 

ever since. We are slowly getting a little better off, but I still wash clothes over a scrubbing board and 

tub, and my husband farms with horses. We bought the quarter-section we are living on, and now only 

owe $1,300. It might not sound much, but we have raised four children, and we came up here 

destitute, and we have no debts. My husband works all the hours God gives him, and I try to do my 

share, but oh how we would like things a little easier. 

 

Would it be possible for us to sell our land, and join in on a co-op farm? There are four or five of us 

around here very interested in it. We live 13 miles from town and in the winter community life is at a 

standstill. My husband‘s cousin belongs to a co-operative farm near Meskanaw, and says it is one of 

the best ideas on farming yet. 

 

Thanking you in advance, I remain, 

 

and so on. This person is not a veteran, but a civilian. I have received a number of letters from civilians 

and a number from veterans. I would like to make it clear to any civilian who might hear what I am now 

saying that I am definitely not opposed to civilian co-operatives, but I believe that through the V.L.A. 

we have an opportunity to set up co-operative farms which might be something of a lesson, or of an 

experience for civilians to follow in the future; something of an experiment that we can guide our 

experience by. We talked about rural electrification; we talked about community life; we see our school 

houses closing; we see our farmers going into the city and into the towns; we see rural life dying. I think, 

and I sincerely believe that co-operative 



 

March 24, 1949 

 

 
911 

farming is the answer to many of these problems. That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I sincerely 

moved this resolution on veterans‘ co-operative farming. 

 

The motion was carried on the following division: 

 

YEAS — 28 

 

Douglas (Weyburn) Thair Heming 

Wellbelove Darling Dewhurst 

Benson Nollet Stone 

McIntosh Howe Erb 

Brockelbank Sturdy Kuziak 

Fines Douglas (Rosetown) Denike 

Lloyd Williams Swallow 

Brown Gibbs Willis 

Gibson  Buchanan 

Murray  Larsen 

 

NAYS — 19 

 

Tucker Danielson Loehr 

Marion Dundas Banks 

Loptson Woods McDonald 

Prince Trippe Deshaye 

Culliton Egnatoff McCormack 

Patterson Korchinski Blanchard 

 Cameron  

  

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:55 o‘clock p.m. 


