



















































Hansard: March 28, 1949


932 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Eleventh Legislature 

 

Monday, March 28, 1949 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

STATEMENT RE FISHING INDUSTRY 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I should like 

to make a statement with regard to the fishing industry of the province. 

 

As all here know, the whole inland fishing industry in Canada is in great difficulties due to the coming 

back of the salt water industry and the approach of normal conditions in other food supplies. 

Saskatchewan is not exception to the rule, though with all our disadvantage of distance and location of 

our best lakes, our fishermen are somewhat better placed than many neighbouring fishermen in the 

province on either side of us. 

 

I should, therefore, like to congratulate all those who have worked so hard to achieve this and to pay a 

well-earned tribute to the staff of the Department of Natural Resources and the Fish Board for their good 

service in a very difficult task. 

 

After very careful consideration, the government has come to the conclusion that in the face of so many 

adverse factors to continue to operate the Saskatchewan Fish Board as a commercial agency, attempting 

to buy and sell fish and to measure the results on a balance sheet, is not advisable. At this time we 

should remember that the prime objective of the Saskatchewan Fish Board has always been to render a 

service to the fishermen and to improve their economic position. The making of profits has never been 

an objective in this industry. The government has now decided to concentrate on the social and 

economic needs of those fishermen who must, of necessity, fish for a part of their living. It has now been 

decided to discontinue the Saskatchewan Fish Board as a commercial operation but it will continue to 

act as an agency of the Department of Natural Resources. The filleting and packing plants will be taken 

over by the Department of Natural Resources and will be kept available for the use of the fishing 

industry. 

 

The government recognizes that during the past years fishing has become of considerable economic 

importance to a limited number of people in the province and also, because of the perishable nature of 

the product and the distance from the principle market, extreme difficulties confront the fishermen. The 

Department of Natural Resources will, therefore, increase its advisory and regulatory functions in the 

fisheries of Saskatchewan for the purpose of improved conservation, improved quality of product and to 

assist the fishermen to so organize that they will be better able to protect their interests in the marketing 

of fish. 

 

In addition, the Department of Natural Resources will, in special circumstances, also guarantee a floor 

price to those fishermen who must fish for a living when it is economically and socially advisable to do 

so and, on 



 

March 28, 1949 

 

 
933 

request of the fishermen that the department market their fish for them, the Fish Board Division of the 

Lake and Forest Products Corporation will act as the agent of the department in carrying out this 

marketing operation. The floor prices paid to the fishermen will be such that it will pay normal expenses 

of operation and provide a living while they are fishing. The returns from all the fish marketed will go 

towards paying the floor price and the expenses of marketing and any surplus will be distributed as a 

dividend to the fishermen. Any deficit will be paid by the Department of Natural Resources and will be 

reported to this Assembly by way of supplementary estimates at the nest session. 

 

Where such operations are carried on, only local fishermen will receive licences to fish and limits will 

be set with regard to good conservation practice and the needs of the fishermen. It is also expected that 

any transportation or processing necessary will be contracted. 

 

I am pleased to announce this programme for the coming season and I hope the department will have the 

full co-operation of all members of this Assembly in carrying it through. The needs of the people of the 

north for greater incomes is evident to all. This plan can be a constructive plan for remunerative 

employment of some or our northern people. Needless to state, the cash income of the people in the 

north is only one half of their economic problem. The other half is how much in food, clothing and 

supplies can be bought with the dollars received for fish and furs. Therefore, the Trading Division of the 

Lake and Forest Products Corporation will continue to operate and to improve the six trading posts. 

Greater use of the Saskatchewan Fur Marketing Service will be encouraged among the trappers of the 

north, so as to get for them the full value of their fur. 

 

To implement this programme, it will be necessary for officials of the department to hold meetings with 

fishermen at the many different lakes or settlements to explain the programme and to ascertain the 

wishes of the majority of fishermen at each point. I hope I can attend every such meeting held in his own 

constituency. I also invite the Leader of the Opposition to attend some of these meetings where the 

question will be discussed on its merits without any political reference. 

 

The policy thus outlined will, of course, apply any place in the province where the required 

circumstances exist, but it is quite evident that fishermen on the southern lakes are in a different position 

from those in the far north. These fishermen could organize in co-operatives and do much more for 

themselves in the handling and marketing of their product. The Department of Natural Resources and 

the Department of Co-operation will encourage and assist this development. 

 

I should also point out that so semblance of efficient or orderly marketing in the interest of the fishermen 

can be achieved by a private fish dealer, a co-operative or a government agency except they have some 

assurance of getting a certain volume of fish from a lake or an area. Completely unregulated and 

unplanned merchandising will, in all cases, ultimately damage 



 

March 28, 1949 

 

 
934 

the interests of the fishermen. I can emphatically state that the government has not intention of wilfully 

allowing such chaotic conditions to exist but will continue to plan to organize and to regulate the 

industry in the best interests of the fishermen. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:00 o’clock p.m. 


