



















































Hansard: March 25, 1949


912 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Eleventh Legislature 

 

Friday, March 25, 1949 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o‘clock p.m. 

 

EXPRESSIONS OF SYMPATHY 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, two of our members have recently 

been bereaved and I thought I would just like to say a word about it, and I am sure the House would like 

to join with me in offering to them our deepest sympathy. 

 

The mother of Mr. J.W. Horsman, the member for Wilkie, as most members know, just recently passed 

away. She was born in 1858, was married to Mr. David Horsman in 1880, and came to Saskatchewan in 

1907. She is survived by five daughters, 40 grandchildren and 31 great-grandchildren. Not many people 

have the pride of looking back on a record such as this. Her husband died in 1939, and Mrs. Horsman 

just died recently. I felt, Mr. Speaker, you might, on behalf of the House, write to the hon. member 

expressing the sympathy of the House and offering our condolences. 

 

The Minister of Municipal Affairs, Hon. L.F. McIntosh, also has lost his father-in-law, Mr. Robert 

Jones, who came to Canada from Ireland in 1890, and who worked on a farm in the Brandon district, 

and later joined the Canadian North West Mounted Police. In 1897 he was chosen to be with one of the 

detachments of the Canadian North West Mounted Police going to England to the Diamond Jubilee of 

Queen Victoria. He spent some time in the Yukon with the force. He was a veteran of World War I, 

member of the Prince Albert police force, and later employed by the dominion government in the Excise 

and Customs Branch, and retired about ten years ago. He was active in the Masonic Lodge, and he, too, 

passed away this week. His funeral will also be held tomorrow. I thought the members would want to 

join in expressing to the Minister of Municipal Affairs and the member for Wilkie, our deepest 

sympathy at their bereavement. 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Rosthern): — On behalf of those on this side of the House, we would like to be 

associated with the words of the Premier in expressing sympathy to these colleagues of ours who have 

been bereaved. 

 

As the Premier said, in regard to our colleague, Mr. Horsman, his mother certainly has, in her lifetime, 

made a real contribution, as so many of our pioneers have done, to the building up of our province. 

Although she was over the age of 91 I understand she was in full possession of her faculties right until 

the time of her death. Certainly, we do extend our sincere sympathy to her son who is one of our 

colleagues. 

 

We also wish to join with the Premier in extending our sympathy to the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

Mr. Jones, obviously, was another great pioneer in this province of ours. It seems to bad that these 

pioneers, who 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
913 

joined in laying foundation must pass on. At a time like this we realize that only those who are bereaved 

know the extent of their bereavement and sorrow, but we do try to share with the, and extend to them 

our sympathy. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet moved second reading of Bill No. 107 – An Act to assist Conservation and 

Development of the Agricultural Resources of Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I believe that this particular Bill warrants taking up a bit of time to, first of all, 

point up the need for this type of legislation, as well as to point out some of the principles contained 

within the Bill itself. 

 

In my opinion, the Bill before the House is a most opportune and noteworthy step forward in dealing 

with the basic problems of agriculture in Saskatchewan. This type of Bill, I believe, is even of prior 

importance to the rural electrification Bill which was passed two days ago. In that, reference was made, 

as you all recall, by the hon. Minister of Public Works, in charge of the Power Commission, that the 

density of rural populations and the productivity of soil had a very important bearing and relationship to 

power development in the rural areas of Saskatchewan. As a matter of fact, when one views the entire 

problem, particularly with reference to our own province, one can readily understand the fundamental 

importance that the economy plays in the permanency of the social services that are being made 

available to our people in increasing quantities and of increasing quality. In my opinion, the expansion 

of many services, not only power, but highway construction and social services generally, are going to 

depend to a large extent upon the success and stability of our agricultural industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

First of all I want to say that all of this goes back to the soil itself. I should, therefore, like to draw the 

attention of this House to the great need for people to pay more attention to the fertility of our soil. In 

other words, to become more soil-minded. The people in the United States have been brought up with a 

very sudden start, and a rude awakening, to the fact that much of their land resource has gone down the 

great Mississippi drainage basin to the Gulf of Mexico. Agriculturalists from the great country to the 

south of us tell us that three inches of the topsoil of such outstanding wheat-producing states as 

Nebraska and Kansas have already been lost. In order to point that up, I believe the best way possible 

would be to quote an outstanding botanist at Oberlin College of Agriculture in Ohio. This particular 

state, I believe has a more serious problem of soil depletion than perhaps any other state in the Union. At 

one time this state did enjoy great soil fertility. It is most remarkable, in spite of the fact that this 

continent is still a young continent, our soil depletion and erosion problems are so marked and so far 

advanced due, I presume, to the fact that we were mechanized at a more early date than any other 

country in the world, which, in turn, due to bad agricultural practices, has resulted in a whole lot of soil 

erosion. I would like to quote to the House what Dr. Paul B. Seres of Oberlin College, Ohio, has to say 

with reference to the relationship of soil fertility, not only to human health, but to the health 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
914 

of animals as well. I would like to put in this plug for agriculture, pointing out to the Minister of 

Education and the Minister of Public Health, the important part that soil does play in the health of our 

people. Dr. Seres has this to say, and he begins by talking about the quality of the race horses in the blue 

grass region of Kentucky: 

 

I don‘t care to talk about race horses, only to point out the important part that soil has played in that 

region in developing quality livestock. More and more, agriculturalists are beginning to realize that 

nutrition plays a more important part in quality livestock than breeding itself. Many place it on a ratio 

of 75:25; 25 percent breeding and 75 percent nutrition. 

 

No doubt a goodly number of Ohio doctors have attended the Kentucky Derby at one time or another. 

If so they have been impressed by the beautiful pastures, homes and farm buildings of the bluegrass 

region. The quality of horses bred there speaks for itself, but the secret of the bluegrass region lies 

neither in the fine breeding stock, nor in the skill and wealth of the owners; it is to be found instead in 

the abundant calcium and phosphorus of the soil. Where these have been exhausted, as sometimes 

happens, the best pedigrees and trainers fail to produce winners. 

 

The situation repeats itself in the phosphate basin of Tennessee, the limestone regions of Missouri and 

Texas, and the Osage Hills of Oklahoma. In these places livestock is vigorous and people are 

prosperous. People, too. Yet every one of these favourable areas is surrounded by mineral-deficient 

soil, and there the contrast is startling. In less than 100 feet one may move from a thriving well-to-do 

region to the other extreme. Livestock grown on poor soil, just outside the bluegrass, or the other rich 

areas I have mentioned, is inferior. It exhibits defects in posture development and figures that are 

unmistakeable. The people who live on these inferior soils are poor, a situation often, but unjustly, 

attributed to the lack of enterprise. The late Carl Blackwell, then Dean of Agriculture at Stillwater, 

Oklahoma, a man thoroughly familiar with the south, told me that he had repeatedly observed the 

same defects of posture development and figure in human beings that are found in animals growing in 

these deficient areas. While Dean Blackwell was not a physician, he was a competent scientist. I may 

add my own observations support this. 

 

Several years ago I was driven through the region around Spartanburg, South Carolina by a quarry 

operator. The soils there are derived from granite and are now heavily eroded. Aside from potassium, 

few of the mineral nutrients are present in any large amounts, even in the topsoil. The low economic 

status of the eroded land was evident‘ my guide remarked: ‗We have to keep a special table to feed up 

the workmen who come to us from this territory, otherwise they are physically unable to do a good 

day‘s work.‘ Presently we reached an area that had escaped erosion, and the topsoil, although far from 

perfect, was still in place. Buildings and fences were well kept. I was told that men who came from 

these homes were vigorous and satisfactory workmen. 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
915 

Other indications of the influence of soil that may be noted are as follows: the bone weight of 

livestock of identical age and breeding may be only one-half of normal in those raised in deficient 

soils. The calcium content of vegetables and the iron content of milk respond definitely to soil 

composition. Vitamin C content in tomatoes can be tripled by a trace of added manganese, and vitamin 

A in apples increased by the addition of neede boron. 

 

I do not feel that it is necessary for me to quote any further to point up the importance of soil fertility to 

the relationship of the well-being of people who till the soil. I presume while I was reading the remarks 

of Dr. Seres many of us could cast our minds to many areas of Saskatchewan where we find poor soils, 

there you find poor people. The soil will only produce as much as the fertility and moisture conditions 

will permit. 

 

To move a little bit closer to our own problem in Saskatchewan, and to endeavour, first of all, to give 

you some indication of the area of our province, and some indication of the soil classification of the 

province on an acreage basis: I think perhaps this is the best way, and the best possible background to 

provide in order to point out, first of all, the magnitude of the problem we have, and then the great 

necessity for an expenditure of public money on soil conservation within our own province before it is 

too late. 

 

I wish to point out that the total land area of Saskatchewan, from north to south, amounts to 

approximately 161 million acres. It is worthy of note that there are only about 9 million of water in the 

entire area of Saskatchewan. That is quite striking, particularly when one flies north of Prince Albert, as 

one immediately gets the conception that at least two-thirds of that country is covered with water. 

Statistics state that there are only 9 million acres of water out of the 160 million acres of the land area of 

the province. That points up one important factor very forcibly: that we are living in a moisture-deficient 

area of the Dominion of Canada. I should mention that there are, out of that 161 million acres of land, 

about 60 million presently occupied by farmers. When you break down that 60 million acres once again, 

you find that there are approximately 33 million of the occupied area of the province presently being 

cultivate. Breaking down again that 33 million acres of cultivated land, we find that there are only about 

8 million acres of that soil that can be classified as very good to good wheat land, the rest being 

moderately good to fair wheat land, which means that we have about 8 million acres of land that we 

don‘t need to worry too much about in the immediate future: the type of soil that you have in the Regina 

plains area. But that means that we have another 25 million acres of cultivated land that is certainly 

subjected to deterioration of fertility or the lack of restoration of fibre in the soil. That is one reason why 

we have inaugurated a forage crop programme, in the hope that we can over come some of the 

tendencies towards exploiting the soil. 

 

I believe that this tendency towards land exploitation has been aggravated to a large extent because of 

the type of economy under which our farmers operate in a mechanized way; not only has the operation 

of the mechanized equipment, under present conditions where you see an ever-increasing price for the 

implements of production, for the tractors, the combines, the harvesters, the reapers, and at the same 

time we have an economic situation 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
916 

where there is no positive assurance that the agricultural commodity prices will correspond to the 

increased capital outlay for our farmers must pay in added cost for farm equipment. This has certainly 

been the main factor in contributing to the depopulation of our rural areas. There is not use to try to 

blame this on either the C.C.F. government, a Liberal or a Tory government, or anyone else. I have 

watched these tendencies and looked over the figures very carefully. It might be of interest to the hon. 

members to know that at the outbreak of World War II we had a farm population in Saskatchewan of 

141,000 farm units; today we have less than 125,000 farm units in Saskatchewan, both being operated 

by the owner and by absentee owners. So we can see the tendency going on. We can see the spectacle of 

the more fortunate man enlarging his farm unit, forced to do so because of the increased capital outlay 

for equipment, and if that process is continued towards larger operational units, certainly it is going to 

bring in its wake exploitation of the soil. I have always stated that as long as our farmers are exploited, 

they must, and have no choice but to exploit the soil. If for no other reason, I think that would be 

sufficient that we ought to think very seriously about a different type of economy in general. 

 

These factors, and other factors too, of human injustice have compelled me to take up the fight, not on 

an ideological basis so much, but on the basis of facing up to practical problems that we cannot evade, 

and no administration, whether it calls itself free enterprise or what it is, can much longer ignore the 

basic agricultural problems, particularly in this province of ours were we have larger operating units 

than any other province in the Dominion, with the tendency toward every-increasing, larger operational 

farm units. 

 

A good deal was said yesterday in respect to co-operative farming. In my opinion, this is not a matter of 

ideologies at all; this is a matter of trying to face up squarely with a practical situation. How are we 

going to get scientific farm operations on the land? How are we going to enable our farmers to operate 

more successfully under present conditions and at the same time bring scientific and good agricultural 

practices and good soil husbandry into the lives of our farmers: I believe that the co-operative method 

certainly affords an opportunity to do exactly that. 

 

I want to say to the hon. members that in my own department we have all kinds of problems in 

connection with weed control, soil erosion and all of those things, but I want to say, quite frankly, that if 

we have more co-operative farms established, such as the matador, we would not have any worries in 

that regard because here you have a group of people who are organized in perpetuity, and they know that 

at the end of their lives this unit will still go on and remain intact. They immediately began to think in 

long-term policies of cultural practices that will retain the fertility of that soil. They are not in a position, 

to the same degree as an individual farmer, where they are driven to exploit and get just as much out of 

the soil as possible without something being put back into it. I think it is a very logical answer. After all, 

the principle of co-operation has been well accepted and recognized by all our farm people in 

Saskatchewan. We have banded ourselves together for mutual protection against monopoly in a 

commercial way, and I do think that if this principle of co-operation is good, then it should be like 

charity and begin at home. 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
917 

I would like to refer to other problems that are on our doorstep. Before doing so, I would like to point up 

in the best manner that I think possible the need for spending money on long-term policies and laying 

the emphasis there instead of expenditures of money on emergency relief. After all, when one thinks of 

the amount of money that has been spent over the years in this province for relief, that is not solving the 

problem. The problem has been and is being continuously aggravated. We are always exposed to the 

hazard of having again to pay out millions of dollars in relief, and it seems to me that we are racing 

against time in bringing to fruition long-term polices that will obviate the necessity of sending in relief 

in the form of feed or fodder to deficiency areas. I want to say that the Department of Agriculture is 

directing its attention more and more to long-term policies, and I intend to deal a little bit more 

specifically with both the emergency phase of our policies and the long-term policies a little later on, 

and then, of course, in greater detail, when we are in committee of supply on estimates. 

 

I would like to mention that over the years we have spent in Saskatchewan $186 million for relief. Now, 

that is a $186 million lesson. We should not have to go through that experience again, and expose 

ourselves to the danger of again paying money for relief. I would like to point out that my own 

department has been largely a relief department in the past. I just mention, for instance, that in 1931-32 

the Department of Agriculture spent $802,000 on relief; 1934-35, $4.5 million on relief; 1935-36, 

$9,689,000 on relief; 1936-37, $2,798,000 on relief; 1937-38, $12,223,000; and so it goes. Even during 

the war years we spent as high as $105,000 on relief, mostly for feed and fodder. Now, we just simply 

cannot go on doing that, and we have been endeavouring, because of all of this experience, to place the 

emphasis on expenditure of money in policies that we hope will, in the final analysis, do away with the 

necessity of this type of expenditure. 

 

I mentioned a moment ago that I would try to bring the problem we have in Saskatchewan home in a 

little more striking manner. I have here a map that has been supplied to me by the Prairie Farm 

Assistance office, and it is a most revealing map, and I believe that just taking one look at it will save 

me about an hour of talking. This map will indicate to the hon. members the numbers of times that the 

fried-out bonus has been paid in Saskatchewan, and in the neighbouring provinces of Alberta and 

Manitoba. If the hon. members will look at this space here, that is Saskatchewan in the centre, and then 

when you look over here you will see Manitoba. The average crop failure payments that were made in 

Manitoba, for instance, in the period 1939 to 1947 – eight years – amount, on the average, from one to 

two payments in the townships in Manitoba. I think there are two or three townships in Manitoba that 

have received three and four payments; but then when you look at the centre province of Saskatchewan, 

it certainly is a striking picture. I have said before, it looks like we have a bad case of red measles. We 

find areas in here where they have had eight crop failures, a crop failure every year, in that whole period 

of time. We can move right up here to Turtleford, for instance and see seven crop failures out of eight 

years. I might say that you can see the soil map of Saskatchewan in these figures right here. The hon. 

member for Turtleford (Mr. Trippe) will know, for instance, that were they have had seven crop failures, 

just south of Turtleford, I will bet my bottom dollar that that soil is a light nature. When you look down 

in the southwest of Saskatchewan, around Fox Valley, Maple Creek, you find the same conditions. What 

does that 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
918 

mean? It certainly means that we are going to have to make a real expenditure of money, first of all in 

moisture conservation work conserving all of the spring run-off that we can possibly conserve, and in 

the way of retaining moisture in the soil through good, sound agricultural practice. The experiments that 

have taken place at the government Experimental Farm at Swift Current indicate that much can be done 

in retaining moisture in the soil through agricultural practice and summerfallow methods. 

 

I have head rather discouraging references made in this House in regard to our Agricultural 

Representative Service. I do not appreciate that too much. Surely the people of this province, and I 

should think that the hon. members of this Legislature, would recognize the importance of bringing 

scientific research knowledge to our farmers through an adequate field staff. In our department we 

intend to emphasize soil work above everything else, and conservation work. We are endeavouring to 

place great responsibility upon the agricultural societies and other organizations for quality 

improvement. I would like to see our staff‘s attention directed more and more to soil conservation, 

storage of water, the development of small irrigation projects, and most of all, to raising adequate fodder 

supplies, particularly in those areas that are so exposed. Those are things that we have got to do, and 

many of these small projects, when developed, will certainly be of the greatest values, possibly of far 

greater value, in giving agricultural stability than some of the larger ones that we are speaking of. It is 

primarily the small project, I believe, that will be invaluable in building up reserves of fee, for there is 

one thing very certain when you think in terms of fodder, that fodder is a commodity, as everyone 

knows, that is perishable. It is very bulky to handle and to ship. It is our thinking that we should build up 

these reserves as close as possible to the point of need, in the deficiency areas themselves. Surely the 

department itself cannot be expected to do all of that work. I would like to inaugurate programmes in 

which every farmer in the province will be given an opportunity to play a part. The problem is so big 

and immense that it will take thousands of hands, all working together, to give us a solution. In other 

words, we have based our policies, as far as possible, on a self-help basis, both the emergency policy 

and the long-term policy, and we have tried to be consistent by placing the emphasis on self-help. It is 

only in that direction that we can finally find a solution. In the last two years of operation in our 

self-help policy, in the emergency end of our programme, we have had very outstanding results, in spite 

of what has been said in this Legislature. For the benefit of the hon. members, and I don‘t want to be too 

critical of the new members, because they perhaps don‘t understand our policy. You will recall that it 

has previously been the practice to purchase hay in Manitoba, or wherever we could get it, and then pay 

some freight and charge some freight to the individual. That certainly let to tremendous cost, not only to 

the government, but to the individual farmer himself. In order to get over that situation, here is the 

simple policy we have devised: first of all, we have told our people that in the event of a crop failure to 

try and scrounge every bit of feed they could lay their hands on within their own district. That is the 

cheapest feed that they could get. We said to them, and pointed out to them, that often it would be far 

more economical to cut some of their green cereal crops for feed rather than have it to on and ripen for 

harvest. This particular extension campaign has brought very beneficial results, particularly this year 

after the experience of last spring when the winter was prolonged. We have, this year, more surplus hay 

in Saskatchewan, in this particular crop 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
919 

failure year, than we have ever had before. We have hay listed with us constantly now, surplus hay that 

can be resold. 

 

Here is the policy: we state to farmers – first of all, garner every bit of feed you can in your own district, 

and your next cheapest feed is to take your equipment and move out to feed surplus areas and put up 

your own feed, and we will pay the freight on the movement of your machinery to the area, and then we 

will pay half the freight, up to $3 per ton, on that feed you ship back home again. Many of our farmers 

have taken advantage of that policy, particularly this year, and they were able to bring home much 

cheaper fee. Some of them, indeed, have moved feed from the southeast of the province right up to the 

North Battleford area at a very minimum cost under that particular policy. 

 

The department takes the responsibility of trying to locate the surplus feed areas, and we periodically 

make up lists and send them out to the deficiency municipalities, listing hay for sale, either standing or 

that can be put on shares or any other way. We assist the people in the deficiency and surplus areas in 

getting together, and then we assist them in the moving of their equipment, and then we assist them by 

way of freight on the fodder brought home. Another policy is, if a particular farmer cannot get away 

from home to go and out up his own feed, if he will make his transportation direct with any of these 

people we have listed, we will pay $2 per ton on the hay he makes all the arrangements for. 

 

Regarding feed grain, we have continued a policy of freight assistance there, too. But I should say, 

before we leave the fodder, we cut off the assistance in November 1, for a very obvious reason. If you 

did not have that cut-off date, then you are certainly going to get into difficulties later on if you leave it 

wide open for the entire winter. We feel a farmer ought to have his hay in his barnyard on November 1, 

before the winter comes, because when the winter comes, then the seller of hay is in the driver‘s seat and 

you are going to pay extremely high prices for it. That is the reason we have chosen that cut-off date. 

 

I note, Mr. Speaker, that there was a reference made, which was possibly made without knowing the 

facts, by the hon. member for Turtleford (Mr. Trippe). I would like to discourage any statements being 

made in this House without being able to back them up with facts. It was with reference to starvation of 

stock last spring in the Turtleford area. I want to point out that we had a similar emergency situation in 

the states of Nebraska, Wyoming, to the south of us. When heavy snowfalls came, unprecedented 

climatic conditions came, finally to the extent that the air force, the army and everyone else was called 

in to bring some measure of relief to cattle starving in that area. According to press reports, millions of 

dollars worth of livestock perished in spite of the tremendously expensive effort made to try and save 

many of these livestock from starvation. Last spring, a year ago, we had a somewhat similar situation. 

To be sure, it was a deficient year as far as feed was concerned, but we have moved tremendous 

quantities of feed, and we all felt we were in pretty good shape to meet an ordinary winter, but when 

spring was prolonged, we had the exact situation that developed when you begin to pay freight 

assistance all winter – you get orders coming in all winter long. Once the snow is deep and the weather 

is cold, people do not like to go out and bale hay, the roads are blocked and everything else. But I want 

to say that this statement that was made in this House, like some of the rumours and 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
920 

statements that were being made last spring, were grossly exaggerated, and grew as they travelled. I 

noticed that the hon. member said in the House that 25 percent of the stock starved in his area. I was 

reading an article in the St. Walburg Enterprise that said 75 percent of the stock had starved to death. 

Now, I know that the hon. member for Turtleford (Mr. Trippe) is an honourable gentleman, and I know 

and hope that he will correct that statement made in the St. Walburg Enterprise. We heard those rumours 

before, last spring, and we asked the R.C.M.P. to investigate every such report that we received, and we 

found that although there were some losses of livestock, to be sure, all of the statements were grossly 

exaggerated. One or two animals perished, in some instances due to illness on the part of the individual, 

and in more cases due to some disease amongst the animals, right up on his own territory. I have the file 

of the R.C.M.P. report because we are worried and concerned about those things. I want to say that if 

ever feed reserves justified itself, it was justified last spring when we were able to throw into the breach 

2,000 tons of provincial feed reserves that we had built up ourselves. 

 

In connection with these provincial reserves, this is not the sum total of our programme at all. Here is 

what we are saying: in the short-term policy, and in the interim period until we overcome some of the 

re-occurring deficiency, the provincial government is willing to be the third line of defence – mark that – 

we of the province will build up some reserves too, but we are giving assistance to municipalities to do 

likewise, in an organized way, and we are telling individuals to play their part by building up reserves in 

good years to take care of deficient years. We feel that is a good sound programme all the way through. 

One can readily understand that if the provincial government took full responsibility for supplying all 

the feed to the livestock in Saskatchewan, it would be a super-human task, an impossible task. For 

instance, this year we have had some 2,800 tons of feed in reserve from our summer operations. That 

amounts to an investment of around $51,000. If we were to build up a feed reserve of 100,000, it could 

easily run up into $1 million of a most perishable product, and then we would still have to ship this 

product to the point of need, and thereby incur heavy expenditures on the recipient. So we are laying the 

emphasis on building up reserves close to the point of need. In the meantime, we will build up some 

reserves too, just in case something extraordinary happens. Something extraordinary did happen a year 

ago this spring, and we were able to fill the breach. Just to show the difficulties in moving fodder, do 

you know that it took exactly two days to break our way into the Halbrite hangar because of the heavy 

snow banks? The Department of Highways put their rotary and pushplows there, and we finally had to 

put out bulldozers before we could actually get through to the hangar to get the hay out some 2½ miles 

to the railroad. That shows the problem. There is only one place for feed reserve – on the farm, and on a 

municipal basis, by all means close to the point of need. 

 

I want to go on and say a bit more regarding the long-term policy. It has been inferred that about all we 

had to show for our efforts to date was some 2,800 tons of hay. We have a lot more to show for our 

efforts besides that. A lot of this will come out in the course of my estimates, but I would like to point 

out that we have developed very many projects in community pasture work, land reclamation work, 

irrigation development, in various parts of the province. I want to point out, too, that last year was the 

first year that we began this type of operation, when an irrigation and development division was 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
921 

set up. This year, the estimates provide for a Conservation and Development Branch, an entirely new 

branch that will have an adequate sum of money allocated to it to do the job necessary to implement a 

long-term conservation and development programme. 

 

I would like to point out, also, the steps that were taken, leading up to the establishment of the 

Conservation and Development Branch. You don‘t do these thing overnight. First of all, it was necessary 

and essential to build up a field staff. As you all know, we now have 36 Agricultural Representative 

Districts, with an agricultural representative assigned to each district. We now have practically every 

municipality and L.I.D. organized by way of local agricultural committees to assist the agricultural 

representative, and to promote and develop projects in the particular rural municipality or L.I.D. 

concerned. That took a whole lot of organization, and a whole lot of work. The next step was the transfer 

of the agricultural land from the Department of Natural Resources to the Department of Agriculture. 

That was accomplished, and that, I think, was a very outstanding step. I don‘t think there is any other 

province in the Dominion of Canada where the agricultural lands are all in the Department of 

Agriculture. Naturally, we felt they should be there as we have the necessary field staff; we are the 

people who are more vitally concerned with agricultural development than any other department and, 

therefore, it was deemed essential that the land should go to the Department of Agriculture. 

 

The next step was the transfer of water right to the Department of Agriculture. Since about 96 percent of 

the water rights work has to do with agricultural development, it was felt that the rightful place for the 

Water Rights Branch was with the Department of Agriculture. 

 

In addition to that, we have endeavoured to co-ordinate policies throughout the entire department. In 

other words, we did not want to work at cross purposes. We would like to see all of our branches, and all 

of our people, headed in the same general direction, directing their activities towards specific objectives, 

and I think I can summarize our objectives very simply: first of all, we are directing our efforts, through 

soil conservation work and working with the soil, better soil management, water conservation and all the 

rest of it, towards obtaining agricultural stability, and then to increase production from our soil 

resources. It is really in the direction of the latter that I think we can make phenomenal gains in 

Saskatchewan in increasing our overall agricultural production here. Some time ago I had occasion to 

read a little back history on the development of agricultural services, and I discovered, lo and behold, 

that a lawyer actually gave the first impetus towards the establishment of an agricultural representative 

service in the United States. That is the first time that I know of, on record, when a lawyer actually gave 

an outstanding contribution to agriculture, but it was only because this lawyer was in ill health he spent a 

good deal of his time in the country. Going about in the country – in the state of Pennsylvania – he 

discovered that the farmers were receiving very small returns from their cultivated acreages. I think in 

his particular area they were only getting, at that particular period of American history, eight bushel to 

the acre of corn, and he chose this work as a hobby, and by working with the farmers and carrying on 

research and experimental work he was gradually able to increase the production of these farmers. He 

finally brought his case to the Department 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
922 

of Agriculture in Washington, where he was received favourably, and that was the origination of the 

Agriculture Representative Service in the United States. Since then, when one begins to trace the 

progress of increased agricultural production, it certainly is a phenomenal story. I would certainly love 

to have more time to trace the tremendous increases that have taken place in agricultural production 

through the application of science to farm practice. I know my hon. friend for Arm River (Mr. 

Danielson) sometimes thinks we are wasting time and money on these Agriculture Representatives, but 

surely he must have a pretty keen appreciation of the scientific benefits that agriculture has received. My 

big worry is to farm out the knowledge and research that is available at the university, and in the 

experimental stations, and make that knowledge available to John Farmer himself. Once we get our 

people soil conscious, once we can begin to have them adopt agricultural practices that will retain 

moisture and fertility, surely this province will double its agricultural production. 

 

I mentioned at the outset of my remarks that we had 33 million acres of cultivated land. There are 27 

million that will never be cultivated. These lands are a tremendous available potential for increased 

livestock production through re-grassing and otherwise, and I am more concerned with land utilization 

with reference to these areas than I am to the better soil areas that naturally produce up to the optimum. 

So we have, Mr. Speaker, a tremendous job ahead of us, and I believe that the added expenditures in my 

own department for conservation will receive the approval of every member of this House. I know that 

the policies of the department will also meet with the approval of every member of this House because I 

believe that the policies are a more practical approach to solving the basic problems of agriculture in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make some brief reference to the Bill itself. That is the 

Conservation and Development Act: the purpose of this Bill is to provide an Act which will enable a 

positive public programme to effectively meet the challenge of conservation. Major tasks in the 

immediate future of the conservation of our soil and water resources can only be carried out through 

measures that will allow an organized attach, and the development of an activity which will permit the 

integration of local interests into a sound action programme, a worthwhile work in protecting our soil 

from wind and water erosion and promoting irrigation farming, construction and maintaining drainage 

work, saving the tree coverings of the settled portion of the province from wanton destruction, 

reclaiming misused land for farming, and for the economic improvement of our agricultural industry, 

guiding settlement and establishment of sound farm units, can only be fully expected when the 

responsibility for the introduction of such programmes is assumed by local representatives of the settlers 

chiefly concerned, and the means provided whereby works which may be required may be undertaken 

and maintained. In recent years there has been a strong public demand for a course of action which will 

enable the public to undertake conservation of water and soil resources and provide for the maintenance 

of works which have that or may be undertaken as a responsibility but does not provide an authority 

requiring the execution of this responsibility. The Drainage Act: The Drainage Act maintenance was 

deemed to be the responsibility of the municipality in which the drainage work was located. The Act 

requires that the drainage installation shall be maintained and kept in repair by the municipality. The 

municipalities, however, are not responsible to any authority for maintenance and repair of such work, 

with the result that they are generally not maintained and not kept in repair. That, Mr. Speaker, has been 

our experience as far as drainage work is concerned. 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
923 

During the past two years the province has suffered a loss from one small drainage district alone of 

approximately $1.5 million work of agricultural production. This loss was occasioned by the flooding, 

during the past two years, of roughly 20,000 acres of good to excellent wheat land. The flooding was the 

result of drainage installations, on which approximately $200,000 had been spent over the past 40 years, 

being neglected and unable to serve the purpose for which they were installed, when climatic condition 

required effective drainage in order that the land could be farmed. Organization under the proposed 

Conservation Development Act will permit a responsibility for maintenance and repair being removed 

from municipalities to a local authority. The authority will, under the recommendation and direction of 

the Department of Agriculture, undertake the maintenance of drainage installation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that will suffice to outline the main principles of the Act before us, and with this 

brief explanation and the details of the Act can be more adequately dealt with in committee, and I again 

hail this Act as being one great stride forward in agricultural development in Saskatchewan and backed 

up with the money to do the job. The big kick I get out of the hon. members opposite is that they can 

never see a fact. They keep saying over and over: ―but you are not spending anything for agriculture.‖ 

When my estimates are down, and I think they have them on their desks now, they should see that we 

are actually spending 350 percent more for agriculture now than we did in 1944 when the present 

government replaced the Liberal government in administration. 

 

With these explanations, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 107, An Act to assist 

Conservation and Development of Agricultural Resources in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I don‘t intend to delay the House very much on this 

matter, but this whole question is of sufficient importance that I don‘t think it should pass without at 

least a word from someone on this side of the House. 

 

With a great deal of what the hon. Minister of Agriculture has stated about the necessity of soil 

conservation, I am in very hearty agreement. I have read and heard a great deal from experts in this 

particular line about what has happened in the United States, as he has referred to, in the way of 

depletion of the soil in the Mississippi Valley due to wind and water erosion. When one considers that 

the scene of some of the desert areas of North Africa once were the sites of thriving civilizations, and 

where they once had populous areas the sand now blows and there is nothing but desert with the odd 

oasis, then it makes one realize the importance of soil to human welfare. 

 

I can assure the Minister that, to the extent that he shows any desire to sincerely work along the lines he 

has indicated today, in the way of promoting soil conservation and assisting our farmers to help 

themselves along those lines, he will get the wholehearted support of everyone on this side of the House. 

I regret that in this, in many ways, good speech he made, he saw fit to bring in something to do with a 

very controversial question as to whether this can be better promoted by individuals who are hoping to 

improve their own homes and pass them on to their children, or whether it would be 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
924 

better done by people who are living on a farm owned by a group of people and where they cannot be 

sure that any of it will be passed on to their children. I am sorry he brought that in because other than 

that particular thing, I agree with him. 

 

I think that the greatest development comes where people feel they own the property themselves and, if 

they spend a great deal of work in improving it, they will own it and will be able to pass it on to their 

children. I have to disagree with him on that, the suggestion that you will get better results if you have 

your agriculture organized as you have it in the Soviet Union where nobody owns any land. I think the 

record indicates that the productiveness of our land per farmer is much higher in Canada and the United 

States than it is in the Soviet Union; and the productiveness per acres is much higher than it is in the 

Soviet Union. So on that I don‘t agree with him. I think his speech would have been much more 

effective if he had left that particular reference out of it. 

 

In regard to the Bill itself, I must confess, because the objectives are so worthy and worthwhile, I 

certainly was waiting to hear some indication from the Minister as to how those objectives were going to 

be promoted by the passage of this Bill. That, I think, was what the whole House was waiting on. I think 

we all appreciated the Minister‘s speech. He referred to the necessity for soil conservation and the 

necessity for bringing scientific knowledge to the individual, and I don‘t think that those things can be 

repeated too often, and I do not find any fault with the Minster in what he said about that; but I do wish 

he had gone on and indicated what heir programme really is under this Bill. I listened as carefully as I 

could, and I must say when he got through I was not very much wiser as to what he intends to do when 

he gets this Bill passed than I was at the start of his speech. And so, I say, I hope when we get into 

committee he will enlighten us as to what they are going to do. 

 

There is one thing that I though of the situation in Saskatchewan, that he should have done, and 

something that must be done by any government that happens to be in power in this province, and that is 

they must be prepared to give adequate recognition and adequate appreciation of anything done sin 

regard to these important matters, by the parliament of Canada and the people of Canada. There is no 

doubt in the world that we in Saskatchewan have to have a tremendous amount of help form the rest of 

Canada in this important matter. P.F.A.A., I think, to us in Saskatchewan has been not only a God-send, 

but without it I don‘t see how we would have carried on at all during the last seven or eight years. As the 

hon. Minister pointed out, in these districts where they have had these payments, seven or eight years in 

succession, when one thinks of the problem that would have been thrown upon the province and the 

municipalities if it has not been for those payments going into those districts, one wonders what would 

have been the state of affairs in those districts. I am not raising this matter in any partisan way. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — Oh, no. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, I know my friend from Canora (Mr. Kuziak) cannot thing of anything else but 

partisanship, but in this particular thing it is that very thing that 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
925 

I deplore. This has to be paid by the people of Canada regardless of their political parties. If the 

government does it, and it is going to be the object of continual sniping and attacks because in some way 

the Act does not go quite as far as they would like it to go, and so on, there is a tendency for the people 

in the rest of the country to lose a great deal of their enthusiasm for it. I have heard many people — I can 

probably speak with a little more feeling in this matter because I sat in the federal House for 13 years 

and I saw the effect of this continual sniping, by the willingness of other people to vote money that is 

going to be expended in Saskatchewan in large measure – say, well, you people get into more trouble 

over P.F.A.A. because you have it and because of the fault that is found here and there with it than if 

you did not have it al all. I don‘t say that we should not try to get P.F.A.A. improved. I am in entire 

agreement with that. We have got as close to putting it on an individual basis as we possibly can, subject 

to the constitution which says that the Dominion has the power to engage in crop insurance. I do say, in 

all of these things, regardless of party, we should be ready to work together, to give credit to the rest of 

the country if they help us out in these measures and we should be very careful not to drive these thing 

too much in the realm of partisan politics. If a government is doing a good job, it does not matter what 

government it is; we should be ready to give it credit in this particular field. 

 

In Saskatchewan, since the P.R.A.A. was established, there has been somewhere around $4 paid out for 

every $1 paid in by the farmer. It does not help, in regard to getting this Act extended and perhaps the 

payments increased by having people in the Government of Canada and members of the House of 

Commons in other provinces here, the people run around the province of Saskatchewan and try to tell 

the farmers: ―You are paying the entire cost of it. Don‘t give any credit to the government for it, because 

you are paying the entire cost.‖ Well, that sort of thing, in the long run, like any other form of 

dishonesty, is not in the best interest of the people who promote it, a provincial or anybody else. I think 

the Minister is inclined to give credit to the federal government for what has been done along these 

lines, and I ask him to continue along that line in order that we may get the fullest possible measure of 

support from the rest of the country for these great agricultural projects which we ant them to put 

through. I try to be always very careful, in speaking about the great P.F.F.A. administration to say it was 

inaugurated by the government of Mr. Bennett so that it will not be thought, in some way, in speaking 

about it that there is an attempt being made to claim too much credit for any political party. This thing 

must have the support of all political parties in order to get the support that we must have for the great 

programme we should have under the P.F.R.A. 

 

I remember when I was not long a member I had a chance to talk to the late Lord Tweedsmuir who had 

been through Saskatchewan, over the area that was being reclaimed under P.F.R.A. He had had 

experience in India and Egypt in that sort of work in building canals in the irrigation and reclamation of 

the soils. He told me: ―You people in Canada don‘t realize yourselves what wonderful work you are 

doing under that P.F.R.A. administration.‖ He seemed to be absolutely enthusiastic about the work of 

re-grassing this land that was blowing around, and stopping it from blowing and the topsoil from being 

eroded and blown away entirely. 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
926 

Under that programme of the P.F.R.A., great work has been done, and we know that in this province we 

have got the resources to begin to do otherwise than co-operate with a real programme that we must ask 

the federal government to put on in regard to the things that the Minister mentioned: irrigation projects, 

small water conservation projects, re-grassing projects and soil conservation. Those are tremendous 

projects that require the expenditure of large sums of money, and I think, regardless of politics, we must 

be prepared to indicate to the rest of the country our appreciation of anything that they may do, and 

resolve to join together in asking the members of our respective parties in the federal field to realize our 

special position, and go as far as possible along those lines. 

 

Under the P.F.R.A., I have the report of the Dominion Minister of Agriculture for the year ended March 

31, 1948. I have a more recent report, but I could not lay my hands on it at the moment, and I did not 

want to rely on my memory. I just wish to give some figures to the House as to the great amount of work 

that has been going on under that Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act. This report says that the water 

development branch of the P.F.R.A. constructed during 1947-48 some 2,109 projects. This number was 

made up of 1,804 dugouts, 63 small irrigation projects, and 202 stock watering and community projects. 

When one realizes that every one of those mean so much in improving the conditions in that one 

particular area and around it, that is really a great deal to do in one year. It goes on to say: ―these 

projects were distributed through the three prairie provinces as follows: Saskatchewan got 1,465, 

Manitoba 359, Alberta 285.‖ As the Minister indicated by his map, the extra need of Saskatchewan is 

being recognized by the amount of work done under this P.F.R.A. work. The total up to the end of last 

March was over 36,000 projects, both large and small have now been constructed by P.F.R.A. since its 

inception under the last year of Mr. Bennett‘s government. There was a grant made at that time, 

realizing the special problem we have got in the triangle of more or less drought areas, and that work, 

with the support of all parties, has been extended and pressed forward in the years since. Every advance 

made is an advance more or less something where we can make that advance and hold it. Each step we 

take ahead, we make a further step ahead. I think myself that we can feel a great measure of satisfaction 

in what is done in regard to these projects. 

 

Now, with the new idea of irrigation, where you don‘t have to level your land, where you have 

aluminium pipes which are reasonably cheap and one man can handle, carry it, lay it down and connect 

it up with a pumping unit, we are really going to make much greater use of the water that we preserve 

and keep from running off than we have ever done before. I talked to farmer who lived alongside small 

lakes and large sloughs and so on, who are figuring, if they can get help from the P.F.R.A. to buy these 

irrigation engines and systems, on using the water that is laying on their land without being of any use to 

them very much ever since they have been farming, and they are going to be able to water considerable 

areas of land right from the sloughs and lakes that they formerly could not use at all. That is a great 

thing. 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
927 

Then of course, I think we are going to get more benefits out of irrigation projects, with this new system, 

than when we had to level the land and ditch it. I am very enthusiastic about this great development in 

regard to irrigating by the use of pipes, because it does not mean trying to level your land, particularly in 

some of the rolling part of the country. The small irrigation outfits, which can be bought now without 

too great an expenditure of money, if there is a good big dugout constructed and the water preserved, 

they can be used to make sure that the farmer has a splendid garden, the he never needs to be short of 

vegetables; it can be used to water a certain number of hardy fruit trees, and there again I think there 

should be the greatest distribution of the hardy fruit trees that will grow in Saskatchewan. I have taken a 

great deal of pleasure myself out of planting plums, cherries and hardy apples. It certainly will promote 

a greater appreciation of our province if children get used to a nice garden in which there are beautiful 

fruit trees with blossoms in the spring, and later on bearing their fruit. That will be a very worthwhile 

work, and it is something in which we may very well co-operate together in bringing that amenity to as 

many of our people as possible. That is why I am so enthusiastic about the question of rural 

electrification, because if you have a good dugout then, of course, it is even easier to supply the 

necessary pressure to make use of that water. But you don‘t need to have rural electrification to have 

water used like that because a gasoline engine very inexpensively can be sued to provide the necessary 

pressure. 

 

It goes on to say that 23 community projects, having a total storage capacity of 16,000 acre feet, were 

constructed during the fiscal year, with a possibility of some 3,000 acres being irrigated. Those are 

distributed over several smaller projects. Then, of course, it goes on to speak of the larger irrigation 

projects. I notice that he Minister, speaking yesterday on the Matador farm, spoke about the irrigation 

project and I thought to myself when he was speaking, why could he not have brought himself to give 

credit to the dominion government, the P.F.R.A. administration, for bringing that assistance to the 

veterans on that farm; but he coupled the fact that they had a tremendous advantage of the irrigation 

project, which was put in there as a result of assistance from the dominion government, with an attack 

upon people who had some part in supporting that programme almost from its inception. I think that it 

would have been better, and that it would be better in all of this work, to give all the credit you can to 

people in other parts of Canada who are being asked to vote this money. 

 

In regard to land utilization, the community pasture idea has worked out, I think, even better than most 

people expected it to do. It reports on this that in the year under review a total of no less than 67,121 

head of stock was handled on these community pastures. It says: ―The number or patrons who made use 

of this service was over 5,000. The number of cattle that were pastured were over 58,000.‖ I don‘t wish 

to belabour this point, but I do say that a great start has been made in western Canada, and considerable 

headway has been made along the lines that were spoken about by the Minister. When one thinks of the 

situation in this southwester part of our province, back in 1938 and 1938, with so much of our area 

drifting, and the soil blowing around, when one things of the community pastures that have been set up, 

and the amount of land that has been seeded down to grass, and the great progress that has been made in 

the different water projects, stock watering dams, small dugouts, then I 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
928 

think that we can at any rate have made a good start on this project. I hope and I believe, that the 

Minister has some very good men in his department, and some very good men in the Ag. Rep Service, 

and they have got at the heart of the necessity and the importance of going ahead with carrying along 

this work. The man who has been appointed in charge of P.F.R.A., Mr. L.B. Thompson, is an 

outstanding man in that sort of work; he is a very able man in public relations, and I am sure he will do 

all that he can do to see that his department co-operates in the fullest possible measure with the 

provincial employees in promoting this work. I saw the report of a speech made by Mr. Thompson to the 

Agriculture Representative Service outlining the work he wanted to do, and indicating to them that he 

wanted the greatest possible measure of co-operation between the provincial officials and the Dominion 

officials in extending this great and important work of land conservation, moisture conservation, and 

dams, and dugouts, and the conservation of our land resources. 

 

I hop when the Minister comes to speak he will indicate in considerable detail, at least give us some 

substantial idea of what the province feels it can do to make its contribution in regard to forwarding this 

great work of conserving out great heritage of the rich land we have in our province, and such water as 

providence has vouchsafed to give to us. If we make use of every bit of it, we have in it a priceless 

heritage of land and water that providence has given to our province, he can rely on the very ultimate 

degree of co-operation from everyone on this side of the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a very few brief references before taking my 

seat again. 

 

I regret very much if I left the impression that I was for taking land away from individuals and 

incorporating individuals in any type of co-operative farming. I certainly want to disabuse anyone‘s 

mind in that regard. This matter of development of co-operative farms is absolutely a voluntary matter, 

and I was merely point out that I think we should give every encouragement to people to engage in that 

voluntary type of co-operative association. It is all to the good. I am not so particularly concerned that 

this would take land ownership from people as individuals; they would have their individual holdings 

and their individual ownership would be guaranteed to a far greater extent under a co-operative 

workable arrangement than under the old basis. In fact I argue for the co-operative type of set up to give 

security of tenure to a far greater degree than the old system, because the records indicate that in 1901, 

96.0 percent of the farmers in Saskatchewan owned their farms, whereas today, in 1946, only 56.6 

percent of the farmers own their own farms. I am very much alarmed over this tendency towards tenant 

farming. It means that when you get a tenant farmer, two people are trying to life off the same land that 

only one family lived off previously. The thing is not economically sound. 

 

I do regret, Mr. Speaker, as I had it in my notes to make reference to the relationship, and the happy 

relationship, between P.F.R.A. and the new Conservation and Development Branch. This branch is 

something that the P.F.R.A. has been praying for for a long time because there are certain provincial 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
929 

responsibilities applied in the Order in Council passed by both governments in June, 1947, that places 

the responsibility on each. One cannot move without the other. I wanted especially to pay a tribute to the 

new director of P.F.R.A., L.B. Thompson. If there ever was a man who appreciated the need for soil 

conservation, or one who almost made a religion of it, it is L.B. Thompson. Our department and other 

departments are working in a most happy relationship and in co-operation. We are almost working as 

one staff, each understanding the responsibility of the other. So that relationship is very well established. 

 

I would like to point out, too, that on a lot of these public projects, as the hon. members will know, 

where governments spend money in order to set land aside either for community pasture or irrigation 

development, we do have to get some protection against speculation on land values. That is going to be a 

real problem in connection with irrigation. It is not too pronounced at the moment, but it will become of 

growing importance. 

 

I would also like to point out – I don‘t like to say this – in connection with community pastures, that the 

hon. Leader of the Opposition is very much concerned about the private ownership of land, but that land 

was formerly owned by private individuals who, unfortunately, settled on sub-marginal lands. To 

guarantee that that land would be put to the proper use, and as many people as possible would gain 

benefits from it in perpetuity, it was formed into community pastures, and the individual goes not own it 

any more, but all of these same individuals are getting greater benefits from it than they ever did before. 

I, as an individual holder, envy people who put their cattle into a community pasture. They can operate 

their ranches and their livestock proposition far easier than I can. Sometimes this question of ownership 

– I don‘t know if it is so real. We come into the world without any land and without any resources of 

any kind, and we come from the soil and we go back to the soil, and about all we get out of it when we 

are all through with it is three feet one way and six feet the other. So there it is. 

 

I think we should be thinking more in terms of good soil husbandry, and get away from the idea of 

taking as much out of the land as we possibly can. After all, I think life and living consists almost 

entirely of giving a contribution to society while we are here. We ought to think in terms of the 

generations still to come, and the things that we do in life are the things that remain after us. The 

property we own we cannot take, but the actual things we do and contribute do live on forever. So 

maybe there is going to be a change of philosophy of a whole lot of these things, and I do not think we 

need to be too disturbed about it. 

 

There is something about the Act, too, that I regret, as I probably did not make it too clear. The 

importance of this Act lies in the fact that we can apply this Act to almost any type of agricultural 

development, or any different type in contemplation. For instance, we had a real problem here, and some 

reference was made to the loss of crops in the Lajord area and on the Scott Rural Municipality, southeast 

of Regain. We were not able to do anything about it because it involved drainage, water storage, and all 

of those things. Under The Drainage Districts Act only a municipality is involved. In this case, several 

municipalities were involved, and we did our best to be of some assistance to them. Under the new 

Conservation and Development Act we can set up a district and all municipalities concerned can 

participate in the benefits 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
930 

derived in that particular agricultural development area. It means that we can drain the waters from 

Lajord and Riceton, carry them down to Weyburn where they can be put to beneficial use, and then 

below Weyburn we can start them again and use the waters again, possibly in the Souris Valley. That is 

the purpose of this Act. 

 

It could be applied to a reclamation project such as at Mortlach, and a variety of agricultural projects. It 

gives us broader scope than existed previously under The Private Ditches Act., The Irrigation districts 

Act or The Water Users Associations Act. It does give us broad scope, and that is the main purpose, and 

the main benefits, we expect to derive from this Act. 

 

The motion was carried. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines moved second reading of Bill No. 114 – An Act to amend the Hotel Keepers Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in moving the second reading of this Bill to amend The Hotel Keepers Act, I 

would like to make reference to another Bill which is before the House. The hon. members will recall 

that in the Bill to amend The Liquor Act there is a section which would have the effect of removing 

from that Act two sections which prevent the drinking of liquor in hotel rooms except by registered 

guests. At the time I pointed out that these sections were being violated every day and that it was 

impossible to enforce them. I pointed out, also, that then intention of the amendment was not to make it 

easier for drinking parties to be help, but to make it possible for the police to require hotel keepers to 

follow the regulations of the Act. I regret, however, that, in the publicity which followed, the impression 

was gained that we were loosening up the Act, whereas the real purpose was to establish a sensible law 

in order that we could control the consumption of liquor in the hotels. 

 

Since introducing the amendments to The Liquor Act, I have had representations made by the 

temperance people and by the Hotels Association, both of whom are afraid that the removal of these two 

sections would take away any control over people engaging hotel rooms in which to conduct drinking 

parties. I am quite in agreement that there is some foundation for their fears and, consequently, when 

considering the amendments to The Liquor Act, I shall introduce a House amendment restoring these 

two sections, but amending them to enable the bona fide guest to use his room as he would use his own 

home. In other words, the amendment which I shall propose will prohibit drinking in hotel rooms unless 

they are occupied by a bona fide guest. It will be illegal, under penalty of losing their licence, for hotels 

to rent rooms for the purpose of drinking parties. 

 

This Bill today, to amend The Hotel Keepers Act, introduces an amendment which should be considered 

along with the amendments to The Liquor Act. It will make it illegal for anyone to cause a disturbance 

which will affect the comfort of other guests in the hotel. I also places the responsibility upon 



 

March 25, 1949 

 

 
931 

the hotel keeper to see that there is no noise in the hotels, and it will also make the hotel keeper liable to 

a penalty if he does not take immediate stops to halt any disturbance. These amendments have been 

discussed with the temperance people, and with the hotel keepers. They both agree that they will give a 

much greater measure of control than was proposed in the original Bill. It is believed that these 

proposals will eliminate many of the drinking parties which are taking place in our hotels today. If 

experience proves otherwise, I shall not hesitate to bring in other legislation at a later date. 

 

I am confident that this Bill, along with the amendments I am proposing to The Liquor Act, will have 

the support of a vast majority of people who believe in true temperance without destroying individual 

rights. I would move second reading of this Bill. 

 

The motion was carried. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:00 o‘clock p.m. 


