



















































Hansard: March 31, 1949


935 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Eleventh Legislature 

 

Thursday, March 31, 1949 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

WELCOME TO NEW PROVINCE OF NEWFOUNDLAND 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, it might be appropriate for the Legislature to just take a few 

moments to give consideration to the fact that this is a very historic day in the history of the Dominion 

of Canada in that on this day a new province is being added to the Canadian family. At midnight tonight 

Newfoundland becomes the tenth province of our Dominion, and it is an historical occasion as it now 

brings another part of the British Commonwealth into the Dominion of Canada. 

 

I am sure that all the hon. members will want to publicly welcome Newfoundland into Confederation, 

and to say how glad we are that they are joining with us and to hope that the relationship will be a happy 

one. 

 

In 1934 Newfoundland, which up until that time had had self-government, was placed at their own 

request, as most members will remember, under a Commission. That Commission administered the 

affairs of Newfoundland until a few short years ago. The British government, after having sent in a 

group of people to make a study of the situation, both their economic and political problems, arranged 

for a convention to which all interested parties and groups were invited. That convention, after studying 

the report of the British committee, suggested that a referendum should be held on the part of the 

citizens of Newfoundland. The first referendum turned down the idea of responsible self-government. 

The second referendum voted in favour of joining the Dominion of Canada; whether there was a small 

majority or a large majority it does not seem to me matters now, but a majority of the people voting did 

vote to come into Canadian Confederation. I think, to some extent it is unfortunate that in the period that 

has intervened there have been some constitutional quarrels about how they should come in. I am one 

that has never held to the compact theory of Confederation. I do not think it is widely held in this 

province. We have never take the position in this province, I do not think, under any government, that 

we are sovereign power and that we need to be consulted before another opposition can come in. We 

have taken the position that we are now a nation of Canadian people with a central government having 

certain clearly defined functions, and that we have provincial governments which also have certain 

jurisdiction within which they operate. I can think of nothing more democratic than the manner in which 

Newfoundland has come into Canadian Confederation. They came in by referendum of their own 

citizens, by action of the Canadian parliament, and by amendments to the British North America Act by 

the parliament of the United Kingdom. I am sure I am expressing the hope of all members and of the 

people of Saskatchewan generally, when I say that I hope the people of Newfoundland will not feel that 

any differences of opinion there may have been about constitutional procedure will in any way detract 

from the very warm welcome which we extend to them as they come into the Canadian family. 



 

March 31, 1949 

 

 
936 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, on this historic and very propitious occasion, I would like to move, seconded by 

the hon. Leader of the Opposition: 

 

That this Legislative Assembly, in its own behalf and that of the people it represents, warmly and 

wholeheartedly welcome into the Dominion family of provinces the new province of Newfoundland; 

looks upon this day – March 31, 1949 – as marking the consummation of an age-old desire for the 

union of the British democracies of North America; views this historic occasion as a further stop in 

Canada’s march towards the fullness of its destiny; expresses the sincere hope that this union will 

redound to the mutual advantage of the contracting parties, and prays that Divine Providence will 

bounteously bless and prosper the ten provinces now at last welded into one nation, united in a 

common allegiance, with common aims and aspiration, and dedicated to the peaceful promotion of the 

welfare of all the peoples of this Greater Canada. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I am sure that everyone on this side of the House will agree with the remarks of the 

hon. Premier in regard to this very great occasion when our Confederation is being completed. 

 

The representatives form Newfoundland attended the Quebec conference as the hon. members know, 

and the two gentlemen who attended apparently were satisfied with the resolution which later became 

the basis of the London resolutions upon which the British North America Act was based; but in a later 

referendum the people of Newfoundland did not vote to enter Confederation. There was a further 

movement for them to join Confederation in the latter days of the last century but, again, that came to 

nothing. So we had, on the north half of this continent, the Dominion of Canada, a member of the British 

Commonwealth, and, of course, Newfoundland, which was referred to as the oldest British colony. 

 

It was always, I think, the feeling of many people that the great vision of the Father of Confederation has 

been, in some respects, more than realized by the filling out of Canada to the west, but, in some way, 

there had been a failure in regard to Newfoundland not becoming part of the family. When one looks 

back at what the Fathers of Confederation faced when they met together in 1864, to endeavour to come 

to an agreement, and when one thinks that Upper and Lower Canada were then populated by people of 

two different races and that in joining together they were putting so much faith in one another’s 

willingness to live up to the only basis on which they could hope to get along; the faith, for example, 

that the representatives of what is now Quebec showed in what was to be their fellow citizens of the rest 

of Canada in joining with them and putting their future into their hands to a great extent, one must 

certainly say that the faith of those people in their fellow man was really something to admire and for us 

to look back to with admiration. 

 

As I view our different troubles today, and hear people find fault with those of our fellow Canadians, 

French-speaking Canadians, in the province of Quebec, I often think that they do not realize that without 

a great act of faith those people showed when they agreed to enter Confederation, confederation would 

never have been possible – if it had not been for the willingness 



 

March 31, 1949 

 

 
937 

of our French speaking fellow citizens to join together with the rest of what is now Canada. I think, in 

the first place, it should make us very tolerant of the claims and rights that they feel were given to them 

at that time, should always be respected; and always feel that we owe a great deal to their sense of 

tolerance and their willingness to co-operate, and their willingness to trust their fellow citizens because 

without that our great county would never have had its birth. It was the nature almost of a marriage; each 

person trusts his future to the other, and because of that great act of faith it seems to me that there is a 

great obligation upon all parts of Canada to respect the basic rights of the people who actually went 

together to form our country. On no account, it seems to me, should the letter or the spirit on which that 

great pact was entered into be violated. I feel that should always be understood and remembered because 

without that willingness to come together at that time, our country never could have become a country. 

 

The faith that they had has been vindicated because I think that we get along together in our county in a 

very splendid way. I do not suppose there is a country in the world composed of so many different racial 

origins that are bound to make up our basic stock, where there is so much real basis tolerance and 

goodwill. What happened during the war when people of biased racial origins came together and each 

played their full part in such a splendid way was a great demonstration of the basic unity of our country. 

 

As today we see the vision of those Fathers of confederation finally achieved, and now the 

Confederation of all British people in the northern half of this continent is finally completed, we may 

say that the federal idea and the goodwill and tolerance and mutual confidence has been vindicated 

because if the people of Newfoundland had not been absolutely satisfied that the basic rights which had 

been agreed should be given to the provinces in regard to education and in regard to the exercise of basic 

rights of language, religion; if they had not felt that all those rights had been respected by the people of 

Canada, I do not think they would have been willing to join. It is a great thing to think that, in these days 

when some countries are trying to extend their power by virtue of force, the attitude of our country 

towards Newfoundland, although there was this background and hope that went back to the days of 1864 

that they would be part of our country, when the intimation was made to our country that they would 

like to join us, there was never the slightest pressure brought to bear whatever. The attitude was: you 

people must decide this absolutely for yourselves. We will tell you the terms upon which we feel that we 

are willing to have you join; we will discuss them with you, and then you shall go back to your own 

people and they shall decide whether you become part of this nation of Canada, and they voted for that 

without the slightest degree of pressure or in any way anything being done by the people of Canada to 

try to get them to take that step. 

 

I think it is a great tribute to the Canadian people that this proud old colony has been willing to join us. 

It shows that they feel that we are a people that they would like to join their future with. I think the 

Canadian people may be very proud that those fellow citizens of ours are willing to join us practically 

for all time to come. It was a most momentous decision for them to make because it was a decision 

which, once made, there could be no turning back from. 



 

March 31, 1949 

 

 
938 

I agree with what the Premier said in regard to the welcome which we all feel towards them. We have 

shared a great deal of trouble and difficulty particularly in the post-war and the second war. No people 

showed themselves more ready to sacrifice themselves for the cause of liberty and freedom than the 

great people of Newfoundland. I am sure that, as we now take them into our country, and welcome them 

as a province of Canada, we welcome one of the finest peoples in the world; one of the braves, the most 

courageous, and as fine a people as inhabit any part of the earth’s surface, and we can be proud to have 

them as part of our country. I am sure that in the hearts of every Canadian must go a feeling of 

thankfulness that the great vision of the Father of Confederation is now at last realized, that we are 

welcoming into our midst such a gallant people as the people of Newfoundland. I am sure all of us feel 

that we will go forward together to a very great future. 

 

We will now be a people of almost 13.5 million souls. Providence has blessed us with great forest areas, 

great mineral areas, great farming lands, great lakes, great water falls; we have been blessed almost 

beyond any people on the face of the globe. We have tried to preserve the democratic form of life and 

government, and I think we are probably as happy a people as any on the face of the globe. We have a 

future for our children, which is as good as the future of the children of any country in the whole world. 

So, I think, as we celebrate this great occasion of the completion of the building of our nations, we 

should express with all humility profound gratitude to Divine Providence for the way it has blessed our 

country, the way we have been protected and shielded, the way we have been guided, and that we may, 

under His guidance, look forward to a greater and greater future for our children in the generations to 

come. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — With the consent of the House, I would like to take about one or two 

minutes to make a few remarks on this question. 

 

Sometime ago, in the Department of Natural Resources, we had the idea that it would be nice to 

commemorate in some lasting way this event. So we decided to name one of the physical feature or our 

province after the new province, Newfoundland, coming into Confederation at this time, would be in 

one way a fitting commemoration and a lasting commemoration of this event. So we have found in 

Beaver Lake, or Amisk Lake, in township 63, range 2, W. 2nd Meridian, there is an island 

approximately one square mile in area. It has locally been known as the Big Island, but there are other 

islands in the province or at least one island if not more, that has the official name of Big Island, and so 

we are now proceeding to name this island ‘Newfoundland Island’. I have a map here showing where it 

is located, which I would be glad to lay on the Clerk’s table so the members can have a look at it. This 

island will, therefore, serve as a marker along the historic fur trade route of the Sturgeon-Weir River to 

the Churchill River basin. A post was established by Alec Henry and Joseph and Thomas Frobisher on 

Amisk Lake in 1775, and it is, therefore, among the early settled areas of the province, being established 

one year after Cumberland House which is the oldest continuously settled area in the province. Although 

Newfoundland was discovered by John Cabot on June 24, 1497 and claimed for England by sir 

Humphrey Gilbert in 1583, and ante-dates the discover of Amisk Lake by almost 300 years, nevertheless 

it does seem appropriate that an island in one of the early discovered areas of this province, the second 

earliest permanent settlement in this province, is now named to commemorate the entry of 

Newfoundland into Confederation. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:00 o’clock p.m. 


