



















































Hansard: February 10, 1949


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Eleventh Legislature 

1st Day 

 

Thursday, February 10, 1949 

10 o’clock a.m. 

 

This being the first day of the meeting of the First Session of the Eleventh Legislature of the Province of 

Saskatchewan for the despatch of business, pursuant to a Proclamation of His Honour the Honourable 

John Michael Uhrich, Lieutenant Governor the Province, dated the twenty-seventh day of January, 1949, 

John Mason Parker, Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, Commissioner designated by His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor for administering the Oath to the Members of the Legislative Assembly, attending 

according to his duty, John M. Telford, Clerk of the Executive Council, delivered to the said John 

Mason Parker a roll containing a list of the names of such members as had been returned to serve in this 

Legislature, which are as follows, viz.: 

 

OFFICE OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL, SASKATCHEWAN 

REGINA, FEBRUARY 7, 1949 

 

To: J.M. Parker, Esq. 

 Clerk of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

This is to certify that by reason of the dissolution of the Tenth Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan and in virtue of writs of election dated the nineteenth day of May last, and addressed to 

the hereinafter mentioned persons as returning officers for the electoral divisions in the Province set 

opposite their respective names for the election of members to represent the said electoral divisions in 

the Legislative Assembly, the following persons have been gazetted as duly elected to represent the 

electoral divisions set forth below, as appears by the returns to the said writs, deposited of record in my 

office, viz.: 

 

Division    Member Elected   Returning Officer 

 

1. Arm River    G. Herman Danielson   S.D. Brun 

2. Athabaska    Louis Marcien Marion  Harry Gordon 

3. Battlefords, The   Paul Prince    C.L. Simpson 

4. Bengough    Allan L.S. Brown   Wm. Surdia 

5. Biggar    Woodrow Stanley Lloyd  James B. Currie 



 

February 10, 1949 

 

 

2 

Division    Member Elected   Returning Officer 

6. Cannington    William John Patterson  Albert Bell 

7. Canora    A.G. Kuziak    Mike Sleeva 

8. Cumberland    Lorne E. Blanchard   Robert M. Locker 

9. Cut Knife    Isidore Charles Nollet   B.G. Woodward 

10. Elrose    Maurice John Willis   Cecil Reed 

11. Gravelbourg   E.M. Culliton, K.C.   R.P. Sinkinson 

12. Gull Lake    Alvin Cecil Murray   F.V. Davies 

13. Hanley    R.A. Walker    F.H. Walker 

14. Humboldt    Arnold W. Loehr   Edward Loehr 

15. Kelvington   Peter Anton Howe   W.D. Bowerman 

16. Kerrobert-Kindersley  John Wellbelove   W.F. Cooke 

17. Kinistino    W.C. Woods    H. Paine 

18. Last Mountain   Jacob Benson    E.J.H. Lanham 

19. Lumsden    William Sancho Thair   M.S. Hesla 

20. Maple Creek   A.C. Cameron    Ernest Frei 

21. Meadow Lake   Wm. T. Lofts    H.C. Parkhouse 

22. Melfort    J.G. Egnatoff    Martin McLaren 

23. Melville    V.P. Deshaye    W.C. Northgraves 

24. Milestone    J. Walter Erb    E.B. Moats 

25. Moose Jaw City   John Wesley Corman, K.C. 

     Dempster Henry R. Heming  F.W. Ingram 

26. Moosomin    A.H. McDonald   N.W. Noren 

27. Morse    Jas. Gibson    P. Unroe 

28. Notukeu-Willowbunch  Niles Leonard Buchanan  J.R. Mayhew 

29. Pelly    John G. Banks    Alex Klimchuk 

30. Prince Albert   Lachlan Fraser McIntosh  Wm. Berezowski 

31. Qu’Appelle-Wolseley  F.M. Dundas    J. Hamblin 

32. Redberry    B.L. Korchinski   Paul Wozny 

33. Regina City   Clarence Melvin Fines 

     Charles C. Williams   Geo. W. Thorn 

34. Rosetown    John Taylor Douglas   A.W. Keith 

35. Rosthern    Walter A. Tucker, K.C.  C.B. McLachlan 

36. Saltcoats    A.A. Loptson    V. Rooke 

37. Saskatoon City   John Henry Sturdy 

     Arthur Thomas Stone   Roger Carter 

38. Shellbrook    Louis W. Larsen   V.W. Davies 

39. Souris-Estevan   J.E. McCormack   E.J.B. Quist 

40. Swift Current   Harry Gibbs    Roy Trumble 

41. Tisdale    John H. Brockelbank   Greville Jones 

42. Torch River   John R. Denike   Stan Meeks 

43. Touchwood   Tom Johnston    Noel West 

44. Turtleford    L.L. Trippe    A.E. Jacques 

45. Wadena    F.A. Dewhurst    C.W. Roberts 

46. Watrous    James Andrew Darling  John Riben 

47. Weyburn    Thomas Clement Douglas  E. Robins 

48. Wilkie    J.W. Horsman    W.A. Haight 

49. Yorkton    Arthur Percy Swallow   John Popoff 
 

J.M. Telford 

Clerk of the Executive Council 



 

February 10, 1949 

 

 

3 

The said Commissioner having previously administered the Oath to the members who appeared, and the 

members having subscribed the Roll containing the Oath, they took their seats in the Assembly at 3 

o’clock p.m. 

 

3 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber and took his seat on the Throne. 

 

The Honourable Mr. Williams, Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

I am commanded by His Honour the Lieutenant Governor to inform you that he will defer stating the 

reasons for which the Legislature has been summoned until the Legislative Assembly have elected a 

Speaker. It is, therefore, His Honour’s pleasure that the Legislative Assembly do now proceed to the 

election of a Speaker. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor then retired from the Chamber. 

 

The Honourable Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), addressing himself to the Clerk, moved, seconded by the 

Honourable Mr. Fines that Tom Johnston, Esquire, Member for the Electoral Division of Touchwood, 

do take the Chair of this Assembly as Speaker. 

 

The question being put by the Clerk, it was: 

 

Resolved, nemine contradicente, that Tom Johnston, Esquire, do take the chair of this Assembly 

as Speaker. 

 

The Clerk having declared Tom Johnston, Esquire, duly elected, he was conducted by the Hon. Mr. 

Douglas (Weyburn) and the Hon. Mr. Fines to the Chair, where, standing on the upper step, he returned 

his humble acknowledgments to the Assembly for the great honour they had been pleased to confer upon 

him by choosing him to be their Speaker. 

 

Thereupon he took the chair and the Mace was laid on the Table. 

 

3:15 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor re-entered the Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne. 



 

February 10, 1949 

 

 

4 

Mr. Speaker then addressed His Honour to the following effect: 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR, — 

 

The Legislative Assembly have elected me as their Speaker, although I am but little able to fulfil the 

important duties thus assigned to me. 

 

If in the performance of those duties I should at any time fall into error I pray that the fault may be 

imputed to me and not to the Assembly whose servant I am, and who, through me, the better to enable 

them to discharge their duty to their King and country, hereby humbly claim all their undoubted rights 

and privileges, especially that they may have freedom of speech in their debates, access to your person 

at all seasonable times, and that their proceedings may receive from you the most favourable 

consideration. 

 

The Honourable Mr. Williams, Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

MR. SPEAKER, — 

 

I am commanded by His Honour the Lieutenant Governor to declare to you that he freely confides in the 

duty and attachment of the Assembly to His Majesty’s person and Government, and not doubting that 

their proceedings will be conducted with wisdom, temper and prudence, he grants, and upon all 

occasions will recognize and allow, their constitutional privileges. 

 

I am commanded also to assure you that the Assembly shall have ready access to His Honour upon all 

seasonable occasions and that its proceedings as well as your words and actions will constantly receive 

from him the most favourable construction. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open the Session with the following speech: 

 

MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the First Session of the Eleventh Legislature of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Important steps have been taken during the past year to improve the economy of Saskatchewan, and to 

distribute more fairly to the citizens of the province, in the form of social services, a portion of the 

wealth which the people produce. Notwithstanding the threat of drought during the early summer an 

average crop was harvested in the Province, but unfortunately large areas suffered near or complete crop 

failure. Employment 



 

February 10, 1949 

 

 

5 

has remained at a high level. New sources of wealth have been found, and it is anticipated that economic 

activity will continue to provide favourable opportunities for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mineral production in 1948 reached an all-time high and the outlook for 1949 is more favourable than at 

any time in the Province’s history. Prospectors operating under the Government assistance plan have 

already discovered considerable wealth, and the extension of this programme in the coming year 

promises to reveal additional deposits of base metals and uranium. Geological and geophysical surveys 

will be carried on in the field; scientific research at the University will co-ordinate the information thus 

secured; knowledge so acquired will be made available for the further development of Saskatchewan’s 

mineral resources. In the course of this Session, you will be asked to approve legislation designed to 

facilitate these objectives. 

 

Exploration for petroleum is assured in large areas by agreements which, at the same time, reserve for 

the Province a percentage of all productive areas which are discovered. Four years ago, the petroleum 

industry was almost non-existent; in 1948 the value of production totalled almost one million dollars. 

With full realization of the value of these products to the Province, this work will be further encouraged. 

 

The Government has announced a new potash discovery in the past year; progress has been made in 

ceramic experimental work; sodium sulphate production on a large scale has been achieved by the 

Government-owned plant at Chaplin; research into briquetting techniques has proceeded. The 

Government has continued to move toward its objective of promoting the greater development of the 

natural products of the Province, and this work will continue during the next year. 

 

Forestry activity has been based upon the recommendations of the Royal Commission, and important 

forestry research and education are being carried on. You will be asked to approve legislation removing 

certain areas from forest reserves for the purpose of increasing the agricultural land acreage in the 

Province. 

 

You will also be asked to approve legislation designed to create the machinery for a long-term 

programme of rural electrification, the basis of which will be joint participation by the Government, 

local organizations and individuals for the construction and operation of transmission lines. 

 

For the purpose of overcoming some of the natural hazards and uncertainties of agriculture, my 

Government proposes to initiate a broad programme of irrigation and water conservation in co-operation 

with the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 



 

February 10, 1949 

 

 

6 

Administration. An Act to facilitate the conservation and development of the agricultural resources of 

the Province will be presented in the course of the Session. 

 

A new Conservation and Development Branch will be established to implement new policies directed 

toward achieving greater agricultural stability and security for Saskatchewan farmers. Provision will be 

made to promote the re-settlement of farmers living in sub-marginal areas. Engineering assistance will 

be made available for individual water conservation and drainage work. Grants will be paid to rural 

municipalities to assist in the new programmes and policies, thus carrying forward the advances made in 

the field of agriculture during the past year. 

 

In co-operation with local committees, the Agricultural Representative Service is working in almost 

every rural municipality and local improvement district in the Province. The contribution of the local 

agricultural committees has been invaluable and merits special mention. 

 

The fodder conservation programme directed to obtaining a better balance between the livestock 

population and feed resources of Saskatchewan has reduced farmers’ dependence upon outside sources 

for costly feed supplies. 

 

Provision for an active programme to meet the increased grasshopper menace in 1949 has been initiated. 

 

Progress has been made in the control of animal diseases. Ten veterinary districts are now operating 

with practising veterinarians, and fifteen more have been organized. Scholarships have been awarded to 

students now receiving training in veterinary science. Legislation will be presented to amend The 

Veterinary Services Act for the better control of Bang’s disease. 

 

The decision of the Privy Council holding the ‘crop failure clause’ of The Farm Security Act to be ultra 

vires will necessitate legislation designed to give all of the protection which it is constitutionally 

possible for a provincial Legislature to extend to needy debtors, and especially to farmers in crop failure 

years. You will, therefore, be asked to enact certain amendments to The Moratorium Act enlarging the 

powers of the Government to declare moratoria for the benefit of debtors in crop failure areas, and of 

individuals burdened with certain classes of debt. 

 

Amendments to The Legal Profession Act will be presented with the Object of enabling the members of 

that profession to establish a fund to indemnify persons who may suffer loss through the default of a 

solicitor. 



 

February 10, 1949 

 

 

7 

In its second year of operation, the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan provided hospitalization for 

more than 150,000 persons. By virtue of hospital construction grants, a number of new hospitals were 

completed last year. Eleven new union hospital districts were created. For the purpose of fully utilizing 

the Dominion health grants there have been established a Division of Research and Statistics and a 

Health Survey Committee. These agencies will lay the foundation for establishment of a complete 

programme of health services through joint Dominion and Provincial participation. 

 

Legislation will be introduced to provide for the compulsory pasteurization of milk in all cities and 

certain towns in the Province. 

 

The new Regina Cancer Clinic opened in the spring of last year, has made available to the people of 

Saskatchewan the most modern facilities for the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. The untimely death 

of Dr. Allan W. Blair, late director of cancer services, removed one of Canada’s most capable and 

devoted scientists and public servants. The Government pays tribute to his monumental work in the field 

of medicine. 

 

The mercy work of the air ambulance service increased, almost a thousand flights having been 

completed in 1948. Additional services are being given in health regions, and new nursing homes were 

established in the northern areas. Legislation will be presented to provide psychopathic treatment of 

alcoholics and drug addicts. Steps have been taken to implement certain recommendations of the Penal 

Commission by emphasizing training and rehabilitation rather than mere custodial care of adult and 

juvenile offenders. A major step in carrying out this programme is the construction of a modern 

industrial school for boys. 

 

In the past year, a supplementary cost-of-living allowance has been paid to old age pensioners. Social 

aid payments have been increased by fifteen percent, commending in November, 1948. 

 

Certain amendments to The Larger School Units Act will be introduced. The new curriculum for grade 

twelve, to be introduced this year, will complete the reorganization of the high school courses. Revision 

of the elementary school curriculum is being planned with a view to its implementation in 1952. 

 

School districts have been assisted in meeting building costs to the extent of more than one million 

dollars. Plans providing assistance for a comprehensive school building programme will be submitted. 

In the course of the Session, you will also be asked to approve legislation establishing the Saskatchewan 

Arts Board. Legislation will be presented to establish procedures for collective bargaining between 

teachers and trustees. 



 

February 10, 1949 

 

 

8 

The University’s School of Agriculture building, soils and dairy laboratory, medical building and 

gymnasium are nearing completion and will be ready for use in the next year. 

 

Legislation will be introduced to establish a student aid fund, the purpose of which will be to provide 

assistance to teachers in training, university students and nurses. Amendments to The Teachers’ 

Superannuation Act will also be introduced to make provision for dependants of teachers who die in 

service. 

 

The continued rise in the cost-of-living has worked great hardship upon all persons, and especially 

wage-earners in the Province. One of the consequences of this situation was the unfortunate strike in the 

Bienfait-Estevan coal field. As a result, the Government proposes to appoint a Royal Commission to 

investigate certain aspects of the coal industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

The decision of the Privy Council affirming the validity of the key provisions of The Trade Union Act 

will assure continued vigilance over the rights of labour in the field of collective bargaining. 

Amendments to The Workmen’s Compensation Act and The Department of Labour Act will be 

submitted for your consideration. 

 

Unprecedented flood conditions last spring wrought extensive damage to the province’s transportation 

system. The Government not only took immediate steps to repair the provincial highway system, but 

gave special assistance to the more unfortunate municipalities. Notwithstanding this emergency, the 

Government succeeded in building 578 miles of roads, gravelling 1,175 miles and black-topping 175 

miles of highways. Progress has been made toward the completion of an agreement with the Dominion 

Government for the construction of a trans-Canada highway, and the Government will continue to press 

fro the completion of such an agreement. 

 

Legislation will be presented in the course of the Session to give effect to a policy of decentralized 

administration of local improvement districts. Provisions will also be made by legislation to advance the 

date for the nomination and election of municipal councils. During the year, the Government referred 

The Railway Assessment Act to the Court of Appeal for an opinion as to its constitutionality. 

Confirmation of the right of municipalities to tax railway property will have the effect of increasing 

municipal revenues by substantial sums. 

 

Co-operative activity in the Province increased during the past year. A Co-operative Extension Services 

Branch is being established for the purpose of assisting the development of co-operatives. It is proposed 

to stimulate interest in secondary industries and to this end, a consultative committee of business 



 

February 10, 1949 

 

 

9 

and trade personnel will be set up. The Government has placed before the Board of Transport 

Commissioners the case for more equitable freight rates and it will urge these views before the Royal 

Commission on Transportation. 

 

The Automobile Accident Insurance Act has continued to protect people in the Province, and 

amendments will be introduced to further extend the scope of the plan. 

 

The birth of a son to their Royal Highnesses, Princess Elizabeth and the Duke of Edinburgh has been the 

occasion of general rejoicing in all parts of the Commonwealth, including Saskatchewan. The 

indisposition of His Majesty, the king, has been cause for regret and concern. The people of this 

Province hope and pray for the rapid and complete recovery of the King’s health. 

 

The Public Accounts of the last fiscal year, together with the Estimates for the year beginning April 1st, 

1949, will be submitted. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session with full confidence that you will favourably discharge 

your duties and responsibilities in the best interests of our Province, and may Divine Providence 

continue to bless our Province, and guide the Legislature of Saskatchewan in all its deliberations. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor then retired from the Chamber. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 3:25 o’clock p.m. 

 


