



















































Hansard: March 03, 1949


518 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Eleventh Legislature 

 

Thursday, March 3, 1949 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

RESOLUTION RE MARKETING OF COARSE GRAINS 

 

Mr. Brown moved: 

 

That this Assembly: 

 

(1) go on record as strongly urging action by the Government of Canada to prevent the speculative 

trading in grain futures by closing the Winnipeg Grain Exchange. 

 

(2) endorse the principle of marketing through a Canadian Wheat Board; and 

 

(3) recommend that, to achieve a more stable method of marketing their produce than through the 

medium of speculative trading, the scope of the said Board extended to include the marketing of oats, 

barley, rye and other grains. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the resolution which I am about to introduce at this time is one that has been 

introduced on several occasions in this Legislature, and has received considerable discussion; but I make 

no apology for re-introducing it at this particular session, in spite of the fact that the opposition has on 

several occasions levied criticism on it to the effect that we are loading the order paper with resolutions 

asking the federal government to do this and to do that. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the resolution we are introducing at this time is one of paramount 

importance, and affects the welfare not only of the farming population, but affects the welfare of every 

citizen in the dominion of Canada. The resolution asks for three things. It asks first that the Winnipeg 

Grain Exchange be closed, and closed permanently; secondly, that, through the medium of this 

resolution, we are endorsing the principle of marketing grain through boards such as the Wheat Board; 

thirdly, we suggest that the scope of the said board, that is the Wheat Board, or a board of similar nature, 

be extended so that it can incorporate in it the handling of grain such as oats, barley, rye and other 

grains. 

 

A grain exchange, under western Canadian economy, is not a new thing. Two years ago the Winnipeg 

Grain Exchange celebrated its 60th anniversary, and the theory and practice of future trading is a 

practice which was established some 100 years ago. During this 100 years of its existence, that is a far as 

the principle of future trading is concerned, and through the 60 years of existence of the Winnipeg Grain 

Exchange, it has failed, and failed miserably, to find a solution to our marketing problems, and the story 

and the history of the struggles of the farmers of western Canada in particular to establish some other 

more equitable means of marketing their grain is a story in which 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
519 

the whole romance of the development of western Canada is incorporated. We can go back to the early 

days in western Canada to the struggle of the farmers at that time conducted against the railways in an 

attempt to find a more equitable method of marketing their grain and not be entirely at the mercy of the 

railways. 

 

In the early days of western Canada, the farmers formed themselves into a protective society. That in 

itself answered a temporary problem, but it was far from the solution which they had set out to get. The 

people had in the back of their minds that the most sensible way to market our products was through 

marketing boards. In the year 1917 there was formed the idea of a Wheat Board, and in 1919 the first 

Wheat Board in Canada came into operations under The War Emergency Act of that day. However, that 

particular board had a short life, and the feelings of the farmers were pretty well expressed in an 

editorial in the Grain Growers Guide of that day, in which they stated: “Following the advent of the 

Liberal party into power, it may be assumed that the Wheat Board idea is dead.” And the farmers of that 

day did assume that the Wheat Board was dean, and they formed themselves into the Wheat Pool and set 

out to establish a marketing system in which they had complete control and through their own 

organizations attempted to put their products on the markets of the world. That in itself did work 

successfully, and very successfully, for a few years. We all recall the crash which occurred in 1929 and 

the early thirties, to the extent that our whole economic structure in western Canada was jeopardized, 

and indeed it was only through the steadfast courage of those people in the Wheat Pool that that great 

organization was able to win through that particular depression. 

 

Once again the farmers of western Canada realized that they needed something better, or of greater 

significance than their own organization to market their grain and, once again, there was an agitation on 

the part of the farmers to have established in Canada the principle of marketing their products through 

boards. In 1935 the late R.B. Bennett introduced into the House of Commons in Ottawa a Bill which 

purported to set up a Canadian Wheat Board, a Bill which in its initial stages had the power to market 

coarse grains. During its travel through the House of Commons that particular provision was removed 

from the Bill. However, in the fall of 1935 the Canadian Wheat Board went into operation. While, in 

1935, there was also an election, and, as in 1920, the Liberal party were once again returned to power, 

and while at this time they did not attempt to scuttle the Wheat Board in its entirety, they did at least 

temporarily put in dry dock to the extent that no grain was marketed through the Wheat Board unless the 

price of grain at Winnipeg or Fort William dropped below 90 cents. So once again we were not given 

the freedom of choice as to where we could market our grain; we were given the right to market our 

grain through the Wheat Board only if the price dropped below 90 cents. 

 

Since that time the Wheat board ideas has been, to a large extent, incorporated into our economy in 

Canada, and it is working more or less successfully. Even today there is a concentrated attempt on the 

part of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange and their colleagues to deprive the farmers of western Canada of 

even that which we have at the present time. We are not assured that marketing of wheat will be 

continued under the Wheat Board, to say nothing of being assured that coarse grains and other grains 

will be incorporated by a board such as the Wheat Board. 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
520 

At the present time, the grain exchange is once again attempting to throw its weight around. The hon. 

members will recall, from reading the story of the struggle of the farmers of western Canada, that in the 

early days the Grain Exchange threw its weight around, and had expelled from its midst members of the 

Grain Exchange who were splitting commissions with their patrons. At that time it was a practice which 

was not approved of by the Exchange, and, as such, was expelled. 

 

The Grain Exchange, it has been suggested by the president, is a voluntary non-incorporated association, 

a self-governing institution. It has taken on to itself the power of being prosecutor, judge and jury. As 

last as last fall, in November, as reported in the Western Producer of November 25, 1948, they once 

again indicate very clearly that if they are too hard-pressed they are prepared to throw their weight 

around. 

 

At a meeting held some time in August, the Board of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange passed a resolution 

in which they attempted to show their authority and their power. I do not propose to read all of this 

resolution, but part of it would no doubt be of interest to the hon. members. It states, in part: 

 

No member shall do any act or thing to make any public statement or remarks which, in the opinion of 

the Board, is contrary to the spirit which has governed the members of the exchange, or is detrimental 

to the exchange, or to its interests or welfare, or which reflects upon the Exchange or its marketing 

method, working, trading or markets, or which stands to lessen or impair confidence and stability in 

the Exchange or its marketing methods, working, trading or markets. Such member shall be liable of 

fine, censor, suspension, or expelled from the association. 

 

In my mind, Mr. Speaker, there is no question against whom that was elaborated. It was, in my opinion, 

placed on the records of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange for the sole purpose of attempting to deny the 

great farmers’ organization, the Wheat Pool, of using that facility. There is no suggestion that the Wheat 

Pool wishes to use the facilities of the Grain Exchange, but, so far, our society has failed to create any 

other agency which a farmers’ organization may use in the marketing of its products. 

 

Through the long struggle which has existed on the part of the farmers to obtain their just share of the 

national income, a struggle in the attempt to find orderly, organized marketing systems, while there may 

have been doubts as to the wisdom of certain actions the farmers may have taken at certain times, there 

is one thing that stands our very clearly: on one side you have the farmers and their organization, and on 

the other side you have the vested interests – vested interests which are represented by such 

organizations as the Canadian Chamber of Commerce, the Line Elevators Association, and, indeed, 

individual companies of the line elevators. Even, at times, political parties of Canada have attempted to 

take sides in this issue, and at times they have taken the side of the vested interests. We can refer to the 

action of the Liberal party in 1920, and again in 1935, in which they did not place themselves solely and 

strongly on the side of the farmers. Even today the Conservative party, if we can consider it to be a 

national party, has indicated clearly on which side it proposes to stand. John Bracken, when 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
521 

he was Leader of the Conservative party, made a strong bid for the support of the Grain Exchange when 

he suggested that the farmers should have the right to market their grains, if they so saw fit, through the 

Grain Exchange. As late as August, 1947, at a Conservative nomination convention held at Tisdale, they 

passed a resolution asking that the Winnipeg Grain Exchange be opened. Sometimes we wonder, since 

the opposition has taken into its fold the Conservative party, whether they also took into the fold that 

particular plan of the Conservative party. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Rest assured we did not. You can set your mind at rest entirely, right now. 

 

Mr. Brown: — He suggests that he has not. The Leader of the Opposition has not incorporated that 

particular plan into his platform. If he has not included it in his platform, then I suggest that he spent a 

good many years at Ottawa in which he could have had the principle of the marketing of coarse grains 

incorporated into the Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I supported it just as sincerely as your people did. 

 

Mr. Brown: — Mr. Speaker, The Winnipeg Grain Exchange has put a strong argument in favour of 

their particular type of marketing of grain. They suggest that it is only through a medium such as this 

that you can satisfy the law of supply and demand. They suggest that through the medium of an 

exchange you obtain the highest price for the producer. I suggest, whether they proved that or not, they 

have provide that it is possible to get the lowest price for the producer, when back in 1932 the best 

wheat grown anywhere in the world was sold for as low as 25 cents a bushel. They suggest, because the 

Pool and other farm organizations as have had seats and the facilities of the Grain Exchange, that it has 

become and institution which is necessary for the marketing of our grain in western Canada, and, as 

such, is of benefit to our whole economy. 

 

The tactics of the Grain Exchange have changed during the past few years. It is not so long ago, Mr. 

Speaker, and I am certain all hon. members will recall, when the Grain Exchange put forth the argument 

that the farmers had no right to have an interest in the marketing of their grain. It was the duty of the 

farmer to produce the grain and allow someone else to market their product. They suggested, at that 

time, if the farmer knew his job and worked hard enough, he could produce wheat for as low as 40 cents 

a bushel. Today they come out as the great friend of the farmer and suggest that it is only through their 

medium that we can obtain a price for our product which is in line with the cost of production. 

 

There can be no question as to the importance of a resolution such as we are introducing into this House 

at the present time. There is a philosophy and idea behind this resolution which, on two occasions, 

inaugurated and started the march of the farmers on Ottawa. Even as late as 1942 the farmers of western 

Canada, and of Saskatchewan in particular, banded themselves together and sent a delegation to Ottawa, 

asking that the Winnipeg Grain Exchange be abolished. The Wheat Pool organization, which is at times 

referred to as the 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
522 

“Farmers’ Parliament”, has never missed a meeting in which they have not suggested that the Winnipeg 

Grain Exchange should be closed. Year after year we in this House have sent a resolution to the Ottawa 

government. The farmers in a portion of western Canada have regarded the closing of the Winnipeg 

Grain Exchange of such great importance that they were prepared to call a non-delivery strike of grain if 

the exchange was allowed to operate and continue to market our grain through that channel. 

 

The Grain Exchange has lately been using an argument which is of a similar nature to the argument the 

opposition have used against this government, and it is possible that they may get their arguments from 

exactly the same source. I refer to a statement made by Mr. Jones, who is president of the Winnipeg 

Grain Exchange, and a great exponent of that particular method of marketing. In reference to a statement 

he made, he pointed out that the government has gradually encroached into the grain trade until now 

there is complete elimination of the competitive urge. Under a state monopoly, the government inroads 

into the grain trade, the producer has lost his freedom of action. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, where we have 

heard that term before: “the producer has lost his freedom of action”? I am afraid we have heard that 

echoed and re-echoed from the opposition when we attempted to introduce similar schemes into our 

economy here in Saskatchewan, as we suggest should be put into our economy in Canada as a whole. 

 

I might also suggest that we here in western Canada stand in a very precarious position. We have seen 

before where political parties have stood up, possibly – and I say possibly – for political expediency, 

have stood up in favour of one type of marketing, and when in a position to do something about it, 

produced exactly a different result. I can refer to our Natural Products Marketing Act which was passed 

by the Conservative government in the thirties, and when we attempted, here in Saskatchewan, to put 

into effect that particular act, when we tried to put into effect The Natural Products Marketing Act, we 

received opposition from people whom my hon. friends are today very closely associated with. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — May I ask the hon. gentleman a question: with reference to The Marketing Act, did 

you refer to The Marketing Act which is on the Statute Books of the province of Saskatchewan today? 

 

Mr. Brown: — No, I was referring to The Natural Products Marketing Act. I thought I stated I was 

referring to The Natural Products Marketing Act which was placed upon the Statute Books by the 

Conservative government at Ottawa, under the leadership of R.B. Bennett. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — May I ask another question? I would like to ask the hon. gentleman: when was the 

attempt made to put that particular Act into operation insofar as Saskatchewan is concerned? 

 

Mr. Brown: — I cannot give the hon. gentlemen the date. I have not the date with me, but I do very 

well recall, and I am satisfied that the hon. gentleman himself recalls the attempt that was made to place 

under The Natural Products Marketing Act the 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
523 

poultry products and, as such, a vote was taken on it here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The Natural Products Marketing Act is on the Statute Books today. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member will have the opportunity of replying. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — We’ll do it. 

 

Mr. Brown: — We are today, as I suggested a moment ago, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — If the hon. Gentleman will permit a question? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. gentleman wishes to continue. 

 

Mr. Brown: — As I stated, Mr. Speaker, I referred a few moments ago to the danger that we are in of 

losing even that which we have. I suggested, at that time, there was being made an attempt to destroy the 

faith that we have placed in a form of orderly and organized marketing such as the Wheat Board. The 

Grain Exchange has been very busy in organizing what I consider to be phony farm organizations, and 

this is particularly true within Manitoba. Phony farm organizations which have no grass roots in any 

particular farming area, but are organized by the Grain Exchange for the sole purpose of bringing to 

light what the Grain Exchange wishes to be brought out under discussion. 

 

I suggest that they are also attempting to scare the farmers of western Canada into a camp in which the 

farmers do not want themselves to be found in. I can refer to a paid advertisement put into the papers by 

the Winnipeg Grain Exchange, and in this paid advertisement on the part of the Winnipeg Grain 

Exchange they suggest, in referring to the Wheat Board: “The open market would disappear in favour of 

a state monopoly. There are differences of views about the open market, but nobody of consequence is 

advocating a state monopoly as the alternative. Over and above all other objections, we oppose such 

changes in national policy as wheat agreement implies. The government has no mandate from the people 

to embark upon a programme of state socialism.” I would refer that to my hon. friends, to point out to 

them the danger that we stand in at the present time. They have stated time and time again, the 

government in Ottawa is not embarking upon a programme of state socialism, and yet it is suggested that 

in inaugurating the principles which are incorporated in the Wheat Board, we are embarking upon a 

programme of state socialism. If the government sees fit to draw back from its programme of 

embarkation on state socialism, we will indeed lose that which we have at the present time. 

 

The second part of this resolution, Mr. Speaker, we are endorsing the principle of the Wheat Board. 

While we do not agree entirely, and I do not expect that we ever will agree entirely, the operation of the 

Wheat Board has always been at all times in the best interests of the farmer, and it has given 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
524 

us stability and an assurance of some security in our farming practice. It has made possible bilateral 

trade, bilateral to the extent that we here in Canada agree to deliver to another country certain specified 

amounts of wheat at a certain set sum. We have also agreed to a principle which is sound and which has 

produced results favourable not only to the producer but favourable to the consumer, no only in Canada 

but in other parts of the world as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I come to the last part of a resolution which asks that this Board be extended to 

include coarse grains. You will note that the resolution suggests the marketing of oats, barley, rye and 

other grains. At this particular moment, I know of no other grains which would be incorporated under 

the Wheat Board except flax. The majority of our other grains are of small quantity, and the majority of 

which are marketed either by contract or through co-operative organizations. I do not suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Wheat Board should set up elaborate machinery to handle these grains which are today 

handled in small quantities, but I do suggest that if these grains ever become in a position where they 

require marketing on a national scale, or that the marketing cannot be continued through contract or co-

operative, that they also be incorporated under the Wheat Board. 

 

Legislation, it is true, has been placed upon the Statute Books at Ottawa, which would make it possible 

for that Board to handle coarse grains. A year ago they put up the argument that they could not put it 

into effect until the provinces of western Canada had passed complementary legislation. Manitoba has 

not yet seen fit to pass such legislation. There may be reasons for that. One possibly is that Manitoba is 

at peace with the Grain Exchange, and the second reason may be that they have a government composed 

of people with the same philosophy and ideology as sit in with the opposition ranks in this House. Mr. 

Garson suggested, at that time, that it was not necessary for such legislation to be passed by the 

provinces, and now Mr. Garson, who was at that time Premier of Manitoba, today sits in the federal 

government; I suggest that he is in a very good position to convince the federal government that it is not 

necessary for Manitoba to have this legislation and to put into effect a policy which will incorporate the 

coarse grains. But I suggest that this Board must be a feature of the federal government and, as such, to 

be responsible to that government. They also used the argument that the farm organizations were not 

unanimous in their opinion as to whether or not they wish their grains marketed through that Board. We 

are no longer in that position today, Mr. Speaker, for the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, which 

speaks for a good many farmers in Canada and in the whole of Canada, has unanimously endorsed the 

principles of marketing through the Board, and it advocated that the coarse grains be incorporated under 

the Wheat Board. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I do not suggest that if the federal government sees fit to adopt what we suggest 

in this resolution, that we will create here in western Canada a Utopia and a western paradise. There will 

be other problems that will be required to be solved but, at least it will create a medium of orderly 

marketing on an organized scale, and will bring a greater measure of stability to our western agriculture, 

and, indeed, to the whole agriculture industry in Canada. It will eliminate from our economy entirely the 

speculative marketing of grain. It will make possible bilateral trades in other commodities that wheat, 

and even will make possible a multilateral trade. It will make possible an international wheat agreement 

which will work 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
525 

in the interests of the producing nations, and of this consuming nations. Once again I say this will not 

solve our problems but will go a long way towards that respect. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, 

seconded by Mr. Wellbelove: 

 

That this Assembly: 

 

(1)  go on record as strongly urging action by the Government of Canada to prevent the speculative 

trading in grain futures by closing the Winnipeg Grain Exchange. 

 

(2)  endorse the principle of marketing through a Canadian Wheat Board; and 

 

(3)  recommend that, to achieve a more stable method of marketing their produce than through the 

medium of speculative trading, the scope of the said Board be extended to include the marketing of 

oats, barley, rye and other grains. 

 

Mr. J. Wellbelove (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to rise in 

support of this motion, it being my pleasure for three or four years to say a few words in support of 

similar resolution. I think it is necessary this year to stress our views and our impressions more strongly 

than we have ever done before. 

 

The Grain Exchange evidently, by the amount of literature that they are distributing, are right down for a 

fight to the finish. Anything we can do in this main grain growing province of the Dominion of Canada 

to strengthen the arms and stiffen the backs of the administration at Ottawa, I think we should do. This 

closing of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange is not a new question at all. There has been about 12 or 13 

enquiries and commissions have been set up since farmers started growing grain in any quantity in 

western Canada. That alone would be evidence that the farmers are not satisfied with the speculative 

system of marketing their grain. All commissions have agreed on one point. I do not think there is a 

commission that has given the farmers’ viewpoint 50 percent of their support when they brought down 

their findings, and yet they have all agreed on one point, and that is that the speculative market, to 

enable it to function satisfactorily, needs a tremendous lot of speculative support. Now, just what is that 

speculative support? If you go into the office of any grain broker, you will notice a bunch of people 

there and several of them are just mere ‘scalpers’; that is, they will watch the markings on the board and 

they will put up the margin for a few thousand bushels of grain, and when there is a fractional increase 

they will sell and get the price of a meal ticket out of it. As far as having any hand in growing the grain, 

they make no contribution at all and yet they get something of a livelihood out of it. Then, there is the 

person who invests considerable amounts in a margin on a large bushelage of grain’ all that he handles 

in paper’ he never intends to make or take delivery of one bushel of wheat, and yet they come in 

between us, as producers, and the consumer, and every dollar that is diverted into those particular 

channels is either taken away from the producer of grain for the proper price that he should get from the 

consumer, or it adds to the consumers’ price in the way of bread or feed grains as the case may be, 

compared with what the farmer gets. 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
526 

Then you will notice that the Winnipeg Grain Exchange is dwelling on another fallacy, and that is, it is 

very, very necessary for the miller to have the speculative market. They tell us that if a miller takes a 

contract for delivery of a large quantity of grain, whether it be overseas market or home market, it is 

necessary fro him to hedge his purchases. On the surface, Mr. Speaker, that does appear to be correct. 

That is, if a miller accepts an old country bid for a large quantity of flour, it is necessary from him 

before he closes that deal to be able to know that on the delivery months in which he is going to mill that 

wheat, it will be necessary for him to have that wheat available to fulfil his contract. Well, now we have 

proved through the setting of a Wheat Board that that particular posting of a margin can be absolutely 

dispensed with for the simple reason that we have a definitely set price for the marketing of our grain; 

the miller can today go and cable his acceptance of an overseas bid for any quantity f flour with the 

definite assurance that he can procure that wheat, not paper from the speculator, but actual wheat from 

the Wheat Board the day on which he is desirous of cleaning out his margin and filling his contract. 

 

They say sometimes that the farmer gains advantage by the speculative market. We would possibly 

believe that if the Grain Exchange had not a record. It is like a good many other things, it has a very 

damaging record. If you go back to 1919, as has been mentioned by the mover of the resolution, the first 

Canadian Wheat Board functioned in that year. The initial payment on wheat No. 1, Fort William, was 

$2.15, and we had a participation certificate of 48 cents, making No 1 Northern, Fort William, $2.63. 

The Grain Exchange put up exactly the same howl in 1919 as they are putting up today. They said: “You 

give the farmer freedom of choice of marketing his wheat, and we can guarantee to increase his returns.” 

The government of the day, as has been said, listened to that argument and the Wheat Board folded up 

before the 1920 crop, and the average price for all grades – I quoted to you before that No 1 Northern 

was $2.63 – in 1919, under a Wheat Board was $2.37. Then we have the open market in 1920. The 

average price for all grades was $1.62. We were down 75 cents the first year that we had the open 

market. In 1921, we had the open market again, and it dropped again 81 cents from the previous figure. 

So, in two years, Mr. Speaker, from $2.63 we went down a loss of $1.56 a bushel on the average price of 

our grain – in two years under and open market. That, in itself would not justify any government – it 

does not matter what the open market supporters and people have – in listening to their demands. But 

that is not all. We had the open market in 1930 and the average price was 49 cents a bushel. We had the 

open market in 1932 – average price was 35 cents a bushel; and in 1932, at one time, threshed wheat 

was 38 cents. That netted the farmer 20 cents a bushel back on his farm. Those are the conditions that 

we had under the free enterprise system of marketing our grain. Then the Grain Exchange continued to 

howl that we would get a better show. 

 

At the time of that great march on Ottawa for $1 wheat on February 2, 1952, it is rather interesting to 

note the Winnipeg Grain Exchange at that time said: “Well, now, if you have the open market again, we 

can get you a wonderful price.” They tell us today that the federal government is denying us, I forget 

how many hundreds of millions of dollars – I will come to one aspect of that presently – that we have 

been defrauded of through marketing through a Wheat Board. It is rather interesting to note that, at the 

time we were marching on Ottawa on February 2, 1942, Chicago No. 1 Northern was quoted at $1.29½ . 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
527 

Winnipeg Grain Exchange was 78½ cents a bushel. You have there a spread of 51 cents between those 

two agencies, and yet today, Mr. Speaker, they have the audacity to say that if you open the Winnipeg 

Grain Exchange and give the farmers an opportunity to use the speculative market, independent of the 

Wheat Board, that there we will even up prices with the Chicago price. Yet we have the definite record 

that when we were marching on Ottawa in 1942 there was a spread of 51 cents between the Winnipeg 

Grain Exchange and the Chicago market. 

 

Now, to deal very briefly with the Canadian Wheat Agreement, the guarantee, of course, was 16 million 

bushels for the first two years of contract, at the guaranteed price of $1.55 a bushel. The third year, the 

1948-49, the year through which we are functioning now, the guaranteed price was $1.25, the 1949-50 

crop, a guaranteed minimum price of $1.00. This contract evidently presupposed a drastic drop in wheat 

prices. That has not, of course, materialized, but it has left quite a lot of dispute with regard to the 

clause, and unless the market drops very drastically in the next two marketing years, there will be a wide 

margin there to make up with what should have been the average price. We will receive the second 20 

cents which will give us quite a bit more in return. I am arguing for the Wheat Board, but I realize the 

arguments and some of them give a fair or a medium basic of logic, but we can never estimate what 

effect that 160 million bushels of wheat would have had if it had been thrown on the open markets of the 

world where, instead of being guaranteed delivery through our government Wheat Board, if that 160 

million bushels had been floated around in the open market and the interchange of prices as between 

Chicago and Winnipeg, we do not know what effect that would have had on bringing down the Chicago 

price. So when Mr. Jones and his associates – they circulate us very often and very persistently – draw 

our attention to the prevailing Chicago price, they should also draw out attention to what they would 

estimate 160 million bushels of free wheat floating about on the speculative market and what depressing 

effect that would have had on the Chicago market. I would maintain, Mr. Speaker, that had that been 

free wheat, just floating around on the world’s market, there would have been a considerable mark-down 

in what we sometimes call world prices. 

 

In 1946 and 1947, Canada supplied to Great Britain 169 million bushels of wheat – 9 million bushels 

over the stipulated amount. She sold outside to other buyers 71 million bushels of wheat at an average 

price of $2.41 – that is outside of the guaranteed Canadian Wheat Agreement. In 1947 she supplied 170 

million bushels to Great Britain at a stipulated price of $1.55, and about 18 million outside at $2.77. 

Canadians take a lot of credit for that. They say Canada has supplied Great Britain with cheap wheat. 

We are proud to do it; we are pleased to do it, but at the same time if Canada is going to take all the 

credit for that, Canada should assume something of the financial responsibility that has been undertaken 

in that Agreement. What I mean to say is this: I bear in mind my point before, that 160 million bushels 

would have depressed world markets, yet I think we can take it that there would have been a far better 

price than the $1.95 that we will get now, and $2.00 guaranteed for the next year, and I think the federal 

government should give some consideration for the margin in between that, possibly, if the people of 

Canada are going to take all of the credit for supplying cheap wheat to Britain, and the farmers should 

not have to pay the shot. Canada should be prepared to come in with a total payment to show their 

appreciation of some of the financial sacrifice that the farmers have been called upon to make in 

stabilizing the consumption of food 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
528 

matters for the people in Great Britain. I believe that the winning of the peace is just as essential as was 

the winning of the war. Those people who had it within their power to provide our men who were 

prepared to go out and sacrifice their lives, had it within their power to provide them the necessities for 

carrying on a combatted, destructive war, I often regret to think that it is written in the annals of our 

federal parliament, before those people would undertake to supply the munitions of war, we had to lift 

the cost of production plus five percent profit, before we could get any bids or they would undertake to 

supply the munitions of war. If the people who carried on a destructive occupation, or at least they 

carried on the means for producing the weapons of destruction, had to be recognized and the ceiling was 

their level, I think we, as farmers, being in the occupation of providing the necessities to carry on a war 

for the preservation of peace, I think we have a right to be recognized. 

 

In regard to the matter of the future for the farmers, I think we are facing into a rather uncertain market 

as far as world markets are concerned. I would like to see us be unanimous on a resolution in this House, 

to go down to the federal government and let them realize that we can speak with one voice on this 

matter. It matters not what our politics are as far as the preservation, maintenance and the assistance to 

our major industry in western Canada is concerned. We speak with an undivided voice. 

 

It has been said that there is a possibility of wheat being declared surplus. The United States has had two 

bumper crops and the possibility that she will get another one. If wheat should be declared surplus, as 

we understand at the present time, there will be no Marshall dollars available to Great Britain to 

purchase wheat in Canada. If that should definitely transpire, it might be disastrous as far as Canada’s 

purchasing power is concerned, unless our dominion government is able to adjust its finances – it is 

beyond my reasoning as to how they would be able to do it – but we are faced with that possibility. In 

the Monthly Review of the Wheat Situation, December, 1948, sent out from the Dominion Bureau of 

Statistics at Ottawa, there was this rather disconcerting statement: 

 

The largest addition to the world wheat supplies in 1949 may again come from the United States. On 

December 20, the Crop Reporting Board of the United States Department of Agriculture reported that 

the acreage of winter wheat seeded for all purposes is estimated at 61,370,000 acres – more than five 

percent larger than last year’s record of 58,161,000. The estimated acreage is one-quarter greater than 

the ten-year average on the basis of December 1 conditions. The 1949 winter wheat crop is forecast at 

965 million bushels. Should such a crop be realized, and an average United States wheat crop also be 

harvested, a total of 1949 wheat production in the United States would, for the third year in 

succession, exceed 1¼ billion bushels. 

 

That gives us something serious to think about. I think we should strain every nerve and effort in 

bringing whatever force we can to bear upon the dominion government to strengthen their efforts with 

regard to overcoming the resistance from the Winnipeg Grain Exchange, to assure that, as far as it is 

humanly possible, the farmers of western Canada can be assured of a stabilized market over a long-term 

period of delivery. 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
529 

In connection with the coarse grains, if you take the argument that I have advanced that it is necessary in 

the interests of the wheat grower that wheat be stabilized, no logical argument can be advanced that oats, 

barley, rye and flax should be thrown to the mercy of the speculator in the field. My work takes me 

down every fall to the board room in the Winnipeg Grain Exchange. I wish every member could see the 

crazy method of selling our grain. When you think of the quietness that is surrounding, to a great deal, 

the raising of our crops back here on the prairies, and then see the crazy antics of those people in the pit, 

and the hectic time they have, especially at the time they had a few millions of rye to shovel around 

there, it was something alarming to see that we should ever have to resort to such crazy method of 

marketing our grain. 

 

I want to support the resolution, Mr. Speaker, because I think a sane, orderly method of marketing is 

essential for the farming population. There is no other body of people, either professional or working 

classes, that would allow their income to be tied to the vagaries of a speculative market, and yet that is 

just exactly where the farmer is today. He does not know whether his wheat crop, under speculative 

market, will drop off 60 cents, 80 cents or 90 cents a bushel. I maintain, Mr. Speaker, that no other class 

in the world would allow their income to be tied to such a speculative, hectic foolish system of sending 

in returns for labour. 

 

I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. L.W. Larsen (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, I was glad of the privilege to say a few words on 

behalf of this motion, and I do not think there will be a more important motion passed in this House 

during this session than that very one, because, after all, agriculture is the backbone of this country. I 

hope sincerely that this motion is not turned into being a political issue. I think every member, on both 

sides of this House, will agree with it, and I would support that motion regardless of what side of the 

House it is coming from. 

 

I would like to say a few words and express some of the viewpoints my people have up in the 

Shellbrook constituency on this question. There is no question about it that it is every farmer’s wish to 

take the speculations off that commodity, where the Grain Exchange is playing a little poker game and 

the farers have the chips. If they want to play poker with their own money, we have no objections 

around Shellbrook. But it is a fact that with several questions coming up, and the war is over, and if I 

can remember my history correctly, during the 40 years I have been here we saw very low prices most of 

the time outside of the war years, and thereby I am afraid that if this control of the prices on our grain is 

turned over to the Grain Exchange, that history will repeat itself. I remember, just like it was yesterday, 

when people brought oats into our town and the elevator man said: “what did you bring that stuff in for, 

there is nor price on it?” “Well, he said, I haven’t had a smoke for a few days and I would like to have a 

can of tobacco.” After the elevator man looked through his list and raised the grades three times, up to a 

3CW, he was able to provide him with 1 1/2 cents per bushel, and he got this can of tobacco. And this 

same farmer told the elevator agent that he paid seven cents fro threshing that same grain that year. So it 

is no wonder that farmers in my constituency are practically 100 percent for this commodity to be 

marketed through the Wheat Board. 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
530 

There is a lot more at stake than just the prices. We have a question before us today, for instance, the 

margarine question, and quite a few political parties like to take a very strong stand on it, but I do know 

what is going to happen to the hundreds of little quarter section or half section farmers in my 

constituency, if they have to get out of hog production and milk cows. These farmers will, I imagine, go 

into big grain farms and there will be a surplus of wheat. There will be no livestock. All we need to do is 

to go back, roughly speaking, about 17 months when we were buying our commodities in the line of 

barley to finish our hogs which were picked out by the Bacon Board at $21.10 f.o.b. Prince Albert for an 

“A” grade hog dressed. The barley price under the Wheat Board at that time was between 48 and 53 

cents a bushel. Now, almost overnight, some authorities – I am not going to blame anyone particular; I 

know, maybe, where it is, but I want this motion to be carried by both sides of this House, so I am not 

trying to raise any political issues out of it .. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Don’t worry, they’ll support it. 

 

Mr. Larsen: —  . . . but this barley within a few days was raised up to $1.30 out of the elevator to 

furnish our livestock. I know the results up in our country. You can hardly find a hog in the country 

anymore. The train crews on the railroad trains told me it was a pitiful sight when they got into Prince 

Albert and they had to shovel the breeding stock and little pigs into the boxcars. Some were stuck and 

others were squashed to death. That ruined the industry of hog raising in this country, due to the account 

that some people’s ears were a little closer to certain interests than they were to the farming community. 

I can see the great danger if we get rid of these half or quarter section farmers in the province. We must 

preserve them, other wise they will have to go into urban centres and we will just have a great big grain 

factors out in the country. We do not want that to happen either. I cannot see that there is anything that 

could do more harm than if these regulators set the standard of living for the thousands of people out on 

these small farms, which is the case if we leave the coarse grains to the speculators. I know there is no 

government, regardless of what party they are, that would ever date to put oats down to a cent and one-

half a bushel on our Grain Board in this country. 

 

Since a lot our breeding stock has gone down – because coarse grains and breeding of livestock goes 

together – it is very likely that we will have a surplus of wheat in the very near future. You see rumours 

in the daily press that wheat might be declared as surplus grain any old time – there will be no market 

for it. Again I say there is not a reason why we shouldn’t get the Wheat Board to handle our coarse 

grains. There are other reasons. It is going to take the importing nations a longer time to get into the 

raising of livestock than it does to get them into grain production. Again, I say, let us not put all our eggs 

into one basket. Let’s have a little diversion in farming, but with a speculative market you cannot have 

it. I think if I remember correctly, one of the great Liberal leaders of this country said one time 

something about the horseless and cowless and sowless farms. I am telling you, Mr. Speaker, unless we 

have some long term policy for these coarse grains, this is exactly what is going to happen in the very 

near future. 

 

One of our biggest markets for coarse grains is Ontario, for instance, and they do not want particularly 

cheap barley or high barley, but they want a 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
531 

guaranteed supply at reasonable prices. They were caught something like ourselves a year ago last fall to 

furnish our livestock we were paying three times the price; when our finished product was set onto the 

Bacon Board, and we were not justified to go out and pay $1.30 per bushel for barley to finish our 

livestock instead of 50 cents which had been the price for a number of years. We shipped the stuff – of 

course, we were always promised to have that market open to the States but of course, like a lot of other 

times these things are not opened until the election year for the federal government. I am sorry to say 

that a lot of farmers, including myself, had to get rid of our livestock because our livestock market was 

picked and controlled and our supply of feed was uncontrolled. These things simply do not work. That 

has also ruined a good many livestock producers in this country because they listen to the speculators in 

Winnipeg and the demand to get the coarse grain thrown open to the world. That was very detrimental in 

a suggestive measure, and I am sure that every farmer or every member of this House must feel 

something like ourselves since agriculture is the backbone of this country; whether you are a labourer or 

a business man we want to see prosperity amongst our farmers, and if there is prosperity amongst our 

farmers we have practically solved all our difficulties as far as the prosperity for this province is 

concerned. That is why it gives me a great deal of pleasure to say a few words on this motion, and I am 

sure that every member in this House would like to say a few good words on this motion. That is why I 

agree with the mover of this motion 100 percent, and I am sure that a large majority of the farmers in the 

Shellbrook constituency would be glad to say a few good words for that motion. I am also sure, Mr. 

Speaker, that if the farmers had a broadcasting station and we had a receiver down here, if they could 

express their viewpoints on this very question, there would be so much noise here saying: “Yes, put it 

through,” that we would not be able to hear ourselves speaking in here. Since they haven’t that privilege, 

I am glad to have the privilege of speaking on their behalf in supporting this motion because I saw too 

much abuse for a good many years on a driveway of an elevator; people coming in there in rags; their 

grain was seized; they had nothing to eat – if they had anything to eat they had to sell it just to get a few 

dollars for groceries; and I am there fore sure that every member in this House would support this 

motion 100 percent, and that is all I would ask for because I think it is a good one for the prosperity of 

the agriculture of this province. 

 

Mr. W.S. Thair (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I had not intended to say anything on this resolution, but I 

would just like to read a statement to do with clause 3 in this resolution that was moved by Mr. Brown, 

and that is a statement from the Regina Leader-Post, to the effect that the government at Ottawa has 

reversed its decision on the coarse grain stand. I quote: 

 

Ottawa, Staff, March 3, 1949. 

 

The passage of a new Federal Marketing Act is expected to be recommended to Parliament this 

session by the Minister of Agriculture, Hon. J. G. Gardiner, as a result of explosive coarse grains 

issues between the provinces and the Dominion Government. 

 

Such a movement would be a complete reversal of the stand taken by the government last year and 

would toss the issue back into the laps of the provinces. 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
532 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Passing the buck. 

 

Mr. Thair: — This new Act or promise of legislation would enable the provinces to make their own 

plans for marketing and pricing of coarse grains. I do not intend to continue this argument any more than 

to say what the effect would have, in this statement. One province could act along, or in association with 

others, where it would set up as a result a most favourable vote would be either named by the provincial 

government or a restrictive producer-controlled board. One of the big questions to be answered is: who 

would be the central sales agency for one or more provincial boards in inter-provincial trade: 

 

RESOLUTION RE MARGARINE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Gibson. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I must apologize for not being present when this 

resolution was called. I did not expect it would be before six o’clock. 

 

I am not going to take up a great deal of time of the House on this resolution. However, there are a few 

things in connection with it which I think should be pointed out. I question very much if there is any 

resolution that has come before this House in the last two or three sessions that deals with a problem so 

great and of such grave concern to the dairy farmers of the province of Saskatchewan, and the Dominion 

of Canada as a whole, as does this resolution. 

 

The history back of this is well-known to everyone. Ever since Sir John A. Macdonald, there has been a 

law prohibiting the manufacture, distribution and sale of margarine in Canada. During the last few years 

there has been a good deal of debate on the advisability of continuing such prohibition, and the result 

was that on December 15 last, after having had the question referred to the Supreme Court of Canada, a 

decision was handed down which advised the dominion government. To my mind, it was not really a 

judgment, it was an advisory opinion passed on to the government of Canada that they did not have the 

power in their constitution to enforce the particular rules and regulations governing this product. We 

also know, when this decision was handed down, it was not by any means unanimous. As a matter of 

fact, the court was divided two to three, and the Chief Justice and another judge were in the minority. 

That indicates to me at least that it is not a decision. There is a grave doubt in Canada today as to where 

they are at. We are in sort of a flux, or a confused state of mind in regard to the actual legalities of this 

question. 

 

We have another court in Great Britain, the Privy Council, where we can send questions we are not able 

to agree on, or are not satisfied with; regardless of the Supreme Court, it is taken to the Privy Council to 

decide. After some hesitation on the part of the government and the farmers’ organizations concerned, a 

decision has now been reached, and this question is now being taken to the Privy Council for their 

decision. Our good friend, Mr. Milliken, who has been engaged in legal work for the farmers; 

organizations for many years, has been engaged for that purpose. 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
533 

The mover of the resolution very properly pointed out certain questions that are very pertinent to this 

problem. Of course he was the mover of the resolution, and he was very careful not to go too far along 

the path of pointing out the consequences of the problem if it is left in the state it is in at the present 

time. What would be the result to the 370,000 dairy farmers in Canada? I think there are approximately 

60,000 in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

A few moments ago, when the member for Shellbrook (Mr. Larsen) spoke, he touched on that very 

problem, and I could not help but think that he has a sense of the importance of that very thin, although 

he was not speaking on this resolution at all. 

 

I wish, with the consent of the House, to go into a few of the things, in my opinion at least and in the 

opinion of better men than I am, of what the consequences will be, if this decision is left in the place it is 

now: whereby the manufacture, importation, distribution and sale of margarine is wide open in Canada, 

or operating as it is at the present time. 

 

The milk production, throughout the Dominion of Canada, two or three years ago was 15 billion pounds; 

today it is over 17 billion pounds. We know that during the war years there was no industry that was 

more regulated and hedged about by control than was the dairy industry. We know, also, that this 

particular branch of the agricultural industry was willing to accept these regulations, but I think now, 

after all these years, it is still under regulation and control. Other parts of our productive economy has 

the opportunity and privilege of selling their products and to charge anything they like. The dairy 

industry is still under regulation and control by the government of Canada. I think it is a very poor return 

for work and service, performed in the interest of the national economy, to have this particular industry 

left to the mercies of conditions we find in Canada today. 

 

There is no doubt in my mind that at the present time the people in the towns and villages – the workers 

– probably have a hard time, in some instances, to get by, and look upon the privilege of buying 

margarine as a very welcome assistance to the cost of living. There is no question about that, and I do 

not blame them for doing so; but don’t forget that this is not a permanent condition. The price of dairy 

products in Canada today is only a temporary phase of the matter. No on thinks for one minute that this 

is going to be a permanent condition just as we know that the present price of wheat, beef, port, clothing 

and everything else we buy is not permanent, and will not stay at the price it is at the present time. I 

would like the members of this House to try to visualize what the condition will be in the dairy industry 

in Saskatchewan and in Canada as a whole when the price of good dairy butter will be down to 30, 40 or 

45 cents a pound. We have been fortunate in one respect that we have the only industry in the 

agricultural bracket today that is no dependent on the export market for the sale of their products. We do 

not export any butter from Canada. By the way, Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan is the only 

one in all the nine provinces in Canada that is producing more butter than we use in our own province. 

We are the only province in Canada which exports butter to the other provinces of Canada. We have 

been able, through that position to provide ourselves with a stable market for our butter, or a fairly stable 

market. Let me point out that there is no country in the world where it costs more to produce dairy 

products than it does in Canada. We are in the extreme northern part of the continent. We can talk about 

New Zealand, Denmark, and all these 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
534 

other places, and let me assure you I know something about some of them, and there is no comparison 

whatever. In Denmark, what do we find? It is really a tropical country in one sense of the word because 

the Gulf Stream skirts the whole islands which constitute the Kingdom of Denmark. They have a much 

warmer and more temperate climate than they have in Scotland and England during the winter months. 

Everyone knows that. Another thing is that they have an export market to Great Britain, and Denmark’s 

export of butter has been encouraged and pushed along. It has been encouraged to a great extend by the 

government. The consumption of margarine in itself is encouraged and fostered by the government and 

the very people in Denmark who produce the butter for export. Why is that done? Because they are in 

the same position as Great Britain is in today. They have to export something in order to keep their 

exchange in proper balance with other countries, and that is one of the chief exports of that little country. 

 

We have the United States to the south of us. I have here a set of figures which I will give to the House 

on the consumption of butter and other edible fats as compared between the two countries, Canada and 

the United States. The butter consumption in the United States is 10.5 per capita. In Canada it is 28.6 

pound per capita. Margarine consumption in the United States is 4.2; in Canada it is nothing. Lard, 11.9; 

in Canada 4.7. Other fats, 6.2 in the United States; 1.4 in Canada. The result in total fats is 42.7 in the 

United States, 42.6 in Canada. It is practically the same. The human body requires a certain amount of 

fat, and we see how even they are on the whole American continent. Some will say that the little 

difference between the two would not be very important in Canada. Well, if we eat as much margarine 

for the population of Canada, and margarine should supplant butter to the extent of the difference 

between 10.5 pounds and 28.6 pounds in Canada, we will have a least 25 to 30 million pounds of butter 

for export. That in itself has been proven in the years gone by when we did export butter, and it 

depressed the price of butter in Canada from 28 to 35 percent. That is history in Canada today. If you 

check back you will find my figures are absolutely correct. If the Canadian dairy industry is going to be 

placed in the position where they have to export the amount of butter, we are going to be regulated by 

that exportable surplus insofar as our own price is concerned. 

 

In eastern Canada, particularly, there are thousands of people on small farms, and there are thousands of 

people in Western Canada on small farms of 100 to 300 acres, and the balance of the farms are pasture 

and wood lots. The member for Shellbrook (Mr. Larsen) touched on that situation and it can be applied 

right here. He said that if something was not done to stabilize the price of coarse grains, these farms 

would go out of business because in the northern part of the province they produce more coarse grains 

than they do wheat. Those coarse grains are produced and fed on the farms. Well, one of the most 

important parts of livestock production is the dairy industry; we know that, and one I tied in with the 

other. If we are going to put these farmers in the position where they have to go out of dairy production, 

then we are going to find that these farms – now on the basis of individual farms of 200 to 300 acres, or 

even 100 acres – will all be combined and there will be grain farming with one farmer, perhaps, where 

you have from three to seven today. That is going to be the situation all over the province, if a fellow 

takes a car and goes all over the province of Saskatchewan – I have done it the last few years a little bit, 

and I was astounded to find that you can leave Regina, go clean over to Manitoba in the northern part of 

the province, and the whole territory is nothing but a mixed farming area. The real prairie section of 

Saskatchewan with grain 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
535 

growing exclusively is not so very large, and there is a tremendous part of that, Mr. Speaker, as you well 

know – you live in that part of the country – that is subject to drought and you know what happened a 

few years ago. Well, I say that the cream can was the mainstay of thousands and thousands of grain 

farmers – not the mixed dairy farmer, but the grain farmer. You can go into any station in my district 

and see 75 to 100 cream cans stacked up against the side of the station. Today you would not find that 

proportion, you might find 40 or 50, but you let the price of grain go down until you get $1 or 85 cents a 

bushel at Fort William – we are going to see those days again – and you will find you will have to resort 

to the same type of farming you had previous to these high grain prices. 

 

It is estimated that 17 percent of Canada’s population – not Saskatchewan alone, it is more than that in 

Saskatchewan, but taking every province in Canada – owes its living to the dairy industry. Now these 

figures astound me, but it is a fact. There figures are authentic, and I have them here. For seven 

consecutive years in the thirties Canada’s annual milk production brought in more than the whole wheat 

crop of Canada. That goes to reinforce the statement I have made of the tremendous importance, and of 

the tremendous risk we are facing. To countenance anything that is going to put that part of the 

agricultural industry into a position where there is confusion and they don’t know where they are at. 

There has been a lot of criticism, sometimes from the federal government, on account of the open 

market, taking the ceiling off coarse grains, and so on, and there probably was some confusion for a 

short time; but don’t forget that there is over $500 million invested in the dairy industry of Canada 

today. I would say there is over $100 million invested in the province of Saskatchewan in that industry. 

Two-thirds of the population of this province in the rural area will be affected by removing the ban on 

the sale, production and importation of margarine in Saskatchewan. 

 

In the United States, where they have all the ingredients necessary for the manufacture of margarine, 

they imported millions and millions of pounds of certain types of see. They produced edible oil from this 

seed at 4 1/2 a pound. That market is opening up again for the United States right now. I would like to 

put this thing to any farmer who knows anything about farming; how are the farmers in the Dominion of 

Canada going to be when we can run tankers up to the seaboard, and to the packing plants and have big 

tankers of edible oil at a price we probably never dream of today; but that is coming. You could 

probably sell the margarine for 20 to 25 cents a pound. I am sure you could because they sell it now for 

43 cents. What else is going to happen? There is one difference between the United States and us; the 

United States have lost out in the fight between the dairy industry and margarine and I have the figures 

to show you that. But they have another means of taking care of themselves by the tremendous demand 

of that 155 million population for fluid mil, and the dairy industry that used to produce the better in the 

United States is now selling their supply for fluid consumption. They can do that. The United States is 

densely populated, with large centre in every state and community. They have the finest transportation 

system by way of highway and truck transportation, which can take the milk from the farmers every day 

in the year and transport it into these centres for cold storage and pasteurization. That is done just as 

quickly as you could dispose of it right on the farm when you separate the milk. We have not got that 

situation in Saskatchewan and many parts of Canada. The farms of Saskatchewan are isolated, with poor 

roads and, in some cases, no roads – in spite of the government that has done so much. All they can do is 

put their 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
536 

own facilities in, as far as possible. Some of them have an ice-well on their farms, a very good system of 

protecting their dairy products; some of them have a frig. operated by oil or electricity, but they separate 

that milk and it is only the cream that they preserve and market. They have it picked up once or twice a 

week, and in the meantime they are able to take care of it themselves. If we should force our farmer into 

the position they are in in the United States, to depend on the fluid milk demand to take off their dairy 

production, they are out of business. It is not here, and it will not be here. As I said, the very location 

and nature of our country, and the climatic conditions prevent anything like that taking place. In the 

United States we find that the dairy cow population is rapidly dropping in the butter-producing states. In 

Minnesota it has dropped 8.4 percent in the number of dairy cows. In Iowa it has dropped 11.1 percent; 

16 percent in Idaho; 18.6 percent in Nebraska. Butter is taking a terrible trimming from margarine in the 

United States. 

 

We have exactly the same position in Canada, but it is going to be far more aggravated if margarine is 

going to be manufactured, sold and distributed in competition with our butter. 

 

It has been said, as I pointed out a little while ago, that it is lawful in Canada to do this thing. I am not so 

sure about that. I am not a lawyer, by any means, and I don’t intend to express my opinion, but I 

question very much, when a law has been operating in the country for so many years – 60 years – it is by 

an opinion of the Supreme Court negative or non-constitutional. Is it lawful for any packing company, or 

anybody else, to immediately rush into the manufacture and sale of margarine, which has been 

prohibited, until that judgement has been verified by a higher court, and settled on once and for all? That 

is not commonsense to me. We know what happened in other cases. If there is a decision in the District 

Court of King’s Bench, the thing remains in status quo until a final decision is reached, and I think they 

should have done that in this case. 

 

I have here a little extract from a letter written by a gentlemen of the name of G.R. Love of Edmonton in 

an open letter to the members of parliament last December, this session, and he says: “Butter, in Canada, 

comes from 370,000 farms whose operators get 85 percent of the retail price of their product.” There is 

another think, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Turnbull, one of the leading lights in the creamery business in this 

business in this province, a man who has been engaged in it practically all his life, said: “Conversion of 

Canada’s entire output would yield 78 million pounds of margarine, a value of $33 million at today’s 

price.” Mr. Turnbull said that of this only $10 million would be returned to the producer. Of an 

equivalent amount of butter, out of $51 million, $41 million would go to the producer. That shows that 

we are not only going to ruin our industry, but we are going to cut down the occupation of thousands 

who are engaged in that industry. I wonder what some of our Labour men would think if about 20,000 

farmers, young and old, left the farms in a year or two and flooded the cities to compete for work. They 

would take anything they could get. That is going to be the exact situation, there is no question about it 

in my mind at all. You cannot expect the farmers, when they cannot make a living on the farm, to stay 

there. Statistics show, in this industry, if you go into it, the reduction of 20 percent in the income of the 

dairy farmer of Saskatchewan would put them out of business. That is going to come, and therefore you 

would probably have 15,000 or 20,000 men, all from the farms of the province – dairy farms cover 

about two-thirds of the province – and where are they going to go? Some of them would probably go to 

British Columbia and be on the labour market there. 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
537 

Many of them with families growing up are going to come into the cities and try to get work there. I just 

want to point out that these men – and I am not blaming them – by buying all the margarine they can 

buy at 40 cents a pound at the present time, and probably as low as 22 cents a pound two years from 

now, might have a temporary advantage, but it will be mighty dear butter in the long run, if you are 

going to put these men off the farms, which includes 60,000 farms in Saskatchewan today. 

 

Mr. Turnbull said something else. “Eighty-five percent of the rated price goes to the farmer when he 

produces butter. The labour force would be a fraction of that now employed in the manufacture of butter 

which would be displaced. The control of industry would pass into the hands of relatively few men who 

control the world’s trade. A shift from butter would bring profit to relatively few Canadians and take 

work from many. The dairy business is the main reliance of the farmers on marginal lands. The farmers 

in the remote districts operate small under-capitalized farms, and the standard of living on these farms is, 

on the whole, no better than that of the urban poor on whose behalf the admission of oleo was urged.” 

 

I do not want to take up much time, but I just want to turn to another phase of this thing. Under the 

present situation, according to the decision or ruling of the Supreme Court, and according to legal men 

in the province, as Mr. Milliken said: “Special legislation would have to be passed by the provincial 

governments if the manufacture and sale of margarine is to be prohibited in Saskatchewan, R.H. 

Milliken of Regina said Tuesday. Mr. Milliken, Counsel for the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, 

made that observation following the handing down of the judgment by the Supreme Court of Canada, 

which, in effect declared that the federal government did not have the power to regulate the sale and 

manufacture of margarine. There is no provincial legislation at present to prohibit the sale and 

manufacture of the butter substitute, he said.” Now then, that has put it in the position that it is up to the 

individual provinces, evidently, in the confused state in which this matter rests at the present time, to do 

what they think should be done. I realize, as well as anybody, that the provinces would have quite a 

difficult time regulating the sale, and so on, but the province of Quebec is doing that very thing. They 

have come out with a definite statement by the Premier and others in the government that no margarine 

will be manufactured and sold to the people of Quebec. Well, if it is good in one province, it should be 

good in another. 

 

I intend, before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, to move an amendment to this resolution, and I am leading up 

to that now. I was more than interested to check over some of the opinions of these men who are very 

much interested in this industry and who have not only been associated with it as producers but also as 

processors. I have here the report of the National Dairy Council of Canada, August 10, 1948, and I 

would like to mention to you that these men are not actually dairy farmers. They said: “There are three 

things that should be done: one, that the government of Canada take immediate steps to import a 

sufficient quantity of butter (as a matter of fact that was before the judgment of the Supreme Court was 

brought down) to satisfy the minimum requirements of the consumers of Canada. (That is number one.) 

Two, in the event the government finds it impossible to import a sufficient quantity of butter to satisfy 

the minimum requirements of the consumers of Canada, provision be made for the re-introduction of 

consumer’s rationing. Three, in the event the government cannot implement the recommendations set 

forth in paragraphs one and two, the sale of 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
538 

the quantity of a suitable substitute product should be authorized until such time as the butter supply is 

sufficient to meet the demand, or that, in the event the supply of butter is augmented as recommended, 

the maximum price order be revoked and thereby enable the industry to assume a normal and orderly 

distribution.” I take that to mean, Mr. Speaker, that they should be permitted to export butter to the 

United States or any other places that they wish, and get the worlds’ price or the best price they can for 

the product. 

 

I find, however, that they are not all agreed on these things. At least I was rather surprised to check back 

on some of the expressions of some of the members of this government, and compare them with the 

resolution that is now on the Order Paper. To my mind, this resolution on the Order Papers is a sort of, 

should I say indication, or tacit admission that we agree with thins, that the butter substitute of oleo-

margarine should be sold in Saskatchewan. We say we want to make a rule that the privilege is not 

going to be abused. I don’t agree to that, Mr. Speaker. It is impossible for me to agree with it because I 

have already endeavoured to set out some of the reasons why I don’t think that is to the best interests of 

Saskatchewan, and surely not in the best interests of 60,000 dairy farmers in this province, and I am not 

going to be any party to anything that will force us to accept it. I don’t think the members on this side of 

the House are ready to accept the accomplished fact yet. We think that this is in a flux, and a turmoil, 

and these manufacturers, big shots, are taking advantage, and a rapid advantage, of this thing, to 

manufacture and flood the country with this cheap margarine. That is what we think, W think that until 

this thing is definitely decided once and for all, and the Privy Council has placed the responsibility for 

control, no matter what the control may be, I am not going to say what the dominion or the provinces 

should do, that is not question here at all. We say that if it is decided it is the dominion government’s 

responsibility to legislate to regulate this product in Canada, well then it should belong there and let 

them do it. I am going to be one to tell them to do it. On the other hand, if they say it is the responsibility 

of the provinces, then we know definitely that is so, and it will be the responsibility of this government 

and every other provincial government to take the responsibility on themselves that this thing is going to 

be sold and manufactured. The responsibility will be squarely on the dominion government or on the 

provincial governments. That is my position in the matter. 

 

If we had that opinion today we could then probably get down to something more definite in this 

resolution, but we have not got it and we will have to wait until the time comes. In the meantime, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it is the duty of this government and this legislature – I don’t think we can escape this 

great responsibility – to do what we can to see that the dairy industry, in the meantime, between now 

and the time the final decision is rendered by the Privy Council, is not further jeopardized, and that 

turmoil and insecurity does not destroy that industry. I think it will be months before we get that 

decision. I think, also, that much harm can be done in the meantime if an unlimited amount of this 

margarine is going to be permitted to be sold and distributed in the province of Saskatchewan. I realize 

that is going to be profit to somebody, and going to have a lot of income from advertising and things like 

that. There is not question about that, but I am not concerned about that al all. I think we have a duty to 

the dairy industry in the province and we should say to them that we are willing to step out and protect 

these men who have their homes and 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
539 

occupations at stake in the meantime, until they know where they are at. Then we cannot escape the 

responsibility. I say, then, if it falls on the dominion government, then let them take it, and if it remains 

where it is hinted at the present time, on the provinces, let the provinces take it. That is my position and I 

think I also speak for the members on this side of the House. 

 

Let me go back to what has been happening during the past few months. I listened to a broadcast by the 

hon. Minister of Agriculture, December 9, 1948. I am not going to burden you with the whole thing 

because he covered just about the whole world. He cleaned up the Alberta government on their Natural 

Products Marketing Act, and the Social Credit party, and all that sort of thing. Then that coarse grain 

problem kept recurring, that story of the fall of 1947. He wound up by saying: “It looks like we are 

going to have margarine in Canada.” That is the only thing he did not take issue with. He quit right 

there, whether his time was up or not, I don’t know, but that was the last he said. He also made a speech 

on November 25 – that is the date of the report – to the United Farmers convention at Saskatoon. I took 

this from the Western Producer, Mr. Speaker, and this convention took place on November 15 to 20. He 

said, after dealing with many things which I agreed with on agriculture, which I don’t criticize, but he 

also said this: “The question of oleo-margarine is now being considered, and an adverse decision would 

be the financial ruin of 60,000 dairy farmers.” That was what the Minister of Agriculture, the Hon. I C. 

Nollet, said. 

 

I am just quoting this to show that a Minister of this government realizes and admits that this will be the 

ruin of the industry in the province of Saskatchewan. I can read you another one. Mr. Speaker, a week 

ago last Tuesday morning I had a telephone call from Saskatoon, from a man who is very intimately 

connected with the dairy industry in this province, and the first thing I asked him was: “I have been 

checking over your dairy convention’s report, and the Canadian Council of Agriculture in Saskatoon, 

and every other Farmers’ meeting that has taken place in the last three or four months, and I have been 

trying to find one place where you come straight out and put your cards on the table and condemn this 

thing, or take a stand on it. Why is it?” He said: “It is because we don’t know where we are at. We are 

all up in the air and we don’t know whether we are coming or going.” That is the situation in the dairy 

industry. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture says it will be the financial ruin of the 60,000 dairy farmers. I think he is 

telling the truth, but I cannot reconcile his statement at that time with some other statement’s he has 

made. I am going to give another indication that he realizes the danger of this thing. Talking to a 

livestock meeting some place, January 6, 1949, he said: “If the ban on margarine is lifted, it is hoped the 

ban on the export of butter to the United States would also be removed. This, he said, would perhaps 

minimize to some degree the effect of margarine on the dairy industry.” Well, that is the best he hopes 

for, that if the restrictions on the export of dairy products was removed, that it would only minimize to 

some degree the danger and the harm it was going to do to the dairy industry. He is right in that, too. 

That is one time I agree with the hon. Gentleman. But when I read this resolution, and check over some 

of the records of the political party represented opposite, I cannot help but note the decided difference of 

tactics and the contradictory views expressed by the party organization and some of the Ministers of this 

government. I have here a report that at the Winnipeg convention the C.C.F. party endorsed 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
540 

the manufacture and sale of oleo-margarine in Canada – we are part of Canada. It was discussed there 

and some of them charged that the farmers had a monopoly in the dairy industry. The British Columbia 

delegate was very impatient of the tactics of some of the other delegates, and he wanted action 

immediately, and the immediate removal of all restrictions on the sale of margarine. This brought Tom 

Bentley of Swift Current to his fee to deny the monopoly charge – he is another good C.C.F. member in 

public life who realizes it – and he painted a horrible picture of barefoot boys and girls of Saskatchewan 

going out in the early dawn to chase the cows out of the bushes, and the whole family milking the cows 

so the city dwellers could get their butter. The country had a law against using child labour in industry, 

he said, but not for the farmer. The farmers were the least organized in the country. There was a man 

there from Ontario, and he said: “We hope we will not hand over to monopolies the power to destroy the 

dairy industry in Canada.” 

 

I could stand here and talk for an hour on this, Mr. Speaker. I have lots of ammunition here, but I am not 

going to do that because I don’t need to. What I have said, I think places the party opposite on record as 

riding two horses at the same time, and there is going to be no Trojan horse performance in this, as far as 

I am concerned. The Minister of Agriculture says that it will be the financial ruin of the dairy industry in 

Saskatchewan – 60,000 farmers. He and other fellows of his kind go down to the national convention 

and endorse a plank in the next four-year platform of the C.C.F. party that would permit the introduction 

into Canada of the manufacture, sale and distribution of margarine. 

 

Premier Douglas: – On what basis? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, I can give you that all right. That was on August 23, 1948. 

 

Premier Douglas: – May I ask my hon. Friend on what basis? He ought to finish the sentence to be fair. 

It was on the basis of public ownership. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, here is what you do. You recommend – I am not going to hide anything here, 

Mr. Speaker – that this butter substitute be handled by a Crown Corporation. Now, how in the name of 

common sense are they going to have some kind of a machine that they can just supplement here and 

there with a few pounds of margarine if there is a little scarcity of butter. The thing is ridiculous. They 

can call it anything they like. I was going to say a box factory, as they might need boxes for the oleo-

margarine. The Minister is running a salt factory to make salt. 

 

That is the situation, and there is no excuse. There are no alleviating circumstances as far as this thing 

being handled by a Crown Corporation is concerned. Oleo-margarine is a butter substitute whether it is 

made by a C.C.F. Crown Corporation or whether it is made by the packing houses. It is the same thing, 

and I am danged sure, Mr. Speaker, so far as the record goes they would not make as good a margarine 

as the other fellows would; that is a cinch. At least I wouldn’t buy it if I could buy it from the Canada 

Packers. 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
541 

I want to say, don’t let us ride two horses on this thing, and I am going to move . . . if anyone wants to 

ask a question, I will be only too glad to answer it . . .  

 

Mr. Tucker: — That is different from them, of course. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am going to move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by Mr. Horsman, that the resolution be 

amended as follows: 

 

That all the words after the word “that” in the first line be deleted and the following substituted 

therefore: 

 

Until the Privy Council decision is received, in the appeal taken by the Canadian Federation of 

Agriculture, in the opinion of this Assembly, the Government of Saskatchewan, should assume its 

responsibilities, as determined by the advisory judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada and prohibit 

the manufacture, sale and distribution of margarine, or other butter substitutes, within the province, 

and thus prevent the irreparable dislocation of the dairy industry, pending final settlement of the law. 

 

RESOLUTION RE INCOME TAX 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Dewhurst. 

 

Mr. W.A Tucker (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to detain the House very long on this 

particular resolution because we on this side are in accord with the idea that the exemption that might 

have been adequate five or six years ago, to have the same adequacy today would have to be increased 

in amount. That is quite obvious. If a dollar is worth only 60 cents today, as compared with seven or 

eight years ago, then naturally to give the ratepayer who pays the taxes the same amount of protection in 

the way of income tax exemption you should raise the amount of it in dollars. 

 

Our suggestion, however, Mr. Speaker, if we are going to deal with this matter at all, is to deal with it a 

little bit more adequately. I would hate to have this resolution go to the dominion government indication 

that if they just did what is set out in this resolution and raised the exemption from income tax to $1,250 

for a single person and $2,500 for a married person, that is all that we wanted in that regard, and 

presumably, if they pass this resolution it indicates that that is all we do want. So I think there are one or 

tow considerations which should be borne in mind by the Assembly, and I intend to move an 

amendment to this resolution to deal with what we consider a couple of the most important features of it. 

 

One of the difficulties about a blanket increase in exemptions is this: the higher the amount of the 

income, the higher the rate of taxation, and the more relief you give to the people in the higher income 

bracket. That is one of the difficulties and, of course, as a very large share of the income tax is paid by 

those in the higher income brackets, it means that a resolution 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
542 

like this would mean that you are giving much more relief in the higher brackets than you are giving the 

lower brackets. Now, for example, in the case of a single taxpayer, the present tax on $1,000 is $29, and 

if this amendment were accepted by the dominion government, the amount of reduction would be $29. If 

his income were $1,500 the present tax would be $120; and under this exemption the new tax would be 

$29, and the reduction $91. 

 

Now we will take the case of a person with an income of $3,000 – a single person. The present tax on 

that income is $420. Under the proposed amendment, the reduction in his taxation would be $100. Then 

we come up to the person with an income of $10,000. His present tax is $2,253, and the tax if this 

resolution were accepted would be $2,078 – a reduction in his taxation of $175. If you go to a person 

who has an income of $100,000 – there may not be many of those in Saskatchewan, but we are asking 

for this to be applied in all of Canada – the reduction in his income tax would be $325. 

 

Insofar as I am concerned, and those associated with me, we feel that the relief should come to those in 

the lower income brackets, and that those in the upper brackets are not in need of relief because they are 

left with a great deal of income after they pay their taxation. We feel that to say to a man with an income 

of $1,000: “We will give you a reduction of $29”, and to the man with an income of $100,000: “We will 

give you a resolution of $325”, it is not necessary to give him that reduction in the first place, and in the 

second place it means that if you reduce the income of those in the upper brackets you have to make it 

up some other way. That is the position that the opposition take in regard to that matter. 

 

I could give somewhat similar figures in regard to a married man with no dependants, and in receipt of 

$2,500. His tax at the present time is $170. If he is in receipt of a $5,000 income, his present tax is $670. 

Then in the case of a man in receipt of an income of $2,500, you take $170 off his tax, but in the case of 

the man with an income of $5,000 you take $470 off him. If you get up in the bracket of a $100,000 

income, instead of taking off $170 as you do with the person with $2,500, you take $650 off. If you 

relieve those upper income people of large amounts of taxation, then you are going to have to put it onto 

somebody else. That is one branch of this thing, and I do not want to labour it because I feel that we 

have good representatives in the federal House, all parties down there, to speak on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan who were elected to deal with federal matters and who represent our people with 

regard to federal matters. It is extremely doubtful that we are justified in taking off too much time from 

dealing with our own constitutional obligations for which we are elected to deal with and deal too much 

with federal matters. I agree that it is quite all right for us to express opinions, but I do not think that we 

should take too much time in regard to matters that are entirely within the jurisdiction of the federal 

government. I do not find any fault with any debates that have taken place on these resolutions so far 

because this afternoon, for example, I thought they were all very much to the point, and I think we are 

acting quite properly in doing that, but I do not want to take up too much time on things as this which 

are purely a matter of federal jurisdiction. 

 

There is another feature of this matter that I think we are justified as an Assembly in making 

representation on for two different reasons, and that 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
543 

is the case of the wife, particularly on the farm who makes a real contribution to the income of the farm. 

Far more, than in any other line of work, the farmer’s wife who helps look after the cattle, poultry and 

all the rest of it makes a very real contribution to the farmer’s income, and all that is allowed today as an 

exemption in that regard is $250. We do not think that is enough and we would like to suggest to the 

federal government that they give consideration to raising that exemption. This advantage today, Mr. 

Speaker, in the need of the world is more and more production, and particularly the production of more 

and more food. If you give some recognition to extra work done, as it is done by the farmer’s wife in 

regard to the production of dairy products, poultry products and other farm products, by giving some 

recognition in the way of an exemption from income tax, you are going to stimulate the production of 

food and perhaps help alleviate the situation we are in in that respect. The same is true in other branches. 

One of the main difficulties today, I think we are all familiar with it, is the necessity of having enough 

nurses to carry on the work that has to be done in our province. It has been suggested to fully-trained 

nurses, who have no dependants at home and can spare some time away from home, that they go out and 

do some nursing. The moment that they earn over $250 a year their husbands are put on the same basis 

as if they were single men. We think that there should be some more . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Prior to the federal election, 1945, Mr. Gardiner suggested at a meeting in the 

province that he would advocate an exemption to farmer’s wives of $650 . . .  

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, I took my seat to be asked a question, not to listen to a speech. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I would just like to ask the hon. gentleman if anything had been done in this 

regard by Liberal members in the House of Commons at Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I did not hear your question. You made such a long speech. I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, all 

I heard was a speech from the hon. member. I did not hear any question. If he wants to ask a question I 

will try to answer it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Members of your party have been advocating exemption for farmers’ wives for 

over $600 as far back as 1945 . . .  

 

Mr. Tucker: — Is that the question? It is just another speech. 

 

Mr. Sturdy: —  . . . What members of parliament, including the hon. gentleman, have raised or 

advocated this in the House of Commons at Ottawa? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. members very well know, there are many things advocated in 

the place where they can do the most good that do not always find themselves 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
544 

official government policy. I can assure the hon. member that I have advocated what I am going to 

move, very consistently. I can assure him that the thing I am going to put forward today is something 

that I am just bringing forward at this particular time. I regret to find that that seems to be a bit the stock 

in trade of some of the members opposite, to suggest when they bring something forward they are very 

sincere about it, but if we bring things forward then we are playing politics. Nobody can don so many 

halos and pretend that they are so righteous and at the same time attack other people quite so much as 

some of the members opposite. The answer is, of course, that I have advocated it. I know there is a great 

deal of the ideas that the only thing that counts is to get up in the House of Commons and make a speech 

etc., and that is a very good thing sometimes. But sometimes, as the hon. members opposite know, they 

can fight more effectively in the party gatherings, and I surely think they must know that, and to suggest 

that because a man, when he has not got his party to agree to something, should immediately denounce 

the party with which he agrees on general principles and leave it on that particular thing. Well, we will 

wait and see if the government are going to do that in this coming session. I say this to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that I have tried to advocate these things where I felt they could do the most good, and if that is 

any comfort to the hon. member for Saskatoon I give it to him and I ask him to accept the assurance. 

 

I was going to say that this particular opposition of these days, when there is such scarcity of food 

products, such scarcity of people to do the work of the world, that were a married woman is willing to 

go out and do some of this work, then they should get more encouragement than the $250 exemption. 

That is a suggestion which we propose to add to this motion. So, Mr. Speaker, without any further ado, 

because it seems to me that if we are going to move a resolution on this, these suggestions I have made 

might very well be added to it, I propose to move, seconded by Mr. Horsman, that this resolution be 

amended by striking out the word “and” in the fourth line, and adding thereto the following: 

 

 . . . and the present exemption for a wife be increased to $500 and that such increased exemptions be 

applied to those in the low income groups. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. V.P. Deshaye (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to associate myself with the Hon. Leader of 

the Opposition with respect to the amendment that has been submitted to you. There have been certain 

increases in the exemptions allowed on income tax in recent years, especially since the conclusion of 

that war when the income tax exemption was raised from $650 to $750 for single persons, and from 

$1,200 to $1,500 for married persons. However, I agree with what the speakers on the government side 

of the House said, yesterday I believe it was, that the dollar has depreciated to approximately 60 cents, 

whereas it was 100 cents on the dollar previously. Taking that into consideration it is easy to understand 

that the dollar today cannot go as far as it did a few years ago, and consequently if the exemptions of 

income tax remain at their present status, then we are having an increase in taxation that we actually had 

before. For that reason I also endorse the lifting of the amount of income tax exemption from the present 

figures of $750 and $1,500 to the figures proposed in the amendment, of $1,250 and $2,500. 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
545 

I also wish to especially associate myself with the Hon. Leader of the Opposition in the addition made in 

the amendment just proposed to you, that the present exemption of $250 for married women be raised to 

$500. We often forget the work that is being done by the women on the farms; the contribution that they 

have made to the wealth in resources in this province as well as in other provinces of Canada. There 

seems to be quite a difference in the amount of work that some women do in the rural and urban areas. 

We have the women on the farms getting up with their husbands at five or six o’clock in the morning, 

milking cows, gathering the eggs, separating the milk and adding to the income of the farm. Under the 

present situation, the husband is taxed for that income which is actually produced by his wife. That, to 

my way of thinking, is not fair and for that reason I think the amendment that has been proposed is a 

very good one. 

 

We not only think of the farm women, but we also think of the married women who are registered 

nurses, because of the economy of the country today registered nurses are scarce and have left the 

province through the present C.C.F. legislation and gone elsewhere. These women are asked to come out 

and work, whereas the girls have gone into other provinces where they can obtain a better form of living. 

These women are married and they go out and work and they say: “We will work until we earn $250, 

and we won’t work any more.” As a result our hospitals suffer from lack of nurses. Whereas, I submit 

that if the exemption was increased to $500 for married women, these women would work much longer 

and our province would have the benefit of the services of married registered nurses to that extent. It 

does not stop there. We have, especially in the towns and even in the rural areas and in the villages, a 

great scarcity of teachers. Our government today, owing to some lack of proper administration has been 

obliged to have teachers in schools who have only five or six months Normal training, and I believe 

even less in some cases. They call them baby sitters. However, in each village and town there are a 

number of very good and highly-qualified school teachers who are married, and these teachers could be 

induced to take on some of these schools and teach if there was an inducement in the form of earnings. 

Today they go out and consent to teach until they earn $250 and then they won’t teach any more. I 

submit, therefore, that if the amount raised to $500, these teachers would be available for longer periods 

and, as I said before, there are a lot of very good teachers in the province that are qualified and have a 

great deal of experience but who, because they are married, will work only until they receive the sum of 

$250, and then they will say: “Oh, well, I won’t work any more because the government takes most of 

it.” I think the exemption would have that benefit. 

 

Then there are others such as the small storekeeper who has a store and he and his wife operate the store. 

Under the present set up, there is no allowance made for his wife’s assistance in that store, and I submit 

that if the $500, as submitted in the amendment, was in force, that there would be some allowance made 

for these wives that assist their husbands in the small country stores. 

 

Those are some of the features. There are others who could also benefit, and I think the general economy 

of the province would be improved through that benefit and through that increase. However, as the hon. 

Leader of the Opposition stated, this is a federal issue and is merely a matter of a recommendation going 

to the federal government, so I do not propose to take up too much time on this subject. 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
546 

There is just one thing that I would like to mention in passing which is not incorporated in the 

amendment, and that is that the government of Saskatchewan might take some interest and draft, as 

some time, a resolution whereby the income tax of farmers might be deducted at the source. There is 

considerable agitation by the farmers to have their income tax deducted at the source. On looking 

through the Accounts, I see where this government employs some very, very brilliant men. They must 

be brilliant for the amount of money that they are paying them. I suggest that the government give this 

matter which is very important to the rural areas of Saskatchewan to some of these men that are so 

highly paid by the government – the so-called experts – and see if they can figure out something that 

will help the farmers in that respect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the amendment. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Regina): — I do not want to take up very much time of the House. I regret that the 

resolution is being so badly confused as it has been this afternoon. I think the original resolution is one 

that could be clearly understood by all, but I am no sure that with what has been put to it that anybody or 

even the hon. member himself quite understands what it means. 

 

In the first place, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say this: that this does not make it even as good as it was 

up until two years ago when the dominion income tax regulations were changed. Up until that time a 

married woman could have income up to $660 without any deduction at all. At that time, if she had $660 

or over she then had to file a separate income tax form and her husband had a status of a single person 

for income tax purposes. But two years ago the dominion raised the exemption to $750 and changed the 

whole method of computing deductions for the wives. They changed by providing that a woman may 

earn in her right up to $250, and any income that she had in excess of $250 would be deducted from the 

husband’s exemption of $1500. It does not put him in a single category. If a woman, for instance, had 

$350, all it does is take $100 off the husband’s $1,500 exemption; thus making his exemption of $1,400, 

but it does not put him into the category of a single person for income tax purposes. That is where I was 

correcting my hon. friend. 

 

Now this is asking us to raise the exemption for a wife to $500. This is not going as much as the 

dominion government did for us up until two years ago. It still does not solve the problem. This is not 

making provision for the wife on the farm; this is not making provision for the children on the farm. I 

think if we are going to amend this resolution, and I propose later to adjourn the debate in order that I 

might have an opportunity to amend it still further to do what my hon. friend suggested. The original 

resolution was one which was asking for an increase in exemption. If we are trying to develop our whole 

philosophy, then, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you when the resolution comes back there will be one or two 

other things in it. I shall have something, possibly, in an amendment with regard to higher rates on the 

increase. I am not greatly concerned about those people getting the $100,000. I have looked up the 

statistics here, and I find that in the whole of the Dominion of Canada, in 1948, we only had 91 of those 

persons in Canada. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Are there any in Saskatchewan? 



 

March 3, 1949 

 

 
547 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — It does not give the names. 

 

In any event, what my hon. friend suggested in discussion, I think every member in the House concurs 

in. I think we all want to do something that is going to help the people getting the lower incomes. We do 

not want to assist, particularly, those people getting the higher amounts. We certainly do not want 

anything that is going to give an exemption of $29 for a person getting a very small salary and giving 

several hundred dollars. That could quite easily be corrected through having a steeply graded income 

tax, and I think we can probably get the unanimous support of the House in that. Then, too, I think we 

can get the unanimous support of the House to try to get a resolution drafted which will give the farm 

wife some share of the income, and we might also have the unanimous support of the House allowing an 

exemption for the young people that assist. We know that in many homes in Saskatchewan, where there 

are three or four young people living, they are all assisting and yet, under the present income tax 

regulations, that gives them no income whatever. 

 

Mr. Culliton: — It is not a fact that as long as they are not shown as a dependant you can allow them 

wages? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Quite correct. It is even true, I suppose, with the wife if she has the property in her 

own right she can then file her own income tax returns and the husband can be a single person for 

income tax purposes. But the point is that there are many of these people who are dependants that do 

assist in the building up of that income for the farm, and yet there is no provision made. That is, the 

husband cannot deduct from his income tax anything for the labour of all these other people who would 

have assisted him. I think that should be considered too. When the original resolution was introduced I 

take it that it was a simple resolution based upon the necessity for increasing the basic exemptions, but 

now, with this amendment to it, I see no alternative but to adjourn the debate in order that we might 

clarify this and get some of these other points in order that we might express to Ottawa the opinions of 

this House. 

 

I would move that the House do now adjourn. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11 o’clock p.m. 


