



















































Hansard: March 08, 1949


627 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Eleventh Legislature 

 

Tuesday, March 8, 1949 
 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o‟clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. Mr. Fines: 

 

That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair. 

 

Mr. J. W. Horsman (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, first I would like to say hello to the members of my 

constituency, some of whom may be listening on the air today. I hope so anyway. I am in rather a 

peculiar position up there as my constituency is rather peculiarly located. I am just sitting there like a 

little island in the midst of the ocean, surrounded on all sides by not exactly hostile camps, but people of 

different political beliefs at least. I have this distinction though: on the north we are bounded by the 

constituency of Cutknife, represented here by the Minister of Agriculture; on the east by Biggar, 

represented by the Minister of Education; to the south-east we have the Rosetown constituency, 

represented by the Minister of Highways; immediately south by Kerrobert-Kindersley, represented by 

Mr. Wellbelove. On the west we have the fourth meridian and the Social Credit province of Alberta, so I 

am pretty surrounded. 

 

I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that we have a very good constituency there, with very good land, and 

I am very proud of the people who live there, and I thank them for this opportunity for service that they 

have given me. 

 

Now, I would like to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer on the very able and eloquent manner in 

which he presented the budget. I was very much interested in it; in fact I enjoyed it very much; and one 

reason was I knew that the hon. gentleman was enjoying himself immensely, and I like to see a man 

enjoy himself. He was just throwing millions around with the carefree abandon, you might say, of a 

small boy throwing stones at a farmer‟s cows, or something like that. I enjoyed it very much because I 

knew he enjoyed it. 

 

The budget is notable, at least, for one thin: that it is the largest ever presented in this Legislature, and it 

reflects the fact that the heavy spending of the last four years is going to keep right on. We had thought 

that things might ease off, but instead of that, expenditures will continue to skyrocket. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — You wanted more service. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — I was rather disappointed in this because I know that under a budget of this size no 

decrease in taxation is possible, and that the farmers of this province, the working man, people of small 

income, will continue to be loaded down with this crushing burden of taxation. This, of course, is a time 

of buoyant revenues, that is in good crop areas, and we hear the expression from the other side of the 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
628 

House almost every day referring us back to the hard times of the thirties. I would just like to inform the 

hon. members of this House that there are parts of this province today, if you go there where they have 

not had a crop for about four years, you will find that conditions are not much different from what they 

were in the thirties. The people there, in many cases, are depending upon the few gallons of cream they 

can sell, or a few crates of eggs, on the P.F.A.A. bonus that they receive from the government in the 

crop failure areas. The high taxation they have to pay cleans the most of it up. 

 

We don‟t want to see a return of times like the thirties, but I think it would be good business to put 

something by for a rainy day. It seems to me what would be considered good business for an individual 

or a private company should also be considered good business for a government. We have heard a good 

deal from government members, especially from the Premier of this province about the great debt 

reduction in municipal and farm debts of the province. Well, that is very true. The farmers have paid 

their debts in the areas where they have had crops, and they have also paid their taxes. Farmers, as a 

rule, are honest as are business men and so throughout this country. They are honest people and they are 

anxious and willing to pay their debts if they have anything to pay them with. When the farmers paid up 

their taxes, and arrears of taxes and so on, that put the municipalities in a position to pay their debts. 

There is not anything extraordinary about that at all, and nothing that any government can take any 

credit for either. It is just the times. But there is this: the people in this province have done, wherever 

they were able to do it in the past four years, besides paying their debts if they had any, they have built 

up reserves, started bank accounts, and laid something by for hard times when hard times might come 

again. I would just like to recommend to this government that they follow the good example that has 

been set them by the farmers and the municipalities and business men in general throughout the 

province, and try to lay up something for a rainy day. 

 

I have heard, too, and the expression has been made quite often in this House since we have been here, 

that, according to the opinion of the people on the other side of the House, a good many of them think 

there is a depression on the way, and before long we will find ourselves in the middle of another 

depression. I sincerely hope, Mr. Speaker, that these hon. gentlemen are just as wrong in the prophecy as 

they have been in most of the other prophecies they have made. By the size of the budget that has been 

presented it could not indicate to nay thinking person that anything such as a depression could possibly 

happen to this country. It does not give you that idea. 

 

There is not much complaint to make about a big budget. In good times a big budget might be all right. 

It all depends whether the money is sent wisely and well, instead of being wasted in some sort of 

experiments which are due to failure before they ever start. The hon. Premier of this province, when he 

addressed this Assembly, to use his own words, he admitted that many of the Crown Corporations 

established by the government in the last few years, were „problem children‟, and that many of the 

others were still in the experimental stage. It would appear to me that if a government intended to go 

into business, it would be wise for them to make a thorough investigation of whatever line of business 

they were going to go into before they started at all, and profit by the experience and what happened to 

people in those lines of business. It is a very astonishing fact that in view of the fact that this government 

had hired planners, legal advisers of all kinds brought in from other provinces and 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
629 

countries to advise them in all their business ventures, and yet at the same time these ventures have 

failed so miserably. We know that many of these corporations or businesses are losing money. We also 

know that most of them have been forced to close their doors. This must be a terrible disappointment to 

these gentlemen opposite. They have my sympathy, and this is a fact. I am very sorry for them. Another 

thing — it is a very keen disappointment to the people of this province, because after all, it is their 

money that is involved, and the money that was lost in these ventures belonged to the people of the 

province and naturally they are disappointed too. 

 

We were told, you will all remember, before these corporations were ever started up, that the profits 

from government business would pay for social services, and everything else that the people of this 

province would require. I repeat that it is a great disappointment to the people of this province that such 

is not the case, and I hope that the government by this time are beginning to realize that any ordinary 

business is not always a profit business, but that it is also a profit and loss business. It is a very 

unfortunate circumstance that so many of our government ventures have shown a loss instead of a profit. 

The government will, somehow, be required now to get along without that great golden stream we have 

heard so much about which was going to flow into the Treasury of this province, and we would be all 

sitting pretty, and have no taxes or anything to pay out. Instead of that golden stream flowing into the 

Treasury, there is a loss that will have to be made up through other sources of revenue. I think, when a 

government does this kind of business, that there is no hope of any reduction in taxation on the land, or 

anything else. I see no sign that the members on the government side of the House have any ideas of 

abandoning any of their socialistic tendencies. They are still ardent socialists and if anyone was to tell 

any of these hon. gentlemen that you did not think they were socialists, I am sure they would be highly 

insulted. 

 

Speaking here last evening, the hon. member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. McCormack) quoted a couple of 

paragraphs from the C.C.F. platform. I think I can repeat that. In speaking of the evils of capitalism, and 

how you were going to get away from it, here is what they say: “We believe that these evils can be 

removed only in planned and socialized economy, in which the natural resources and principal means of 

production and distribution are owned, controlled and operated by the people.” The last paragraph — I 

will quote that again, too: “No C.C.F. government will rest content until it has eradicated capitalism, and 

placed into operation the full programme of socialized planning which will lead to the establishment in 

Canada of a co-operative commonwealth.” I just want to establish this fact: we have a socialist 

government, by their own admission. That is all I want to establish here. They condemn capitalism, big 

business, monopolies and everything like that. I do not blame any government for condemning 

monopolies. I do not believe in monopolies any more than the C.C.F. government does, but they do not 

hesitate, Mr. Speaker, to create a government monopoly as soon as the opportunity presents itself. We 

have a good many businesses in this country, if they are not total monopolies, they are at least partial 

monopolies. We have the Fish Board, the Timber Board, and the Fur Marketing Service in the north. As 

far as a good many people in that country are concerned, these things are complete monopolies to them; 

for those who are forced to sell to those corporations, as far as they are concerned, it is a total monopoly. 

In spite of that fact, they still lose money. I maintain that a government monopoly can be just as vicious 

and just as big a detriment to any 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
630 

country as any private monopoly can be. I believe, too, that the government of this province intend to 

establish another monopoly in the sodium sulphate business. 

 

As I said a moment ago, there is nothing too bad for these gentlemen to say about capitalism and 

everything connected with it. What they are saying to the people of this province, in effect, is this: these 

vultures, these corporations, these monopolies have robbed you long enough, now give us a chance. 

Another remarkable fact is that while our government businesses have turned out so badly, yet in the 

same period private business has flourished in Saskatchewan. There is not a man in this House who 

could not tell you of instances where business in these times, during the very same period when our 

government businesses with all their planners and experts and legal advisers have failed. That is 

something to think about. It is disappointing, I am sure it must be, especially in times like this because, 

you know, nothing succeeds like success, and nothing fails like failure. 

 

I think we have established the fact that we have a socialist government, and I want to say that socialism 

in a place like Saskatchewan must be a gradual process. If this government, when they were elected in 

1944, had started right out then and set up a completely socialized economy in Saskatchewan, or tired to 

do it, there would have been a revolution in Saskatchewan. There is no question about that. They know 

that in order to put over these socialist practices and work up to a socialized economy, it must be a 

gradual process. You can see the signs right now by certain amendments to certain Acts, and so on, in 

the Legislature. A few years ago, when the Accident Insurance Act came into force, people did complain 

somewhat about it, principally, of course, the compulsory features of the Act; but as time went on people 

began to accept it very well indeed. They began to realize that some form of insurance was necessary, 

and unless a good many people were forced into it they would never go into it, and they accepted it. 

Now the government comes out this year with two new clauses to this Act, covering fire and theft, two 

things from which there is very little risk. I don‟t think that the people of this province are going to like 

that. It would have been all right to put these new clauses in, but they could have been left voluntary for 

a person to take advantage of if he wanted to, or to refuse if he did not wish to. But that is socialism. It 

must be forced on you, and you can see the gradual growth of it. Under the amendment to the Town 

Planning Act, Bill No. 71, which was passed here the other day, under the amendment to that Act more 

power is placed in the hands of the Minister, taking the local power out of the hands of the people and 

investing it in Ministers of the Crown and government boards, and the like of that. Mr. Speaker, I don‟t 

know that you could use a better word than this; I think it is the best example of the creeping conquest of 

socialism that you ever had. 

 

I think I should say a few things in defence of our own group. After all, we are in here and we get 

severely criticized from members on the opposite side of the House; sometimes we may throw a little of 

it back. They call us reactionary, and they say that reform is something we never think about, the Liberal 

party. These are extraordinary statements. Anyone who knows the history of politics at all in Canada 

knows that many, many reforms have come into being here long before the C.C.F. government was ever 

heard of. We know these things. Just to make a short review back over a few years and mention only a 

few of the things: I think we have had a social revolution in the last 20 years in Canada 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
631 

and the United States. Security has been spread through unemployment insurance, health insurance, and 

community medical schemes. 

 

Premier Douglas: — What health insurance? 

 

Mr. Horsman: — Wealth has been spread through income taxes, bearing heaviest on the wealthy, and 

exempting those least able to pay. 

 

Premier Douglas: — May I ask my hon. friend where this health insurance comes from? 

 

An Hon. Member: — He‟s scared to. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — Family allowance . . .  

 

Premier Douglas: — Health insurance. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — Labour unions — we hear a lot about labour unions. Labour unions, Mr. Speaker, 

have grown to a strength undreamed of, and they have secured for their members the highest real wages 

in the history of the world. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — Since when? 

 

Mr. Horsman: — The P.F.A.A. provides security for the farmers in drought-stricken areas. The 

P.F.R.A. has provided water for irrigation and for the watering of stock. There are many other things 

such as mothers‟ allowance, old age pensions and the like. I would just like to say this, too, that security 

of tenure for the farmers of Saskatchewan was first brought in here and enacted by the Patterson 

government in 1943, under the terms of The Lands Contract Actions Act. Now, I say these things were 

done before the time of this government, and I think that the Liberal party has a right to be proud of 

them. We have no intention of resting o past achievements. If we sat down and said we have done this 

and that and the other thing, we‟ll lay off now, we would be just like the duck that always flew 

backwards instead of forward because he was more interested in where he came from than where he was 

going. 

 

Premier Douglas: — This duck has sunk. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — That does not apply to us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the danger I see in the government going into business is not the money they lose, so 

much, but suppose it became more extensive and they branched out in this, that and the other, and they 

had thousands of men on the government payroll as they would have, naturally those men could not get 

out at election time and quarrel with their bread and butter. Once cannot do that. They might not all vote 

for the government, but they could not take an active part against the government because they would be 

right on the spot — they would lose their job the next day just the same as if they were working for a 

private employer. If you work for a private employer, you cannot go out and advise the people to put 

this man out of business, you just cannot do it 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
632 

and hold your job, and that is where I see the danger of this thing. I would like to say this, too: the 

reason I, myself, and other men like me could get out in the election of last June and oppose this 

government, and criticize their policies, we could advise the people to vote them out of office, was 

because we made our living from resources over which this government has no direct control. That is 

what I think. 

 

I would also like to mention that there are people in this country, and every country for that matter, who 

would gamble with the nations‟ solvency and destiny in order to gain political advantage. 

 

I listened to the Minister of Agriculture some time ago, speaking in this Legislature, and he spoke about 

the fodder policy of the government, how they have people putting up feed bands, and so on. Well, there 

may be something in that but, in the main, that is not responsible for the fact that we have sufficient feed 

in the country this year. I come from a part of the country where we grow brome grass extensively. It is 

not grown for feed, it is grown for seed. In years when feed is scared, naturally the people save the hay. 

There are thousands of acres of it grown up there, and that is what relieves the situation in that area. In 

fact, there is an abundance of feed, and it was not caused by any policy of this government. Farther 

north, where they grow alfalfa, this same situation applies. They save the hay, but they grow the stuff for 

seed — that is the main object. 

 

I just want to mention a word about highways. I don‟t think anybody‟s address here would be complete 

without saying something about highways. I live on highway No. 14, west of Saskatoon. It is a main 

highway right through the province. A good number of years ago they started in to black-top that 

highway. They had not progressed very far when this government came into office, and we thought, of 

course, that the black-top would extend right on, and in not too far distant time we would have a 

hard-surface road through there. But, for some reason, after this government came into office, this 

hard-surface road took a sudden turn to the south and headed for Rosetown, and here we were sitting 

there. It was rather disappointing. I think, too, with all defence to the members of the government, I 

don‟t think there is a fair distribution of the spoils, if I might use that term, as far as highway 

construction is concerned. Take my own constituency: since this government came into office they have 

rebuilt a few miles of highway, and done some gravelling. We have not had one mile of reconstruction. I 

don‟t think that is fair, especially when two constituencies here, Rosetown, from April 1,1947 to January 

1, 1948, had $263,985.63 spent on highways; over the same period, in the Weyburn constituency, there 

was $537,181.81 spent. That makes a total of $801,167.47 spent in two constituencies. As I say, I don‟t 

think it is a fair distribution of the money. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Who represents those two constituencies? The two Douglases. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — Well, yes. I just wonder about that too. The thought had struck me that Weyburn is 

represented by the hon. Premier, and Rosetown is represented by the hon. Minister of Highways, both 

with the name of Douglas, and I just wondered if the name had anything to do with it. I thought it did 

have, it might be a good 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
633 

thing for us fellows to all get out and get someone in our places by the name of Douglas. It is a 

wonderful old Scottish name, and there may something in a name. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You‟ll never get it. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — I have heard the expression made “a rose by any other name would smell as sweet”. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have not much more to say. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Horsman: — Hear! Hear! I am glad he appreciates the remarks I have made. You have given me a 

very good hearing. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — But they can‟t take it. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — Oh, I think they do. I hope, anyway, that from the goodness of your hearts and son, 

you will excuse these few halting remarks from a farmer, and of the few reasons I have mentioned, Mr. 

Speaker, I will naturally oppose the motion. 

 

Mr. A. W. Loehr (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I, too, am a farmer and you will also have to bear with 

me when you have to listen to some halting remarks. I first of all, want to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, 

for accepting the high honour that has been bestowed upon you, and I want to congratulate you for the 

able, efficient and fair manner in which you conduct your office. I even want to say that I appreciate the 

fact that, during the life of the last Legislature, the poor, gallant „five musketeers‟ gave you lots of work 

and you naturally would and could expect more work to keep proper decorum and support in the House 

during the present session. If, in the hear of debate, even you are perhaps let to make some 

unparliamentary remarks, I am sure everybody here will overlook it, and we know that in your hands our 

affairs are in fair hands and that you will do everything you can to give, especially us new members, lots 

of latitude when we don‟t stick close enough to the rules of parliamentary debate in this House. 

 

I also want to congratulate the Premier for having led the majority group into this House after the last 

election. Particularly do I want to congratulate him because I am convinced that this is the last 

opportunity that anyone will have to congratulate a C.C.F. leader of a majority group in any House, 

either in Saskatchewan or in any part of the Dominion of Canada. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That is what you said last June. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You got a big scare anyway. 

 

Mr. Loehr: — There is nothing like being optimistic. 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
634 

I was rather impressed with certain passages in the speech from the throne. We are speaking on the 

budget at the present time, but the speech from the throne is, after all, the forerunner and reflector of 

what to expect from the budget. I was particularly impressed by the first part of the first paragraph in the 

speech from the throne, which reads as follows: 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Might I remind the hon. member that he cannot rehash any debate that took 

place in this House on the Speech from the throne. 

 

Mr. Loehr: — All right, I will submit to your ruling, Mr. Speaker, but the fact remains that previous to 

1944 the C.C.F.‟ers went up and down the province and told the people that social services were going 

to be given free to the people. There is no doubt about that. It cannot be denied because I have heard 

them make those statements by the score — that we would be provided with social services free. We all 

know now that that was a bubble, something that those who gave the matter any though at any time 

knew could not be. The bubble of the idealism of something for nothing has never come to pass, either 

here or any place in the world, and never will come to pass. Somebody will have to pay. 

 

I want to say a few words in connection with the hospitalization. This is what let me to remark about the 

offers of something for nothing. I cannot be accused of being against social services of any description, 

and especially of health services. I have been reeve of a municipality for a period of seven years, right 

through the hard times of the hungry thirties, as they are called, and during that period of time I was 

instrumental in inaugurating a municipal health scheme which was second to none in the province. In 

fact, I have been told repeatedly by those who know — the then Minister of Health and his Deputy — 

that up in our district we had one of the best functioning health services that could be inaugurated under 

a plan anywhere in the province. 

 

We had, in that municipality, no municipal doctor until the year 1932. In that year we engaged a 

municipal doctor, and included in the ordinary functions of a municipal doctor we included surgery. 

This plan worked very well. The doctors at that time, of course, were practising their profession for very 

little pay and, in many cases, no pay. There were good doctors in the Humboldt district who gave us 

good service at a very low rate — there is no need to mention how little, but we know it was far too little 

for the services rendered. In accordance with the times, we got very good service for the money we gave 

to them. 

 

In the year 1933 or 1934, the people of that municipality and the neighbouring municipalities decided 

that they should inaugurate a plan of free hospitalization. I was appointed on a committee; in fact, I was 

chairman of a committee to make enquiries from the local hospitals on what basis we could inaugurate 

such a plan. The result of this was we got a contract from the local hospitals to give people of the 

municipalities — our municipality in particular — hospitalization. It had its limitations in this regard: 

the hospitalization per person per year was limited to 15 days; after that either the person or the 

municipality — in the case of indigents — would have to pay. The hospital authorities, after looking 

over their files, established the fact that in previous years the hospitalization days taken by the people of 

that 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
635 

municipality — by the way there were at that time about 3,300 people in the municipality — was 

approximately 1,100 days, and, based on the $2.50 rate, or $2.75; they agreed to give us hospitalization 

for the round sum of $2,500 per year on the basis of the 15 day restriction per person. 

 

I am telling you this as preamble to what I am going to tell you about the hospitalization plan of the 

province today, which is not, in my opinion, functioning as it should. We found at the end of the year 

that, instead of the people of that municipality taking the ordinary amount of hospitalization days that 

they had been taking previously, they took a total of 3,400 and some odd hospitalization days, for the 

simple reason hospitalization was free. The result was that the hospitals realized 61¼ cents per 

hospitalization —day given to the people of that municipality. In addition to that, of course, they got 50 

cents per day grant from the government. 

 

Of course, the next year the hospitals simply could not agree to carry on under that contract so, again, it 

was left to me to devise some plan that would still give hospitalization and reduce the number of days 

the people would take in the form of hospitalization. After a long discussion with people directly 

connected with it — the hospital authorities — we devised a semi-hospitalization scheme whereby the 

municipality, instead of paying a round sum for complete hospitalization, paid $1 per day for 

hospitalization given to the people, and the hospital collected the balance from the patient concerned. 

The result of that was — and, by the way, the municipality and the neighbouring municipalities from 

that year on until the day the provincial hospitalization took effect all had that same plan working, and it 

functioned 100 percent — from that day we, in that municipality, never paid more than $1,900 for our 

hospitalization, which means that immediately, when the hospitalization was not entirely free to the 

people, they reduced the number of hospitalization days taken from 3,400 to as low as 1,725. That is 

what I am trying to illustrate. When something is entirely free, the responsibility of the individual 

remove, then a thing like that is, in my opinion, always abused, and not matter what you try to do to 

circumvent that, it will be abused by the people. 

 

As far as the provincial hospitalization plan is concerned, I have no fault to find with it. I am entirely for 

it and for health services, but I am not in agreement with the regulations governing it, which leads to just 

one thing, and that is that our hospitals are overflowing. I am sure that you all agree there are any 

number of cases that really require hospitalization and have an awful hard time to find space. The hon. 

Premier, in his throne speech I believe it was, took credit for the government increasing the 

hospitalization facilities of the province form 3.2 percent per on thousand persons to 6 point something. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Point nine. 

 

Mr. Loehr: — No matter what the decimal point may be, I am afraid you will have to, in order to 

provide space for hospitalization for the people of the province under this regulation, increases it to nine 

to ten before you will have sufficient hospitalization space. In connection with that, there are other 

factors, not only the entirely free phase of hospitalization, that are inducive to the glutting of hospital 

space. One is, if you go into a hospital — I don‟t care 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
636 

which one — and if you watch who is waling up and down the corridors, during the day, with a kimona 

on, you will find there are ever so many more aged people in there than there were some years ago. 

Why? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Because there was no place to care for them. 

 

Mr. Loehr: — I believe — and I know, personally, some cases where it applies — the effect of people 

who are infirm, not particularly sick but infirm and cannot help themselves, the people who ordinarily 

should be and are responsible for their care simply put them in hospital, and that is where they stay. 

Another feature is that by your hospitalization regulations you have thrown the responsibility squarely 

into the laps of the doctors to say, not who should go in, but who should not go into the hospitals. Let 

me tell you what I mean by that. There are the services to „in‟ and „out‟ patients. You know what I 

mean, of course, or I think you do. If you require x-rays, lab. tests, or if you have slashed yourself or 

broken a finger requiring you to go into the hospital for maybe an hour or two, your are not an „in‟ 

patient. When you go in for a lab. test or a dressing or an x-ray or for a few stitches where you have 

slashed yourself, you have to pay the hospital. When this hospitalization plan first came into effect, a lot 

of the people did not know that but they found it out when they ran up against a case where they had to 

pay for hospitalization. Yet they knew that the people who were in the hospital were getting those 

services free. The result is that when a patient goes to a doctor and the doctor wants to take him to a 

hospital to get and x-ray taken, or a lab. test, or something like that, he wants to know what he has to pay 

for it. If he has to pay for it, he is reluctant to go there, and the result of it is, if the doctor refuses to put 

him there, the patient the next time is going to go to some other doctor who will take him into the 

hospital. Under that regulation, doctors — not because they want to, but because they have been put into 

that position — to get these services free that the „in‟ patients get free are making provisions to get their 

patients into hospitals for everything and anything. That, also, is a factor in glutting up the hospitals. 

 

This hospitalization plan is costing, in my opinion, far too much money. The estimate for the year 

ending in the 1949 period is, I believe, over $9 million. In the year ending 1948 it was $8,850,000. The 

population of the province is 860,000, which means that this hospitalization plan is costing the people of 

the province the sum of $10.25 for every man, woman and child in the province and I believe that is 

entirely too much. While we ay, during these buoyant financial times, be able to stand that, the time is 

not far off, even if only normal times come back, when the people of this province cannot pay that 

amount of money. I would say that had the government, instead of taking in some economic planners 

costing some $30,000 a year to help formulate the hospitalization plan, taken any four or five 

experienced men in the municipalities, who had actual experience over a long period of years, and asked 

those four or five men for a few dollars to come in and help draw up a plan, you would have had a plan 

that would be functioning today far better than your present plan. So much for hospitalization. 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
637 

There is a plan whereby the government is helping the municipalities insofar as municipal doctor 

schemes are concerned. In our municipality we still have the municipal doctors, they pay the sum of 

$12,000 for surgery and health services of all descriptions with the exception of specialist work. Under 

this scheme, having such a contract, the government was to reimburse the municipality to the extent of 

$1,350 — I believe it was — at the end of the year if they could show that they had given the people of 

the municipality that service. However, in the fiscal year of 1947 — I don‟t know what has happened 

since — the municipality found that they were disqualified from getting that grant, and the reasons given 

by the Department of Health was that under this contract the municipality had with the doctors, office 

consultations were eliminated, or at least to the effect that the patient had to pay $1 and the municipality 

had to pay the rest. As a result, they said, that was not a health scheme of which the government 

approved. Their health scheme was more of a preventative nature than a curative nature, and by putting 

that restriction of $1 on office calls, the municipality restricted the people and induced them to refrain 

from consulting doctors. To qualify that statement further, they were told that in order to give real 

preventative service, every man, woman and child should consult a doctor at least three times a year. If a 

municipality with a population of 3,300 people would consult a doctor three times a year, it would mean 

that a doctor would have to serve them for office consultations 9,900 times, and how many doctors 

would that take? That is utterly ridiculous. It could not be cone. And, in other words, if the people would 

do that, it would mean that the municipality would have to spend $9,900 more to qualify to receive a 

grant of $1,350. The thing is utterly ridiculous. 

 

There is the matter of Crown Corporations. How different is the attitude so far as Crown Corporations 

are concerned as it affects unemployment. Previous to 1944, before the C.C.F. were elected in this 

province, they were going up and down the country saying that if elected the socialistic implementation 

would eliminate unemployment. People would be able to find employment in businesses and factories 

that would be established. After they were elected in 1944, of course, they started some of these Crown 

Corporations. You know what happened. Of all the Crown Corporations, those that are still going today 

and on anywhere near a paying basis are those that were established, some of them at least, previous to 

the C.C.F. taking over, and were being run by departments under a commission, and now have been 

turned into Crown Corporations. There is a Power Commission and the Telephone Corporation, those 

are still functioning and at least making a little money. There is a transportation company which is a 

Crown Corporations; that made the stupendous amount of $14.41 profit for the last fiscal year. That is 

something I cannot understand — and that before paying interest, taxes and setting aside the funds to 

offset the wear and tear on the property, the sinking fund I you like. Nearly all the other Crown 

Corporations are a flop. The woollen mill is closed . . .  

 

Premier Douglas: — May I correct the hon. gentleman‟s statement? The woollen mill is not closed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — He is trying to pull the wool over your eyes. 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
638 

Mr. Loehr: — What I want to say in connection with unemployment is that it is very peculiar that the 

government, through the Crown Corporations, are the first to submit and recognize the old 

much-lamented cry of supply and demand. Just as soon as there was no more demand they closed their 

ills and factories, and the employees were let out. There is no other business closed but the Crown 

Corporations that I know of. The box factory, for instance; it is very questionable whether that can be 

kept in operation insofar as financing is concerned. 

 

It is very peculiar, because the very man who started the box factory during the period when business 

was lame in this province during the thirties built up a flourishing business, and immediately after the 

government took the box factory over they, for instance, raised the price of the slabs that were used for 

firewood in the city of Prince Albert 100 percent or more, and yet, within a very short time, the 

employees of that box factory were told that, unless they could show different figures on the right side 

of the ledger, they would have to close the doors of the box factory. I don‟t know just whey that should 

be. This business was conducted on a paying basis by the man who had built up the business, and 

immediately the government took over, it ran into difficulties. 

 

The bus line is another thing. They inaugurated the bus lines, and compared with the hungry thirties, 

these bus lines are carrying a lot of people. In the thirties you could see the Greyhound Bus Lines, or any 

of them, running up and down the country empty, and yet they kept things going. Whether they were 

operating those at a stupendous loss, we don‟t know, but anyhow they kept on running. The government 

took over several private bus lines, including on out of St. Walburg operated by a man named Gleason. 

This man started the bus line system up in that country on a shoestring, and in the course of about ten 

years built it up into a very fine serviceable bus network in that part of the country. That is why it was 

appropriated by the Saskatchewan government, and turned into a Crown Corporations. That, together 

with the choice runs they are operating in the province, leads me to believe there must be something 

wrong or they should be making more than $14.41 in a year. If they are not, and things come back to 

normal, they will, I am sure, have to abandon the bus lines. 

 

The hon. Premier called these secondary businesses, these Crown Corporations, „problem children‟. I 

don‟t know whether that is just the right description for them. Here, with your permission, I will recall a 

joke, one of these stock-in-trade jokes the hon. Premier used in the election campaign, and not doubt 

some more of the members across the floor of the House have used the same one. This is in connection 

with the time the hon. Premier went to a house and the lady of the house was very glad to see him. She 

immediately picked up a air of twins she had in the cradle and brought them over to him, and told him to 

hold them, and he, of course, very kindly took the babies in his arms and admired them and 

congratulated the mother on the nice twins she had, and profusely praised the twins. While he was 

holding the twins, the mother said: “One of the twins is a C.C.F.'er. I wonder if you can tell me which 

one it is?” Well, he looked at the twins and handed them back and did not say anything. The lady said: 

“Can you tell which one it is?” “Oh, he said, this one.” “How do you know?” “Well, he said, that is the 

one that has done something.” These Crown Corporations are doing something, and the people are 

paying for it. They are not „problem children‟, the government should have knows what they were going 

into before they undertook those. 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
639 

Then there is agriculture. I wonder whether this government actually thinks that the people of the 

province, the farmers of the province, have benefited by the actions of the government during the last 

four years. I have not seen one thing that has been improved so far as this government is concerned and 

so far as the farmers of the province are concerned. I don‟t know of one thing. The only thing I can think 

of is that, instead of the 21 Agricultural Representatives employed by the previous government, there are 

now nearly double that number, and the cost is trebled, I think, or somewhere in that neighbourhood; I 

might say that in spite of the fact that now there are double the number of Agricultural Representatives, 

and while I was one of the regular representatives prior to 1944 and had a certain territory through 

Moose Jaw north to the lake and the river, I even now get letters from people in that area who still think 

I am the Agricultural Representative. I represented that are for two years, while it has been represented 

by somebody else for four years since. 

 

Another thing that has been done by this government is that the service of the Livestock Commissioner‟s 

office has been withdrawn from the Purebred Livestock Association of the province. At least they have 

been notified to the effect that the service of the Livestock Commissioner‟s office will no longer be 

available to them. I don‟t see where that is going to be of any service to the agricultural element of the 

province. The Purebred Livestock Association of this province has done a wonderful job, and any 

government that will refuse to give its services to that body of people is certainly not doing the 

agricultural element any good. It means this association will have to set up an office and a staff which 

will cost so much that the association will almost be forced out of business. What is going to be done 

about it, I don‟t know, but that is what is happening at the present time. 

 

As far as „socializing‟ agriculture is concerned, I wonder if this C.C.F. government of Saskatchewan has 

any idea that they have now convinced the farmers of Saskatchewan that, if the will get into office in 

this country, the farmers of Canada and Saskatchewan will be immune from socialization. I don‟t think 

they have. I think that when this government thinks about the implements that have been fashioned, 

which would be at their disposal for the socialization of land if they could get into Ottawa, their tongues 

must be watering and they must be licking their chops, because all they would have to do, if the C.C.F. 

government got into power at Ottawa, would be to use the Wheat Board and other similar boards to 

handle livestock or any other produce that comes off the farm, and do what the socialist governments are 

doing in New Zealand and Australia: that is, pay the farmer so much and retain the rest for the treasury 

of the country. They cannot do it in Saskatchewan, of course; but were they in office in Ottawa, the 

instruments set up for the benefit of the farmer would become the very instruments that would 

automatically be in the hands of the socialist government to socialize the farming element of the 

country. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That is what you peddle around the country, eh? 

 

Mr. Loehr: — I would say that, so far as agriculture is concerned in this province, the only assistance 

this government has given to the farmers is the fact that this government has asked Ottawa for this and 

the other thing right along, and are continuing to do so. As far as the government of Saskatchewan is 

concerned, so far at least, it has not given agriculture any assistance in any way, shape or form. 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
640 

Now, unit schools. I am not going to say very much about the Larger School Unit system, but I want to 

say that the Larger School Unit, so far as elementary education is concerned, and certainly not so far as 

secondary education is concerned, has not improved the education system of this province one iota. Not 

one iota. It has not brought secondary education into the rural areas, and so far, by its functioning, I do 

not see any hope that it ever will. When they had, for instance, organizations meetings in all the large 

units in my own little town, there was a speaker from the Department of Education and the school 

inspector from Humboldt was there. I was there and stayed at the back of the hall as I did not want to be 

drawn into any discussion, but the school inspector who knows me very well spotted me in the back and 

asked mot to voice my opinion regarding the establishment of a Larger School Unit. I got up and told 

the, that so far as I was concerned I was convinced that the establishment of the larger School Unit 

would have one result, and that would be to remove all local interest from the little red schoolhouse 

which was the community service for all communities all over the country. It would remove control 

from the hands of the parents as regards the children. But, I said, apart from that, if the inauguration of 

the Larger School Unit brings secondary education into the country schools, I would not object to it even 

if it would cost more. As far as costing more is concerned, I told them that, in my opinion, it would cost 

more. That has been borne out, not to the extent I had in mind which was a few dollars more, but it is 

costing double what it was costing before, with not added benefits for it. I can tell you this; so far as 

many Larger School Units are concerned, if they had a vote today it would be thrown out at once. 

 

Automobile insurance: I had a few words on the Bill when it was up the other day. I want to enlarge just 

a little bit on that. I want to reiterate the fact that his government, through the Automobile Insurance 

Office, is evading its responsibilities when it uses the methods that it does employ, in some instances at 

least, to meet its obligations insofar as insurance is concerned. I started to tell you about a case in 

Humboldt where an adjuster intimidated with the threat of laying a criminal charge against a member of 

the man‟s family, intimidated the owner of the car to the extent that he finally signed a release for half 

the amount of the value of the car when the car was totally destroyed. In addition, I know of a case 

where a man allowed his hired man, who had been working for him for years and had been driving the 

car repeatedly, to take his car to an evening‟s entertainment away from home. While the hired many was 

away from home he took his girl friend out for a drive. Apparently his girl friend took hold of the wheel 

and drove the car. The car was totally wrecked and when finally the owner of the car made a claim for 

the wrecked car, it was discovered that this girl drove the car and this girl had no driver‟s licence. She 

had been driving cars before but she had no driver‟s licence for that year. The result of it was the Crown 

Corporations refused to pay that man one cent for a new car. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — What would a private company have done? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Humanity first. 

 

Mr. Loehr: — What would a private company have done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Loehr: — Well, I don‟t know what they would have done. I never heard of them refusing anything. 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
641 

Premier Douglas: — Oh, come now. We are not in kindergarten. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — The hon. Premier seems to be an expert on kindergarten. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I have so many pupils opposite. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I would not say that we think that. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Loehr: — I would say, if this government is so anxious to institute a real cheap insurance plan, all 

they would have to do, if they believe in compulsory insurance and if they want to be friendly to 

community affairs handled by the people, is to seal the Saskatchewan Mutual Insurance Company or the 

Wawanesa who are insurance companies who have been operating in this country at cost for years to the 

farmers and the people of the province. All they would have to do is say, or put through an Act whereby, 

before you could buy a licence, you have to produce a five-point policy. And you would find that these 

insurance companies instead of having to insure cars that made 25,000 miles a year or more and card 

that are driven in the city constantly, subject to being destroyed, if they would find policies on 150,000 

cars in the province that are not going to be damaged in a year, they would give the people of this 

province far cheaper insurance than this government. They would be very pleased to do that I am sure. 

What is more, I am sure that those people would not have a strike on their hands when they started 

offices either, because they would pay adequate wages. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The same as they did in the hospitals. 

 

Mr. Loehr: — I have rambled quite a bit. I have the honour to represent Humboldt. Humboldt is 

situated as an appendix to the great garden of the west, the Carrot River valley which lies to the north. It 

is peopled by hard-working, agricultural people gathered from all parts of the United States, eastern 

Canada, the British Isles and continental Europe. We have a cosmopolitan population, all of whom are 

really true Canadians. The farming in Humboldt constituency consists of ideal farming that is the 

backbone of Saskatchewan and the Dominion of Canada. There we have a size of farm which is about 

2½ quarter sections per farm, and we have less than one-half of one percent of holding farmers. 

Listening to a number of speakers on the opposite side of the House discussing the election, I came to 

the conclusion that I must be the one who stands alone. I represent the constituency where there were 

two-thirds anti-socialist votes, and I represent on of the two-thirds. The total vote there was 7,861 and 

5,204 were anti-socialist votes, and the remainder were C.C.F. votes. When I hear charges made by the 

C.C.F. of collusion between the Liberals and the Social Crediters, I don‟t know just what to think about 

that. I cannot help but wonder at the reasoning in their mathematics so far as Humboldt is concerned at 

least. In that Humboldt constituency, an almost superhuman effort was made to split the anti-socialist 

vote, and they very nearly succeeded. Now, when it come collusion and charges of collusion, it seems to 

me if 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
642 

there was any collusion it must have been with the Social Credit and the C.C.F., not between me and the 

Social Credit; that is a cinch. So far as the C.C.F. were concerned in the Humboldt constituency — and I 

think I know whereof I speak because I have good friends amongst them — the election, so far as I was 

concerned had been conceded to me many months before the election. They told me so, and they were 

convinced that that was a fact. It was not until the Social Credit appeared on the scene and started to 

make inroads, and tried to convince the people that Social Credit was going to seep the province, and 

that the only way they, the people, could be sure to get the C.C.F. out was to vote Social Credit that the 

C.C.F. started to take notice. Just about a month before the election a veteran C.C.F. organizer appeared 

on the scene. This party is in the civil service. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, no. 

 

Mr. Loehr: — The people of the province paid this C.C.F. organizer somewhere around $200 to $250 

— I can check up on the days he was there — to organize for the C.C.F. He is some organizer. He was 

well known in that district. He has lived there for years and his activity during the last Liberals years he 

was there was solely to organize for the C.C.F. I can assure you that, in the last three or four weeks of 

the campaign, there was a beehive of activity started by C.C.F. organization, with this man at the head of 

it. The house-to-house canvass was carried on. I am sure the muddy roads, which were referred to on the 

other side of the House yesterday, did not stop the C.C.F.'ers going to Wolseley on election day. It never 

did before. As far as the C.C.F. going to the poll is concerned, I can tell you that in the federal election 

in 1945, when a real storm struck over the constituency of Humboldt at about half past one at noon, at 

poll after poll not a single voter came out after the rain, but every C.C.F. voter came out that there was. 

In one poll over 80 C.C.F. voted, and not one single Liberal voted. I don‟t think any C.C.F. vote was 

every stopped by muddy roads. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Loehr: — More power to them, of course. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They expect jobs. 

 

Mr. Loehr: — Both the hon. member for Canora (Mr. Kuziak) and the hon. Premier make fun of what 

they call attempts on the part of the Liberals and the other political parties who are anti-socialists to 

scare and intimidate voters into believing that there would be no more elections if the C.C.F. party were 

elected. Mr. Speaker, I, myself, never heard a Liberals or any other anti-socialist candidate or speaker 

make that assertion in connection with a provincial election. I have heard it made — and I have made it 

myself — in the federal campaign. I made the suggestion, and I make it now. It is my belief, my sincere 

belief, that if the C.C.F. socialist government were elected in the Dominion, where they have control of 

the British North America Act, which they have told us repeatedly when they get in there they are going 

to wreck, we will have not further elections, not for a number of years. There is no need of being 

amused over this because it is happening in other countries and what has happened in other countries 

will happen here. 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
643 

Premier Douglas: — Oh nonsense. 

 

Mr. Loehr: — That comes to pass. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That is just used to frighten children. 

 

Mr. Loehr: — There is no doubt about that. It naturally follows that once a socialist government is in at 

Ottawa there will be no further election. That is what has happened in other countries, and that is what 

will happen here. There is no doubt about that. I am quoting from a pamphlet that I had personally 

prepared in the 1945 federal election in the Humboldt constituency. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Did anybody lay a charge of libel against you for it? They should have. 

 

Mr. Loehr: — I said in that pamphlet that we cannot give socialism, with its inevitable dictatorship a 

trial and then remove it with the stroke of a pencil on a ballot if we don‟t like it. The socialists 

themselves are agreed that their plans can only be made to work if the changes are permanent, which 

means the socialists will have to be permanently in power, which means that opposition cannot be 

tolerated by word or by ballot. Opposition has been classed as reason by every totalitarian state for the 

simple reason that a state could not be totalitarian on any other basis. There is no use laughing bout it, 

because it has happened in other places and it would happen here. The first vote we would ever get 

would be after the country is so socialized that there is nor reverting back to any other method. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That is what you said in 1944, and you got one in 1948. 

 

Mr. Loehr: — This government has built up a gigantic stagnation structure, and the climax has still not 

been reached. We can see that it is still in the ascendancy, and where it will end, if conditions in the 

country remain buoyant as they are now, is hard to ascertain. We have been talked about as „do-nothing‟ 

Liberals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Loehr: — Well, perhaps Liberals in the past have moved just a little bit slowly, but the results have 

proved that the move was in the right direction. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Consistently back. 

 

Mr. Loehr: — How it is a „do-something‟ socialistic age. These socialist experiments are dying off, one 

by one, and every time one of them drops into an ashcan, so much of the people‟s revenue goes with it. 

 

I cannot support a budget of this nature. I consider this government must come around and realize there 

is a limit, and I think it is up to us to see that the government realizes there is a limit. I will not support 

the motion. 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
644 

Mr. L. W. Larsen (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, I am glad to chip in a few words on this budget. I am 

proud of it myself. I think it is a good budget. We have had budgets for years and years. When I go 

home my wife says she wants more money to balance her budget. But the criticism the opposition has 

given us simply does not hold water. The main issue they know just as well as I do, which I will come to 

later. However, to go into a few little details: on Saturday last the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix had some 

very good comments on the budget, that I am 100 percent in agreement with. Their criticism was that we 

did not spend enough money in the north, and I am 100 percent in favour of spending more up there. I 

am sorry to say, a lot of the members down here don‟t understand the conditions up north. In some ways 

we are keeping them at the present time but perhaps they will keep us in the future — you never know. 

So I can agree with the Star Phoenix in those comments. 

 

In other ways the budget looks pretty fair to me. I have heard several criticisms from the speakers but 

they don‟t amount to a row of beans. They look at it just as if everything was a loss. They say the Crown 

Corporations were just loss after loss. Well, I don‟t know; if these Crown Corporations show a profit of 

$3,150,000, which is 8 percent profit on the capital, I don‟t think it is too bad. Besides, I never saw the 

Liberals bring in a surplus of $3 million. 

 

They mention the bus lines. I do know they did a business somewhere close to $1 million, and I think it 

went around $14,000 in the hole. Well after I went up to your City Hall here a week ago last Sunday I 

did not feel so badly about it. The speaker — I forget his name — spoke on Capitalism, Socialism and 

Christianity. I think he preferred Christianity, and I had no disagreement with him there either. But, 

making a few comparisons, he said that when the beautiful street cars and buses burned up in that 

terrible fire most of the people in Regina felt badly about it; but that street railway was not built for 

profit. It was built to give the ratepayers of the city a service. There were several years when the street 

railways in the cities went in the hole, but I never heard any political speeches that they should throw 

them in the ashcan and discontinue them. Conditions always come back. The street railways are still 

running. Now, what is the difference? A railway system like the city of Regina has is here to serve the 

60,000 people — as a rule I know private enterprise always prefers to take the lines over where the 

population is dense — and this government trying to give that service to the people who live mile an 

miles apart; I don‟t think the bus service was made for any profit they expected from it. They have given 

a valuable service to these people I don‟t think we should be too critical. They did go $14,000 in the 

hole on a turnover of practically $1 million, but that might even happen to your street railway in the city 

of Regina here. It is a service that the people demand, and I think it is good service and they should be 

entitled to it whenever feasible. I cannot see any criticism there. 

 

I would like to quote a couple of lines from The Leader-Post. According to the critics on the other side, 

it is the spending of the provincial government that is putting us in a bad financial position, and that we 

are spending all the money. Prior to the war, the federal government, according to the Leader-Post 

today, collected 51 percent, roughly speaking, and the provincial government collected 18.8 percent. 

Now, that is quite a difference, 51 percent 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
645 

to 18.8 percent. Today, what do we find? The provincial percentage of taxes has come down from 18.8 

to 12.5 and the percentage of taxes collected by the federal government has gone up from 51.2 to 76.7. 

So that shows where the money goes. 

 

There are budgets and budgets, but I say here that the most important budget ever brought in 

Saskatchewan is always made in Ottawa. There is not question about it. It is Ottawa policies which 

either makes or breaks us, not the government of Saskatchewan. Because their power is practically 

unlimited they can put you in the fritz for a while, and you cannot exist; but, nevertheless, that is where 

it is made. I do not need to mention the terrible conditions in the lean thirties, which lasted ten years, but 

neither the federal nor provincial governments had a solution. The only thing that came to the rescue 

was that horrible war. Is it any wonder, after the suffering of the lean thirties, that such movements as 

our Grain Growers started and grew, or such movements as the Wheat Pool started, or for that matter, 

the United Farmers also? Is it any wonder that on such a budget which created these conditions, 

unemployment grew by leaps and bounds? You know what happened here in Regina, when the 

authorities of the day pulled these fellows off the trains by force, when they just wanted something to 

eat. It is no wonder again that our Ottawa budget becomes the most important. Of course, when the war 

broke out, the capitalistic budgets produced dollars into circulation overnight, just as if by magic. The 

troubles, for the time being, financially were pretty well rectified, and, again, that refers back to the fact 

that the most important budget we have in Saskatchewan is still in Ottawa. After that the farmers of 

Saskatchewan decided to make their own budget, and I am glad to say that these movements I 

mentioned before grew and grew, and there is no question in my mind, and I am sure there is no 

question on the opposition side either, that that is the reason we have a C.C.F. government today. These 

movements were started 20 or 30 years ago to try and make a budget of their own. 

 

We come now to 1942, and I chipped in my two-bits to send down that delegation of 400 to Ottawa 

because, at that time, even after four years of war, we could not make an existence on the farm. The 

prices the farmers received were frozen and the other prices were allowed to go up to a large extent. I 

was glad that the Leader of the Opposition, at that time, spoke so kindly about them when they landed in 

Ottawa, and told them it was a crime that they should raise that wheat for 70 cents a bushel f.o.b. Fort 

William, and that it should be immediately raised to $1.25. I don‟t need to go into any details; we know 

that he voted for considerably less when the vote was taken in the House down there. 

 

The Liberals speak so much about free enterprise. It is a fact that they did not believe in free enterprise 

as far as the labourer and the farmer was concerned during the war, because the labour man‟s wages 

were frozen — oh, he got a pitiful little bit of cost of living bonus, but it was of no account as the cost of 

living had gone up so far and they were finding it hard to balance their budget in those days also. The 

farmers — why, they were not even in it. The price the farmer got on the 24 cent freight rate in 

Saskatchewan for No. 3 wheat, which is a good average grade, was 46½ cents, for four years of war, 

1939, 1940, 1941 and 1942, and it is no wonder that delegation went down to see if they could not do 

something bout it. We know what happened. It got raised to 20 cents, after all the arguments. What I 

would like to point out is just what that meant to a little farmer. 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
646 

Let us take a small farmer, for instance with a 3,000 bushel grain production, ten head of cattle per year, 

and 50 hogs. That is not a very large farm, according to the farms we are used to now. There is no 

question in my mind that under free enterprise, at least, he was fleeced of $1 a bushel, but let us be 

conservative and say 50 cents. Well now, on 3,000 bushels that is $1,500. Then, if he sold his cattle — 

there always was a market for his surplus down across the border, which was immediately cut off by our 

Liberals in Ottawa. I know he was out sometimes $200 on a steer. I am certain of it because we only 

need to go back to a year ago last fall, when a good many of our steers were quoted from 30 to 40 cents 

a pound. But we will say $50 per head, for I don‟t want to get into any argument, and that would show 

an amount of $500. We do know a lot of farmers raised a considerable number of hogs, so let us just 

take a small farm again, with 50 hogs. Again, I would say that live sows in the States brought more than 

our dressed bacon in our market. We know the loss would be $20 according to the war market under free 

enterprise, but let us say $10. Well, that is another $500. That is not very much, but multiply that by nine 

years, and that little farm would be out $22,500, and I have quoted very small figures. 

 

It is no wonder that such a movement as the C.C.F. has grown up, because during the times on which 

these figures were quoted it was under the Liberal policies in Ottawa. What did surprise me is that we 

did not have a movement, such as we have today in Saskatchewan, long ago. I know if this farmer had 

that $22,500, he could have built a little house, could have got some new machinery and improved 

things. Instead of that, a lot of these little farms are the same as they were 20 years ago, practically. And 

that was under the idea of believing in free enterprise for some, but not for others. 

 

Out budget is made on a dollar and cent basis in Ottawa, and I think we should get together on both 

sides of this House, because if Saskatchewan does not speak up against some of these condition, who is 

going to do it? We cannot expect the governments or the people of the other provinces to do so. It 

amazed me a couple of years ago, when I was out on Vancouver Island, I bought wheat out there, in the 

spring of 1947, for 90 cents a bushel, and I think I had already received around $1.30. Now, if I get the 

next payment — and I still have my certificates — I have an idea that that wheat we were buying for 90 

cents will bring me $1.60, roughly speaking. Now, that was my money. I helped to pay for that. Besides, 

they had a better price for the hogs out there, and I maintain that the Ottawa government deliberately put 

a political fence around British Columbia, the Maritimes, Quebec and Ontario, with the farmer's money 

from Saskatchewan. I cannot see it any other way because under the free freight assistance and 25 cents 

a bushel off, that is exactly what they paid. I saw the bills out there from the pig raisers. I saw what they 

got, which was considerably more than here; and they were buying all their grain, roughly speaking, for 

$30 a ton. You can figure that out, and 90 cents a bushel would not be far wrong. You can phone up any 

grain company, or the Pool, and you will see that it is wheat which I will receive $1.50 for. When I feed 

hogs, I have to feed them $1.50 grain, and these other provinces are feeding 90 cent grain, at my 

expense. That is why I say our budget is made in Ottawa as far as the economy of this province is 

concerned. 

 

I think our speakers, particularly on the other side, have gone around like a cat around hot porridge, and 

left the important question alone. I do 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
647 

know that it is federal policy that either makes or breaks us on the farm. I do not know what the 

opposition will go to the country on next time when there is an election if this Red scare disappears. I 

don‟t think we will need any desks over there at all. 

 

As far as this budget is concerned, I think it is 100 percent, Mr. Speaker, and I am going to support it. 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — I would like to rise at this time and make a few comments on my 

observations. 

 

I would like to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer on the budget he had brought down. We hear all the 

time that the budgets are getting bigger and better, and we hear that they are spending far too much 

money, so I would like to deal with these topics further as I go along. I do believe that the budget is one 

any Provincial Treasurer can be proud of. There has been no increase in taxes and yet the Provincial 

Treasurer has been able to see ways and means of increasing services along certain lines in the province 

for the next fiscal year. If any former government of this province could have had a Provincial Treasurer 

who could have brought them down a budget as good as the one our Provincial Treasurer is bringing 

down now, they would have thought they were well off, and I believe they would have been a lot better 

off than they were. We can go over the back budgets and we do not find anywhere near as good a 

planning, and they do not show half the capability our Provincial Treasurer shows in preparing his 

budget. I think there is lots of praise coming to the Provincial Treasurer. 

 

I would just like to say a word or two about the Wadena constituency which I have the honour to 

represent. Wadena constituency is well known throughout Saskatchewan as one of the vanguard 

constituencies of the reform movement. The people of the Wadena constituency are not satisfied to just 

sit back under a laissez-faire attitude, they are always ready to go ahead. The Wadena has not had a 

Liberal representing that constituency in the provincial House since 1920 or 1921. The election at that 

time put in a Progressive and the Liberals have fought vainly ever since to try and get a hold in that 

constituency. In the 1944 election they did not even dare put up a candidate. In the by-election of 1945 

they did run a candidate, but they did in some localities give their help and blessing to the Communist 

who was my only opponent by that time. In 1948 they would not have dared run a candidate if they 

could not have got the Conservative backing so they could all go together, and then, at the same time, I 

had the Social Credit for an opponent. The Social Crediter got pretty near the same vote in the last 

election that the Communist got in the by-election. So we have not much illusion as to where the 

communist vote is being thrown, by and large. 

 

The member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Culliton) was in my constituency and held a meeting at two or three 

different points, and I would like him to tell the House, sometime when he is speaking, of his impression 

of the school at St. Front. St. Front is a large French settlement. It is the largest French settlement in my 

constituency by quite a bit. In St. Front they have there now a three-room school. They have a workshop 

in the basement. The work on the school is not yet complete but they are fixing up more facilities in the 

basement for the workshop. The children of St. Front and district used to attend 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
648 

 

school that was really only big enough to hold about 20 pupils at the most, and there were 64 pupils 

crowded into that school. The plaster was falling off the ceiling down there necks while they were doing 

their work. The Sisters who taught the school complained that the children had to wear their overcoats 

and therefore, could not do their work efficiently. That school was a disgrace to any government which 

was ever in this province, and nothing was done about it. Today St. Front has one of the better schools in 

this province, and St Front is in the Wadena Larger School Unit. I have no illusions that had the Wadena 

unit taken a vote before that Unit came into being, St. Front, pretty near to the last man, would have 

voted against it, because, Mr. Speaker, they did not have the facts before them of the advantages; but St. 

Front today has one of the best schools in that unit. They realize now the advantages of the unit. On top 

of that, St. Front school taxes used to be as high as 35 mills, when they sat in the old school with their 

overcoats on. They are not paying half of that tax today, and they have a good school. We have heard 

the criticism of that some other school has to help them pay for it when they are in the unit. That is 

correct, but St. Front has their school and they are using it. They will help to pay for other schools when 

other schools are being built. In that way, they have greater strength by more people working together to 

help to bring better education to the children. I heard the member for Humboldt (Mr. Loehr) saying that 

the Larger School Unit has not brought any benefit to the people of the rural areas. Well, I don‟t think he 

has travelled to the rural areas much because I have travelled in parts of his constituency of Humboldt 

— his seat happens to be right alongside mine — and I have heard what the people in there have said. 

Right in the town of Watson the children in that school are getting 50 cents a day for attending school if 

they have to go over four miles to school You cannot tell those parents that the Larger School Unit has 

not benefited them. 

 

At this time, too, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the Leader of the Opposition for being in the 

House here. He has been the Leader of the Liberal party in this province for over two years, but to a lot 

of us he was something like a museum piece, something we had often heard about or from, but never 

saw, so it is a change to see him in here. Some of my neighbours went to the convention in Saskatoon at 

the time he was elected as their leader. They came back very disappointed, and I said: “what is the 

matter” It was your convention and you were there.” “Oh, yes, they said, but it was cut and dried ahead 

of time. The man we have chosen now is not half the man the former leader was.” And they were quite 

sore about it. “Well, I said, maybe Mr. Patterson wants to retire.” They said: “that might be so, but if Mr. 

Patterson wants to retire as the leader, we had another man there who would have made a far better 

leader than the man we have now.” “Oh, I said, who was that?” They said: “The man who used to 

represent Gravelbourg, Mr. Culliton.” I said I did not know either Mr. Culliton or Mr. Tucker. They said 

there was no comparison between the two. Now, that was not my statement, that was the statement from 

the Liberals in my own district. I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for paying a visit to 

the town of Wadena a year ago last fall when he held a meeting in that town. You know, Mr. Speaker, I 

never had a majority — not did any other candidate in the town of Wadena — until this last election, but 

thanks to the Leader of the Opposition coming there we had a majority in every poll in the town of 

Wadena. I suppose once they had a chance to see him, they thought they could not better themselves 

under his promises, and they would sooner go along with the present Premier and help him bring in 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
649 

security for them. One fellow described it to me and he said: “Well, Mr. Tucker, as a leader is much like 

the Colonel in an army who lines up his men to go into battle, but instead of being ahead of them he 

followed at the back of them.: Someone said to him: “Why don‟t you go ahead when you are leading 

your army to battle?” he said: “Well, it is this way; when I am at the back I can direct them and see that 

they all go together. If the battle begins to get tough and we have to retreat, then we need a leader.” 

 

We also see in this great united front we have across the aisle of the Liberals, Conservatives and what 

have you? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Independent. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — Yes, and Independent — I am coming to that in a moment. 

 

We see in the Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley constituency the great collaboration between Mr. Staines and the 

present member. It has been said that the member for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Dundas) has put on a 

good campaign. Well, it looks like he did put on a good campaign in order to take the „Staines‟ off 

Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley. Seeing that Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley did not want any „Staines‟ on their 

constituency, because after having a member like Warden Burgess for the past four years, they surely 

did not want any „Staines” on it, so he went up to Athabaska and . . .  . 

 

An Hon. Member: —  . . . got lost. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — He was trying to run there and the former member for Athabaska who had been in 

this House as a Liberal was ousted without anything to do about it, and there was the „Staines‟ on 

Athabaska. So I guess all is smooth in the Liberal camp. In my opinion, what is going to happen is that 

we are going to see a steady disintegration of the Liberal party; we are going to see in this country what 

has happened in the countries across the ocean, the Liberal party is going to become a thing of history 

only. We have seen in Quebec one of the old traditional seats go to the Conservatives under George 

Drew. I am not saying for one moment that anybody could be any more reactionary than the 

Conservative party, but, nevertheless, with the collaboration of the Duplessis the seat elected a follower 

of George Drew. What will gradually happen, the rightist Liberals will switch over to the Conservatives 

and the Liberals who have been badly disillusioned all through the years will see fit to give the C.C.F. 

their support, and we will find in years to come that the Liberals will be not only provincially but 

nationally a forgotten party like they are in Britain, because we cannot have reaction riding two horses. 

 

I would just like the hon. members across the way to look at the little piece that was in the paper, The 

Leader Post, a few days ago — I have it in my pocket and can produce it if necessary — where the 

Minister of Health and Social Welfare in British Columbia was telling he had been a Cabinet Minister 

since 1933 but he had never been able to do the things he wanted to to help the people. That, Mr. 

Speaker, was because he was tied to big business. Our old capitalistic decayed system had strings on 

him and he could not do the things he wanted to, and he advised the coming members in the British 

Columbia Legislature to stick by their principles and become tied to big business. 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
650 

Last fall I happened to take part, for a day or two, in the Rosthern by-election. It makes me smile when I 

hear our friends across the aisle condemning the large budget in Saskatchewan. I happen to have here a 

whole handful of Liberal literature that was handed around in that campaign. They are always telling 

about the money hat Saskatchewan spends. According to their figures they are spending well over twice 

as much in one year in the province as what the provincial government is. In 1948 there is a list of eight 

items on which dominion money was expended in Saskatchewan. Now this was in 1948, according to 

their literature, and among those eight items there is one for natural resources of $8 million. Well, every 

hon. member of this house knows that there was no $8 million settlement of natural resources in 1948. 

Another one is provincial debt write-off of $36.3 million. Well, Mr. Speaker, we are all well aware of 

the fact that there was no provincial debt write-off in 1948 of $36.3 million. I just wonder if this will 

appear on the 1949 or 1950, trying to take credit for the same things. There was no credit whatsoever 

coming to the federal government for the natural resource settlement or the provincial debt write-off. 

That was in lieu of agreements signed on taxation agreements. They should give all the facts and not 

half of them. When I was in the town of Aberdeen one evening, I went down the street and I placed on 

every telephone poles some of our handbills advertising meetings on behalf of Mr. Makaroff. The next 

morning — it must have been very windy that night because I tacked the posters on well — there was 

not one left on there. I think the wind was just as usual, Liberal wind. 

 

Mr. Dundas: — The pole didn‟t‟ like them and they flew off. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — The member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. McCormack) yesterday was speaking in this 

House and he said he was not concerned with what happened prior to 1944. Evidently his past only goes 

back four years. Then immediately he began speaking of the Regina Manifesto. Well, that was prior to 

1944. Then he talked about his Sunday School days. I wonder if he went to Sunday School since 1944. 

He was also talking bout the young people going to the war; well, that was prior to 1944. He mentioned 

the sacrifice his parents made in order to give him a decent chance at life and his education and so on. 

Mr. Speaker, I do not want to belittle any effort of his parents, but I do take objection to the statement 

when he says he is not concerned with what happened prior to 1944. I am, because I lived prior to 1944; 

I lived through those years of the thirties, and I know what not only myself but what hundreds of others 

have to put up with. For any member to say he is not concerned with what happened in the past, I think 

it shows very poor taste. 

 

We have heard a lot about the freedom being taken away from the people of Saskatchewan; how they 

are losing their freedom. Sometimes I wonder, when I hear our friends across the aisle talking, whose 

freedom they are talking about. Lincoln once said there should be government of the people, by the 

people and for the people, but they seem to believe in government of 94 percent by two percent for the 

four percent. That totals their 100 percent. We, on this side of the House, believe that the people should 

have a say in what is the best for the majority of the people, and the majority of the people should share 

in the benefits of society wherever possible. It is true that within provincial 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
651 

jurisdiction we do not have the scope to bring as many freedoms to the people as they should have, but 

we have, in the budget before us, compared with previous years, made a tremendous effort toward 

helping the sick and the needy in giving them more aid and care. Mr. Speaker, I am not satisfied yet that 

we have done what should be done for the people of this province. As Churchill said: “Give us the tools 

and we will finish the job.” 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You sure will. You will probably do that next year. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — The member for Souris-Estevan was speaking about the miners, and so on, down at 

Estevan, but I wonder if he was so much perturbed about the freedom of the miners‟ wives as he was 

about the mine owners. 

 

We heard the member for Humboldt (Mr. Loehr) say that if the government went into all industries there 

would be hundreds of men employed and they would not dare protest against their employer because 

they would be fired and thrown out, and that was their bread and butter. Surely, to any intelligent man or 

woman, the strike that was at the insurance office last fall, if it did not teach them what it should, it 

should have taught them one thing, and that was that the employees of any Saskatchewan Crown 

Corporation were not afraid to meet the government and negotiate with them over their grievances. 

Those people were not thrown out on their ear and all fired. We have had many instances before when 

they were, and I would just like to give you one, where a person was fired for political patronage. I 

asked a question, which was answered today in the House, and the answer will appear in the Journals 

tomorrow, for the benefit of the rest of the members. I wanted to know who was the Liquor Store vendor 

in Rosthern on July 19, 1934. I find from the answer that a man by the name of E.F. Hobson was the 

Liquor Store vendor at that time. I asked if he was a returned soldier, and the answer was yes. I asked 

then if he was dismissed by the Liquor Board, and the answer was yes. If so, who was appointed in his 

place, and the answer was a man by the name of G. Ens. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! One of the finest pioneers this country every had. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — I am glad the hon. Leader of the Opposition applauds that because he talks about 

political patronage, and I think I will show that this was a bit of political patronage. It was a government 

of which a party is now associated with that was in power at the time the change was made. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — We are proud of George Ens. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — I asked if Mr. Ens was a returned soldier. The answer was no. Was he a former 

Liberal M.L.A., and the answer was yes. Now, pound your desk on that one. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — What is wrong with that. Are you ashamed of being an M.L.A.? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
652 

Mr. Dewhurst: — I asked what his age was on the day of his appointment. He was 72 years of age at 

the time of his appointment. He retired on August 1, 1944 at the age of 81. Now, Mr. Speaker, I wonder 

if the Leader of the Opposition is going to talk about party patronage. When he comes in this House and 

tells us that it was a Liberal government at Ottawa which brought in the old age pensions, when anyone 

who has read the history of the Parliament of Canada knows how that was brought in by the Liberal 

government. They would not have done it unless they had to. He told us they brought in the old age 

pension, but they put a man, who was eligible for the old age pension — which was adequate, according 

to them — in as Liquor Store vendor at the age of 72. One of the main reasons was that he was an 

ex-Liberal M.L.A. that is paying off your old debts. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — They would probably give you a job too, if they were in power. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tim Buck is looking for a job. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — Well, Tim Buck may look for a job with us, but he will land up with getting it with 

the Liberal party. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How about Makaroff? 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — We have heard a lot about different election promises for so long. I did not hear them 

in the 1948 election, but in 1944 election it was a common cry to hear our friends across the way 

running up and down the length and breadth of the province saying: “Oh if you vote for the C.C.F. that 

terrible bunch of Bolsheviks they will take all your babies away from you and put them in a babies 

home.” Well, I have not seen any questions on the order paper asking how many babies were taken 

away. Mr. Speaker, they were just trying to mislead the people on those statements, and, therefore, they 

put no stock in it themselves. 

 

The Liberal candidate they had in Wadena in the last election, Mr. Halderson . . .  

 

Mr. W.S. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! He had a good war record, too. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — He went into the different farm homes, and he would look around and say: “Pretty 

nice house you have here, eh?” “Oh, not too bad”, the lady of the house would say. “I guess you worked 

hard for this house?” “Oh, yes, we had to earn our living all the way through in this part of the country.” 

“You know, he said it would be too bad if you should lose your farm.” “Oh, there is no danger of losing 

it.” He said: “You will if the C.C.F. get back in again.” This one woman told him in no uncertain terms 

what she thought of him and that sort of lying. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Tell us about his war record. 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
653 

Mr. Dewhurst: — She told him she was not going to support him. It so happens that these people go 

around there, up and down that constituency, and they do not seem to realize that the people of the 

Wadena constituency told them 28 years ago that they were through with the Liberals, but they still go 

back and keep asking for more. They will come back again in 1952 or 1953, as the case may be, and 

they will get the same answer as they have in the past — that they are not wanted any longer and are 

wasting their time. 

 

We hear the opposition always talking on the Crown Corporations - how the government has spent so 

much money in Crown Corporations, and lost so much money. It is quite interesting to note that the 

Premier made the statement in this House that there was less than five percent of the Crown 

Corporations, when you figure the dollars invested, that have not made a showing at all. There is only 

another seven percent that is doing fair to medium. The balance are proving very satisfactory. You see, it 

just shows how they just want to mention the five percent all the time instead of taking the 88 percent — 

88 percent is too large a business for them to look and find any details on it. 

 

We can turn back to what happened to the Power Commission since its inception. The Power 

Commission was not a success in the first one, two or even three years, Mr. Speaker. The Power 

Commission — according to the Journal of the 1947 season, an answer shows that the Power 

Commission was started in 1929. In 1938, after ten years of operation, it had been losing steadily year 

after year until 1938 when it was over $326,000 in the red, and it was not until the C.C.F. government 

came in that it got out of the red and started to make money for the people of this province. 

 

I would like to refer the hon. members across the way to what happened in the Bienfait Briquetting Plant 

down there some years ago. They are talking about the government losing money, but they have not yet 

spent half a million dollars in any project, and then sold it for the sum of $1, which the former 

governments of this province have done. We don‟t believe in doing business that way. That is the way 

they believe in helping people. They spent $500,000 of their money, provincially here; another quarter 

of a million federally and a quarter of a million from Manitoba, and let it all go down the drain. One 

million dollar value was sold for $1. 

 

We hear also in this House that there has been no grants given to the municipalities to help them out. 

Now, there are a dozen different examples I could go into in the different ways we have helped them, 

but I am just going to deal with the grants to the rural municipalities for road purposes. I would just like 

to give a few figures — I did not choose one of the constituencies belonging to the Douglases, that we 

heard about; I took a constituency that has been represented for a number of years and consistently by a 

Liberal member who still sits in this House. I have the figures on the Arm River constituency from 1940 

to 1948 inclusive. I find, in round figures, in the first five years, 1940 to 1945, the amount of grants 

given to rural municipalities in the Arm River constituency was a little over $17,000. In the past four 

years, under a C.C.F. government, it was over $50,000. So, in five years $17,000; in four years $50,000. 

On the average $3,500 per year for the entire constituency of 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
654 

Arm River; the last four years, $12,500 a year grant. And yet we hear the member for Arm River (Mr. 

Danielson) rise in his seat and say that the municipalities are not receiving an advantage from this C.C.F. 

government. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — If he will take the figures of his own constituency, he will know better than to make 

those statements. 

 

I had the opportunity last Saturday of visiting the institution at Weyburn. I did not go through it very 

extensively. I was down there visiting some friends, and I went in into the institution, and the man at the 

information desk was kind enough to show me part of the institution. We have heard a lot of criticism 

from the increase of the civil servants in this province. Mr. Speaker, I would like to say here and now 

that if they do not believe in increasing the civil service to help remedy conditions in those sort of 

institutions, then there is something wrong with their thinking apparatus. The people who worked in 

those institutions were on a 12 hour per day shift, working with people who had the misfortune of 

becoming sick and having to go to those mental hospitals. That is bad enough for those people but to 

have to have attendants who are tired out on their feet and have to stay there 12 hours a day working 

with them was asking more than any society has a right to ask of any man or woman employed there as 

nurses and helpers in those in those institutions. The Premier made the announcement in the House a 

few days ago that he would arrange for a trip down to Weyburn this coming Saturday for members of 

both sides of the House to go down there and visit that institution. I hope very member of the opposition 

goes down to the institution, and I would like them to keep in mind the conditions in those institutions 

which the young men and women have to work with, as the staff around there, and ask them how they 

would like to be on a 12-hour shift, which is a thresherman‟s shift, for all the year round. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Don‟t you go down there. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — Today they work eight hours a day, six days a week one week, five days a week the 

next. Therefore, the conditions, they tell me, are far better than they ever had before. I can be sure of the 

statement, if any government of this province had to try and turn those institutions back to a 12-hour 

shift, they would have the employees quit en masse. Mr. Speaker, I would not blame them because they 

are helping the fit ones who are back home, and a lot of those people who are in there may be anybody‟s 

husband, anybody‟s wife, sister, brother or child. Because they have had the misfortune to become 

injured and sick, should they not have proper care instead of being herded in there like a bunch of cattle? 

Any member of the province, when he starts criticizing expenditure for health and hospitalization, would 

do well to visit those institutions first. 

 

Three years ago this coming spring, I had the opportunity to visit the Battleford institution. The same 

conditions were prevalent there. The eight-hour day was just coming in then for the staff, and they were 

sure glad of it, because they told me it would help them to be able to get the place cleaned up to a better 

standard and maintain that efficiency. 



 

March 8, 1949 

 

 
655 

Mr. Speaker, there is a lot that could be said on the record of this government, and what we can look 

forward to with this budget. A lot has already been said, and a lot more will be said before this debate is 

over, but I would just like to say that in my estimation any government that looks after the unfortunate 

people of its land with social services, health, and those sort of things, the people who are least able to 

help themselves, they are measured in the eyes of society as to whether they are a government fit to keep 

in office or not. In 1948 the people of this province, despite the numerous misrepresentations that had 

gone out from time to time over the radio and through the press, returned this government. We are 

intending to continue to try and help relieve the suffering of the unfortunate citizens among us. If the 

federal government would come through with their proposals in the Social Security Conference of 1945 

. . . it is very funny, Mr. Speaker, every time we mention the federal government the members of the 

opposition seem to think the federal government is something we should pay taxes to, but we should 

have no rights to claim benefits from them. When the Leader of the Opposition was a member in the 

House at Ottawa, why did he not get up on his hind legs and holler for justice for the people of the west? 

He never did. He just sat down and, consequently, not he hates to stand up. When any member is on his 

feet talking, he always likes to sit down and talk. If he had been on his feet a little more in Ottawa on 

behalf of Saskatchewan he would have learned to get on his feet a little better now. 

 

I would like to say in closing that this is a humanitarian budget and any time we can do anything to help 

the people, by and large, of this province, I am wholeheartedly behind it. I agree there are some 

departments I would like to see more money available for, and, naturally, it would be quite popular to go 

around the country saying I am in favour of increased services all along the line, and I am going to fight 

for the removal of taxation. We cannot have it two ways; we cannot have our cake and eat it too. If we 

have free services, we have to pay for it. It is not the amount of money we pay that affects us; it is the 

services we get for the money rendered; and at no time in the history of Saskatchewan has the taxation 

dollar been as wisely spent as it is now, and has been for the past four years. There are numerous cases 

which prove it. At no time has there been less political patronage in the province. You can go back to the 

record, I have in my desk some of the Canada Journals dealing with what happened in the general 

history of this province back around 1912. Some of the scandals that took place under the Liberal 

government since the formation of this province. You don‟t hear a thing mentioned about that. Some of 

the Liberal members of the House, at that time, were put in jail for fraudulent actions, and yet we hear 

some members of the opposition now say they are not concerned with what happened prior to 1944. 

They would like to forget it all right, and they would like the people in the country, the towns, the cities 

to forget; but you know, Barnum Bailey used to say that you can fool some of the people some of the 

time but you can‟t fool all of the people all of the time. For a number of years they fooled the people of 

this province and they fooled some of them in 1944; they fooled some of them in 1948; but I will wager, 

Mr. Speaker, that they won‟t continue to fool them in 1952 or 1953. The people are going to fool them 

and leave them where they should be. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that I heartily support this budget, and I will support any budget, as 

long as I am a member of this House, which helps to give real security to the people of this province, 

and I will also support any demand on Ottawa to help get back some of the money they have taken from 

us in federal taxation. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‟clock p.m. 


