



















































Hansard: March 04, 1949


548 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Eleventh Legislature 

 

Friday, March 4, 1949 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o‘clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. Mr. Fines: 

 

That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair. 

 

Mr. W.J. Patterson (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, may I first congratulate the Provincial Treasurer on 

the very clear and well-delivered budget address which we had the pleasure of listening to on 

Wednesday afternoon. I cannot go so far as to say that it gave us a very complete and comprehensive 

picture of the financial situation of the province o Saskatchewan. However, he did give us a good deal of 

information, for which we are obliged. 

 

For the first time, at least in my experience, a political and partisan note has been introduced into the 

budget by the Provincial Treasurer in his reference to the policies of the Leader of the Opposition. 

Whether he wishes to do that or not, of course, is within his discretion; but, as I say, it is something new 

in this Legislature. And it is rather unusual, Sir, in any business organization, for the officers responsible 

for the administration of the organization, in presenting their annual report to their shareholders, to take 

the occasion to criticize those who are in competition with them. 

 

For several years now we have had predictions of a depression from many members of the C.C.F. party, 

from the federal leader down, and even in this House, in this Legislature, we have been told that times 

are going to be tough in the near future. The Provincial Treasurer, apparently, has not paid very much 

attention to those predictions, and the budget is not prepared on that basis. This year, as in previous 

years, the government‘s budget is based on a full measure of prosperity and the taking of full advantage 

of a buoyant revenue condition to increase government spending. 

 

At first glance, the estimates tabled might appear to indicate a reduction in provincial expenditures for 

the fiscal year 1949-50. I must say, in fairness to the Provincial Treasurer, he was entirely fair and fully 

explained why that apparent reduction has taken place, and that for a comparison we should properly 

accept $56.5 million as the proposed revenue expenditures for the coming year. I only hope that his 

supporters in the country will follow the same practice as the Provincial Treasurer did, and not try to 

create the impression in the province that this government has, for the first time, reduced its proposed 

expenditures. The Provincial Treasurer has not quite reached his objective of $60 million, but he is 

getting very, very close to it. As a matter of fact, if you include the hospital tax, the amount actually 

exceeds $60 million. 

 

With that statement in the budget speech ―it asserts the right of the common people, through their 

elected representatives, to control the public 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
549 

purse‖ I am in entire agreement. I may say the sentiment comes somewhat strangely, sir, from a 

government that has so far departed from the principle, and if the present tendency is continued, the time 

will come, and not so far in the future, when we may have to have another Runnymede in Saskatchewan, 

because we have in Saskatchewan seven Crown Corporations engaged in 13 various business activities, 

not one of which was established by Act of this Legislature, and not one dollar of the money for their 

operation and establishment was ever voted by this Legislature for that specific purpose. All of these 

corporations were established without the knowledge or consent of the members of this legislature. They 

may have been discussed in the C.C.F. caucus, I do not know. The money used to establish them was 

voted by this Legislature in the form of blank cheques to be used as the Lieutenant Governor in Council, 

of the Government Finance Office, saw fit. If that is complying with the spirit and the principle 

enunciated by the Provincial Treasurer, I cannot agree with him. 

 

What I have said applies to seven of the nine Crown Corporations. There were two others, one of which 

was incorporated by a special Act of this Legislature – the Government Insurance Office. That was 

done, not because the government was so greatly concerned about consulting the House but because of 

the fact they had to have special authority to conduct that particular business. The other was the 

government bus lines, in which case, in a supplementary vote after the buses had been purchased and the 

government was in the business, not this Legislature but a previous Legislature voted either $750,000 or 

$1 million to cover the purchase price. 

 

We have in Saskatchewan a Government Finance Office, provided for under Section 22, Chapter 13 of 

the Statutes of 1947. That Government Finance Office may receive from every department of 

government, every board, commission office or Crown Corporation any funds, and they may loan those 

monies or advance them, not on the authority of this Legislature, and not necessarily on the authority of 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council, because the authority is alternative: ―Such funds as the office may 

deem desirable, or the Lieutenant Governor in Council may designate.‖ It is an alternative authority and, 

actually, if the Government Finance Office wants to exercise its authority, granted under Chapter 13 of 

1947, it does not even have to go to the Lieutenant Governor in Council, much less come to this 

Legislature. 

 

I may assure you, as you will remember, Sire, we who were in the opposition at the time this blanket 

authority was given, protested very vigorously. We contended, and I think we contended rightly, that the 

members of that Legislature were negligent of their duty, and that they were prepared to relinquish a 

right and a responsibility which was properly theirs. However, it was done. 

 

We have in Chapter 19 of the Statutes of 1944 provision for the establishment of a Reconstruction and 

Rehabilitation Fund which may go up as high as $5 million, and that money can be expended without 

this Legislature knowing the first thing about it, without any reference to the representatives of the 

people. It is entirely within the control of the Lieutenant Governor in Council: ―The monies at the credit 

of the said fund, whether borrowed under the provisions of the Act‖ – again alternative – ―or 

appropriated by the Legislature, may be disbursed as may be designated by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council.‖ And yet we are told it is a scared right the elected representatives of the people are supposed 

to enjoy, the right to control the public purse. 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
550 

Further, the Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Fund is not required to make even a report to this 

Legislature after they have collected and spent the money. According to an answer given in the House, 

there has been some $2.5 million spent from this fund during the past year, and unless we ask for a 

return, no one in this House will ever know where it went or how it was spent. 

 

Then we have an Industrial Development fund, under chapter 13 of the Statutes of 1947. A section of 

this Act provides: ―The Lieutenant Governor in Council may borrow on the credit of the province up to 

the sum of $2 million. And when that money has been so borrowed, the Industrial Development Fund 

has, in this case, subject to the Lieutenant Governor in Council but without any reference to this 

Legislature, again the authority to expend that money as it sees fit. 

 

I sincerely trust that this Legislature will be more careful in preserving its rights and its responsibilities. I 

will say in respect to this last fund it does require a report to be made to the Legislature after the 

expenditure has been made. It is only a realization or an understanding of these facts which indicate the 

extent to which, in the province of Saskatchewan, the control and regulation of the expenditures of 

public money have been removed from the members of this Assembly and transferred either to the 

Cabinet or, in some cases, to people even outside of the Cabinet. I might say, incidentally, that what has 

been done with reference to financial matters is only in line with that what has been done with reference 

to financial matters is only in line with what has been done with regard to legislative matters, and I am 

sure the members of this Assembly would be surprised if they had complete information as to the extent 

to which the previous Legislature gave up its rights and responsibilities, and placed them in the hands of 

the government or of individual Cabinet Ministers. 

 

There is always a measure of argument as to the proper financial policy for a government to pursue. Is 

government a business, or is it a charitable institution? Should it be operated on what is considered 

orthodox business principles and along business methods, or should it go on the principle of ‗let the 

future take care of itself‘? Most self-sustaining individuals, engaged in business, farming or similar 

occupations, try to conduct their operations on what might be called a business basis. That is, in the 

prosperous times they endeavour to retire their debts if they have them, to increase their assets or to lay 

aside reserves for a future, more difficult, period. 

 

If that is a proper principle to apply to private operations, it might fairly be argued that, to a considerable 

extent, it should be applied to the operation of government, because, after all, the government is the 

representative of all the people, and is merely, in ordinary cases, carrying on a business for all the people 

in connection with certain activities. If that is a sound principle to apply to the administration of a 

government, then we can properly say that this government is not adhering, or even coming close, to the 

application of that which I regard as a very sound principle. After all, the government of this or any 

province has a responsibility to all its citizens, and it should so conduct its affairs and manage its 

finances that, in the final analysis, all the people benefit and gain an advantage to the maximum extent 

possible. 

 

In discussing the budget, Sire, three different fiscal years come under review. On this occasion we will 

deal first with the fiscal year 1947-48. For that year we are in the position of having complete records. 

We have our 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
551 

Public Accounts and the Estimates which were presented for that year, and the final results. For the year 

1948-49 we only have the Estimates that were presented one year ago, plus such information as has been 

given to us by the Provincial Treasurer, plus such information we may have obtained by asking 

questions in the House. For the year 1949-50 the Estimates of expenditures are on our desks and will 

receive consideration when we go into Committee of Supply. 

 

I don‘t hold myself out as an expert, and I don‘t want to adopt a tedious attitude, but, for the benefit of 

the newer members of the House, might I distinguish very briefly between expenditures on revenue 

account and expenditures on capital account. I find very many people find this rather a difficult 

distinction to understand. In the course of the year‘s operations, the government of this province collects 

approximately $55 million from various sources: subsidies from the government of Canada, taxes from 

the people of Saskatchewan of one kind or another, returns from our natural resources, and revenue of 

that kind. Those are recurrent revenues that come in from year to year. Because we collect that amount 

his year does not mean we won‘t be able to collect it again next year, presuming, of course, conditions 

are equally good. On the other hand, capital expenditures are expenditures of a special nature – to build 

a building or a bridge, or extend the Power Commission, or something of that kind – where, once the 

money has been spent, that expenditure does not have to be repeated or renewed the following year. 

When you pay a grant to a school this year, it has to be paid again next year. If you make a grant to a 

municipality to build a road, that grant, not necessarily on the same road, may be expected in the 

following year. But, as I say, these capital expenditures are with reference to those expenditures which 

are for some specific purpose, and the same expenditure will not have to be made in a future year. It has 

been the practice in this province, generally speaking, to borrow the money for that purpose on the credit 

of the province. All of my comparisons of figures today, unless I made exception, deal entirely with the 

revenue receipts and the revenue expenditures of this province. I am leaving out of consideration for the 

time being, unless, as I say, I make special reference to them, expenditure for capital purposes. 

 

The estimates for the fiscal year 1947-48 when presented to this House – that would be in the session of 

1947 – called for an expenditure of $45.5 million. At the following session, supplementary estimates for 

that year were presented for somewhat over $7.5 million, making a total of $53 million. The Public 

Accounts show that that amount was not entirely spent; something about $53 million was spent. On the 

basis of the revenue received, after the Provincial Treasurer had taken $5 million of liquor profits into 

the revenue, he had a surplus of some $1.5 million. I am not going to criticize; that was a very 

satisfactory surplus. I think that if due economy had been observed the budget could have been balanced 

that year without having recourse to the liquor profits at all. However, the Provincial Treasurer was in 

the very happy and fortunate position that he had approximately $8 million of liquor profits upon which 

to draw. 

 

When we come to analyze the estimates as presented to the Legislature and the actual returns, however, 

we find some rather strange differences, particularly in connection with revenue. Fro that particular year, 

the Provincial Treasurer told us he expected to collect from the education tax $3.2 million. I am afraid 

that in making that estimate he was guided too greatly by the Premier‘s statement that he had reduced 

the education tax 40 percent. As a 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
552 

matter of fact the actual revenue from that source was $6.2 million, approximately twice as much as he 

estimated. The same thing happened all down the line in connection with our major revenues, but not to 

such a great extent: gasoline tax, $400,000; motor licences, $500,000; public revenue, $400,000; natural 

resources, $400,000; old age pensions reimbursements, $500,000; reconstruction, $500,000 and the 

federal subsidy, $500,000. So, as a result, the actual revenues were very much in excess of the Estimates 

presented to the Legislature. Now, I don‘t know whether this Budget Bureau was in operation that year 

or not; I don‘t think it was. I was going to say, in that case it wasn‘t very much credit to the. 

 

The government was fortunate, Sire, in that revenues proved to be so unexpectedly buoyant. The people 

were unfortunate in that expenditures were equally buoyant. As I have said, the total expenditures for 

that year, when you couple the original estimates and the supplementaries, ran fairly close to the amount 

voted. There is no particular need to go into them in detail, taking them department by department. I 

might point out that, when we were on the Treasury benches, the then Leader of the Opposition used to 

be very critical of us if our supplementaries were more than 2, 3, or 4 percent of the original estimates. 

In 1947-48, the supplementary estimates were something like 17½  percent of the original estimates. 

 

There is another item in connection with those supplementaries, and now I am referring to capital 

account. For that year we were asked, in supplementaries, to vote $4.15 million for Crown Corporations, 

without any information except such as would be obtained by questions across the floor of the House as 

to what particular corporations would receive that money. 

 

Coming now to the second year under review, that is the fiscal year rapidly approaching its end, the 

fiscal year will close at the end of this month: as I stated, the only information we have in respect to this 

year is, first, the estimates as originally submitted, the supplementaries now presented to us, the 

information given to us in the budget speech, and the information obtained by questions in this 

legislature. We asked a question in the House a few days ago, about the revenues and expenditures to the 

end of the calendar year – that would be for a nine-month period – and on the basis of that percentage of 

the year we would estimate that the revenue for this current fiscal year would be $48 million, and the 

expenditure would be $53 million. Well, the latter figure, apparently, from what the budget speech told 

us, is approximately correct. We are advised, and again the Provincial Treasurer is fortunate, that 

revenue are exceeding all expectations and that he expects to close the year with a surplus. Here again 

the supplementaries presented to us for the current year, while not nearly so large as those of a year ago, 

are sill fairly substantial, $2.7 million. Now it is not necessary to discuss those in detail at this time, Sir, 

because they will have to be voted, item by item, by this Legislature, and then we can get more detailed 

information as to what the various items are, and for what purpose they are required./ 

 

But, again I say, the Provincial Treasurer is fortunate to have this buoyant, prosperous position, which 

enables him greatly to exceed the expenditure presented to and voted by this Legislature, and still feel 

confident that at the end of the year he will have a surplus. 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
553 

The estimates for the coming fiscal year, 1949-50, have, as I indicated earlier, been prepared on a 

somewhat different basis as the Provincial Treasurer explained to us. While the figure in the estimates 

appearing on our desks is $49 million, actually, if you take into account the reimbursements, the total is 

$56.5 million. I am not critical of the change of method in preparing the estimates. Personally, I think 

the former method was the proper one. After all, all of this money comes into the Provincial Treasury 

and is paid out from there, and I think a proper representation of the financial administration of this 

province should account for all the money that goes into the Treasury. It was for that reason that, in 

1941, we changed from the net to the gross basis. However, as has been explained to us, other provinces 

are following the net basis, and so far as comparisons with them is concerned it is probably only fair we 

should go on the same basis. Although, let me repeat, I still think the gross basis is the proper one. So far 

as within the province of Saskatchewan is concerned, it is all right. It doesn‘t make any material 

difference, provided that, in making comparisons in the future with the past, this change in method is 

taken into account. 

 

When we analyze the expenditure which show a substantial increase over the current year, we find 

certain items. In the Treasury, for instance, and rather surprisingly, we find the interest on the Public 

Debt is up $600,000 as compared with a year ago – this notwithstanding the fact we have been told 

repeatedly that the government of Saskatchewan has reduced the public debt of Saskatchewan more than 

any other province in Canada, and that we are improving or lowering the interest rate that this province 

has to pay on its securities. The other increases, some of them not very large, are: Public Works, 

$150,000; Education, $500,000, partly for the university, partly for the school grants, and partly for 

some of the frills that have been established in that department; Health, $700,000; Health Services, 

$600,000; Social Welfare, $1 million – this increase is gross and the reimbursement reduction has to be 

taken into account; and Agriculture, $300,000. 

 

With respect to education, may I point out that still, and with all the increases this government has made, 

they are subject to the same criticism that they used to throw at us: that is, the entire expenditure on 

education is provided by the school lands and by the education tax, and that the other revenues of the 

province are not affected one bit. I must add to that the revenues from the Department of Education 

itself which are comparatively small. But, further, the Education Fund which comes from three sources – 

school lands, education tax and the Department of Education‘s own revenue – is not only providing all 

of the expenditures, greatly increased as they may be, but is also providing many hundreds of thousands 

of dollars for capital expenditure. 

 

I must confess I have some difficulty in figuring out how a capital expenditure can be made out of a 

revenue account fund. The government has some way of doing it apparently because they ask us to vote 

capital expenditures to be charged to the Education Fund. So, when they take such great credit for the 

increased assistance to education, actually that is being provided by the people of this province to a very 

large extent when they paid in $6.2 million in education tax, after the Premier had reduced it 40 percent. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — It was a good story though. It got a few votes. 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
554 

Mr. Patterson: — I don‘t know whether the Provincial Treasurer explained it very clearly or not, but I 

think maybe he did. It probably would not hurt to repeat it and explain the reimbursements of $7.4 

million which must be added to the $49 million to create $56.5 million. Most of those are by reason of 

grants, of one kind or another, from the government of Canada; $1.8 million is the interest from the 

Wheat Pool and Telephone Department and Power Commission, and an amount – from memory – 

$350,000, the contribution by the civil servants to their pension fund. But when you want to get the 

gross expenditures on the basis of the 1949-50 estimates, as on our desks, you must add $7.4 million to 

the given figure of $49 million. 

 

Again, I am not going to enter into any detailed arguments or discussion of the departmental increases 

except to point out that again, this year as in every previous year, each major department of government 

shows a substantial increase in expenditure. The result is that the estimates on our desks today are the 

highest in the history of the province, even the highest in the history of the C.C.F. government. 

 

Some members of the government and some supporters of the government seem to think that the test of 

efficiency of a government is the amount of money it spends. Of course so long as revenues are buoyant, 

that is a very easy test for the government to comply with. It revenues go up very year it is easy for the 

government to spend more money every year; and if that is the yardstick by which efficiency is to be 

tested, then the answer, of course, is obvious. But I am sure that thinking people, and particularly those 

who have to pay the taxes which provide these revenues, are concerned not so much with the total 

amount spent but with the purposes for which they are spent, and whether value is received for the 

money so spent. I say that that is the proper yardstick by which to measure the efficiency of any 

government. 

 

As I say, this government has established a scale of expenditures beyond anything this province has ever 

previously known, and a great deal of it has been expended on what I referred to a few moments ago, 

and I am going to refer to it again, as the ―frill‖ services. They don‘t provide any real service to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan they make ―window-dressing‖; they make good publicity; they 

make propaganda. In the expenditure of all our departments there has been a lack of economy or of 

careful attention to the expenditure of public money, which in large measure is responsible for a good 

deal of those large increases. The hon. member for Last Mountain (Mr. Benson) and myself can 

remember when, because of conditions in the country and failing revenues, the government of the day 

was faced with a very difficult situation, when they had to eliminate some services and make drastic 

reductions in others. I am sure that neither he nor I would ever wish to go through that condition again. 

 

This government has, on the basis of the present condition of prosperity in Saskatchewan over the past 

four years, established a scale of expenditure on the basis of a full measure of prosperity. They have 

extended many services and established many new ones, and some day it will be the difficult problem of 

some succeeding Provincial Treasurer to get the business of this province back on a business basis. He 

won‘t have a very easy or happy job when that time comes. 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
555 

It is all very well to say we spent so much on this in 1944-45 and this year we are going to spend twice 

as much. Is the additional expenditure warranted? Does it bring value to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan? Does it meet the test I outlined in the earlier part of this address? We have and Economic 

Advisory and Planning Board that is going to cost us $55,000. Well that represents an increase in 

government expenditure of 55 percent as compared with 1944-45. That does not justify, nor does it 

mean that the province of Saskatchewan is getting value for that particular expenditure. Connected with 

that is the Research Council. Strange to say, we have never heard anything about it; the Bureau of 

Publications has never sent out anything about it outlining the Council‘s operations. That expenditure 

represents an increase of 32,000 percent compared with 1944-45. For the Bureau of Publications in 

1944-45 the expenditure was $34,000; next year it is to be $120,000. That is an increase of 400 percent. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It is doing a good job. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — Doing a good job. Who for Sir? For the people of the province of Saskatchewan or 

for this government? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — The C.C.F. party. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — All of these beautiful booklets and pamphlets we get printed on the most expensive 

paper and coloured and illustrated and all that sort of thing: very fine, but the taxpayers of this province 

have to pay for it. If this government wants to take credit for increasing the expenditures for that purpose 

by 400 percent, they are entitled to do so. 

 

Then there is the Civil Service Commission. True, we have 50 percent more civil servants, but we have 

800 percent more expenditure on the Civil Service Commission. It takes eight times as much money to 

administer the affairs of that particular Commission as it did in 1944-45. What benefit, value or 

advantage do the people of Saskatchewan get for that increase? I say, you can‘t base the efficiency or 

value of a government on the amount of money it spends. You have to take into account the purposes for 

which they money is spent and the value received for it. 

 

You have a Budget Bureau now – $27,000 to present a little book of estimates; they got it so mussed up 

it takes you all your time to find what you want. Actually, the members of this Legislature probably 

should pay for that particular expenditure because it is for our particular benefit, and I am sure if we take 

up a collection the members of this House, on both sides, would be very glad to contribute $27,000 to 

ensure this bureau keeps in operation. No, Sir, I think I will put it the other way: they would be glad to 

contribute that amount if the government would eliminate the Budget Bureau and let the Treasury 

officials prepare the estimates as they used to do. 

 

Then we have in the Department of the Co-operation what is called its Research Service. Well, you 

know they certainly have provided a marvelous service for us – for $50,000. Every two or three days I 

get a little booklet or something from this Research Service of the Department of Co-operation. 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
556 

One of them told me the value of the entries from the United States at the customs ports along the 

Saskatchewan boundary. Well, in view of the fact that 90 percent of the things imported into 

Saskatchewan come in through other ports of entry, that information was extremely interesting and 

extremely valuable to me. Then, the other day I got another booklet on the imports through Hudson Bay, 

and there were, I think, eight boxes of something or other – crockery – eight boxes of candy, half a ton 

of this and half a tone of that; and that; also, was very valuable to me. And that is what the people of 

Saskatchewan are getting for this $50,000. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Education. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — Well, my hon. friend says ―education‖. I just finished explaining – probably he 

wasn‘t in the House – that the people of Saskatchewan are paying the full bill for the education, through 

the education tax and the school lands fund. If it is the there for the government to spend, it is not 

because of any particular policy or administration on their part. 

 

I don‘t suppose there ever was a year in the history of the province in which there was such universal 

criticism of the condition of our highways as was the case in the summer of 1948. In defence of this 

criticism, the government offers two excuses. They say: ―Look at the tremendous amount of money we 

have been spending on our highways: - and that is the case. When we ask them what we have got for it, 

of course, that is not quite so easy to answer. The other excuse is the deplorable condition that existed in 

1944. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Patterson: — I am glad our friends have cheered that sentiment, because I go back to the Manifesto 

that was issued by the present Premier of the province on May 20, 1944, when he outlined the policy of 

the C.C.F. party if it became the government, and, strange to say, highways are not mentioned in this 

document although it runs to several pages. Here we have, the Minister of Highways tells us, what was a 

deplorable condition. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — You can‘t deny it. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — . . . deplorable condition, and yet, in their great interest in the welfare of the people 

of the province, it was not of sufficient importance to warrant a reference to it. Let alone any statement 

of policy or, more strangely still, any promise of what they would do if they were returned to office. 

That is the thing that convinces me more than anything else that conditions could not have been nearly 

as bad as the hon. gentleman has let us to believe. The conditions were nearly as bad as they indicated, 

or they would like the people to believe. They took pages, and pamphlets, and radio addresses – if I have 

time I will discuss some of those this afternoon – to malign the education system of this province and 

the health services of this province – and it was a downright shame, Mr. Speaker, an absolute 

misrepresentation of conditions that actually existed. It the highways in Saskatchewan were so 

deplorable, why didn‘t we hear something about it? 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
557 

An Hon. Member: — We were speechless. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — Now, I don‘t mean to say, Mr. Speaker, that during the election individual C.C.F. 

candidates did not go out and promise some voter: ―You go out and vote for me and I‘ll get you a road.‖ 

. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Those were your tactics. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — . . . because that kind of promise was made up and down the length and breadth of 

the province of Saskatchewan, not only with reference to highways, but with reference to bathtubs, with 

reference to painting the buildings, and hundreds of other things of that nature. Some were even 

promised sewing machines. 

 

Now, as I say, the alibi is: ―Look at the money we have spent.‖ That alibi might get by in two 

constituencies of this province, Rosetown and Weyburn. It won‘t go in Souris-Estevan, Cannington, or 

any other constituency I know of except those two particular ones. 

 

The indifference of the government to the conditions of highways in the province is perhaps 

understandable. Four of the members of this government represent cities where highways are not a 

provincial problem. Two others, in total more than half of the cabinet, represent constituencies which are 

very largely urban, and so far as one of those is concerned the member and the constituency have cashed 

in, and that is the constituency of Weyburn. But I would suggest that, at least, our city members might 

interest themselves in the improvement of roads leading to their constituencies, on the outskirts and 

leading out from their constituencies, although they may not be, individually interested in the question 

of roads in their particular riding. 

 

Now I say, as I have said on previous occasions, that the administration of the Highway Department in 

this province has been wasteful and extravagant, and I do not think we are going to get any better roads 

in this province by voting more money to be expended in the fashion it has been expended in the last 

four years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You used to build them with shovels. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — I mentioned in a previous debate the motto of the C.C.F. party: ―The first concern of 

the C.C.F. is to its own well-being.‖ So long as the Minister of Highways believes and follows that 

motto, we are not going to have any substantial measure of highway improvement in the province. 

 

The estimates for the Department of Agriculture are substantially increased – on the surface. It is 

another case in which we are told the percentage of increase in expenditure is 150 or 160 or 200, or what 

have you, over 1944-45. There appears, as I say, on the surface, to be a very substantial increase, and 

may I say, and I am sure I speak for every member on this side of the House, we welcome and support 

every increase provided for the benefit of agriculture, provided the expenditure is going to be 

worthwhile and get results. That is the only reservation we make. Now, this tremendous increase, one-

third 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
558 

of it approximately, was obtained by a change in bookkeeping. Formerly, the Department of Natural 

Resources administered the Crown lands in this province. A couple of years ago administration was 

transferred to the Department of Agriculture, and the expenditures in that connection were transferred 

from one department to the other – approximately $500,000. What benefit that was to agriculture in the 

province, I don‘t know. At the time I thought it was an advantage. Previously the administration of 

Crown lands in the province of Saskatchewan was under the former Minister, Mr. Phelps, and he was so 

difficult to deal with, and so uncertain in his policies, that people who had Crown land leases from the 

government of this province did not know where they were from one week to the next. And, at the time, 

I thought the transfer of the administration of those lands from that Minister to the present Minister of 

Agriculture, might be for the benefit of the people who had to do with that particular phase of our 

business. From what I have heard since, I am not so sure I was right. Be that as it may, there is $500,000 

of so-called increase that doesn‘t mean anything, and unless those who have Crown lands have some 

better relationship with the Minister than was formerly the case, it does not make that much difference. 

 

We heard a great deal last year, and I think there is a vote for it again this year, about the establishment 

of a ‗fodder bank‘. It is rather difficult from the Public Accounts, and from the Estimates, to determine 

just how much of this has been spent to actually create a fodder bank, but the votes have been very 

substantial: for 1947-48 and 1948-49, over $600,000. What have we got for it? We have got 2,400 tons 

of hay, Mr. Speaker; 2,400 tons of hay is what we have got for our $600,000. That was the information 

brought down in reply to a question asked in the House, the other day. Then there are some bins 

somewhere in the province, I presume from the answer, that the government owns and the municipalities 

can obtain the use of. To meet such fodder shortages as we have experienced in the past – last winter, for 

instance – I hate to think of the astronomical figures we will have to vote to begin to supply even an odd 

ton of hay to the odd head of stock. We have made a marvelous start; we have already got 2,430 tons 

and a fraction. 

 

Then you will remember, Sir, all we have heard in this House about money the government was 

spending to improve the veterinary services in the province. The way they started out, we though by this 

time there would be certainly veterinary for every town, village and hamlet in the province of 

Saskatchewan; but, actually according to the information brought down in answer to a question a few 

days ago, there are 11 fewer veterinarians in this province than when this government started, and I 

don‘t know how much again has been spent on that. 

 

Now we are going to have some money spent on grasshoppers, and that is something with which we are 

in entire agreement. We realize the seriousness of that danger, and if this government will use common 

sense business methods of attacking it we are quite willing to support them when they ask for $230,000 

to carry out that work. But, for goodness sake, Mr. Speaker, I hope they won‘t bring in somebody from 

England, New York, Chicago or some other place to tell our farmers how to combat the grasshoppers, 

and spend all the money in this vote on activities of that kind. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — We‘ll go up to Rosthern. 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
559 

Mr. Tucker: — Take my advice, you‘ll be better off. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — Then there is very substantial increase, over the years I am comparing, for the 

Agricultural Representatives. I am not going to criticize that, except to say the condition is getting such 

that we have almost more Agricultural Representatives now than we have farmers, and if the 

government continues it will create a bit of a problem. There will be two Agricultural Representatives 

on each farm instead of one as is presently the case. I heard of a meeting out in the Swift Current district 

a year or so ago. There were about 40 people at it, and 22 of them were departmental representatives, 

each driving a government car, and there were 18 farmers. On the extension that has been provided, I 

suppose the proportion of government representatives and farmers will increase in favour of the 

departmental representatives. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — That‘s an old one he‘s selling over again. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — There is one thing, of course, the farmers are getting. They were promised in 1944 – 

it is a little slow perhaps, but it is coming about – and they are getting their barns painted. 

 

There is provision in the agricultural estimates for certain work in connection with irrigation and 

drainage, and may I say again, we on this side of the House are entirely in agreement with expenditures 

for that find, with this proviso: that the money is wisely, efficiently and effectively spent, and the people 

it is intended for get some benefit out of it. 

 

There is another thing I must not forget, Sir. Talking about settlements, the Provincial Treasurer in his 

budget speech made some reference . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Are you sure you have the right speech. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Time marches on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Longtime no speak. We don‘t want people to think we‘re shut off the air. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — Well, anyway, it indicated that this government has not departed from the ideas on 

which it was originally established – the state ownership of land. It will be remembered that when this 

party was established, the use-lease system was advocated. Now, that was just a little too much of a 

direct approach to this question to be agreeable to the electors of this province, and the C.C.F. party 

dropped it like a hot potato. But the leaders of the party who promoted that policy had not forgotten their 

original theories, and in the Provincial Treasurer‘s budget address, he said: ―Our efforts to establish farm 

families on economic farming units, through secure leasing arrangements‖. In other works, Mr. Speaker, 

the Provincial Treasurer and the government apparently do not want to see the people of Saskatchewan 

established on their own farms with the title in their own names. 

 

Some Hon. Members: —Oh, no? 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
560 

Mr. Patterson: — Well, I read the speech, and that is what he said. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer was pleased to remind me that he had some $10 million in the bank on 

February 15. Well, I don‘t know what happened between December 31 when he had only $270,000 and 

the 15th of February. He must have had some good luck somewhere, but the question answered in the 

House showed that there was less than $300,000 in the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — With $4 million in bonds. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — Of education tax? Well, does the $10 million include the $4 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Sure. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — I wonder if this much-maligned federal government has sent them along a substantial 

subsidy payment, or some of these grants for old age pensions or something of that kind in the 

meantime. I don‘t know where else it could have come from. It couldn‘t come from any economy this 

government would practice, and I think I can assure the members of the House that it won‘t be there 

very long either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — It has been every year yet. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — I am surprised, and I am saying this seriously; for a friend came to me last fall, about 

a small account he had with the government, which he submitted in June and for which he received 

payment a few days before Christmas. As far as he knew there was nothing wrong with the account, and 

it was not a very large one. Even the $300,000 my hon. friend had on December 31 would have covered 

that particular account. However, be that as it may, there has been some mention throughout the country 

about delay in the payment of accounts by the government. 

 

This, Sir, so far as I can remember, is the first budget speech ever presented in this Legislature, certainly 

during my time, when the Provincial Treasurer did not give a report of the bond sales he had made 

during the preceding year. What that particular information was omitted, I do not know. That brings up 

the question of the public debt – and the government takes a great deal of credit for the reduction of the 

public debt of the province, and there has been a substantial reduction. Why they insist on taking credit 

for some $5 or $6 million reduction made by us before they came into office in their first fiscal year, I 

don‘t know; but they will insist on going back to April 30, 1944, notwithstanding the fact that $5 million 

of the debt at that date was reduced before the 1st day of July, 1944, and they came into office on the 

10th of July, 1944. However, I may say, this is strictly typical. They go throughout the length and 

breadth of the province and take credit to themselves for things the Liberal government has done in the 

past and the federal government is doing now. As an example of that is this: all through the June 

election, hundreds of people in the province of Saskatchewan were assured by the C.C.F. workers and 

canvassers that the family allowance was paid by the provincial government . . . 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
561 

Premier Douglas: – Oh, no. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — . . . because the cheques were mailed from Regina. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Anything to get a vote. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — The public debt of this province, deducting sinking funds and including direct debts, 

on July 1, 1944 was $209 million. On December 31, 1948, on the same basis, it was $145 million, and 

the government takes credit for a reduction of $64 million, plus the $5 million we made prior to their 

coming into office. Now I am going to make the general statement – that thee is not one dollar of this 

reduction attributable to any economy or savings or thrift carried out by this government. First of all, of 

that amount the federal government cancelled $36 million, and they made a settlement with the province 

for the Natural Resources claim of $8 million. So of the $64 million, $44 million came from the 

government of Canada. Of the balance, since July 1, 1944 to December 31, 1948, the Wheat Pool has 

repaid $4,235,000 against the bonds issued for it back in 1931. I suppose in 1951 when those bonds 

mature and, by reason of payments made by the Wheat Pool, the issue of $14 million is retired, this 

government will take credit for it, provided of course they are in office at that time. 

 

In that same period, borrowers from the Saskatchewan Farm Loan Board have repaid $7.8 million. The 

Telephone Department has repaid $2.3 million. What amount has been collected on seed grain accounts, 

I do not know, but the amounts $4,235,000, $7,800,000, $2,300,000 have all been paid in by the Wheat 

Pool, the Farm Loan borrowers and the Telephone Department, and this government could not properly 

use this money for any other purpose. 

 

In the same period, 1944-45 and 1947-48, liquor profits in this province have been over $26 million. The 

Provincial Treasurer has taken $14 million for his revenue account, leaving him $12 million to be 

utilized for debt reduction if he so desires. Now, who has reduced the public debt of the province? Was 

it the government, or was it the Wheat Pool, The Farm Loan borrowers and the Telephone Department, 

or the government? In connection with this let me point out, Sir, that all of these payments by these 

various organizations, while they tend to reduce the public debt also reduce the assets of the province, 

and the net position of the province is not materially improved. If the Wheat Pool has paid in $4 million 

over that period, it means the Wheat Pool owes the province of Saskatchewan $4 million less than it did 

four years ago; and if the Farm Loan borrowers have paid in $8 million, or nearly so, it means the assets 

of this province have been reduced by that amount. There is a great deal of propaganda about this debt 

reduction. Actually, the net position of the province has not improved as would appear on the surface to 

be the case. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What happened to the liquor profits? 

 

Mr. Patterson: — What happened to them? Some of them went to pay the public debt, and very 

properly so; but half of them went to carry on the normal operations of the government, 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
562 

to keep the ship floating. It is a strange thing that, under much more difficult conditions and much less 

prosperous times, the former administration was able to carry on the operations of the province without 

calling on the liquor profits. 

 

Premier Douglas: – Leaving their debts unpaid. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — The public debt, while there is an apparent reduction, actually has increased over $4 

million in the last year. The funded debt and the treasury bills a year ago were $183 million; now they 

are $187 million. It is true that in the interval, sinking funds have increased, and when you subtract them 

you get a net figure that shows a small reduction; but, as I say, these sinking funds have come from the 

sources I have indicated, and, so far as the public is concerned – and it is confirmed by what I said 

earlier, the vote for the interest on the public debt next year in this province is $600,000 more than it was 

last year. 

 

There has been a good deal of discussion in the province with respect to the financial agreement 

between the province of Saskatchewan and the government of Canada. Here again there has been a great 

deal of propaganda put out that does not accurately represent the position. Prior to 1942, the province of 

Saskatchewan collected income tax, corporation tax and succession duties. The government of Canada 

also collected similar taxes. That is, they were both in these fields of taxation. In 1941 the Minister of 

Finance of that day made a proposal to the provinces. He said it was awkward for the citizens of the 

country to have to make returns and pay similar taxes to tow authorities. He thought he could increase 

the revenue to the dominion to carry on the war if the provinces would agree to retire from these fields 

of taxation for the duration of the war; and he agreed to pay them, in lieu of that, a subsidy either based 

on what the provincial collections from these sources had been or, if the provinces preferred, a subsidy 

based on the interest on the public debt. 

 

There are a great many details that I don‘t need to go into, but that was roughly the proposal he made. 

Finally, all the provinces of Canada entered into that agreement; we did in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and the agreement was confirmed by an Act passed in the session of 1942. Under that 

agreement, for a period – I think it was to be approximately one year after the war – the province of 

Saskatchewan agreed not to collect any income tax or any corporation tax and in return for the province 

retiring from these fields, the Federal Minister of Finance agreed to pay us an annual subsidy which, as a 

matter of fact, was almost three times as much as we had been collecting from those source. 

 

The statement has been made that the province could not collect corporation tax – I am speaking of the 

period prior to this agreement. As a matter of fact, we did collect corporation taxes from the banks, 

railways, insurance companies, mortgage companies, implement companies. Only last summer, I think, 

an appeal was taken to the Privy Council in the matter of a dispute between the International Harvester 

Company and the province of Saskatchewan with regard to an assessment for taxes levied on that 

company by the government of this province in the period when our own Corporation Tax Act was in 

operation. 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
563 

That agreement continued until a year ago. When this agreement was made back in 1942, we were 

collecting in Saskatchewan $2,090,000 from income tax and corporation tax, and the government of 

Canada agreed to give us $5,830,000 for retiring from those fields. We thought it was a good deal, and 

still think it was a good deal. As a matter of fact, the agreement was ratified by this Legislature without 

criticism or objection, and with very little discussion or debate. I want to make it very clear that this was 

entirely optional; there was no force or pressure. It was entirely within the decision of the province 

whether they would accept this offer; but, as I say, if I remember correctly, all of the provinces of 

Canada did ultimately enter into an agreement of this nature. 

 

In 1947, the government of Canada, following the dominion-provincial conferences of 1945-46, entered 

into an agreement of the same nature with several of the provinces, not so much, I think, seeking to 

increase dominion revenues as was the purpose in 1941, but more for the purpose of stabilizing the 

relationship between the dominion and the provinces with regard to taxation. I think that was probably 

the purpose, but I don‘t know. It was not my privilege to attend the conference of 1945-46; but my 

opinion is its purpose was largely to stabilize the situation and get it on a more permanent basis, and also 

with the view, which would be acceptable to most citizens, of eliminating double taxation and double 

returns, and all that sort of thing. 

 

When the provinces were called together in 1945, the dominion made certain proposals. If the provinces 

would retire from income tax, corporation tax and succession duties, the dominion undertook to pay 

certain subsidies based on certain methods of calculation, and, in addition, to share in certain social and 

health services. That conference failed. It is not my part to say who was responsible; but the fact remains 

that it broke up without the provinces reaching an agreement, and the further fact remains that the 

provinces which refused were the two provinces where the largest revenue from these sources could be 

expected. I refer to the provinces of Ontario and Quebec which, of course, contribute a very much larger 

amount in all of these taxes than do any of the other provinces. 

 

Subsequent to that conference – not as a part of the conference, subsequent to it – the Minister of 

Finance made proposals to the provinces individually, somewhat along those same lines, as I have 

already indicated, as back in 1941. But in this cases again, the provinces were asked to relinquish 

income tax and succession duties. In this province, succession duties have never been an important 

factor in our revenue - $300,000 or $400,000; I doubt if they have gone higher than that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — $550,000 is the top. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — So they have never been a very large factor. And in return for that the dominion 

government agreed to pay the provinces a substantially increased subsidy. Again let me stress that this 

agreement was offered to the province. Its acceptance was voluntary on their part, and there was no 

compulsion or pressure. The province thought it was good business and prudent financially to accept it 

and it did so, and I think today all but two of the provinces have 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
564 

made such an agreement. That agreement was confirmed in this Legislature in 1947. Under that the 

subsidy or grant – if you want to argue the term 0 to the province of Saskatchewan is greatly increased, 

and as I understand it, our old subsidies were wiped out. Today, as you will see by your estimates, it is 

expected we will get $16 million from the federal government, against about $8 million in 1943-44. to 

ensure that we have given up three classes of revenue that in 1941 brought us in $2.1 million, or maybe 

$2.5 million when you include succession duties. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What was it last year? 

 

Mr. Patterson: — How do you know? How do I know? It wasn‘t collected in the province. 

 

Now, I am quite willing to agree, Sir, that if the province had continued in those fields of taxation almost 

certainly our revenues from that source would have increased considerably from what they were in 

1941, but that they would increased to the amount of $8 million is simply beyond belief, and I don‘t 

believe the hon. Minister thinks so himself. There are figures available as to what the dominion collected 

in the province from these sources and I did have a statement – I must have mislaid it – of the amount 

collected in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Propaganda has been put out in this province that the dominion government collects $130 million in 

income tax, corporation tax, and succession duties, and that it spends about $20 million in the province. 

As a matter of fact, from all three of theses in taxes, in 1946, the government of Canada collected in this 

province about $30 million; but at no time during any of these agreements was it ever suggested that, by 

reason of these agreements, the dominion government should forgo its previous collections from these 

sources or that the province was entitled to anything more than the amount agreed upon when the 

arrangement was made. Remember again, in 1941 and again in 1942, the dominion government was 

already in these fields of taxation and we are told were collecting substantial amounts. All they have 

become entitled to in addition is the extent to which the province retired from the field. 

 

This argument might go on forever as to how much money was collected in Saskatchewan and how 

much the dominion government spent here; but, be that as it may, the agreement was accepted by the 

government and the opposition of the day to be acceptable to this province. It was made voluntarily and 

the dominion has treated the province generously and fairly for retiring from three fields of taxation 

from which we probably could not have expected to collect more than $5 million at the very outside or 

under the best condition. Nobody can say, because it is only a matter of estimate. 

 

They talk about the dominion government collecting $130 million and spending $20 million in the 

province, and it could equally be said of the province and the municipalities. Exactly the same 

relationship exists. I have taken municipality No. 124 which, as far as I can see, is an average 

municipality as to area, assessment, population and conditions. It is a municipality of nine townships. It 

is assessed for $2.3 million. It has a population of 1,700 and it has 18 rural schools – no all of them in 

operation, 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
565 

of course, because they are in a Larger School Unit. What does this province collect from that 

municipality? Well, they get $4,700 of public revenue tax. On a per capita basis, they get $12,000 of 

education tax. On a per capita basis they get $6,000 in motor licences and $13,000 in gasoline tax. Add 

these amounts and you get a total of $35,000. And how much do they spend in this municipality? Well, 

in 1947 they gave the municipality $1,450 for the roads. For school grants – it is hard because, as I say, 

they are in a Larger Unit – the ordinary $1.50 grant per day would bring them in $5,400, but we will 

allow them a part of this equalization grant and put it at $8,000. In other words, they get $9,450 for the 

$35,000 they paid in; that is, if you are going to argue this thing on the basis of 130-20 that is applied to 

the dominion and the province. I know, and any reasonable man knows, it is not a fair method of 

approaching the question; but, as I say, if you are going to say it about one relationship you can say it 

with equal force about the other. 

 

There is another matter which has affected the municipalities of this province, which is not a straight 

government collection. Back about 1929, the government of the day and the Anti-Tuberculosis League 

entered into an agreement to provide treatment for all T.B. patients in the province at the cost of the 

government and the municipalities. At that time the cost of treatment per patient per day in the 

sanitorium was about $2.70, and the government of the day agreed to pay $1 of this, or approximately 

40 percent. I think it was the intention of those who negotiated the agreement that under normal 

conditions virtually that relationship and proportion would be continued. But, as we all know, the cost of 

operation has gone up very considerably and today the $1 per day paid by the –provincial government 

represents about 27 percent, and the other 73 percent has been left on the doorstep of the municipalities. 

Now, this may not seem a very important matter, but when you add to it the additional cost which has 

been imposed on the local landowners by reason of the larger School Unit, health regions and those 

other things, when you see a half-section of land where the tax levy is over $300; when you have a case 

of a man who wrote me that his taxes in 1943-44 were $28 and this year are $100, then a material 

increase is noticeable. 

 

I think it will be agreed by every reasonable man that, after all, the land can only bear a certain amount 

of taxes. At the moment times are good in most parts of the province. I do no know, I am sure, how 

some of these poor people who live in the drought and crop failure area are beginning to meet their 

taxes, because the people in my district, who have enjoyed good crops over a considerable period of 

years, are finding their taxes sufficiently onerous, and they have experienced these increases to which I 

have referred. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer has told us that he believes his government has done more to assist the 

municipal bodies than any other government. Well, the Municipal convention is going to meet in Regina 

next week, and he will have an opportunity of learning from them whether they are of the same opinion 

as he is. 

 

There has been a substantial measure of reduction in municipal and individual debt and, again, as I 

indicated earlier, this government wants to take all the credit for it. Well, I don‘t know anybody whose 

taxes they paid, and it is through payment of taxes that the municipalities have reduced those debts. 

They have not paid my debts, and I don‘t know whether they paid those of any other individual. 

Certainly, from anything I know, any debt reduction 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
566 

as far as individuals are concerned have been accomplished by the individuals themselves. However, if 

the government wants to go up and down the country and take credit for having done these things, I 

don‘t suppose we can stop them, and perhaps we shouldn‘t criticize them too much because after a while 

these statements will catch up with them. 

 

Now, there is a matter which is some concern to the municipalities of this province – they are up in the 

air, they don‘t know where they are at. In 1944 the former Minister of Municipal Affairs (Hon. Mr. 

Brockelbank) went down to Estevan and announced at a municipal convention there that he was going to 

amalgamate the rural municipalities of this province. He was going to study it and there was not going to 

be any consultation: the government had decided. That created a considerable measure of opposition; so 

much so that the government retreated from the very definite stand they took in the first place. Four 

years ago they formed a committee to study this question, and in answer to a question the other day we 

learned that the committee has not reported yet. I think they should turn this over to the Economic 

Advisory and Planning Board. I don‘t think they would be four years in reaching a decision. But, as I 

say, the result is that the municipalities in this province d not know where they stand: whether they face 

compulsory amalgamation as threatened by the Minister, whether they are going to be left to work out 

their own destinies as best they can. So far as any financial consideration is concerned, they can be 

assured they will be left to look after themselves. 

 

There is another difficulty, and I refer to it probably not as fully as I should. During the difficult years of 

crop failure and economic depression, all of the municipalities of the province, I think without 

exception, reduced their expenditures, cut their tax levies, did everything possible to make it easier for 

their people to get along. As I have already said, land, after all, will only carry so much taxes. The 

municipalities, naturally, expected that, when times improved, they would be in a position to increase 

their levies again and provide more money for strictly municipal purposes; but they have been largely 

edged out of that by reason of the tremendous increase in school taxes in the Larger School Units, and 

by the health taxes of one kind and another that have been imposed upon them. This government should 

be good to the municipal bodies because they have very seriously handicapped and retarded municipal 

development and improvement in this province by the policies they have followed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Oh nonsense. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — We have in this province nine organizations called Crown Corporations. They used 

to be some of the brightest gems in the crown of the C.C.F. party, but the matter of Crown Corporations, 

should make a very clear distinction between the Power and Telephone Operations and the nine hybrid 

organizations that have been established by this government. They should make a very clear distinction 

for two or three reasons. First of all, both the Telephone Department and the Power Commission were 

established by a vote of the Legislature of the day, and were established under specific Acts passed in 

the House and the monies to enable them to commence operations were voted year after year in the 

Estimates. Secondly, they were established for a definite reason: to give the people of 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
567 

Saskatchewan telephone and power service at cost, or as near cost as could be. Thirdly, they were to be 

established on the basis that they were not to cost the taxpayer of the province one cent. The service they 

supplied was to be paid for by the people who got the service. And in all of those things they have 

measured up to and fulfilled the requirements expected of them. 

 

Now they have been declared Crown Corporations. The people of the province are entitled to know, Sir, 

whether or not this government proposes to put the Power Commission and Telephone Department on a 

different basis, and whether they propose to establish them as profit-making corporations from which 

the profits are to go into the public treasury or to bolster up a some weak sister of the Crown 

Corporations. They are entitled to a statement because this government has never said what they intend 

to do with what they continually refer to as profits of the Power Commission and the Telephone 

Company. They have not used any of them yet: but the Telephone Department, as I pointed out, has 

repaid a very substantial amount of the capital that has been advanced to it. Both of these utilities, over 

all of the years, have each paid the interest on the money which was advanced to them by the Provincial 

Treasury. They have set up their depreciation reserve, and the Telephone Department, particularly, in a 

longer period of operation has repaid a substantial amount of the money advanced to it. 

 

These two are in an absolutely different position unless, as I say, this government is going to come out 

and say they are putting those two corporations on a profit-making basis, the same as our other Crown 

Corporations. I might say that the Finance Office, of course, is empowered under the Act to take the 

surplus earnings of these corporations and use them for other activities. But we have another nine 

corporations, and the annual reports of these corporations were laid on our desks today. Now, I haven‘t 

had time to analyze and study them very closely, but there are certain facts in connection with them 

which might be of interest to our members. As I have already said, outside of the Insurance Office, not 

one of these was established by a vote or with the knowledge or consent of this Legislature, and, with 

the exception of a vote for the buses, not a dollar of the capital invested in them was voted specifically 

for that purpose by this Legislature. In other words, the previous Legislature never had an opportunity to 

say whether they wanted to go into the brick business, or the woolen business, or the boot business, or 

the box factory. That was done by the boys in the back room. 

 

Putting aside Power and Telephones which have, I think, roughly $30 million between them – not quite 

that, the other nine corporations have $7 million of the public money invested in them. If they were 

operating on the same basis as the Power and Telephones they would pay the Provincial Treasury 

$250,000 a year interest. You will notice that in all of these statements about profit, it is always ―before 

interest‖. Well, that is very fine for the corporation, but it is not good for the taxpayer, because he is 

paying for them. Incidentally, in many cases it is not so good for the municipal taxpayer because these 

operations are carried on free of or exempt from municipal taxation. When our Government Printing 

Office makes a profit, a substantial sum of it comes out of those of us who are paying taxes in the city of 

Regina because that plant and that property are exempt from taxation. 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
568 

Some unique and extraordinary facts can be dug out of these reports. Take the report on the 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company – the bus lines. They have about $1 million in buses, and they 

lose money; and they have about $25,000 in lunch counter and they make money. If that indicates 

anything it probably indicates the kind of business this government should be in. They make $8,000 at 

their lunch counter, and they lose about $15,000 running the buses. 

 

They made a profit on their freight lines. That, I presume, is a result of the increase that was granted to 

the government-owned trucks some time last summer, and about which there was a great deal of 

controversy as to whether it was an increase or not; but I presume if it had not been granted the 

government trucks might have been in the red. 

 

The Timber Board is presumed to have a profit of $400,000. They have $1.8 million of public money 

invested in that particular operation. That means they should pay $72,000 to the Provincial Treasury for 

interest on the money, if nothing else. They should also pay for auditing and for certain publicity done 

for them. However, those are minor matters. They should also pay the town of Meadow Lake and 

various other centres where they operate lumber yards in competition with private firms. They should 

pay the municipalities the proper taxes on their property. In Meadow Lake there are three men who have 

invested their own money and have to pay interest on it, if they borrowed it as the Timber Board has‘ 

they have to pay taxes to the municipality for the schools, and for the municipal purposes; they have to 

pay the public revenue tax and, if they make any profit, they have to pay income tax; they have to pay 

registration fees to the government of this province if they are in incorporated company; and they are in 

competition with the Government Timber Board. It has its capital free, pays no taxes, no registration or 

what have you. It ought to make a profit. Under the compulsion that applies to the production of timber 

in northern Saskatchewan, this thing would be hopelessly operated if they did not make a profit. How 

could it help make a profit under these conditions? Well, I notice this: it has $1.1 million of lumber on 

hand, at least ‗inventory‘, and that is lumber and other material of that kind; and it has $7,000 

depreciation against it - $1 million with $7,000 depreciation against it. Now the lumber price would only 

have to drop $1 per thousand and the depreciation would be no more, and if the drop goes up to $3 or 

$4, this alleged profit would be wiped out. Now we may have a drop in lumber prices, I don‘t know; but 

that is the protection they have established. 

 

Then we have the Fish Board, with $850,000 of our money in it. They lost $95,000 last year. They sold 

$880,000 in fish and other supplies during the year, and it cost them $175,000 to do it. I don‘t know any 

private enterprise that could stand it, and if this wasn‘t financed by the government it could not stand it 

either. 

 

Now, the tannery. Last year they had $175,000 of an investment. They sold $70,000 of material and they 

lost $45,000. It would have been better for the government if the thing had been closed up. The shoe 

factory – much the same sort of thing: $186,000 in investment does $130,000 of business in a year, and 

loses $36,000 in the operation, ―before paying interest. All these figures before providing for interest. 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
569 

The woolen mill: this is the concern that was going to cost us $90,000 when the Minister stood up over 

there and told us about it first; today we have $590,000 in it, and last year it lost $90,000 or roughly 25 

percent on the volume of business it conducted. This is another concern that we would be better off if 

the government would close it up. In fact if they had it insured I think maybe I would suggest the 

Provincial Treasurer should get a good policy on it with the Government Insurance Office, and let nature 

take its course. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — They‘d still lose on that. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — They wouldn‘t lose as much. 

 

Then the brick yard: $310,000 invested. I think it was in the Crown Corporations Committee last session 

we were told they had spent about $100,000 to winterize it. This session we are told that it won‘t 

winterize. Well, would it not have been better last year to tell us they were thinking of winterizing the 

plant and, in the meantime, gone out and dug up somebody who knew something about making bricks, 

and before spending $100,000, make certain that the winterization process would be effective? 

However, be that as it may, the fact is it is now winterized, and that is all we have got for it. We have a 

winterized brick plant that won‘t run in the winter. 

 

Then we have the Government Insurance Office. They made a very nice profit of $80,000, and they are 

one of two, if I remember aright, which paid something into this Governments Finance Office. 

 

The Government Airways made $14. They got $300,000 and they made $14, ―before interest‖. And I 

think they probably had a pretty good year last year because you remember the activity there was last 

July in the northern part of Saskatchewan, in the constituencies of Cumberland and Athabaska. You will 

remember the number of Cabinet Ministers and members of the Legislature who were up there, and how 

government planes were scurrying here and there and all over. I am sure those trips were all paid for, 

and they probably very substantially increased the revenue from this operation as compared with what 

we can expect in the coming year. 

 

Then the Fur Marketing Service: that made a profit. They did about the same, and paid about the same 

amount to the Government Insurance Office. 

 

The Government Printing Office made a nice profit. I don‘t know why it was not as good last year as the 

year before: $44,000; and paid $65,000 into the Government Finance Office. 

 

The Reconstruction Corporation – that is the baby of the Minister of Reconstruction, and it is a matter of 

sort of tossing it from one hand to the other, and you can pretty near make any profit you like. If you buy 

something and sell it to somebody else in the government, it is just one against the other. 

 

Then we have here, Sir, the report of this famous Government Finance Office. In previous years – quite 

a long time ago – you used to hear the expression that it would take a Philadelphia lawyer to figure 

things out. Well, 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
570 

I have never met a Philadelphia lawyer, but I am sure there isn‘t a lawyer in Philadelphia who could 

make head or tail of this. Anyway, the net result is that the government is in business, and if the whole 

thing were properly analyzed and put on a proper basis, they are losing a good deal of money. The 

public are paying for these operations in one or two ways; partly by way of the Public Debt, through 

advances made to the corporations, partly by the loss of municipal taxes, the loss of federal income 

taxes, and things of that kind. I am quite satisfied the depreciation reserves set up are, in many cases, not 

adequate, and not such as should be provided in that type of operations. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer tells us he is not going to impose any new taxes or increase any taxes, and we 

are very grateful for that. As I said, the people who are paying the taxes I quoted a few minutes ago feel 

they have about reached their limit of taxes. He forgot, of course, that he has already, by the Bill that had 

third reading today, increased the tax or the cost to the motorist from 33 1/3 to 66 2/3 percent on 

insurance, as compulsory insurance on motor cars. He has also forgotten that nearly every issue of the 

Gazette brings out new regulations increasing scales of fees for certain government services, certain 

government publications, and this, that and the other thing. Well, these are not very large in individual 

cases, but I have yet to see any case where an exception has been made; in every case where there is a 

change, the price has gone up. Fortunately, as members of the House we get the Saskatchewan Gazette 

free, other wise we would have to pay more for it by reason of a regulation that appeared in the Gazette 

itself not very long ago. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer says the population has gone up 9,000 since they came into office. Now, that is 

a fact I think the government is entitled to full credit for. If you take the 2,500 additional civil servants, 

all of the economic advisers, planners and experts that have been imported from Europe, the United 

States and other countries, take in the people employed in the Crown Corporations, including those who 

have been fired and are not now working in the Crown Corporations, and their families, you have just 

about 9,000: so I think the government should get full credit for increasing the population. 

 

Industrial development: we have in the province of Saskatchewan an investment of some $7 or $8 

million that has been lying idle since during the war when operations were discontinued. Maybe the 

government has done something about it. I don‘t know, but I image that, if they had, we would certainly 

have heard about it. Have they taken any steps to get the Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company to 

resume its operations in the Goldfields area, or are they insisting on rates of royalty which makes it 

impossible for that concern to bring that operation back into production? The plant is there, the money is 

invested, and it would give employment for a couple of thousand people; but they are piffling around 

here with shoe factories and woolen mills which employ 20 or 30 people. Now, if they have not done 

that, they should have – and they have been negligent. We cannot, as I have said before, expect any 

material or substantial increase in industrial development in this province while the situation remains at 

the present level, where capital and industry do not know whether this government proposes to 

encourage industry, or whether it proposes to eradicate capitalism. The time has arrived when this 

government should make a definite statement as to its position in regard to this matter. 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
571 

The figures quoted in the budget speech about the income in this province, outside of agriculture, were 

very interesting. We are all pleased to see an increase in the value of forest production, mineral 

production, fish production, and all that sort of thing. But all those figures only go to confirm the fact, as 

has been said a thousand times, that the backbone of our economy and the really essential industry is 

agriculture, and the really important income in this province has to come from the land and the people 

who operate our land. The first concern of this government should not be the C.C.F. party. It should not 

be the Crown Corporations. I should be agriculture; and anything it can do to promote the welfare and 

increase the safety and income of agriculture will properly come within the category I have describes as 

being in the interest of this province. 

 

They asked us where we would begin to reduce expenditure. Well, there is hardly a department of 

government here where, if proper efficiency and economy were applied, the cost of government could 

not be reduced, and reduced substantially. The first thing I would do would be to fire the Budget Bureau 

and the Economic Advisory and Planning Board and more of the frills of that kind. If I could not run the 

Civil Service Commission for less than half of what is now being paid, or the Bureau of Publications for 

less than half, then I would quit. Cut out the frills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — You would use the patronage basis. 

 

Mr. Patterson: — Patronage. Here is the telephone directory of government offices. Listen to this: 

Agricultural representative Service: Director, Assistant-Director, Visual Aid, Radio, Farm Labour – 

what do they do with Visual Aid in with the Agricultural Representatives? Then we go over here. We 

have the Budget Bureau: Director of the Budget Bureau. Then we have Economic Advisory and 

Planning Board: Chief Industrial Executive, the Deputy Industrial Executive, and we have got the 

Controllers, the Secretary, and the Legal Adviser, and the Sales Executive, and the Personnel Officer. In 

Education, we have the Director of Teacher Training, Director of Curriculum, director of Guidance – 

who is he guiding? – the government? – Director of Adult Education, Acting Director of Recreation, 

Supervisor of Visual Instruction, Supervisor of School Broadcasts, Supervisor of Libraries, Supervisor 

of School Grants, Supervisor of Technical Education, Supervisor of Music, High School 

Superintendents, Government Correspondence School; and you can go on the same way with all the 

other departments. Evidently they have more supervisors and directors and guiders and advisers. I don‘t 

know, I think they ought to start a Boy Scout organization in this building. Cut out the frills and get 

down to business. 

 

Take the report of the Department of Social Welfare, wee where it is costing form $4 to $7 per day for 

inmates in various institutions in this province. Why, it would be cheaper to send some of them to the 

Saskatchewan Hotel and let them live there. 

 

But there was one very significant statement in the Provincial Treasurer‘s budget address and it was this: 

―I have gone into these detailed estimates to clearly establish that it is possible to increase services, and 

at the same time reduce taxes.‖ Well, that is a far cry from what he was telling us only four short years 

ago. In a broadcast reported in the Commonwealth 



 

March 4, 1949 

 

 
572 

March 24, 1943, he is reported as broadcasting: ―Just as we have made education available to all‖ – I 

don‘t know what it has done to make education available to all – ―the time has come when we must 

make all the benefits of medical science available to all without money and without price.‖ Now the 

Provincial Treasurer tells us that the price is taxes: ―Without money and without price.‖ 

 

Without unduly prolonging the debate, Sire, may I remind you that about the time the C.C.F. leaders and 

supporters were telling the people of the province of Saskatchewan all the services they could have 

without it costing them a cent more, and they were going to get the money: first, by taxing certain 

payments going out of the province; secondly, by the government setting up commodity boards to sell 

goods now being sold by monopolies – and cement was one of them. Well, the government isn‘t in the 

cement business. They have not taxed these outgoing payments they talked about. 

 

There are other things they did not do. They announced they were going to establish secondary 

industries, such as grain alcohol – they haven‘t done that; protein feedcake – they haven‘t done that; 

wheat starch – no; wheat syrup – no; synthetic rubber – no; plastics – no; glycol anti-freeze – no; linseed 

oil – no. but we do have boots, blankets, bricks and boxes. No soap; no paint. 

 

This is what the people were listening to five years ago. These were the promises made to them, and this 

is the return they are getting for it. 

 

Like very other government, this government has learned that the revenues to operate government 

activities, social services, and even commercial operations have to be collected in the form of taxes. The 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan are learning the same truth. 

 

For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I shall oppose the motion. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:05 o‘clock p.m. 


