



















































Hansard: March 17, 1949


799 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Eleventh Legislature 

 

Thursday, March 17, 1949 

 

The Assembly met at 3:00 o‘clock p.m. 

 

RESOLUTION RE SUBSIDIZED HOUSING 

 

Mr. D. H. R. Heming moved, seconded by Mr. Gibbs: 

 

That this Assembly urge that the Dominion Government, in co-operation with provincial and 

municipal governments, take immediate steps to devise and institute a large-scale programme of 

subsidized housing, whereby citizens in low income groups might purchase homes on a thirty-year 

repayment basis at low rates of interest, or lease housing accommodation at rentals within their means. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in moving that his Assembly urge that the dominion government, in co-operation 

with provincial and municipal governments, take immediate steps to devise and institute a large-scale 

programme of subsidized housing whereby citizens in low-income groups might purchase homes on a 

30-year repayment basis at low rates of interest, or lease housing accommodation at rentals within their 

means, I would say that throughout the whole of this world today the governments of all nations are 

much concerned with a common problem: the problem of shelter of its peoples. The problem no longer 

belongs to any one particular nation and is receiving consideration at the hands of international bodies of 

thought. The International Labour Office, of which Canada is a member, in a special report brought 

down last fall by the Housing Committee, asserted that four of the largest member states of the world 

need 2 million house increase annually from now on in order to house their people adequately. Canada, 

equally as other nations of this world, is deficient in housing. We have 5 million people in this country 

of ours who are known as the civilian labour force. Of this 5 million, 2.6 million or thereabouts are 

knows as the urban working class. Of this 3.6 million, approximately 40 percent are people within the 

low income classes. 

 

The Dominion of Canada has lagged – from 1921 to 1931, for every 100 houses they built per capita, 

Great Britain built 190, the United States built 160. It became easily apparent when the House of 

Commons in 1935 brought in a report stating that the Dominion Government at that time was 35,000 

houses behind in their building. Since that time, 1935, the situation in Saskatchewan became worse. 

Then we entered into war. During the first years of war men, who in the thirties had been unemployed, 

suddenly found employment in the armed forces and in our industrial war work. From 1939 to 1945 

there were 795,000 marriages consummated within the Dominion, a 50 percent increase over the 

previous seven. This, however, did not make it obligatory to build houses at that time because the 

majority of these marriages were made by men who were proceeding overseas and left their wives with 

parents while they were on duty with various forces. When these men came back, however, the 

government had made arrangements whereby there would be constructed in this Dominion 487,000 

houses for the people. 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
800 

There were supposed to be 78,000 houses the first year after the war, and 100,000 each year after that. 

But there seemed to be an obstruction. The programme as laid down by the federal government was 

unfulfilled, so that in 1947 there were only about 60,000 houses built; in 1948 they figured they might 

do 80,000; in 1946 about 60,000. The programme fell down so badly that at present it is estimated the 

Dominion Government of Canada requires at least 150,000 to accommodate their people adequately in 

sanitary dwellings. During that period too, Mr. Speaker, our immigration has gone up by leaps and 

bounds; whereas before the war our annual immigration was 15,000 annually, our immigration these 

days is getting to be approximately that number every month. That, with the birth rate of 28.5 per 

thousand, indicates that annually, taken on a basis of 4.5 of a Canadian family, we should have annual 

construction of at least 100,000, aside from the fact of any backlog which we may have, caused by a 

deficit in the past. 

 

I might illustrate the point better by quoting figures from my own home town. In the city of Moose Jaw 

approximately 25,000 people live in 6,700 housing units. Sixty percent of these are single dwellings, 40 

percent are suites; 47 percent are individually owned, 53 percent are rented quarters; 77 percent live in 

the same place for 11 years; 88 percent of the houses have six rooms or less, averaging 4.3 rooms per 

unit; 23 percent of the houses have no sewer or water; 22 percent of the domiciles are living more than 

one person to a room; 66 percent of our heads of families are wage earners, earning on the average 

$2,000 a year, but one-third of these earn more than $2,000 a year, indicating that 40 percent of our 

heads of families in my city are earning between 25 and 35 dollars per week. We have a birth-rate in 

Moose Jaw of 29.3; a death-rate of 8.5, indicating that by natural increase alone potentially we shall 

need shortly 150,000 a year from that cause only. We also have our share of immigration; we have 68 

returned men from the R.A.F. living in Moose Jaw who previously served I the Air Force south of the 

city. 

 

Within this picture there is another one, one which has greater priority. From my area there were 3,914 

enlistments, and of those men, there were 3,687 who came back, for whom the government presently has 

constructed 300 homes, wartime houses, with a little less than 100 still under construction; but we have 

394 applications for housing under wartime housing for returned soldiers, and that number would be 

easily doubled if it were known that just by asking these houses would be coming to the veterans. 

Within that picture again, Mr. Speaker, there is an up and coming group of young people, the younger 

brothers of our veterans who served overseas, too young to enter into the armed forces, but now steadily 

engaged, drawing their money regularly, unencumbered by the embarrassment of the thirties when their 

elder brothers were unemployed; they are now getting of an age when they are getting married. They do 

not have the same claim as the veteran does, but they do have a claim, as a young Canadian citizen, to 

live in normal, sanitary, modern surroundings. They are hoping now that in some manner they will be 

found housing, adequate for their family needs as time goes on. 

 

One of the reasons that the housing situation has not progressed apace has been that costs have been too 

high, and the ability to buy has not been there. It is estimated that 20 percent of the taxpayers of Canada 

have incomes of over $3,000 a year, and probably ten percent have incomes that would permit them to 

build houses; but this group, a preferred group, have not gone 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
801 

into the construction of homes; they have remained constant in their own house because the cost of 

construction generally throughout Canada, both for depreciated houses and for new construction, has 

advanced from 175 to 200 percent. This advanced cost has not gone where it possibly should go. The 

carpenter, bricklayer, decorator, plasterer, labourer, all the human elements that go into the house 

building have had advances in salaries or wage rates from 30 to 70 percent, but we find that the profits 

of the people who are dealing with the goods which go into houses have increased in some instances up 

to as much as 800 percent. There is no question but what the whole situation, under private enterprise, 

has fallen down. They deal with the rich men who buy houses for cash, but the poor man they will not 

touch as there is not sufficient return on the investment at today‘s prices. 

 

I might possibly quote the extreme instance: a big lumber company in British Columbia, one of the 

biggest in Canada, with $10 million capitalization, in 1939 had met their depreciation and interest debt, 

taxes, and the company made $1 million profit, or ten percent on the $10 million investment. In 1947, 

after having given their employees a 70 percent increase in rates of pay, this company, with the same 

capital set-up of $10 million, made $7 million profit. In 1948, still paying their employees a 70 percent 

increase in rates of pay, this company made a profit, after taxes and depreciation, of $8.4 million, which 

means, as far as I am concerned, that ten or 12 years ago you could buy drop-siding for $25 or $30 

thousand, today it costs $235 per thousand. That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason, together with other 

companies of a similar character, which makes the building of houses difficult. By the removal of 

controls the building of houses is prohibitive to everybody except the very, very rich. 

 

In the city of Glasgow, a few months ago, there was a survey held in regard to the ill effects of bad 

housing upon the area involved in the dockyards. They found out that in homes where there were more 

than two people living, that the death-rate was 20.14 per thousand; in homes, however, where one 

person had two rooms or more to themselves, the death-rate was 10.7 – just half. 

 

There are many reasons why this resolution should be adopted, and this report particularly from the 

International Labour Office, issued last September, says this: ―The I.L.O. researches declare all the 

evidence from the past and investigation of present conditions emphasize that the housing problem 

cannot be solved by private enterprise along.‖ That indicates that they, too – an international body with 

international authority – say that private enterprise could not alone solve this problem. They say further: 

―To a great and dangerous extent the supply of houses to low-income groups has been left to depend on 

the vacating of depreciated houses by the higher-income groups.‖ This committee made that particular 

remark here, in the publication of the Winnipeg Citizen on February 22. It says: ―Private initiative in the 

United States, Republican Senator Taft of Ohio declared recently, has failed to solve this housing 

problem. I am a great believer in free enterprise, he added, but this happens to be one field where it has 

failed to find a solution.‖ There is no question about Senator Taft being a private enterpriser, but he 

admits that this one particular phase has failed. 

 

I might also say, in connection with housing in Great Britain, in four years they have provided housing 

for 3.5 million people, but they have it 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
802 

on this basis: the municipalities have to assume responsibility that any government-subsidized house 

planning will be for the low-income groups, and they insist that 80 percent of all construction of housing 

shall be for the common people, and they are very successful. 

 

There is another item that came to my attention, too, handed to me by a man in Moose Jaw, from a paper 

called the Ensign, published in Kingston, Ontario. This paper, too – a free enterprise paper – says this in 

an editorial: ―How much suffering, how many delinquent children, how much disease and illness, how 

many broken homes, how much immorality can be directed to inadequate housing? And yet we tolerate 

this situation because we lack the determination to take drastic measures which alone can cure it. 

Despite the dangers of its abuse, we see no remedy to Canada‘s housing crisis save a large-scale, 

long-term scheme of subsidized housing.‖ 

 

There have been many suggestions put forward by committees, who have been working with the 

government at Ottawa, as to what should be done. They say that research should be undertaken into the 

prefabrication business, that the government should subsidize companies who would go into the 

prefabrication of houses. They say, too, that money should be made available to provincial and 

municipal governments at a low rate of interest for public housing. They also suggested that there should 

be a national housing reduction rent front. They also say that loan facilities of the Central Mortgage and 

Housing Corporation would be made available to local committees, appointed by municipalities, to deal 

with local housing. 

 

When we see that the United States of America recently, although President Truman asked for 1 million 

low rent housing units of Congress, passed a Bill whereby there will be constructed in the next five 

years in the United States of America 800,000 low-rental units for the common people. This is in 

addition to what will be constructed by private enterprise. 

 

I might say, too, that even in this country, as in the United States, individual areas have gone into the 

co-operative movement. In Washington, D.C., Bannockburn Co-operative Housing project has just been 

started, right outside of Washington, D.C., where they figure on having, eventually, 300 housing units 

on a co-operative basis. But one of the most striking co-operative ventures, outside of the province of 

Saskatchewan, is one which was started in a small parish at Three Rivers, Quebec. This area is a factory 

area, and a parish priest named Camberland three or four years ago was sent there to that little parish. He 

saw the people living in attics and cellars, garages, and living almost like animals rather than human 

beings, so he organized, under the Rochdale plan, a co-operative amongst these workers in the eastern 

manufacturing plants. In four years he has constructed, under the co-operative plan, 90 duplex housing 

units, costing three years ago $3,000 apiece, but currently costing probably nearer $5,000 than $3,000. 

The only obligation that a man in this particular area had to have was that he did not have to have any 

money. If he had any money then he was told to build under the private enterprise. 

 

There is one other phase. The Chief Medical Officer of Great Britain in a previous administration, Sir 

George Newman, made an assertion. He said that in the field of preventative medicine there was nothing 

in which the evidence was more sure or incontrovertible than was the ill effects of bad housing upon the 

human organism. Possibly the human demand would be better expressed by a letter sent in by a woman 

to The Ensign, dated February, of which I would like 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
803 

to quote parts: ―We have health clinics, social welfare centres, hospitalization insurance, but we have no 

homes for our new young families. Again and again the health authorities berate us for neglecting the 

health of our children. Can‘t they realize that where living space is cramped or where two families of 

young children are housed together, it is absolutely impossible to give them guidance so necessary to 

grow up happy and healthy. And yet we have not homes for our new young families. I hear many homes 

are being built, and many others contracted for, but these are only for those who have cash to make a 

down payment, and whose job or income will ensure settled monthly payments over a number of years. 

But there are thousands whose income just barely covers living expenses, and a minimum amount for 

rent, particularly those with five or six children, where the need for housing is greatest. Maybe 

sometime, 20 years from now, we will provide means for bigger and better mental hospitals or jails. But 

I close this letter with the hope that there are Canadians worthy of the name who can and will do 

something to assure the future of Canada, for what are our children but Canada‘s future?‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would move the resolution before you, seconded by Mr. Gibbs, as on the Order Paper. 

 

Mr. Gibbs (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that my hon. friend and desk-mate, the member 

for Moose Jaw (Mr. Heming) went into this housing project pretty extensively, so I have no desire to 

belabour this House with a long speech, but I would like to draw some facts to their attention. 

 

This afternoon I want to put forward a concrete and practical proposal for a combined federal and 

provincial housing scheme. Much that is theoretical has been written on the question of housing, but 

coming from a constituency in which large numbers of city people lack even the basic amenities, I think 

it is high time that consideration be given to some realistic proposal concerning housing. What is 

required first and foremost is low-cost houses. The people who are able to spend $10,000 on the 

construction of a house have little or not trouble today in finding materials and contractors able to oblige 

them. It is the wage earner whose salary has shrunk to an extremely small size as a result of inflation 

who is without an adequate roof over his head. It is to his problem that we should direct our thinking. It 

is my proposal that federal assistance should be solicited and secured for the purpose of building several 

provincially-owned and operated apartment blocks. 

 

A number of years ago, when I was a member of the Swift Current City Council, I advocated a similar 

plan of going into what we would term in those days ‗council houses‖, something like they did in the 

Old Country, but, of course, my appeal was not borne out, and nothing was done about it. Then when the 

Second World War was in action, the Liberal federal government of Canada sent out questionnaires to 

practically, I believe, every town, city and hamlet in the Dominion of Canada, asking for briefs and 

suggestions on rehabilitation for when our boys and girls came back out of the armed services. I 

remember that quite well. I though we were going to do something about this housing, but evidently up 

to the present time very, very little indeed has been done regarding adequate housing for our veterans 

who returned from the last war. 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
804 

On this scheme we should have located in each of the province‘s cities, and while these would not, in 

themselves, solve the entire housing shortage they would go some distance in so doing. In addition, they 

would point the way to further work along the line suggested. I propose the building of apartment blocks 

of 100 units each which it is estimated would cost in the neighbourhood of $5,000 per unit, or $500,000 

and would require within the price limit today some cost saving planning such as small rooms or 

bed-sitting rooms. The financing of the project would be on a basis of federal loans and grants, the loans 

to be made for a period of 30 years at a low interest rate of any three percent. It is estimated that even on 

the basis of four percent interest, on the money loaded, it would be possible to rent such units at around 

$46 per month. This is not exactly low rental I must admit, but it would give to our city people a type of 

accommodation so immeasurably better than anything they have had to date, that the improvement 

would be applauded, I am certain, by the vast majority of the people of the province. 

 

The financing of such a project is, of course, the major problem. The interest on a loan sufficient to 

finance the project at four percent would alone be $20,000 per year. A sinking fund established for the 

purpose of paying the capital indebtedness in a period of 40 years would require approximately $5,300; 

taxes would approximate $70,000 per year; insurance would cost approximately $750; repairs would 

total $7,000 per year, and servicing would be approximately $10,000 per year; the annual cost of one 

such project is estimated to be approximately $57,000. 

 

Such a project, if begun in only one locality, would further prove the value of publicly-owned and 

operated housing. I might say that in Swift Current, and we know this provincial government has done 

quite a lot with regard to housing, remodelling the various buildings of the Air Force, and we have in 

Swift Current 68 to 70 families housed in suites in one of the airport buildings about five miles east of 

Swift Current. We can do these things, I believe, if we get down to it, and according to the Assistant 

Treasurer or City Clerk in Swift Current a few weeks ago, he made some remarks regarding housing in 

an address he was giving to the Rotary Club at Swift Current, and he stated at that time that the shortage 

of houses in Swift Current alone, independent of the new houses which have been built within the last 

few years since the war, is in the neighbourhood of 160 or 170 houses short. 

 

I know the province has done a great deal today in housing veterans and in providing accommodation to 

students at the university. This is the only province which unaided has made so many housing units 

available to people in low-income classes who are most in need of homes. More than 600 housing units 

in all parts of the province are being provided now by the Department of Public Works, and 185 families 

are being housed in the community apartments at Saskatoon. This is all helping our people materially, 

but with federal assistance, the good work that has been begun by this government can be carried still 

further, and temporary housing units may then be replaced by the permanent units so desperately 

required at the present time. 

 

Now, I am in favour of such a project which, financed with the assistance of the federal government, can 

be self-sustaining. Our people do not wish to receive handouts from the government; they are perfectly 

content to pay their own way, but in the case of houses, such very large financial resources 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
805 

are required, most wage earners are powerless to meet the problem alone. They must rely on assistance 

that government can give them, and the plan that I propose will meet such a need; it will assure 

repayment of the money advanced for construction, and it will constitute an investment upon which rich 

returns may be expected to accrue. The returns from good housing are not to be measured in money 

terms alone, more important are the dividends in good health, both mental and physical, which adequate 

housing makes possible. If we wonder today why our children spend most of their time away from 

home, that answer can be found in poor housing. If we wonder why sickness threatens our families, why 

they lack the necessary sunshine, why they suffer from respiratory diseases, of ten that answer can be 

found in poor housing. If we wish to make the home the centre of family activities, if we wish to keep 

our children close to us, to develop understanding and to provide them with the advice and guidance 

which only parents can give, then it is important that the homes in which our families grow should be 

healthful and adequate, that there should be air and light for them to enjoy, space in which to play and 

work and sleep, and an environment which will assist in improving their characters and attitudes. This 

can be done by providing our city people with apartment blocks in which life can be made easier for our 

working folk, by modern conveniences and appliances, and in which life can be more pleasant and 

happier for our children through recreation rooms and playgrounds. 

 

The government has made a start in this direction by establishing the community apartments in 

Saskatoon, and by converting Air Force buildings into apartments in all part of the province. More, 

much more has yet to be done, and this can be done only with the help of the federal government. I, 

therefore, call upon the government to shoulder its share of the responsibility to our people and assist in 

such a programme. 

 

A few days ago, I understand, the Prime Minister of the Dominion of Canada, Mr. St. Laurent, gave an 

announcement over the air that he thought, coming down in this session of the federal House, something 

would be done about housing. I sincerely hope, Mr. Speaker, that they don‘t forget, and that they do give 

the province, and individuals if necessary, financial assistance in building good homes once again in this 

Canada of ours. 

 

In the session of the House a few days ago, the C.C.F. member Sandy Nicholson, C.C.F. member for 

Mackenzie, was speaking, as we are doing today, on the housing problem in the federal House. I am not 

going to read all he said, but I will just quote a few words which that member said: 

 

The C.C.F. member said men who had fought overseas for Canada found it difficult to understand why 

a nation that could display such ingenuity and productive capacity in war could be so helpless in 

dealing with the housing problem. The time had come for Canada to tackle slum clearing and home 

building programmes in the same way Canada tackled defence in the time of war. 

 

And he goes on to say: 

 

Dealing with rural housing, farmers were not receiving a fair share of the national income, and so 

could not get a fair share of materials needed to modernize their homes. 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
806 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, I am in agreement with what the Federal member for Mackenzie said. To bring 

it closer to home, you were a member of a group of members of this House that went to Weyburn last 

Saturday to visit and go through the mental institution down there. We saw for ourselves, we did not 

have to be told, we saw the congested and crowded conditions of both the patients and the men in 

white and the nurses and attendants who are doing such a great work in those institutions, and I would 

say to this House that if it was at all possible, after what we saw in Weyburn last Saturday, to help 

those people down there to expand the work and expand their housing, I think I would heartily support 

a vote of anything as far as monetary power is concerned, from $1 million to $5 million in order to 

give those people adequate housing and a real place; to do away with that basement, the basement 

there where they had those patients, and give them cottages or something like the psychiatrist told us 

was needed down there. 

 

That is the thing, and we know, as far as this province is concerned, the housing is inadequate, and, 

Mr. Speaker, I sure would like to see things to on. Other nations are putting on big housing projects; 

we can see what the Labour government in the Old Country is doing in that regard. They are making 

great strides and building to great capacity. By the way, Mr. Speaker, as one socialist labour 

government to another, I would just like to draw to the attention of this House that once again the 

socialist Labour government of the Old Country has won another by-election for labour yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have great pleasure in seconding the motion. 

 

RESOLUTION RE MARKETING OF COARSE GRAINS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed resolution of Mr. Brown: 

 

That his Assembly: 

 

(1) go on record as strongly urging action by the Government of Canada to prevent the speculative 

trading in grain futures by closing the Winnipeg Grain Exchange: 

 

(2) endorse the principle of marketing through a Canadian Wheat Board, and 

 

(3) recommend that, to achieve a more stable method of marketing their produce then through the 

medium of speculative trading, the scope of the said Board be extended to include the marketing of 

oats, barley, rye and other grains. 

 

Mr. W.C. Woods (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this motion I want to say, before I go any 

farther, I am not opposing the resolution, but I do find fault with the wording of it, and the way it is 

drawn up. The first is: 

 

That this Assembly go on record as strongly urging action by the Government of Canada to prevent 

the speculative trading in grain futures by closing the Winnipeg Grain Exchange. 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
807 

Well, as far as closing the Grain Exchange is concerned, that part of the resolution should be directed to 

the Manitoba Legislature. The Winnipeg Grain Exchange is situated in Winnipeg, and will come under 

the jurisdiction of the Manitoba government, so it hardly looks right to have that part of the resolution in 

with the balance. The second clause is: 

 

That this Assembly endorse the principle of marketing through a Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

Well, of course, we are doing that now. We are marketing our wheat through the Canadian Wheat 

Board, and that does not say it has to include coarse grains, but I take it that is what the mover of the 

resolution intended. The next paragraph: 

 

That this Assembly recommend that to achieve a more stable method of marketing their produce than 

through the medium of speculative trading, the scope of the said board be extended to include the 

marketing of oats, barley, rye and other grains. 

 

This side of the House demonstrated about three weeks ago that we were for that Board to be set up, but 

we went further; we asked for a Producers‘ Board, and I think that the farmers of the province would be 

back of us in asking that it be a producers‘ board. The telegram which was sent by the hon. member for 

Rosthern (Mr. Tucker) read as follows: 

 

Believe overwhelming majority Saskatchewan farmers favouring handling coarse grains by a Wheat 

Board exclusively, acting solely as an agency of the producers of such coarse grains. Hope it will be 

possible to work out plan whereby this may be possible in respect of the 1949 crop. 

 

This resolution does not say whether it is to be a producers‘ board, does not say it is to be a compulsory 

board, and it might be taken that it is to be the same as the board of earlier years where you marketed 

through these boards or through the Winnipeg Grain Exchange, whichever you saw fit. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It would be hard to do that if you had closed it. 

 

Mr. Woods: — Well, of course, the direction to close the Grain Exchange is going to the wrong place. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Oh no. 

 

Mr. Woods: — If the Grain Exchange is to be closed, then we must have a compulsory board. If it is not 

to be closed, if that part of the resolution, providing it were the federal government‘s duty to close or 

keep it open, if the first part was not fulfilled, then the board might be a voluntary board, or a 

compulsory board. To go further, why is it necessary to send the first part of the resolution to the federal 

government if the third paragraph is acted on? There will be no necessity for closing the Winnipeg Grain 

Exchange; as they would have no business to do I imagine they would close up themselves. I do not 

think the resolution 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
808 

could be much better worded, but I don‘t see it is going to do any harm as it is and will not harm the 

resolution we have already sent – the telegram which the hon. Leader of the Opposition sent some little 

time ago. 

 

As I said when I started, I am supporting the resolution. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add a few words to what has already been said 

regarding the closing of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange, and the marketing of coarse grains through the 

Wheat Board. I am very glad that the opposition has indicated that they are in favour of the spirit of the 

resolution, although some exception was taken to the wording of the resolution. I can quite readily 

understand why some exception might be made to the wording of the resolution, revolving around this 

whole argument that this board ought to operate in the interest of the producer. Now, I have heard that 

argument so much in the last year that I have gotten pretty tired of it. It seems to me that that argument 

has afforded a convenient opportunity for some people to dodge the issue. First, when the legislation 

was passed Ottawa, and suggested to the provinces that they pass complementary legislation, we noted 

that the government of Manitoba took the stand – at that time represented by Premier Garson – that there 

was a constitutional question involved. They thought that the federal government had full jurisdiction 

and they wanted a constitutional ruling on the matter. Well, I notice now, since Premier Garson of 

Manitoba, the former Premier, is not Minister of Justice, he has not come forth with any ruling on the 

matter at all. I think he should do so. But he did quote on the whole thing as to whether this Board 

should operate in the interest of the producer or not, and, as we all recall, he wanted some definite 

assurance at that time from the federal government that this board would operate in the interest of the 

grain producer to the extent that they did not pass the complementary legislation. The province of 

Alberta took a similar attitude, and expressed the attitude too of opposing two marketing boards as being 

too socialistic, and preventing the farmers from having what we term, and have heard so often, the 

freedom of choice as to where they should market their grain. The farmers of Saskatchewan know a 

considerable bit about this freedom of choice. At one time they did not have any choice as to any place 

where they could sell their grain at a remunerative price. 

 

It is because of those factors, and the ups and downs that are part and parcel of the speculative system 

under which conditions no farmer can intelligently plan his agricultural production programme, and 

because of all of that, and in order to ensure some stability of price, and in order to be able to follow a 

good, sound agricultural policy, the farmers of Saskatchewan have repeatedly asked that coarse grains 

be put under the Wheat Board. As a matter of fact, the voice of the organized farmers is unanimous in 

the Dominion of Canada that this be done. 

 

We have had two conferences held here in Regina, called at the invitation of the Canadian Federation of 

Agriculture, at which were representatives of the Alberta and Manitoba governments. Their attitude at 

the first conference was that they had to have definite assurance, even written into the Act, that this 

Board would operate in the interest of the producer. At the second conference that was called this fall, 

they finally boiled their arguments down to 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
809 

a statement from the federal government that the board would operate in the interest of the producer. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — When was the conference held that the hon. gentleman is referring to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The conference I am referring to was recently held, this fall. 

 

As a result of this conference, and after a whole lot of quibbling, and after the representatives of these 

two provinces were put on the spot by the farm organizations, they finally agreed that they would go to 

Ottawa and participate in the conference there. That conference was subsequently called, at which Mr. 

Howe, Mr. Garson and the Hon. J.G. Gardiner were in attendance. Again this matter came up as to the 

policy of this Board. To me it seemed that there was a good deal of quibbling, and a good deal of 

opportunity, provided there for not only the federal government to slip out from under the 

responsibilities, but an opportunity as well for the other two provincial governments to slip out. 

Subsequent reports we see in the press confirm the thing I was suspicious of right along. I certainly 

would not want to re-word this resolution one iota on that account, because it seems to me that the 

Wheat Board is going to be thrown back as a political football, and the opportunity is going to be 

afforded the provincial governments of both Manitoba and Alberta to say this: now, because the federal 

government takes the attitude that they don‘t agree that the Board operate in the interest of the producer, 

and they don‘t agree that any such statement of policy, and the provincial governments will say that 

because they have not that assurance they will not pass the complementary legislation. They give them 

both, it seems to me, a convenient way out. 

 

I think that is what the whole thing was working up to because we have seen the spectacle of the Hon. 

J.G. Gardiner last summer running around this province, and in Rosthern constituency particularly, 

repeating over and over that it was not necessary for this government, or any provincial government, to 

pass complementary legislation. He said the whole thing could be done under a Natural Products 

Marketing Act. He said: ―You have got one in Saskatchewan. Other provinces can invoke their powers 

under those Acts and, in doing so, they can place coarse grains on the Wheat Board.‖ Either Mr. 

Gardiner was speaking for himself or he was speaking for the government at Ottawa, or both. To me it 

sounded like double-talk again. It looked to me that he was preparing the public for exactly the situation 

that has developed right now: They will wash their hands of the Wheat Board entirely, and provide a 

convenient opportunity for the Manitoba government to get out from under, and then go through the 

motions of passing a Natural Products Marketing Act, and saying to the farmers: ―Well, we passed the 

legislation, now you can do it that way.‖, when in the first place we were advised to pass the 

complementary legislation. As all the hon. members know, this is the only province that passed that 

complementary legislation, and I can say to the credit of this House that it was passed unanimously here. 

This House, as I pointed out, did not quibble then as to whether this Board would operate in the interest 

of any particular group. It is beyond question that the Wheat Board is going to operate in the interest of 

agriculture. It simply cannot operate in the interest of any particular group of agriculturalists. It cannot 

be that way because the price of coarse grains must bear some relationship to the price of livestock, 

dairy and poultry products. That goes without saying. Maybe the resolution that was taken to Ottawa 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
810 

was not worded as well as it should be worded, but I think it was worded in a manner that would be 

suitable to the governments of Alberta and Manitoba, and the whole principle behind that resolution 

was, and I have heard it stated and restated over and over again by all of the farm representatives there, 

that this Board should operate in the interest of all agriculture. Surely, they said, coarse grains should be 

marketed to the best possible advantage. Well, anyone would naturally say that, but that did not mean 

the dominion government was to go out into the export field and sell grain at exorbitant prices as against 

the needs of the livestock producers of the Dominion of Canada. So a qualifying clause was inserted that 

due regard would be taken towards keeping adequate feed reserves within the country, all of which 

indicates the whole spirit and intent of that resolution was that the Wheat Board operate in the interest of 

agriculture. With that we are satisfied. 

 

I have repeated our stand at the conference we had in Ottawa, stating that as far as this province was 

concerned we had implicit confidence in the Wheat Board to handle both wheat and coarse grains, and 

that we knew that, as a matter of policy, the marketing of coarse grains, and all grains, would be in the 

interest of everyone concerned. So this whole matter of whether this Board is going to operate in the 

interest of the grain producer, or the interest of the livestock producer, is a whole lot of political eyewash 

in my opinion. As I stated, it has provided an opportunity now for some people to dodge this issue again, 

and I am going to serve notice, Mr. Speaker, right here, that if there is any more pussy-footing on this 

question, the people of this province are going to be told about it in no uncertain terms. Neither the Hon. 

J. G. Gardiner, neither Howe, nor our hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) who a few days ago 

tried to tell this House, almost tried to prove to this House that they gain more benefits under the Grain 

Exchange system of marketing than any other system. That is what he said, in effect, when he quoted 

figures stating, in fact, that the farmers have made money in that decontrol period from August 1 to 

October 21, which is pure nonsense when you examine the facts of the case. Now the hon. member, on 

the other hand, I know will stand up and support this particular resolution. I don‘t like to see people 

talking at cross-purposes in this House, and I think that the hon. member for Arm River should be 

consistent. First he said that hog production was never more prosperous than since the decontrol took 

place, which is pure eyewash and nonsense. Everybody knows that the marketing of hogs and hog 

production because the relationship between feed and livestock is coming into line once more, and that 

is exactly the way we want to keep it. 

 

For those reasons the farmers of the entire Dominion of Canada are today unanimously behind bringing 

coarse grains under the Wheat Board, and for that reason, Mr. Speaker, you are certainly going to have 

my whole-hearted support of this resolution, and I hope there is no more quibbling in this House. If the 

hon. member for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) wants to wait for more information, I hope it is good 

information in favour of bringing these coarse grains under the Wheat Board. Don‘t worry, if there is 

any more quibbling, I am going to remind everyone concerned, and the hon. members opposite, too, that 

they backed this proposition. Don‘t quibble on whether this thing is going to operate in the interest of 

the producer any more. I have heard enough of it. I have listened to it now for a year. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You‘ll hear lots more. 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
811 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — What we want now is some action on this, no more squirming, and when we do 

that the Winnipeg Grain Exchange will automatically close, regardless of what the government of 

Manitoba wants to do about it. I hate to pin my faith on this coalition Tory-Liberal government in the 

province of Manitoba to close the Winnipeg Grain Exchange because it will never be done. 

 

I should remind the hon. members opposite that the support you have given this whole thing by your 

own wire, you should stand behind that wire and see that this is done in Ottawa. Don‘t quibble any 

more; see that the Hon. J.G. does not come around here with any more Natural Products Marketing Acts 

for the purpose of marketing coarse grains under a board. I want to remind the hon. members of this: 

there is only one board today that has jurisdiction over the elevator system, and that is the Canadian 

Wheat Board. They have taken over these handling organizations as working in the public interest. How 

in the world could you market coarse grains in any other practical way, other than through the Wheat 

Board? Surely it could not be done under a Natural Products Marketing Act, as long as we have the 

statutory machinery set up to do the job as it is. 

 

With these few remarks, off-hand references, Mr. Speaker, I suppose I have indicated to the House that I 

am going to whole-heartedly support this resolution. 

 

Mr. G. H Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I had not intention of taking part in this debate at all 

until the Minister of Agriculture worked himself up into a frenzy over there about certain things that 

have been discussed in this House, not this time but for the last two or three years. 

 

I am glad I was an inspiration to you. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I spoke on that resolution, and it was unanimously supported here. The principle of 

marketing coarse grains through the Wheat Board is unanimously supported here today, and he knows it. 

He is trying to create a false impression among the people of Saskatchewan. He said so many things I 

am not going to bother with them all because I don‘t think it is worthwhile. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You can‘t explain them. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — He was a mental acrobat. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He made some statements about what I said the other day, and seeing that you 

allowed him to go away from the resolution, = entirely, and onto another topic, I hope you will give me 

the same opportunity as he had, to state my side of the case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You did the same. 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
812 

Mr. Danielson: — It may be a repetition of the figures I gave him a few days ago, which none of them 

replied to over there, and in which, during all this long debate, on two occasions in this House, the 

coarse grain payment and the position of the farmer who produces this coarse grain today, and for the 

last year and a half and what he was previous to the removal of controls, has never been raised by that 

group across the floor of the House this session, because they have not ground to stand on and they are 

making jokes of themselves. I would say something more serious than that, but I am being careful and I 

am allowed to say that. 

 

There is no farmer in Saskatchewan today, or in the Dominion of Canada, or at lease in western Canada, 

who does not know that he gets $1.04 a bushel for barley at the local station, against 76 cents before, 

and there is no farmer in Saskatchewan or any place else in western Canada who raises oats who does 

not know that he gets 76 cents a bushel for barley today at his local station when he got 51½ or 52 

before. That is the situation and all the blustering of the hon. gentleman across the floor of the House 

cannot wipe that away. That is all blow, Mr. Speaker. It is springtime and we get a large amount of wind 

at that time of the year, and we sure had one this afternoon. 

 

I have the figures here, and I quoted them carefully, and they are absolutely correct. I spent months to 

get every bushel that was marketed and every one that has been marketed since, up until the end of the 

crop year 1947-48. I have them here, and the gain to the farmers in the three western provinces is: on 

barley, $28,420,000 as compared with what they would have got for that 1947-48 crop year if the ceiling 

had remained for the full 12 months of the year; on oats we have a $33,200,000 gain to the farmers by 

removal of the price ceiling on them, for the same period of time. Let me repeat it again to make it clear: 

from the 1st of August, 1947 to the 31st of July, 1948. Let me go a little further; since the 1st of August, 

1948 to the present time there has never been one day that the price of oats and barley has not been from 

14 cents to 22 cents a bushel more than they were before. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Then why close the Grain Exchange? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It has carried on into this year as well, and what the millions of dollars gained would 

be I have not the figures to show. That is the whole story about that. But do not draw the wrong 

conclusion, Mr. Speaker, from what I said. He knows as well as anybody, and there is not a man in this 

House who does not know, if he wants to use his common sense and apply it to the problem, that the 

Wheat Board was not acting in the interest of the producer to get the biggest possible price they could 

for the producer, and every farmer knows it. They were there as an instrument to equalize and stabilize 

the cost of feed grain all over Canada, and if there was anybody who reaped any benefit from the ceiling 

on coarse grains, it was the feeders of eastern Canada, and nobody else. What we want to see today is 

this: if we are going to have a board to handle the coarse grains, we want to be sure that there is not 

going to be the same policy employed by the Wheat Board previous to the 20th of August, 1947. We 

want our share of the money. We raise the product and we want the price for it. Everybody knows that 

we need it and will need it in days to come. 

 

An Hon. Member: — May I ask the hon. gentleman a question? 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
813 

Mr. Danielson: — No, you sit down. You can get up and talk for an hour or two afterwards. 

 

It is all right, Mr. Speaker, to get up and blow off, and make a whole lot of statements that have no 

foundation in fact, not a shadow of a foundation for them. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You know there is, but you won‘t admit it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — This gentleman over there, called the Premier of the province, he said that the 

farmers have lost millions of dollars. 

 

Premier Douglas: — And they did. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is not true and you know it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, that statement is true, and I know it is true. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You are not authority on coarse grains. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is all right. You were going to hand over a Cabinet Minister‘s head if the 

farmers ever got any additional payment. Well, where is it? 

 

Premier Douglas: — We know what payment they got. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You keep quiet. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You come over and make me. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There has been paid by the grain companies and the Pool, 11.9 percent per bushel on 

every bushel of oats marketed before October 21, 1947. On barley, 29.6 per bushel. That has been paid 

to the farmers. And with the government payment, it brings it up to 17 cents on oats and 25½ cents a 

bushel on barley. That brings it up, with the price they received when they sold it, to . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Why close the Grain Exchange the? 

 

Premier Douglas: — It is about half what was stolen from them. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, no. You are wrong there. You are far out on that as you are in everything else 

you say. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
814 

Mr. Danielson: — There is not half of it sold by any means. That brings the price up to 97½ cents a 

bushel at the farm – I want to emphasize that, the prices I quoted previously are at the local station in 

Saskatchewan - and 69 cents on oats. 69 cents on oats and 97½ cents on barley. Now the Wheat Board is 

making another payment, an equalization payment on barley of 6,780 and on oats 5,881 . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — What do you mean by ―equalization‖? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I know he does not know the conclusion. I am going to show him. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Do I understand the hon. member is speaking to the resolution? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Exactly what he threw in my face. He said that I . . . There wasn‘t anything . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! If the hon. member is speaking to the resolution, then we want to understand 

that he is speaking to the resolution. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, he got up there and accused me, that there was not a work of truth 

in what I said. Let me say now, when this last payment is made by the Wheat Board the farmer will have 

had for the full crop year of 1947-48, the 12 months, $1,04381 at the local station for barley instead of 

76 cents they had before. Now, there is the difference $1.04381, 76 cents before. Now we come to the 

oats: We have 74½ cents at the local station in place of 51½ to 52 cents. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I am sure the hon. member knows that you cannot refer point by point to a 

former speech. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, but another man can get up and tell me . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member cannot quote that speech at all. If you are speaking to the 

resolution and you want to tie it up with the resolution, it is okay. Otherwise you cannot, and you know 

that very well. The House will not allow you to repeat, word for word, a discussion that has already 

taken place. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It is already done, Mr. Speaker. I‘m through. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I‘ll say you are. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The agony is over, and I want to tell my friend over there that you cannot by any 

inference whatever nail anything onto this side of the House of the Liberal party in that respect. What 

did you do last year, before the Bill was through 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
815 

the House of Commons in Ottawa? You rushed your Bill into this House, and I pointed out to you – I 

did not criticize you, I stood on the floor of this House and supported you. I said, and I repeat it to you, 

and I spoke to a resolution just previous to the introduction of your Bill: ―I can speak for the Liberal 

party in the province of Saskatchewan, and that will have our support.‖ It is right in the Hansard, and 

you can see it anytime you like. There has been nothing taking place here today, or this session, that 

does not reinforce that statement I made last year, every bit o it, and you were satisfied last year to go 

ahead with your complementary legislation in the hope that the other provinces would do the same 

thing. I cannot tell the hon. gentlemen why Alberta and Manitoba have not passed this legislation, 

because I don‘t know anything about it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Why hasn‘t Ottawa? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I want to say that Mr. McIvor, when he spoke to a Wheat Pool delegation here, a 

year ago last fall, made the statement that the Wheat Board could not handle the coarse grains without 

supplementary legislation. One of the attorneys who speaks for the organized farmers of Canada made 

the same statement. Today we have that legislation. I say to the, if everybody is in favour of it, if every 

farmer is in favour of it – which I don‘t know, but I think the majority of farmers in Saskatchewan are in 

favour of it, but not all of them, then there is no reason, if they want it, that they should not have it. If 

they are so enthusiastic about putting the coarse grains through the Wheat Board in Manitoba and 

Alberta, surely the farmers‘ organizations, which are very well organized, should be able to convince 

their own government that is the proper thing for them to do. I saw something in the press that may 

happen in Alberta. I don‘t know anything about Manitoba. That is the situation, and when that is done 

there is nothing in the world to stop this thing from going through, but to get up on the floor of the 

House and make a big splash and throw mud and insulations and aspersions on this side of the House 

whose record, as far as we are concerned, is absolutely clear. I take exception to that kind of thing. 

There is no ground for it, and there is not one iota of truth in what he has said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. gentleman a question? I would like to go back to 

his figures. He has quoted figures. Will he tell the House how much the handling companies received for 

the coarse grains when they sold the same in the American market, and how much of these coarse grains 

were exported to the United States. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I cannot tell him that, Mr. Speaker. I had hoped when he threw this question at me 

you would have given me permission to answer in full. I have it here, that the amount the grain 

companies paid and the Pool organization paid is practically the same. In some cases some grain 

companies paid more than the Pool, on some kinds of grains, and less in others. Now, if the grain 

companies made a killing from the coarse grains and if they played what we might call a ‗skin game‘, 

well then you cannot evade the implication that your Wheat Pool did the self-same thing, and I certainly 

don‘t think they did. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: —Will he tell us who made the largest payments, the Pool or the line elevators? 



 

March 17, 1949 

 

 
816 

Mr. Danielson: — Just a moment – I will tell my friend. The Western Grain Company paid 13½ cents 

on oats, 10¾ cents on barley; the Independent Grain Company paid 14 cents on barley; the Searle Grain 

company paid 13¾ cents on barley. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Tell us how much they made. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The Premier knows all about it. He knows that 85 percent of the grain was marketed 

before the 20th of October. Of course nobody else knows, and nobody can find it out today. The records 

show, of course, that he was only about 350 percent out. 

 

An Hon. Member: — From the Liberal write-ups. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I want to say that no man would be able to say because there was no open market 

before the 20th of October, and the selling he had for future delivery could be done. So it just depends 

on how fast they sold the grain. I expect one company would have made ten or 12 cents, and another 

company 12 or 14 cents. Now, that is very possible. 

 

Take your own grain company, the Wheat Pool, which we built. It does not belong to me, but to me and 

all the other farmers around, and we are proud of it, just as proud as anyone. If they came forward and 

did the best they did, and I know they did because if anyone will check over the statement I don‘t think 

they will accuse them of taking money out of coarse grains and applying it to the general account, 

because the profits would still be less than they have ever been, in spite of the fact they handled 101 

million bushels of grain. These are things that the hon. gentleman might check up. But I state again, if 

the grain companies could be accused of a ‗skin game‘ on this thing, then we must apply the same 

yardstick to our own organization, and I refuse to do that absolutely. That is the answer to your question. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6 o‘clock p.m. 


