



















































Hansard: March 07, 1950


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Eleventh Legislature 

14th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 7, 1950. 

 

The House met at 3 o‘clock p.m. 

 

HULL INSURANCE VIA HUDSON BAY ROUTE 

 

Moved by Mr. P.A. Howe (Kelvington), seconded by Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City): 

 

―That this Assembly thorough the appropriate channel urge the Government of Canada to do all in its 

power to reduce Hull Insurance Rates via the Hudson Bay Route and place this Route on a fair 

competitive basis with the St. Lawrence Route.‖ 

 

Mr. Howe: — Mr. Speaker, the Motion before us this afternoon is one which has been discussed in this 

House on many occasions. The Hudson Bay Route is one which has a very long and interesting history 

which I do not intend to go into this afternoon only to say that I am very pleased to say that the Hudson 

Bay Route Association has done very splendid work, not only last year but in former years, in helping to 

develop and encourage the development of the Route, helping to discover the remedy that may be used 

in meeting the problems that stand in the way, and in every way the Association has made a real 

contribution to this House. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to every individual member of this Assembly, if you are 

not a paid up member of the Association, I would urge that you do become a member and also try to 

encourage local organizations also to become members of the Hudson Bay Route Association. In other 

words we want to develop public opinion, get the people Hudson Bay Route conscious in Saskatchewan. 

I am pleased to say that they are that way to a great extent, and I think it is up to every good citizen in 

this province to do what they can to help encourage the Hudson Bay Route Association in their 

important work and make them feel that they have the people of this province behind them. 

 

Another thing I want to mention in regard to this is the Trade Services Division of the Department of 

Co-operatives in this province under the direction of Mr. Hanson. They have done a splendid job in 

regard to compiling information and data, in regard to doing everything they can to help to promote 

trade over the Hudson Bay Route. It is also Mr. Hanson‘s job to initiate all these excursions every year 

up to Hudson Bay. They have been a real success, and, I am sure, have done a lot of good in getting the 

people of this province acquainted with our real seaport which we should use, more than we are able to 

do now, to transport the exportable goods from this province and to bring in to the people of 

Saskatchewan the things that we want imported into this province. Then too, the Provincial Government 

has 

  



 

March 7, 1950 

 

 

 
2 

been doing their bit. They have been making a $500 grant, I believe for a number of years towards this 

Association, in order to help develop this Route and promote trade over it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you will notice the resolution only deals with one subject and to me that is a real 

bone of contention, to me it is the greatest deterrent to the development and encouragement of shipping 

over the Hudson Bay Route, namely Hull Insurance Rates. That is the particular thing I want to deal 

with, because I believe that until we can solve that problem, no matter what we may do to try to develop 

this Route, we are utterly helpless in order to accomplish what we want to do. Just to give you an 

illustration, on a 7,000-ton vessel coming into Hudson Bay, spending in terms of English money; in 

1932, it cost £5,700 by way of Hull insurance to go through via Churchill and as against $800 via 

Montreal. In other words, the Hull insurance rates are over seven times as great – they were over seven 

times as great in 1932 to go via Churchill as against Montreal. Back in 1939 it was increased and the 

difference was still greater. In 1939, it cost shipowners and charters of boats, 7.4 times as much in Hull 

insurance rates to ship to Churchill as compared with Montreal. It is true that, in 1948, there was a slight 

reduction, and then it was only 5½ times as costly to ship to Churchill as to Montreal. 

 

Here is a problem, Mr. Speaker, which no matter how anxious they people of Canada may be to use the 

Hudson Bay Route, no matter how many orders we may get and business men can buy goods from 

Britain by record through this Route, the British boats on leaving Britain to come to this country, if they 

have to pay 5½ times as much Hull insurance to be able to use our Hudson Bay Route, certainly are 

going to go through Montreal. Now that is the problem that we are faced with. I want to say to members 

of this House that there is a Dalgleish Shipping Company in England, and I believe that they have done 

more than anyone else in trying to develop and use the port of Churchill. In 1932, they supplied the first 

two boats to be chartered via that route. Mr. Dalgleish is very sympathetic to developing this route but, 

as I said before, unless something can be done by way of getting a reduction on these Hull insurance 

rates, I am very much afraid that it is going to be a very uphill job to develop this route. 

 

Now you may say, whose job is it? Well, I just want to give you a little bit of history in regard to the 

setup. Who fixes the Hull insurance rates, and what agency is existing on behalf of the public to try and 

see that rates are being brought to reasonable levels? Well, in the first place, there was an Imperial War 

Conference in 1918 and at this war conference there were representatives from Great Britain, Australia, 

New Zealand, South Africa, Canada and Newfoundland – all these people became part and parcel at that 

gathering of what is known as the Imperial Shipping Committee. The Committee was appointed by 

Prime Minister Lloyd George on Jun 15, 1920, but since that time this Imperial Shipping Committee has 

evolved into what is known today as the Commonwealth Shipping Committee. That, I would say, is the 

agency that would protect the general public. Then again, Lloyd‘s of England and the London 

Underwriters have what they call the Joint Hull Committee that make arrangements on their behalf as far 

as insurance rates are concerned. 

 

  



 

March 7, 1950 

 

 

 
3 

The reason, why some of us drafted this resolution as it is, is because here on this Commonwealth 

Shipping Committee, which after all, is the agency that should look into the rates of insurance, and try to 

bring about reasonable comparisons in every way protect the general public, Canada is represented, and 

I would say that the least we can do in this House, Mr. Speaker, is to ask our Federal Government to 

bring all the pressure to bear that they can, in order to influence the Joint Hull Committee to bring about 

a reasonable rate-basis on Hull insurance. I believe, that, if we can do that, it will be more attractive 

naturally for British boats to direct their routes through the Port of Churchill; but greater than the rates 

through the Port of Montreal, it seems to me that that is the biggest obstacle that we have to solve, and I 

hope that members of this House will agree with me and give me that support. 

 

Now, I might say, for the information of members that, in 1949, there was a fair amount of trade over 

the route. I do not want to go into it very much; but I want to say that there were 5½ million bushels of 

wheat shipped through the Port of Churchill in 1949 and there was some 12,000 tons of merchandise 

shipped through that port. I believe that the Port of Churchill should also be made a point at which we 

shall base the price of wheat under the Canada Grain Act, or the Wheat Marketing Board Act. That is 

another thing that should be done; just as Vancouver has become a point at which they establish the 

price of wheat. I believe it is only fair to say that while people in the western part of Alberta particularly 

can use Vancouver to such great advantage, I think it is only fair to say that the people of northern 

Saskatchewan and northwest Alberta and the northwestern part of Manitoba should be able to enjoy the 

benefits of shorter rail routes to seaports. 

 

Another thing I want to mention just in passing, something that may not be generally known to members 

of this House, is that the Hon. Mr. Nollet and the Hon. Mr. McIntosh were instrumental in bringing the 

first Marshall Diesel Tractor into Saskatchewan. It was placed at the University for experiment and 

demonstration and since that time, there has been over 60 of those tractors imported into this province. I 

think it is only fair to mention that, because it just goes to show that a little bit of individual effort will 

do. If we all get behind the wheel, if we all get behind the efforts of the Hudson Bay Route Association, 

give them every assistance and every encouragement, I am sure that the future of the Hudson Bay Route 

may be very bright. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am going to move, and seconded by the hon. member for 

Saskatoon City: 

 

―That this Assembly through the appropriate channel urge the Government of Canada to do all in its 

power to reduce Hull Insurance Rates via the Hudson Bay Route and place this Route on a fair 

competitive basis with the St. Laurence Route.‖ 

 

Mr. Stone: — Mr. Speaker, after listening to the mover of the motion, I am afraid there is not very 

much left for me to say. I do not think it is necessary for me to prolong the discussion a great deal, as I 

believe 

  



 

March 7, 1950 

 

 

 
4 

the Leader of the Opposition has already intimated that he, and I imagine his party, are fully behind the 

Hudson Bay Route. 

 

The progress of the Hudson Bay Route has not altogether been a happy one. The progress has been very 

slow. In 1931 when it was began, it worked up to 1933 where the peak inward cargo reached some 

26,000 tons. This level was more or less maintained up to 1937 when the depression really hit us and 

after that the war years more or less closed the port down; but since 1945, the inward cargo has steadily 

risen until in 1948, it had almost reached 1,000 tons of inward cargo. The outward cargo reached a peak 

in 1948 of over 158,000 tons. Now, I do not think, Mr. Speaker, that this route has been used as 

extensively as it could have been. It is not necessary for me to expound all the arguments, all the 

feasibilities of this route (that has been done so many times) except to point out that it is a some 1,000 

miles shorter freight haul to many points on the prairies, and this means a considerable saving and help 

to the economy of the prairie provinces. 

 

To illustrate, I would like to read a copy of a letter I received, and it was written to Mr. W. A. Watson, 

Foreign Freight Agent, Canadian National Railways, Toronto, Ontario: 

 

―Dear Sir: 

 

As advised you in our telephone conversation, we are presently negotiating for a shipment of 5 million 

board feet of lumber export through Churchill, Manitoba, from various points in Saskatchewan and 

Manitoba. But we find when figuring the cost FAS Churchill on rates recently published in Tariff 

780A Item No. 50 and those quoted from the Big River and Armit, Saskatchewan, they are so high 

that it appears unlikely that we will have any chance of getting business. The Shipper has reduced his 

prices from $7.50 under those in 1947, but even with these reductions, we are still $5.00 per M over 

the market due to the recent freight increases which are approximately 60% over the rates in effect in 

1947. After applying the increases authorized in CFA 71 and 72 effective October 11, 1949, to the 

latter tariff, we are still out of line to the extent of $2.75 per M. The total shipment will amount to 

approximately 200 cars which should bring considerable revenue to the railroad, and, therefore, merits 

some consideration on your part to bring down the rates so that we are in a position to reasonably 

compete, otherwise we may as well forget the whole matter resulting in: (1) a heavy loss to the 

railway; (2) a loss of earning up to a quarter of a million dollars to the producer, which is 90% labour, 

and (3) but not so important, only a commission lost to ourselves. 

 

This will require your immediate attention because the contract must be closed by the end of this 

month and we expect to put in our final bid any day.‖ 

 

  



 

March 7, 1950 

 

 

 
5 

That was written on January 18, 1950 signed by Nicholson and Cates, Limited. 

 

That illustrates, Mr. Speaker, just what the people of these prairie provinces can lose by not having the 

use of this Hudson Bay Route. As I said before, there is no need for me to go over the arguments for and 

against, or submit the seamen‘s version of this route – the easy accessibility of the route by the seamen – 

only just to more or less remind the House that, in 1936, there was an enquiry into a wreck that took 

place at that time, and the Imperial Shipping Committee had this to say about the Hudson Bay Route, 

that as far as physical risks are concerned, and I am quoting: 

 

―We are convinced that the Hudson Bay Route is not dangerous and in some respects it is less 

dangerous than the St. Lawrence Route.‖ 

 

I do not know, Mr. Speaker, what we can possibly do to arouse action from the proper courts. I am 

satisfied that there are men in the Federal Government who are very sympathetic to this Hudson Bay 

Route, and we must do all we can to get them to remove the imposition on this route and to get more 

action for the Hudson Bay Route. I think the very minimum we should have for fair trial, is at least 

sixteen million bushels of wheat going from Churchill. We must take into consideration that Churchill is 

just a village. They have no propaganda agency or Board of Trade like the other ocean-going points, and 

as the mover has already intimated, the Hudson Bay Route Association is doing a very splendid job 

along those lines. 

 

I would just like to quote what the Minister of Transport, Mr. Chevrier, said, in 1945, when he was 

asked for government policy on the Hudson Bay Route. He had this to say: ―In the matter of Churchill, it 

is to facilitate the use of this port in every way possible.‖ And so I plead for the unanimous support of 

the Assembly in this matter to assist the economy of the people on the prairies, to remove the 

imposition, and to bring this port into further use. I gladly second the Motion. 

 

Mr. J.W. Horsman (Wilkie): — I beg leave to move the adjournment of the debate. 

 

Motion agreed to and debate adjourned. 

 

AGRICULTURAL PRICES SUPPORT 

 

Moved by Mr. James Gibson (Morse), seconded by Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): 

 

―That this Assembly request the Provincial Government to urge the Dominion Government to 

immediately invoke the provisions of the Agricultural Prices Support Act to the point of assuring 

farmers of their rightful share of the national income; and that the said Government immediately 

institute a permanent 

  



 

March 7, 1950 

 

 

 
6 

system of support prices on all farm products which will bear a proper relationship to the farmers‘ cost 

of production.‖ 

 

Mr. Gibson: — Mr. Speaker, the farmer in Canada today, and more particularly the western Canadian 

farmer is faced with conditions which will soon result in shaking net incomes. They are: 

 

(1) A decline in export markets for all foods, especially wheat due fundamentally to international trade 

and exchange difficulties. Surpluses are starting to pile up, and the presence of surpluses will inevitably 

force prices down. 

 

(2) Shrinkage of domestic markets due to unemployment, which is also caused in part by trade 

dislocation. 

 

(3) Increasing operating costs of production due to the relatively stable prices of farm equipment, farm 

fuels, etc. Historically the prices of these commodities have never fallen as quickly or as low as farm 

prices, and the increasing control of few farms and farm machinery and oil industries, will tend to make 

these prices even more sticky. 

 

(4) Inflated real restate cost will further aggravate the effect of falling cash incomes. Traditionally these 

costs, interest and capital payments, have been the least flexible aspect of the farm business and have 

been usually incurred when incomes were inflated and interest rates high. Thus a farmer in 1947 may 

have purchased land for $40 an acre and taken out a mortgage on the basis of that assessment. That 

particular farm may be only capable of producing $20 per acre over the life time of that mortgage, and 

when prices and income decline the farmer is still faced with those inflated fixed costs. 

 

These four factors will in the near future cause a reduction in net income for farmers. Furthermore if a 

general recession were to set in at the same time, and because of the tendency of farm prices to drop 

further than other prices in our economy, the farmers‘ share of the national income will be reduced more 

drastically than that of other groups. 

 

I have a table here, Mr. Speaker, that I think will substantiate that statement. It is a table of farm income 

as a proportion of national income for the years 1926 to 1948 inclusive; that is, for a twenty-three year 

period. I should point out that some 45% of our population live in the rural area and over 30 per cent of 

our population are directly engaged in farming. This table as I said, shows the percentage of farm 

income from the national income. In 1926, it was 16.9 per cent; 1927, it was 14.9 per cent; 1928, it was 

14.6 per cent; 1929, it was 9.4 per cent – you will notice now how, as I said, it falls faster than that of 

other groups; in 1930, it was 8.6 per cent; 1931, it was 4.5 per cent; in 1932, it was 4.2 per cent and in 

1933, it beats the all-time low of 3.8 per cent. Now that was just about the time when the more wheat a 

farmer had the larger his deficit became. 

 

I am not going to weary you by reading all of those figures, Mr. Speaker. They continue on down the 

line along about those levels until 

  



 

March 7, 1950 

 

 

 
7 

we get to 1946 when we find it was 11.5 per cent that over 30 per cent of the population got of the 

national income. The next year, 1947, it went down to 11.1 per cent and in 1948, possible the most 

prosperous year in farming history, it reached 13.2 per cent. I took those figures from the Dominion 

Bureau of Statistics, but I totaled them myself. I may have been wrong in this; but I found that, for the 

23 years, the average percentage of farm income of the national income was 9.5 per cent. 

 

I have another group of figures, Mr. Speaker, that I believe are equally startling. Those figures support 

to show the percentage of farm income of the national income and the percentage of corporation profits. 

Those are the years 1938 to 1948, an eleven-year period. The reason I took those years is that those are, 

as you will notice, the years of the larger farm income. In 1938, the percentage of farm income of the 

national income was 9.3 and the percentage of corporation cost, (it is not corporation income) was 13.6, 

or 4.3 in excess of the farm income for that year. The next year, 1939, it was 10.7 for the farm and 15 

per cent corporation profits, again 4.3 in excess. In 1949, it was 9.7 for the farm and 16 per cent for the 

corporation profits, this time 6.3 per cent in excess of the farmers‘ share of the income. In 1941, it was 

8.3 per cent and the corporation profits‘ percentage of the national income was 17.5 per cent – more than 

twice as much for corporation profits as for farm incomes in that year. Mr. Speaker, I have all the figures 

here. I am not going to weary you by reading them, but again I totaled those figures and I find that while 

the percentage for farm income for a 23-year period was 9.5 per cent, for this eleven-year period they 

are 10.9 per cent, and corporation income, that is corporation profits, for the same period is 15.1 per cent 

or an average of 4.2 per cent per year over that of farm income. 

 

This division of 10.9 of the national income amongst at least 30 per cent of Canada‘s population clearly 

implies that rural property is a problem of major concern and points up the necessity of raising the 

income level of this large sector of the nation. The relatively high share of national income represented 

by corporation profits (15.1 per cent) is indicative of the concentration of wealth in Canada. When 

contrasted to the farmers‘ share of the national income, it implies that a re-distribution of income is 

sorely needed either through higher farm prices, controlled prices of equipment and materials used by 

farmers, or by means of progressive income or corporation taxes re-distributed through various welfare 

measures. 

 

The problems of reducing fluctuations in income and raising the minimum level of farm income is met 

by various means throughout the world. In the United States there is a whole host of programmes, 

including support prices based on parity, soil conservation payments, Federal crop support prices based 

on parity, soil conservation payments, Federal crop insurance and a comprehensive Federal farm credit 

system, as well as rural electrification and other more limited programmes. These programmes, I am 

sure, are well known to all hon. members and do not require elaboration. It is of interest to note, 

however, that the U.S. Government, in 1949, spent $340 million in its soil conservation programmes and 

$305 million for supporting farm prices. Now, this latter figure, this $305 million, is not a stated sum of 

money that the Federal Government of the United States has set aside for support prices, but it is the 

actual net cost to the Government in the difference in price after purchase and resale by the Government 

through its Commodity Credit Corporation. 

 

  



 

March 7, 1950 

 

 

 
8 

In Australia a close relationship between support prices and production costs is maintained in the 

guaranteed prices system of the Wheat Stabilization scheme. There the guaranteed price of wheat is 

varied each year in accordance with the movement of wheat production costs. The guaranteed price for 

1948-1949, for instance, was increased by 7.05 per cent since the production costs index of 1948-1949 

had increased by that amount. In addition to this specific programme there are various soil and water 

conservation programmes in effect in Australia. Furthermore, a significant re-distribution of national 

income is effected through comprehensive welfare measures. 

 

The British Government uses a system of forward prices which guarantees the farmer over the entire 

production period of a particular commodity. Prices for vegetables may be guaranteed for three-month 

periods, while prices for wheat will be guaranteed for a year, and for cattle for five or six years. The 

farmer can, under this scheme, plan his production on a basis of a known guaranteed return when his 

product is ready for market. Prices under this system are based primarily on demand but are also 

influenced by necessity for induced planned production levels. Apart from this price programme the 

British farmer together with other groups in the economy has the advantage of national health, housing 

and other welfare measures. 

 

Compared with farmers in other countries the Canadian farmer is in a relatively inferior category. The 

Federal Government has no adequate programme which redistributes national wealth effectively. It has 

no adequate health, housing or old age pension scheme. Its contributory P.F.A.A. scheme had added 

somewhat to farm income in parts of Western Canada, but it is limited to an average of from $200 to 

$300 per farm or, where there is almost a total failure, may reach a maximum of $500 per farm. We 

have the P.F.R.A. which operates on a very limited scale and there is no comprehensive soil 

conservation scheme in effect. 

 

A good start in soil conservation has been given by this Government through its Department of 

Agriculture and further expansion of this scheme is planned for the future, but with the limited financial 

resources of this Province we can never hope to be able to provide sufficient moneys for this important 

project. On the other hand a comprehensive soil conservation scheme through P.F.R.A. would provide 

the western farmer with greater stability, would lessen the need for payments from the P.F.A.A., and 

would stop the loss of our soil resources through wind and water erosion. Finally Canadian tariff 

policies have weighted heavily in favour of industrial areas in Eastern Canada. I believe that it was the 

member from Lumsden (Mr. Thair) who said, the other day, that Canadian tariff policy had cost the 

people of Saskatchewan seven million dollars in 1949. 

 

In the absence of other possible measures, the Agricultural Prices Support Act offers the only immediate 

means of re-distributing national income and should be implemented. It is suggested that support prices 

be related to costs of production. Based on experience in Australia, this would be a practical proposition. 

An intensive study of the Australian scheme should be made prior to adopting a similar policy here. 

 

I made mention a little while ago about the presence of 

  



 

March 7, 1950 

 

 

 
9 

surpluses inevitably forcing prices down. I don‘t think that we should have fear of such surpluses and I 

don‘t think there is any good reason why surpluses should force prices down. I have here a table that 

was made in 1946 by the F.A.O., and they estimated in this table that the following increase in 

production of food would be required to attain satisfactory nutritional levels throughout the world. They 

estimated that cereals would have to be increased by 21 per cent; that milk would have to be increased 

by 100 per cent; that meat would have to be increased by 46 per cent; roots and tubers by 27 per cent; 

fruits and vegetables by 163 per cent, and that fats would have to be increased by 34 per cent. Today, 

however, available per capita food supplies are actually less than they were in 1939. 

 

It is clear, therefore, that we do not have enough food to feed a population equivalent to that of 1939. 

But in addition to the population of 1939, we have an increased population of not less than 200,000,000 

people and a very large proportion of this increase has taken place in the undernourished countries of the 

East. As Norris E. Dodd, the present Director-General of F.O.A. said on a recent visit to Australia: 

 

―We have 50,000 new guests at our table every breakfast time, and we have not got 50,000 additional 

bowls of rice of milk to take care of our new guests.‖ 

 

Social and political security can be maintained only if fundamentals are taken care of. The fundamentals 

the world requires are food, clothing and shelter. 

 

If international action is successful in coping with this problem of the need to increase and distribute 

foods then it is essential that producers receive returns which would permit them to expand production. 

If export prices must be keep low to be within the reach of foreign consumers then domestic producers 

should be compensated by means of support prices. 

 

Expansion of production implies land use and the maintenance of soil fertility. Without adequate 

incomes and without direct financial aid it is virtually impossible for farmers to husband their soil 

properly to produce at optimum levels. The provision of adequate support prices will permit farmers to 

plan production and apply conservation measures. In many cases Government aid will be required in 

addition to support prices to prevent permanent loss of soil resources. Support prices, or rather desirable 

income levels will permit farmers to make investments designed to maintain soil fertility. However, the 

prevention of actual soil removal and major soil rebuilding programmes are out of reach of even those 

farmer show enjoy a moderately good income level. This is recognized in the United States and to some 

extent in Canada here Federal and local governments, as in the case of Saskatchewan, make substantial 

contributions for irrigation and reclamation works. In contrast to the Untied States, the Canadian 

Government has no soil conservation programme as such; that is a program that deals with individual 

farm units. The United States realized 20 years ago that such a programme must be implemented in 

order to conserve irreplaceable resources. The failure of the Canadian Government to take steps to meet 

this problem on a comprehensive basis has resulted in great permanent economic losses accompanied by 

social dislocations. 

 

  



 

March 7, 1950 

 

 

 
10 

The whole question of soil conservation has become worldwide in aspect: the continued pressure of 

population on soil resources which are being rapidly depleted. This depletion is a major threat to world 

peace and human survival. As Mr. H. H. Bennett, Chief of the United States Soil Conservation Service, 

puts it: 

 

―Soil erosion is, I think, a greater threat to the peace of the world than even the atomic bomb. Or put it 

in another way: However terrible the effects of the atomic bomb may loon on the world‘s horizon, the 

real substance of goodwill and peace still resides in production land.‖ 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I believe that through prices support and soil conservation payments the 

Canadian Government will be promoting peace in a more constructive fashion than through the 

construction of armaments. So I move, seconded by Mr. Dewhurst: 

 

―That this Assembly requires the Provincial Government to urge the Dominion Government to 

immediately invoke the provisions of the Agricultural Prices Support Act to the point of assuring 

famers of their rightful share of the national income; and that the said Government immediately 

institute a permanent system of support prices on all farm products which will bear a proper 

relationship to the farmers‘ cost of production.‖ 

 

AGRICULTURAL RECLAMATION AND CONSERVATION 

 

Moved by Mr. N.L. Buchanan (Notukeu-Willowbunch), seconded by Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough): 

 

―That this Assembly urge the incorporation of present P.F.R.A. activities into a more comprehensive 

agricultural reclamation and conservation service by the Dominion Government; and that adequate 

grants be made available to provincial governments for assistance to designated conservation districts, 

organized under provincial status, for the purpose of overcoming the natural hazards peculiar to such 

areas, and that both technical and financial assistance be made available to farmers in such areas to 

enable them to institute proper land use farm practices, as the eventual solution to the recurring 

problems necessitating expenditures in various forms of relief.‖ 

 

In making the above Motion, Mr. Buchanan said: 

 

It should not be necessary, Mr. Speaker, that I take up any great length of time in speaking on this 

Motion. I think that members on all sides of the Hose are in more or less agreement with what this 

Motion sets out. 

 

The Prairie Farm Assistance Act was designed to apply to a large portion of the western provinces south 

of what we know as the Precambrian area, roughly south of a line drawn through Winnipeg, north of 

Yorkton through Saskatchewan, through Saskatoon and to Edmonton on into British Columbia. South of 

this line we have had, for many years, recurrent drought areas, sometimes small areas have been affected 

and too often large areas of this prairie region were affected, with a resultant depressing effect on the 

economy, on the economic conditions of the people immediately affected, also with a depressing effect 

on the economy of the province as a whole and the 

  



 

March 7, 1950 

 

 

 
11 

And so this area to which the P.F.R.A. Act was designed to apply has too often in the past had a 

depressing effect upon the economy of this province and on the economy of the Dominion as a whole. 

 

On April 10, 1935, this Act was brought into effect in the Federal House of Commons. In its 

introduction, before the House went into committee to study the terms of the Act, the Hon. Robert Weir, 

Minister of Agriculture at the time, asked leave of the House to consider a resolution: ―It is expedient to 

bring in a measure to provide for the rehabilitation of drought areas in the province of Manitoba, 

Saskatchewan and Alberta, and for the appropriation for the said purpose of such funds as may be 

necessary to carry into effect he proposed legislation.‖ It was discussed at considerable length and was 

set out with the intention of rehabilitating this part of Western Canada. 

 

This Act has now been in effect for fifteen years and last year, we suffered a major drought in a large 

portion of southwestern Saskatchewan southeastern Alberta. Had this Act done the things that it was 

intended to do, we would not have had the same conditions in this area that we had in the 1930s – that is, 

the picture of people pulling out, leaving what they had there and going to other parts of the province 

and to other parts of the Dominion in order to be able to carry on. Once again, however, to a somewhat 

smaller degree it is true, because the drought did not affect such a large area as it did in the ‗thirties; 

nevertheless, once again this year we see people leaving those drought areas and trying to find places 

where they can make a better living. 

 

This Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act, passed in 1935, is quite similar in its clauses to the Buchanan 

amendment to the Agricultural Appropriation Bill passed in the United States in 1919. Later on I intend 

to compare what has been done under the United States Bill, and what has been done under our Bill. In 

the first place the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act was never given enough money to make it amount to 

anything. Last year, only $3,000,000 was appropriated for the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act. Now 

$3,000,000 to be spent in these three provinces which the Act covers is not nearly enough, and then, in 

the second place before projects were set up under the Act there was not sufficient study given to them. 

 

We have several of the projects in the province. One of the oldest projects that we have, established in 

1939, was in the town of Valmarie which lies in my own constituency. Valmarie was the first large 

P.F.R.A. project in the province. This project was given immeasurable help to the people of that 

community but, because proper land use and development practices were not used in the first place this 

project became too expensive – that is, seventy-some dollars an acre were spent, and it brought into 

operation 4,666 acres. Now this was too high an amount and was caused, they said, by improper land 

development and utilization. 

 

The soil in this particular project is a gumbo soil and, when water is put on it, it swells and then when it 

dries it dries with huge cracks that a car tire will drop into. So some study and knowledge has to be used, 

by the people using it, in the application of water to land in this project. Then, too, the soil contains toxic 

or poisonous salts, and, of course, the water put on this land brought these salts to the surface with the 

result that the original settlers who made use of 

  



 

March 7, 1950 

 

 

 
12 

this soon abandoned it. It had to be brought into active use once again by the P.F.R.A. itself; they were 

forced to cultivate it and sow it to crops and then the settlers were allowed to harvest the crops. This is 

one of the things that contributed to bringing up the cost to such a high figure per acre. 

 

In Maple Creek, the project there cost approximately $50 an acre. There were two major problems here. 

One was the lack of water and the other was very poor topsoil combined with fairly solid subsoil. The 

latter condition has resulted in the deposition of alkali on the surface once again, on the land that is 

being irrigated. However, it is the former problem which is indicative of the inefficiency of the P.F.R.A. 

at the time that these projects were developed. Prior to the installation of the irrigation project at Maple 

Creek, flood rights had been held, traditionally, by the ranchers of the area for the purpose of growing 

feed. Without taking these rights into account and without making arrangements with the holders of the 

rights, P.F.R.A. proceeded with the construction of storage works and distribution system to handle 

more water than was actually available. Irrigated plots were set up, and settlers encouraged to take up 

holdings. However, after all this was done, it was soon discovered that sufficient water was, in fact, not 

available for irrigation. This situation remains today, and only some 4,000 acres are irrigated of a 

potential 10,000 irrigatable acres. 

 

At Eastend, the investment was about $60 an acre. A little more success can be claimed here by the 

P.F.R.A. However, here, too, the mismanagement of water application and inadequate canal structure 

has resulted in considerable damage once again form alkali, which deposits on the top of the soil. This 

necessitates further substantial investment in reclamation of the soils and in new canals and ditches, and 

last but not least the expenditure of about $150,000 at Kisbey Flats and on the Souris-Estevan project 

can be entirely written-off due to poor engineering. Those facilities at this particular place have never 

been used and are not usable at the present time. 

 

The P.F.R.A. Act, in my opinion and I believe in the opinion of all members, is a good Act, an Act 

which could be used to rehabilitate Saskatchewan and the areas subject to drought in Alberta and 

Manitoba. But at the beginning, when the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act was first brought into being 

and first applied, Mr. Speaker, it was applied more for the possibility of immediate political gain rather 

than for the long term benefit of the people of this area. 

 

Some hon. members may not think this is true, but all you have to do is go down around the town of 

Valmarie and talk to some of the people there. First of all, it was rushed in there without sufficient study 

being given to the problems that irrigation would present in that particular type of soil, and then, too, it 

was put in there with the idea of holding a substantial number of Liberal votes. Any person who was 

digging ditches either on the Valmarie project or helping to put up fences on the Valmarie community 

pasture at that time could not hold their jobs if they so much as whispered that they would support 

anything other than the Liberal Party. This was true in those days – you remember 

  



 

March 7, 1950 

 

 

 
13 

in the 1930s – not only of the P.F.R.A., but it was equally true of the administration of relief in this 

province, and people over Saskatchewan, especially the southern part, know this to be true. 

 

Then too, in the early stages of the P.F.R.A. when they moved out of these community pastures, there 

was not sufficient attention paid to their needs. At that particular time I happened to be north of Prince 

Albert and I saw some of these settlers being moved in there, Mr. Speaker. They were brought in there, 

given a team of oxen, a walking plough and a quarter-section of land on a jackpine ridge, and the 

benevolent authorities that sent them there helped that they would never hear from them again. 

However, they became a greater problem when they were established on these jackpine ridges north of 

the Saskatchewan River than they ever were in the drought-stricken south. 

 

I mentioned, at the outset, the amendment to the Agricultural Appropriation Bill passed in the United 

States in 1929. Since this Bill was brought into effect in the United States some 21 years ago, four and 

one-half million farmers have been organized, under this Amendment, on conservation projects, and 

they have been paid for performing certain conservation practices. Fourteen million acres have been 

terraced; 111,000,000 acres contoured; 622,000 acres have been plated to trees; 186,000,000 tons of 

lime have been used also 16,000,000 tons of super-phosphate. In 1950, some $3,000,000,000 has been 

appropriated for this project alone and, last year, as the member from Morse (Mr. J. Gibson) stated, 

$349,000,000 were spent by this project which is the equivalent appropriated for the Prairie Farm 

Rehabilitation Act. Do you know what has been appropriated for the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act by 

the Dominion of Canada, this year? Three million dollars! Three million dollars, and in the United States 

three hundred million dollars. Now, I will agree in that there is a difference in population between 

United States and Canada, but there isn‘t a hundred times the difference such as this would indicate. 

 

Since the inception of the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act we have had a new man appointed to head it. 

His office is in Regina; his name is L. B. Thompson, and, fortunately, in L. B. Thompson we have a man 

who is anxious to do a job without fear or favour. He works in close co-operation with our Department 

of Agriculture. All he needs is the money to go ahead and do a real job of irrigation and land 

conservation and development. 

 

The Provincial Government, as the member from Morse stated, has taken the load in land conservation 

and development; but it has not the financial wherewithal, in the limits of a provincial boundary, for 

comprehensive programmes, and to really go into and do something with such a project is beyond the 

financial powers of any provincial government. There is legislation on our statute books now for the 

establishment of conservation districts, and the provincial Department of Agriculture has, through its 

Agricultural Representative Service and local committees, carried out a programme of land-use 

education. Furthermore, various demonstration areas have been set up in this province which farmers 

can use as a model and so learn how to develop areas of their own. 

  



 

March 7, 1950 

 

 

 
14 

Grants for conservation projects are available for the use of municipalities and groups of municipalities. 

 

In this way the Province has set the stage for a full-fledge conservation programme and awaits the 

contribution of the Federal Government. Since much research has now been done in the field, it is quite 

evident that an action programme is needed at once before further loss of soil resources takes place, and 

before we have a further spread of the more or less localized drought area that we have in this province. 

The possibilities that lie within the power of the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act are practically 

unlimited. One only has to do a small amount of travelling over this province to realize what an active 

and virile Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act could do. Up near the Saskatchewan River there are thousands 

of acres of the best soil in this province that only awaits some work by the P.F.R.A. We have similar 

areas in other parts of the province. P.F.R.A. should not be confined only to the storage of water that is 

necessary, but it should go out into the field of education, out into the field of developing projects to 

serve as an example for other people to follow, and out into the field of assistance to water users‘ 

associations and land conservation projects. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I move this Resolution, 

seconded by the hon. member for Bengough (Mr. Al. L. S. Brown). 

 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough): — After the remarks made by the hon. member for Notukeu-

Willowbunch, I am satisfied that all members of the House will appreciate the importance of the matter 

under discussion, particularly as it affects the long-term or even the short-term production of agricultural 

foodstuffs in the province of Saskatchewan. Realizing that foodstuff is not only important in our 

provincial economy but it is equally important in our national economy, I think we will all realize that 

we must utilize all the forces at our disposal if we are to maintain this agricultural production at even the 

level at which it is at the present time. Particularly the matter is of very great importance if we are to 

consider extending our agricultural production in this province of Saskatchewan, as well as in the 

Dominion of Canada. 

 

We are in our small corner must do what we can to do what the P.F.R.A. implies – to rehabilitate certain 

areas of this province by reclaiming land into production, land which has in the past ten or fifteen years 

gone out of production. Further, by extending the scope of the P.F.R.A. to include not only additional 

areas but to place at the disposal of the P.F.R.A. additional resources, not only resources in the form of 

money but also resources in the form of technical and scientific knowledge in such a way that it can be 

made available to the farmer or the individual so that he can make use of it in the most practical way. 

 

Possibly the most difficult task that faces us who are interested in expansion of the type of work that the 

P.F.R.A. implies, is to convince the public of the necessity of it. This is particularly true of people who 

are not closely associated with the production of agricultural goods and possibly, to a large degree, 

people who are living in urban centres; for they fail to realize that their well-being and their standard of 

living depends to a very large degree on the extent that we are able to maintain agricultural production at 

a very high level. A dust storm in the southwestern part of Saskatchewan affects the living standards of 

anyone living in any urban centres; a flood with its resulting cost in soil erosion, affects the standard of 

living of anyone, no matter whether they may live in that area or not. When we have, as we have, areas 

in this province not making their fair or proper contribution to our economy, it definitely affects 

  



 

March 7, 1950 

 

 

 
15 

us all. 

 

It is imperative for those of us who are interested in this work and who realize the necessity of it, to do 

two things. First, we must use all means at our disposal to publicize the importance of this question; we 

must use means such as the press, magazines and even through the medium of Legislature, to attempt to 

impress upon the people of Canada the importance of this question. Then, within this Legislature, we as 

legislators must use the appropriate means at our disposal to see that we create the legislative framework 

from which we can build a proper P.F.R.A. in this dominion of ours – a Legislative framework which 

must include a co-operating and co-coordinating effort between the Federal and the Provincial 

Governments of the different provinces, for the job is much too vast and much too important to leave it 

to an individual who may happen to be situated in the centre of industrial Saskatchewan or who may 

happen to be living in an area which is affected by some other handicap. It is indeed too much for local 

communities or even local governing bodies to attempt to wrestle with the problem; it is indeed too big 

to expect Provincial Governments, realizing that provincial governments have limitations placed upon 

them, to undertake it on their own behalf. It requires the use of machinery and equipment and long term 

investments which are far beyond the ability of the individual, local governing bodies or even provincial 

governments to provide; so the onus comes on the Federal Government as a national government to 

accept its share of the responsibility, and in many ways to take the lead in that respect. It requires the co-

operation and the co-ordinating efforts of the individuals, local communities, provincial governments 

and the Dominion Government. 

 

I think that no better example can be given to the share that the Federal Government should take in this 

respect than was illustrated here, a few days ago, when the member for Maple Creek suggested that the 

people of his area, which is an area which the P.F.R.A. at the present serves, have made a contribution to 

the national economy of Canada – and they have, unquestionably they have. The people living in the 

areas served at the present time by the P.F.R.A. have made a greater contribution per individual in the 

form of new wealth than has any other group of people anywhere in the world. On the basis, on the basis 

of the contribution which we who live in this area have made to the national economy, it becomes 

indeed a national responsibility, and it is the responsibility of the national government in areas such as 

this to do one of two things. First, they can write off as a total loss investments which have been made in 

these areas which includes writing off the city of Regina. Now I don‘t suggest that anyone is going to 

make that proposal – that we can write off as a total loss the investments which have been made in the 

area now served by the P.F.R.A. Second, they can accept their responsibility in creating a more stable 

and permanent type of agricultural economy within this area. 

 

It is true, as the hon. member for Notukeu-Willowbunch has pointed out, that the P.F.R.A., or the 

Federal Government through the medium of the P.F.R.A. which is at present in existence, has accepted 

some responsibility. As has been pointed out, this responsibility has been indeed limited, and it has on 

numerous occasions been limited and impeded by political activity which reduces its effectiveness and 

reduces the way in which it should be doing its job. But the problem cannot be solved by piecemeal and 

unco-ordinated efforts in which no one knows what the other 

  



 

March 7, 1950 

 

 

 
16 

one is doing, or knows why he is doing it. The problem is not solved by spending a hundred thousands 

of dollars; it is not solved by spending millions of dollars. It can only be solved by investing on long-

term projects hundreds of millions of dollars in the areas in which the P.F.R.A. should and ought to be 

working. There is only one source from which that investment can come, and that is from the National 

Government for within their means they have control over finances of this province and they have the 

means at their disposal by which they can undertake public investment programmes and create physical 

assets which will be of value to Canada as a whole, and they are in a position to create and build these 

physical assets without obtaining an over-riding burden of debt, an overriding burden of debt which if 

placed on the individual or even on a group of individuals, would make it impossible for that individual 

or a group of individuals, or even the individual project, to ever meet. 

 

As I suggested the Federal Government has accepted its responsibility to an extent, and I suggest it is 

only to the extent that they have accepted the responsibility that they recognize that we have a problem; 

but I assure you that this problem is not unsurmountable. It is true that they have obstacles to overcome, 

but other countries have undertaken to meet this problem through a conservation and development 

programme. Reference has been made to one here, this afternoon – to the conservation and development 

programme which has been undertaken in the United States, and I suggest that even in the United States 

they are far from meeting their ultimate goal but they are definitely further along that road than we are 

here in Canada. 

 

The hon. member from Notukeu-Willowbunch made reference to certain specific projects which the 

C.C.F. Government had undertaken, and to these we might add such projects as community pastures, 

which have taken out of our wheat production, in particular, certain areas of submarginal land and 

placed them in a type of agriculture which makes it possible for them to make more profitable use of 

that land. Reference could also be made to certain provincial projects which have been undertaken by 

the Provincial Government through the Department of Agriculture and through their (conservation) 

development branch. We could refer to a few of them which were carried on here in 1949 – the matter of 

feed and fodder development, for instance, undertaken to meet the ever-repeating feed and fodder 

requirements in certain areas. There were 13,000 acres under development, and 5,000 acres, in 1949, 

were seeded to forage crops. In another field, the field of irrigation, in which they attempt to use the 

waters which have been stored up, in the year 1949, some 2,254 acres were put under development and 

in addition to this there have been several schemes undertaken through the co-operation of R.M.‘s and 

L.I.D.‘s and the Conservation branch of the Department of Agriculture. 

 

However, all that has been undertaken by the P.F.R.A. and the Provincial Government has merely 

touched the surface. It has been far from reaching the root of the problem, and what we have been able 

to do in 1949, through the Department of Agriculture of the Provincial Government has been to indicate 

that we realize we have a problem there. We realize that we have certain responsibilities in respect to 

that problem and that we have prepared to co-operate with us in meeting and solving this problem. We 

have, in the year 1949, spent five times as much money in that particular type of work as was ever spent 

by the previous administration or even in the 

  



 

March 7, 1950 

 

 

 
17 

agricultural field of activities as a whole. In addition to that we are in a position now where we have a 

great deal of machinery at our disposal which can be put to work in conjunction with efforts put forth by 

the P.F.R.A., so that the combined efforts of the two may be much more effective and much more 

efficient than they were in the past. I might point out here, Mr. Speaker, that we in Saskatchewan, I 

think, realize the problem even more so than do our neighbouring provinces, for we have, in 1949, spent 

more money on conservation and development than have the provinces of Alberta and Manitoba put 

together. 

 

However, in this question of conservation and development, I believe that we should keep a proper 

perspective and a proper relationship. We are not going to develop overnight, nor even over a period of 

years; we are not going to develop here in Saskatchewan an economy based on irrigation. We are going 

to have dry-land farming coupled with the risks that go with dry-land farming; but what we can do 

through the medium of conservation and development is that we can supplement our dry-land farming 

and place our agriculture economy here in Saskatchewan on a much more stable and permanent basis 

than it has been in the past. We can do more than that, Mr. Speaker. We can make it possible to make 

the best possible utilization of our agricultural resources in this province, which, after all, contribute by 

far the largest percentage to the provincial wealth of this province. 

 

Through the Resolution which has been moved by the hon. member from Notukeu-Willowbunch, we are 

requesting that the Federal Government take the lead in that respect and that it place at the disposal of 

this conservation and development programme the resources which it has at its disposal and which no 

other governing body has, and that they go further, and that they remove from the field of political 

activities such organizations as P.F.R.A. so that it will not pamper or hamstring the work which they are 

undertaking. We suggest that the P.F.R.A. be extended and that it be improved and, thirdly, that a co-

operative effort be undertaken between the Federal Government, the provincial governments, 

individuals and local communities in which these individual projects may be undertaken. Further, that 

assistance in the medium of technical and financial aid be given to farmers or groups of farmers so that 

they may be able to take the best possible advantage of the work which is undertaken, either by the 

P.F.R.A. or by our own conservation and development programme. By doing this, Mr. Speaker, (and I 

close with this), we will to a large degree eliminate the ever-repeating relief problem here in the west, 

and we will be making it possible for the people who live in these areas to make their rightful 

contribution to the economy, not only of Canada but of the world as a whole. 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I would move the adjournment of the debate. 

 

Motion agreed to and debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:00 o‘clock p.m. 


