



















































Hansard: March 22, 1950


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Eleventh Legislature 

25th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 22, 1950. 

 

The House met at 3 o‘clock p.m. 

 

ON ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Public Health): — This morning‘s ‗Leader-Post‘ reports me as 

supporting the amendment proposed by the hon. member for Arm River, yesterday. I will read the 

paragraph — the ‗Leader-Post‘ says: 

 

―Mr. Bentley said the amendment met with his approval and he advised every member to support it.‖ 

 

This is an error in reporting, Mr. Speaker, and the ‗Leader-Post‘ and I have been in touch with each 

other and they will correct this statement in this afternoon‘s and tomorrow morning‘s edition. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed from Tuesday, March 21, 1950, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer); that Mr. Speaker do now leave the chair. (The Assembly to go 

into Committee of Supply). 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, seeing that this is the first time I have 

officially spoken in this House, I would like to add my regrets to those already expressed here in regard 

to the passing of the two members who were with us just a year ago. Mr. Prince of The Battlefords and 

Mr. Murray of Gull Lake — and to extend to their families my deepest sympathy. Naturally, I knew Mr. 

Murray the better of the two, although I have heard Mr. Prince spoken of very well by members on both 

sides of this House; Mr. Murray having relatives in this city whom I was well acquainted with — I, 

perhaps, might mention the fact that one of nephews was a survivor of the sinking of the Corvette 

‗Regina‘ in 1943. They are a very fine family. 

 

I would like too, to congratulate the three new members, and want especially to mention the fact that 

their maiden speeches in this House were all excellent. I want to mention now the speeches of the 

Provincial Treasurer and the member from Gravelbourg. They were both very good and expressed the 

points of view, as far as Government and Opposition are concerned, on the Budget. We could not help 

but notice, Mr. Speaker, that they both blossomed out in new suits when they made their speeches; 

possibly they are preparing for television or something of that kind, or perhaps they were just trying to 

beat the three per cent tax. 

 

Now, just before I get into my speech, there has been some talk here — not for the last week or two — 

concerning the election campaign in England, and I have a copy here of the ‗Daily Mirror‘ dated 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

2 

 

February 23rd. It is quite a Conservative paper (with a small ‗c‘), but had supported Labour in England 

consistently in the last five years. Now this was printed the day before the election, and I have a 

statement here of the policy of that paper which, I think, will be of interest to this House, and I will read 

it: 

 

―WHERE WE STAND: The Daily Mirror supports the Labour Party at the general election. We have 

made this decision after full and careful consideration of the claims of all the Parties. This has 

convinced us that the Labour Party‘s plan for recovery is needed for the safety of Britain as a whole. 

This is a critical moment in our history, and the world. It is not a time for starting to dither and go 

backwards. We must go forward, determined to make secure the future of our great country. Economic 

difficulties are bound to be ahead. We believe that the Labour Party is the only one which can deal 

with them. 

 

We support the Labour Party because it has kept its promises and earned our trust. Its policy 

has been one of fairness and humanity; we believe it is the only policy that can work. We must go 

forward with the people because in these days it is absolutely impossible to go forward without 

them.‖ 

 

Now that is what was said a month ago in Great Britain, by a paper that we possibly would not think 

would back the Labour Party — the ‗Daily Mirror and Sunday Pictorial‘. 

 

I am going to speak mostly on my Department, this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and possibly I might say to 

our friends in the fourth estate that to save them the trouble I have divided up the percentages; perhaps I 

will be two per cent outside of the North American continent, 10 per cent outside of this province, and 

the other 88 per cent in the province of Saskatchewan, which, of course, will include the report of my 

own Department. 

 

Now, the nerve centre of the Department of Labour might be said to be contained in three Acts — The 

Minimum Wage Act, The Hours of Work Act, and The Annual Holidays Act. We have other important 

legislation, of course — The Trade Union Act, One Day‘s Rest in Seven Act, The Workmen‘s 

Compensation Act, and so forth. The one I mentioned first, however, are the Acts that deal largely with 

the lower-paid employees and those who are, perhaps, not very well represented as far as unions are 

concerned. 

 

During the past year, the Department has made 5,995 inspections and collected the amount of $36,956 

for 1,632 employees. I might just read some figures here, breaking it down this way: The Minimum 

Wage Act — $26,027 was collected for 1,061 people; The Annual Holidays Act — $10,161 was 

collected for 573 people. The totals that I have just mentioned. It is interesting to compare the figures, 

Mr. Speaker of one year ago, which were a lot larger — almost twice as great as a matter of fact. The 

total then 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

3 

 

was $83,487 collected for 2,215 people. Now the obvious difference is that the employer in this 

province is becoming used to our legislation and we find comparatively very few infractions. We hope 

that the amounts will be less as the years go on. It is not the best indication to be able to get up and say 

that we collected large amounts of money; we would prefer that those amounts be paid in the usual way 

and not be found by our inspectors. 

 

In this same period, we found it necessary to prosecute five different groups of firms. I might say we are 

always reluctant to take that action, and we only do it in cases of defiance of the law or glaring 

infractions or something of that kind. The most recent case was right in Regina, and I am just going to 

mention this one case over the air. It was the Assiniboia Club, possibly the last place in the city where 

you would expect to find an infraction of that kind. It was the caretaker, I believe who had been there for 

four or five months without any day off, and eventually he asked for one — I think he had been off sick 

an odd time. When he did ask for a day off, however, the reception he got was ―Yes, you can have a day 

off; you can have lots of days off; in fact you are finished — fired!‖ When the case came to us, naturally 

we were quite put out about it, and took the case to court, and the strange part of it is, we lost the case. It 

turns out there was a loophole in The One Days Rest Act and The Master and Servant Act which will be 

plugged in a few days, Mr. Speaker; but the loophole was there. The Assiniboia Club, through their 

lawyer, claimed it was not an industry so that we lost the case — although we won a case and they were 

fined the full amount (I think it was $25 and costs) for not keeping proper records. 

 

I am not criticizing individually the board of directors of that Club, because I know that they are 

considered good employers when in their own particular business and I might even say that one or two 

— Ian McLennan of Burns, Gordon and men like that — are well thought of by their own employees. 

But this case it was the secretary, petty and small, and he is the one that got them into the difficulty. 

 

I am just going to mention strikes and man-days lost, for a moment. It is not very large in this province, 

it is true and even although the situation was fair this year, it was even better than last year and very 

good in comparison with other parts of Canada. Any time there are strikes, we always see the figures in 

the paper and there is quite a bit of publicity given such things; but when we stop and consider that the 

man-days are very few in comparison with, we will say, man-days lost through unemployment or 

through injury, I will just read off what we have here for the last three years: 

 

1947 — 42,908 man-days lost during that year on account of strikes and most of that was striking 

packing house industries; Accidents — 133,377 days lost owing to accidents; Unemployment — 

1,674,000. So even in 1947, which is the biggest year we have ever had as far as strikes are concerned, it 

is very small compared to days lost in other ways. 

 

1948 — 12,333 days lost in strikes; Accidents — 145,011; Unemployment – 1½ million, in round 

numbers. 

 

This year, 1949, very small — 4,574 days lost through 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

4 

 

strikes; Accidents — we have not got that compiled yet; Unemployment — 1,759,000. 

 

So strikes are not a problem in this province, Mr. Speaker, and we are very glad of that fact. We have 

very few of them. 

 

I am just going to take a moment to mention the railway service. I am glad to see that it has been 

restored, a week or two ago, after the drastic cuts on account of the shortage of coal. A good many 

people are rather sceptical that it would ever be restored and thought that the shortage of coal was 

merely an excuse to take off the service; but the officials have kept their word and that service is back on 

again. We are all pleased about it and especially the residents of the towns and communities it served 

and the railway employees who had been put out of work. 

 

Unfortunately for the railways, over a period of twenty or twenty-five years, they have lost a great deal 

of their traffic to the trucks and buses. There is no need to go into a discussion here as to whose fault it 

was. Possibly it was the fault of the officials of that day; they didn‘t keep close enough touch on the 

trend of traffic. In the United States quite a number of railways did; but in Canada, both the C.N.R. and 

C.P.R. have lost out to quite an extent and, as a result, practically carry everything in sight in the 

wintertime while the trucks are able to jack up their tires in the garages and keep them there pretty much 

all winter, then bring them out in the spring again and take the cream of the business. But they have lost 

a terrific amount of business, and, as a result, have been after increased freight rates. 

 

I will just take a moment, Mr. Speaker, and mention an idea I have had pertaining to one of the railways, 

it must be ten years ago or more. It is just this: I believe it is feasible to have much smaller equipment 

than they have at the present time. We all know the size of their passenger coaches; they weigh from 20 

to 30 tons apiece, and often we see them going over their roads with maybe two or three people riding in 

them. My suggestion was that they take buses, take the wheels off them, put on cast-iron wheels, put 

them on the rails and they would have a perfect level, smooth roadbed, and they would be able to make 

good time between the various towns and, I believe, would, sooner or later, put the buses out of 

business. Perhaps I should not be saying that on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, but I am saying 

exactly what I think. 

 

Some attempt was made a few years ago to cut down on this obsolete heavy equipment, and they got out 

some diesel trains. One runs from here to Radville and back every day via Weyburn; but still that, I 

think is much heavier than is required. I would like to qualify it, however, to the extent that the 

equipment I suggest would not be possible for trans-Canada runs or anything like that. I am referring to 

the small branch lines. Someone here, the other day, complained about the fact that there was only one 

train a month up in his constituency. I think it was the member for Redberry, (Mr. Korchinski). Well, it 

costs a lot of money to run a steam train up that particular line and back again, and no doubt the traffic 

does not warrant any more than one trip a month. But with the buses which would, as I said, make good 

time, and be economical to operate, they could give these lines daily service, maybe twice a day, and it 

would not cost them nearly as much as hauling this heavy equipment. I think it could be experimented 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

5 

 

with, with very little cost and, if it was found successful, more frequent service could be put on. 

 

There is just one more thing I want to mention before I leave railways, Mr. Speaker, and that is the fact 

they have decided not to grant a reduced rate to exhibition stock coming into our fairs and going back 

home. I think that is a mistake. Both railways apparently got together and agreed that the stock would be 

charged full rates. Now it seems to me that is rather a short-sighted policy. As the stock comes in, the 

farmers and the stock growers have this stock as a competitive interest. They buy fresh new stock to take 

back, and sell what they have brought in and, as a result, we have a great deal more stock produced in 

this country, I believe, on account of these winter fairs and the exhibitions we have during the summers. 

Now, if the railway is going to persist in the full rate, I feel it is going to cut down on the amount of 

stock moved in for exhibition purposes, and I would suggest that it would even pay them to move it for 

nothing rather than insist on full rates because, if there is more stock produced here, it means more stock 

and products and feed and so forth to be moved by the railways, and that also comes into their general 

revenue. 

 

I am going to mention something for a moment, Mr. Speaker, primarily of interest in the City of Regina 

and that is the water supply. We are greatly concerned about that. For many years we had lots of water, 

but over, we‘ll say, the last ten years — the population of this city has increased from approximately 

55,000 people until now it is up over 70,000 people, and accordingly the artesian wells we have north of 

the city simply cannot supply enough water in the summertime. Ever since I have been in politics here, 

Mr. Speaker, which goes back a period of ten years now or more, there has been talk of securing the 

supply from the Saskatchewan River. A thorough and extensive study was made back in 1930, by 

American engineers, and their reports are still on file at the City Hall. The thought that there would 

eventually be this shortage is not new and, in this connection, I would just like to take a moment and 

read a letter to you. I am sure it is going to surprise everybody here. This is to Mr. F.H. Peters, 

Commissioner of Irrigation in Calgary, and it is from Ottawa. 

 

―Sir: 

I beg to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 21st of April enclosing your copy of report of Mr. 

T.A. Murray, C.E., Consulting Engineer of the Saskatchewan Bureau of Public Health, and the 

proposed scheme of the province to divert one hundred million gallons of water per day from the South 

Saskatchewan River. 

 

―In view of your letter it has been decided to reserve the quantity of water asked for until further 

investigation, and feasibility of the scheme has been ascertained. It is noted that you intend to look into 

the matter personally, and will make mention as to what investigations, if any, should be made by the 

Department. 

 

Your obedient servant, 

L. Travina.‖ 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

6 

 

That letter is dated at Ottawa, June 6, 1911. So obviously, this situation has been considered from time 

to time for almost forty years. We all know where this water eventually must come from, and all that we 

need to do now is to have the ditch dug, put in the pumping station, piping and so forth, and bring the 

water to the cities of Regina and Moose Jaw. That is all that needs to be done excepting to find the 

money, and the amount they expect to need is approximately six million dollars. All municipalities, all 

governing bodies, whether Federal, provincial or municipal, are faced with that problem sooner or later. 

Where is the money to come from? Six million dollars is not very much in the budget of senior 

governments; but it is a lot of money for a comparatively small municipality the size of Regina. The 

Mayor has indicated that the city could handle approximately one-third of it, and someone has made the 

suggestion that the Provincial and Federal Governments put up the difference. Well, that would be a 

simple solution if feasible — and I am referring to the other 800,000 people in the province of 

Saskatchewan who would not wish to see two million dollars of the Provincial Revenue used for 

approximately the other 70,000 people. 

 

I am going to go back for a moment to the ‗70‘s and the ‗80s — 1870 and 1880 — back there when this 

province was being pioneered by the people to whom we owe so much. Now, due to rather arbitrary 

action, I think on the part of the Federal Government of that day, the capital city was placed right here in 

Regina, then called Pile O‘ Bones. Fort Qu‘Appelle was the original site, but it for some reason or other 

was discarded and the capital made right here. I believe the Federal Government must assume some 

responsibility for the actions taken by the government of that day, whether 70 or 80 years ago, this has 

now become a problem too great for the citizens of Regina to cope with. Obviously, some help is needed 

and, at the present time, delegations to Ottawa have made very little headway. 

 

Last summer most of us here will remember the election on the 15th of June. Our Liberal member was 

put in, by a handful of votes to be sure, but still one of the main points of his platform was that he would 

assure the citizens of this city of a supply of water. I think the situation is pretty much up to him, and he 

should make good that promise. There is something else too. We have a fairly active Board of Trade in 

Regina and I think they should be all-out to get this supply of water for the very industrial life of the 

city, and it is not good enough for them to say the Provincial Government should put up 2 million 

dollars. That particular Board of Trade group gets $14,000 from the City of Regina, every year, to carry 

on — and I am not complaining about that; but I think it is up to them to put on the pressure the Board 

of Trade can. It consists of business men, top-flight business men, of this city and I think it is up to them 

to assist in every way possible to have this project started and finished. 

 

Needless for me to say, the Provincial Government is going to assist in any way it can. We have always 

taken that attitude, and the Department of Agriculture and our genial Minister has done considerable 

preliminary and survey work. I would like to see the project proceeded with this year, if possible. We 

can not go along indefinitely with an inadequate supply. Just as a matter of interest, I believe Regina has 

the reputation of being the largest city in the world that is not on a lake or a river or ocean or something 

of that kind. That is not just the best reputation to have; nevertheless, it is true, and the people who live 

here now are not responsible for it. 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

7 

 

I would like to take a minute to mention the high cost of living. Prices seem to continue going right up 

although they have levelled off somewhat in the last three or four months. The history of this index is 

rather interesting. It now stands at approximately 162. In January, 1944, it was 119. Two years later, it 

had only gone up a fraction of a point to 119.7 but then climbed up six points by September of that year 

and, during the early part of 1947, when controls were taken off, the cost of living started to go up 

sharply and has continued ever since. Now, it is no explanation to say that labour is asking for increased 

wages has brought this about. My experience is, all along, that wages usually lag behind, and it is only 

when the cost of living has gone up to such an extent that the wage-earner has to have more money to 

support himself and family that another round of wage increases is asked for. I feel the responsibility 

should not be placed on labour‘s doorstep continually, as it has been done. I have suggested that if we 

can not have Federal controls we should have voluntary controls on the part of the manufacturers, the 

wholesalers, the jobbers, retailers and so forth. I refer to the large concerns because, obviously, the small 

business man has not got very much to say about it. I also suggest that these large concerns get together 

and see if they cannot get along with less profit. That is roughly what I mean, and I have had some 

correspondence with the Secretary of the Canadian Manufacturers‘ Association along those lines. That is 

all I am going to say about the cost of living for the moment. 

 

I am going to briefly mention the rental control which this House has had under discussion, the last 

week or two, and, on behalf of the thousands of wage earners in this province who rent, I want to thank 

this Government, particularly the Attorney-General, for bringing in this Bill. I want to say that I know 

the people concerned are grateful for what is being done. We all know that many rents were ‗frozen‘ too 

low. That is obvious. Everyone in this room knows of cases of that kind; but that can be corrected and 

will be corrected at the proper time. What we have in mind is fairness to the landlord and a fair rent to 

be paid by the tenant. We know that difficulties lie ahead and there are many unseen technicalities and 

circumstances that will arise. We prefer to face these difficulties rather than see many of our citizens 

suffer a loss of real weight to them, with resulting lowering of living standards through being forced to 

pay unreasonable rents. It is enough that the wage-earners in this country must spend considerable part 

of their pay for fuel and to have to pay exorbitant rents in addition. 

 

Generally speaking the Department of Labour has been engaged in the consolidation of its positions and 

the development of more effective and efficient service to the public with which it is concerned. We 

have no outstanding legislation in sight for the moment and, as I say, prefer to consolidate what we have 

done in the last five years. 

 

The outstanding achievement of the Department in the last twelve months is the passage of regulations 

under The Minimum Wage Act which brought in and covered all towns of 300 population and over. 

There are 83 of those towns, and we provided the rate of $18.50 a week for the employees who work in 

those towns. At the same time, the eight cities and nine larger towns have been raised to $21.00 a week, 

and all towns over 300 and over 500 are at the rate of $18.50. 

 

I am just going to mention labour for a moment as to what actually is ―labour‖; what does that one word 

mean? I would say that it is a word used in a collective sense to include all wage-earners, men and 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

8 

 

women, regardless of whether they work in offices, stores, garages, banks, or are school teachers, 

railway employees, and so forth. The one word ―labour‖ describes them all. Statistics show that 

approximately 65 per cent of the people in Saskatchewan live on farms; the other 35 per cent, of course 

live in towns, villages and cities. I think that that is pretty close to what one of the members mentioned, 

the other day. The farm population remains just about at what it is, but many of the young people from 

the farms come into our towns and cities, and, in many cases, in a short time are employed and join 

organizations of one kind and another. Really ―labour‖ in Saskatchewan is the people who come from 

the farms. I don‘t see where there need be any distinction at all, because most wage earners have the 

rural background in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I was going to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the younger or middle-aged people left the farm and now live 

in the town or city, and when they go home for the Christmas holiday season, they might mention to 

their parents and to the other people who might be on the farms, that there should not be this distinction. 

We are all the same, the farmer and the wage-earner. There should not be any distinction, and there 

should not be any wedge driven between us either purposely or in some cases accidentally by 

well-meaning people. As one who has always been a wage-earner himself, I think I can speak for every 

wage-earner in this province when I say that we are only too anxious to see the folks on the farms get a 

fair price for what they produce. And I think, on the other hand, the farmers of this province want to see 

those who work for wages get a fair return for what they do. 

 

At the national convention of the C.C.L., in 1943, a resolution was passed endorsing the C.C.F. as the 

political arm of the congress and that endorsation has been renewed at each convention since. Now I 

think the term ―political arm‖ is one as it creates something of a possessive impression which should not 

be there. This Government is not connected with any congress in a possessive way. They support this 

Government because this Government has done things for the benefit of the wage-earners in this 

province. That is the reason why I support it, and I believe the possessive suggestion is entirely 

erroneous. The Trades and Labour Congress has not made any official gesture of support, but we do 

know that behind it all most of them do support this Government. It is true that both congresses meet 

with the Cabinet, every year, and present briefs for things that they think the wage-earner should have. 

That is no different from any other groups we meet. We meet with the Canadian Manufacturers‘ 

Association, the Boards of Trade, the Urban Municipalities, Rural Municipalities, Teachers‘ Federation. 

They all present similar briefs telling us what they think should be done, and they bring them to the 

Government to sift through these various recommendations and suggestions and pass legislation or 

whatever is decided on. I think that is all I will say as far as the congresses are concerned. 

 

The Hours of Work Act was designed to give the employees a reasonable deal as far as wages are 

concerned, but there is one feature there that we do have difficulty with from time to time, and that is the 

definition of the word ―manager‖. Obviously, you can not take everyone in a shop or in a factory here 

and say that the eight hours is up, or the forty-four hours a week is up, you must drop everything and 

run. Obviously, those who are in charge cannot just do that, and we realize that problem. So anyone in 

the capacity of a manager is not included, although we don‘t expect management to take advantage of 

that fact. But we have on occasion 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

9 

 

found that some employers will give certain individuals maybe high-sounding titles, and they continue 

on doing the same work that they have always done and are kept excessive hours. Well, there is a 

solution for that. If the management feels these men should be in a managerial capacity, all they have to 

do is write in and we will decide; but where we find that the employee is really being worked these long 

hours by being given a high-sounding title, then we insist on the back pay. 

 

The Department also administers the fire commission permits, steam boilers, elevators and hoists and 

the theatres and public hall permits. The inspections made of boilers, pressure vessels, refrigeration 

plants, grain elevators, factories, freight elevators, liquefied petroleum gas, amount to a little over 

48,000 in the year. No fatalities are reported either in the electric stove or steam boilers for the past year, 

and we feel that things are under control there — and you may have noticed, Mr. Speaker, that various 

buildings, not only in this city but in other parts of the province have installed new elevators. The old 

ones were being worn out and obsolete and on recommendations of our Steam Boilers Brand the owners 

put in new equipment. I know the public must appreciate this new service. 

 

The Theatres Branch is in the charge of Mr. Vaughan, who acts as censor and administrator. He censors 

the films. I mentioned that before in this House, and I will not go into detail again. One picture was 

rejected, last year, and a number of eliminations made. Two pictures were submitted to a Board of 

Appeal and passed. We have 1030 theatres, and 741 public halls in the province. 

 

A few days ago I was looking over some old speeches that I made, and I came across one made on the 

14th of March, 1947, I had almost forgotten. Here is what I said on that day: 

 

―Our pictures are not the only offenders. We have these detective stories, sex magazines, and so forth. 

We see them in the book stores in various parts of the cities and towns and they are anything but what 

children should get a hold of.‖ 

 

I can recall that, in my day, it was the Chicago ‗Blade and Ledger‘. This is still in existence I believe, 

perhaps someone in this House can say for certain. They have become more streamlined now, and I 

think not anything to be desired; and if there is anything that can be done to keep these out of the 

province, I think it should be done. I referred of course to these so-called comics; I never saw anything 

funny about them. But perhaps I ought to join those groups that now take the credit for being the first to 

think about banning these comics. I see the Federal authorities have done something along that line, just 

a short time ago. But there is always a certain group, Mr. Speaker, who will do anything for money from 

the making and peddling of French postcards to the establishing of so-called comics or producing 

questionable stage plays, pictures, so-called literature; they are all of the same brand. These people care 

nothing for the harmful results and would wreck the morals of the nation as long as they made money 

out of it. 

 

I would not feel right if I did not say something in my address about the Workmen‘s Compensation 

Board. They had quite a busy year and have had a little over 12,000 cases reported, I believe. There are 

some amendments being made; I had intended to mention the two outstanding ones, but I haven‘t the 

time. However, the fund is solvent and no extra assessments 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

10 

 

will be required. I can assure any of the employers who might be listening to me that anything that we 

are doing is not going to raise the assessment. The Board gets out pamphlets every once in a while, and I 

have one here dated February, 1950, that I thought was very good. It mentions the most unusual 

accidents and the most common accidents, and the luckiest person who has had an accident. I mentioned 

the man who had the most usual accident last year. This is a bit of a subscription with a cartoon over at 

one side which shows him being carried out. It says: 

 

―Mike is a foreman who in a hurry to get back to the job after a rest period was gulping down a cup of 

coffee. The coffee was so hot that he choked and dislodged his false teeth. The teeth turned crossways 

in the gulper‘s mouth and cut his lip. Unnerved, Mike fell of his chair, struck his head against the table 

and cut his ear. It doesn‘t pay to take chances even on hot coffee.‖ 

 

They have a cartoon here which shows them carrying Mike out and the waitress behind the counter is 

looking very sad about the whole thing. 

 

The most common accident that we have, and I presume it is the same in all provinces, is the man who 

tries to lift heavy objects with only his arms or his back. Here is what they say about him. They call him 

George: 

 

―George is a 32-year old warehouseman with several years of experience in warehouse work. One day 

last August, George was stacking 60 lb. cartons of stock and while bending over to lift one from the 

floor he felt a pain in his back. The pain to his back, from strain which George sustained, laid him up 

for three weeks. George might have prevented this injury had he used proper lifting methods, bending 

his knees and getting down, keeping the back straight and lifting with the stronger leg muscles rather 

than the weaker back muscles.‖ 

 

That is all I will say about Workmen‘s Compensation, Mr. Chairman, but I do want to say something 

about fire. Fires seem to happen every few weeks even in a province as sparsely populated as 

Saskatchewan is; and we have fatalities. The latest was in Kinistino just the other day. The annual 

convention of the Fire Commission Branches was held in Regina, last May. That is the first time since 

1933. We had delegates here from all over Canada and some of the States, and were pleased to be their 

hosts for the first time in 16 years. Much valuable information is assembled at these conventions, and we 

were fortunate in securing a Mr. Stevens, from San Francisco, who came here and spoke to the 

convention and left, I think the same afternoon. He was a very busy man and could not stay any longer. 

But one statement he made impressed me a great deal as I think it did everybody and this is it: 

 

―We do not have to have fires, and if there is a fire somebody is responsible for it. If there is a loss of 

life someone is responsible for that, or if the fire spreads someone is responsible.‖ 

 

We have our Fire Commission Branch here. I think we have eight inspectors, and we have inaugurated a 

system of having schools, classes, 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

11 

 

throughout the summer months and here are some of the places we had them in last year. We had 23 

altogether. Our expert instructors go out and they call the local fire brigades together, mostly voluntary 

brigades, and instruct them on how to fight fire and how to handle the equipment properly, and so forth. 

Quite a number of places took advantage of this: Radville, Melfort, Rosetown, Mossbank, Quill Lake, 

Esterhazy, and quite a few others; and if towns want this service if they will write in we will be glad to 

provide it if we possibly can. Last year (1949), the total number of fires was 1503, with 22 deaths which 

included 11 men, 4 women and 7 children. The per capita loss was $3.22. I think someone in this House, 

someone good at figures, figured out the other night that $3.03 was the per capita cost of this new three 

per cent; well, we lost $3.22 last year as far as fire is concerned. The year before was considerably worse 

— 36 deaths; 13 men, 11 women and 12 children. So we are improving as far as fatalities are concerned. 

 

I hope the members of this side of the House will pay particular attention to this. The no. 1 cause of fires 

is smoking; (2) flues and chimneys, and that is the same in every province; (3) stoves, furnaces and 

smoke pipes. The fourth highest cause for fire in the province of Saskatchewan is electricity; fifth, 

matches, mostly children playing with matches; sixth, lightning, and that‘s practically the same all 

across Canada. The province of Saskatchewan has an excellent record. If I had time, I would like to read 

something from ‗McLeans‘ magazine, from the issue of last December, which gave the province of 

Saskatchewan and the province of British Columbia a good deal of credit for the way they have handled 

the fire problem. 

 

I have enough material here to go on for another hour and a half anyway, but we have more or less to 

divide the radio time, and it is almost 4 o‘clock and I will have to take my seat. But I am just going to 

make this one comment before I sit down. 

 

I see the member from Gravelbourg is in his seat — and we were quite interested in his very fine 

address, the other day, of which ―Cash in the Bank‖ might be the title. That would make a very 

appropriate title, I think. But possibly it could be explained this way as far as the Budget is concerned: 

When the baby wakes up in the middle of the night, the Government would give him a bottle of milk, I 

think the Opposition would give him a milk ticket. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, I think that I have said enough to indicate that I will support the budget. 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

12 

 

Mr. Harry Gibbs (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, on rising to officially take part in this Budget 

debate, I would like to join with other members who had preceded me, in passing on my condolences 

and regrets to the families of the late Mr. Alvin Murray and Mr. Paul Prince. I sincerely concur with 

members of this House that we have lost two valuable friends and able workers of the province, who did 

their duties earnestly and conscientiously. The constituency of Mr. Murray and my own of Swift Current 

adjoin, and naturally Mr. Murray and myself had very much in common. Mr. Prince I knew best as one 

of the two Liberal members who went along on the trip to Weyburn, last year, when we paid a visit to 

the mental institution, and I personally found him to be a most genial sort of chap and of a very 

observant nature. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, time marches on, and now I would like to congratulate the new members from 

Cannington, Gull Lake and The Battlefords. Knowing the hon. member for Gull Lake (Hon. T.J. 

Bentley) personally, I can assure this House they have a worthy member whose qualifications cannot be 

questioned and one who has the courage of his convictions, and one who will fight for the principles in 

which he believes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is getting towards the end of the Budget debate. The speakers we have had before 

have pretty well run me out of ammunition, so I think, this afternoon, I will have to try and, possibly 

convert the members of the Opposition to Socialism. They might get a great kick out of it — you never 

can tell. 

 

At this time I would like to congratulate the hon. Provincial Treasurer (Hon. C.M. Fines) on bringing 

down the budget. True, the budget is the highest in the history of Saskatchewan, but I have always been 

of the opinion that in advancing progressive measures while we live and exist under the monetary 

system, we shall have to spend money, and if money is being spent on behalf and for the benefit of the 

people of our province and for progress and development and all that is provided for the welfare of our 

people and the province as a whole, then I am greatly gratified. 

 

Now, Sir, since the opening of the present Session of the Legislature, I have listened patiently to the 

rantings and the ravings of some of my hon. friends the members of the Opposition, and how they have 

belaboured with castigation the hon. members of this side of the House, and I have yet to hear any one 

of them come out with any kind of constructive criticism. 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

13 

 

To me, their aim has, as always, seemed to be to destroy and condemn, and they seem to be sticking to it 

religiously. It is quite true, Sir, we are not perfect, and I have yet to see or come in contact with anyone 

that is; but at least we are trying to build up and construct, under a planned economy, a province and 

future that will be beneficial to every man, woman and child within our boundaries. That, no doubt, to 

my Opposition friends will sound somewhat of a paradox, because in their league of private enterprise it 

is everybody for themselves and the devil take the hindmost. Now the hon. members and the good 

people of our province — have they forgotten already the dreadful, miserable days of the ‗hungry 

thirties‘ and the depression, when under Liberal administration, thousands of our citizens were 

unemployed, yes, and going hungry? The youth of our province and of our country were sent out to 

work in slave camps in this province of ours at 20 cents a day. Have they forgotten when the cream of 

young labour were travelling this country from stem to gudgeon seeking employment and travelling by 

the only transportation they could get in those days — the boxcars on the railroads? All they were doing, 

Mr. Speaker, was looking for and trying to get work in order to give them a decent standard of living 

and surely, Mr. Speaker, we haven‘t forgotten what happened to them here in Regina! I am just bringing 

up that point, Mr. Speaker, because I do think, after the past election that took place in our province, the 

people are forgetting those days; they are forgetting the struggle they were in, and it is about time they 

realized it because, if ever they return a Liberal or Conservative government to this province, I can 

assure the people of this province they will be back again in those dreadful days which we came 

through. 

 

And have our farmers, Mr. Speaker, forgotten a few short years ago — 1942 — when they asked the 

Federal Liberal Government of this Dominion of ours for parity prices on the product which they 

produced — wheat? Have the people forgotten, and the farmers — yes, and a lot of them voted against 

this very Government? Have they already forgotten that they took up a public subscription — two bits 

here, and two bits there, ten cents here and ten cents there — in order to furnish and found a delegation 

to go and appeal to the ‗big shots‘ in Ottawa? Well, did they get their parity price? No, Mr. Speaker, you 

know they didn‘t and I know that we have members in this House, today, who were delegates in that 

trek to Ottawa. 

 

I know one thing, Mr. Speaker, that when the appeal was made to that friendly Liberal farmers‘ 

Government in Ottawa, every member in the House at the time, including my hon. friend the Leader of 

the Opposition, voted against the farmer and dollar wheat. 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of Opposition): — On a question of privilege. There was no chance to vote 

for or against dollar wheat. The vote was whether we would raise this price from 70 to 90 cents, and I 

voted for 90 cents. 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

14 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — And, Mr. Speaker, not only that, but the Liberal Government of that time concurred with 

the manufacturers of farm machinery in raising and taxing the farm machinery at that time. And yet our 

farmers out here in the west, they still vote Liberal — I can‘t conceive it at all, Mr. Speaker. You see the 

manufacturers weren‘t getting enough lavish banquets so they had to kill a few more fatted calves at the 

expense of the hard working western farmer. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and also my Liberal friends: who 

supported these demands of our wheat farmers? I think it is common knowledge and on the record that it 

was the C.C.F. group in the House of Commons that fought the good fight once again for the farmer and 

the common man of our country. 

 

So far here, every Opposition member that has spoken has condemned the present Government for 

spending money, and they have the audacity to say that nothing constructive has been done. I can tell 

them that the members on this side of the House know that a great deal has been done to improve the lot 

of our people and the province as a whole. They have the hon. Provincial Treasurer‘s Budget Speech on 

their desks, giving them facts and figures. I would advise them to read it conscientiously, and compare 

the improvements today to what we had when our Liberal friends were in office. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, after listening to the address of the hon. Minister of Education (Hon. W.S. Lloyd), 

the other day — and for my money it was a masterpiece — surely he must have convinced the hon. 

members across that the ideologies, if any, of Liberalism are obsolete, and it‘s about time they started 

putting their thinking and actions on a higher plane. 

 

To avoid repetition, I do not intend to go into detail of the good legislation this Government has put into 

effect since 1944, because, as I said previously, the Ministers and private members that have spoken 

from this side of the House have given out figures very very extensively; but it is rather amazing when 

we find members of the Opposition opposing and objecting to progressive measures. This Government 

has increased health services; there are more hospitals, air ambulance service, better education, more 

schools and dormitories, better roads and highways, permanent security for the farmer, better old age 

pensions, increased mothers‘ allowances, assisted and introduced Co-op farms for our vets, assisted 

handicapped persons, provided to a great extent housing for vets, done a lot of prison reform, and 

publicly-owned enterprises have provided jobs for over 3,000 men and women. 

 

I think I heard, the other day, when the member for Arm River was talking about ‗just a handful of 

people‘. Well, after all is said and done, Mr. Speaker, the Crown Corporations and industries are like 

every other kind of business. You can‘t expect them to be turning over fabulous profits and returns in a 

couple of years‘ time. You wouldn‘t expect it, even if you homesteaded on the raw prairie and started to 

break — you don‘t expect to get rich in one or two years; but no, it doesn‘t matter, it seems to me that 

they just have to go out and condemn everything we undertake. I say, my friends, give them a chance! 

We have only been in office for five years; you folks over there were in office for thirty-five years; but 

there was never anything entered your minds with regard to 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

15 

 

trying to industrialize our province, or even trying to put people to work, so surely we have some credit 

coming to us as far as that is concerned. I would suggest to my hon. friends, if they would go out into 

the country and be salesmen for a lot of the industries this Government has put into operation, rather 

than condemn it for lousy votes, they would be doing something substantial for this province and for the 

country they live in. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Trade Union Act. My hon. friend, the hon. Minister of Labour 

who just sat down, told you quite a few things about the trade unions so I am not going into that; but it is 

the best in the Dominion of Canada and other provinces are starting to follow in our footsteps, whether 

you like it or not. We never asked them to; but they can see the sensible method of legislation we are 

bringing in and they are starting to follow in our footsteps so, therefore, we are pioneering, to a great 

extent, in that kind of business. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, we brought down the best Minimum Wage in the Dominion of Canada — the 

highest wages paid for unskilled labour in the whole of the American continent. Now that is something. 

I remember a few years ago when my Liberal friends were in office, we all had some idea of what the 

going standard of minimum wage was at that time — why it was absolutely ridiculous. It was around 

$8.00 for girls, $12.00 for men and what have you, a week. We all know that kind of thing is too small. 

True, I must admit that since those times wages started to move, but we are keeping in time and in tune 

with the times and raising wages, to a decent standard of wages on account of that, in order to keep up 

with the times. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I could go on with scores of other improvements which were never dreamt of under 

past legislation. I ask you, Sir is this doing nothing? The queer part about it is that the Liberals are, both 

in the House, and on the hustings, knocking and sabotaging all these worthwhile efforts, purely for 

political expediency. It is about time the people of our province realized and accepted the proof of these 

most important matters. 

 

Now, once again, some of my friends in the Opposition are throwing their barrage of hate across to this 

side of the House and I say that hate, the way that it has come up this Session, from some of my hon. 

friends — some of them, not all of them — is being nothing but fascist hate, pure fascist hate, and when 

I listened to the hon. member from Redberry (Mr. Korchinski) the other day, throwing that hate across 

here to the members on this side of the House, I was just trying to size him up. I thought to myself, 

―Boy, there is a vicious chap‖. He must be, he would probably have fit in very nicely with Hitler‘s gang 

— that same guy. Now, I wonder if any of my hon. friends have come through the bitter school of 

experience when exploitation in this country was rife, when the law of the ruling capitalistic classes was 

divide and rule — and it is so, today, my friends, and when he tells us on the other side of the House that 

we are everything that is rotten and bad — well, I want to tell him emphatically that I was brought up a 

Socialist and I am proud of the fact. I would also point out to him that hundreds of thousands of 

Socialists have fought and defended our country in time of peril and will do so again if the need arises; 

but I must emphasize that we Socialists do not advocate war, we believe in 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

16 

 

construction — not destruction. It seems to me, Sir, that my friend has got the war jitters, and he is 

trying to create mob hysteria. I personally think, at this time, if more and more people were thinking and 

advocating in terms of peace rather than war, maybe we could impress upon our Governments to take 

some of the millions of dollars they are spending in materials for destruction and apply them to the field 

of construction. We all know there is lots of room in that field. 

 

I wonder if my hon. friend over there has ever done any reading of Socialistic works. Sometimes I 

wonder at the statements they throw over here to us on the Government side of the House. I would just 

like to refer them to some of the Socialists of another day. We can go back to the Plebeians if you like 

— the Faebian Society, which preceded the Socialists, good people, every one of them; and, today, over 

in Great Britain we have a Socialist Labour Government through the efforts of those people and the 

working-class combines. They are good people, Mr. Speaker. They saw the struggle when they were 

children. I saw the struggle myself when I was a child in Great Britain and I am going to tell you, under 

the powers that be in those days, exploitation was rife. Has this gentleman forgotten the child labour 

laws that were in force those days? Has he forgotten the millions of kids that went to work at twelve 

years of age? Does he know anything about the girls that had to go in the mines in those days, in order to 

make a living? I don‘t think he knows the first thing about it; yet he comes out with ―Russia, Russia‖, 

Mr. Speaker. Thousands and thousands of people from Great Britain and the British Isles have had to 

emigrate to this country because they were being exploited, not by the ‗Russians‘, but by the powers that 

be in those days — the Conservatives and the Liberals. Mind you, they came to this country, and the 

exploitation there was not under the Russian flag; that was under the Union Jack. 

 

I would like to refer my hon. friends to read some good books. Take the work of Robert Blatchford. I 

remember reading Blatchford when I was just a school boy — when he wrote ―Merrie England‖, ―God 

and my Neighbour‖, ―Britain for the British‖; and the books of Bob Tresall, and then later on Upton 

Sinclair. I wonder how many of my hon. friends have read those books. Well, you want to get busy and 

read some of them, and I would advise you to do so, because I am sure it would not only improve your 

minds but would probably improve a heck of a lot more. I wonder if these men have ever asked the likes 

of George Lansbury, Sidney Webb and his wife, Arthur Greenwood, and scores of others! They are not 

Communists, Mr. Speaker. They are all good men and women — no, they are not all dead. They are all 

good people. I would like to ask the member from Redberry when he cast these reflections over here to 

this side of the House, does he think that we take our hon. member from Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. J. 

Wellbelove) to be a bad man, a rotten type of citizen? Would he say that my hon. friends from Lumsden 

(Mr. W.S. Thair) was a rotten bad man and not fit for decent company? Now then, Mr. Speaker, he may 

laugh, but the day is coming when these facts will come right home to him and so they should; because I 

can tell him and also other members: I don‘t think they have thoughts likewise to the man over there; I 

can‘t conceive of them having those thoughts of the member from Redberry, but the hon. members I 

have just mentioned — the member from Kerrobert-Kindersley and the member 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

17 

 

from Lumsden — I can say to this House that I have been in association with them for a number of years 

and I think they are the most honest, good-living Christians I have ever met in the province of 

Saskatchewan. You had better get busy over there and get some reading matter into you and do 

something about it. 

 

I wonder if they ever think of scientific advancement. It seems to me here in this House that they don‘t 

want to advance anything. But yet, every day in their lives they can see scientific industrial advancement 

taking place, and you have never got much of scientific advancement until the socialistic field was 

opened up. That‘s right, you never did. And I would suggest to the Liberal Party we see all these 

changes, they go right on under our eyes, each day and every day. They can see them too, but they do 

not want to change their political activities of their political stripe. They seem to think that everything 

else can change but politics. Well, I say it is about time politics changed. We are changing them, and I 

think it is all for the better, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A couple of years ago, Mr. Speaker, I happened to pick up a paper and I saw a caption in that paper of 

Socialism and what Socialism is, and that was written by an old lady in Saskatchewan, who had lived 

here for over 45 years. This is what she had to say, what she thought Socialism was: 

 

―I believe in the full plan of life, the intellectual with the physical, the spiritual and the social. 

Socialism then, to me, is this. How can I be happy intellectually, physically and spiritually and socially 

if you are not happy intellectually, physically, spiritually and socially?‖ 

 

Now that, Mr. Speaker, embodies a great deal of what the common people are thinking and hoping for 

today. And we are not trying and wanting war and bloodshed on our doorsteps. We wish to live 

generally in peace and happiness and comfort and without class diversion and surely in a great country 

like Canada this philosophy can be accomplished if we can get together and oust the bitterness and 

hatred from our social and political life. I would like to quote a few words of a man who lived a number 

of years ago who said: 

 

―No men living are more worthy to be trusted than those who toil up from poverty. None less inclined 

to take or touch that which they have not honestly earned.‖ 

 

Now those words, Mr. Speaker, were not uttered by Maxim Gorky, or Joe Stalin or Lenin or Tolstoi. 

Those words came from the great emancipator, Abraham Lincoln. I don‘t know whether our friends 

thought he was a Socialist or not. Well, those are the words he uttered. I think it is great Socialist 

philosophy, don‘t you? Now, Mr. Speaker, I remember when I was quite a kid reading Carlyle and he 

described to me very effectively on the one hand of society‘s start, and this is what he had to say: 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

18 

 

―We have the king in the centre. He rules all. We have the priest on his left. He prays for all. We have 

the judge on his right. He judges all. We have Tommy Atkins or the soldier on his right flank. They 

fight for all. And we have the common labouring man on the left flank, who works for all and keeps 

them all going.‖ 

 

And that‘s about it, gentlemen. 

 

I would just like to give you a little story I heard a while ago, Mr. Speaker. You know, we are talking 

about Socialists and land and one thing and another. Let‘s add them up in language that I can read. This 

happened in Lancashire. You see, Mr. Speaker, the working lad in those days, in order to get a bit of 

shooting of rabbits, ducks or anything, had to go poaching. So this lad is going poaching for rabbits one 

day on his Lordship‘s land. So, as mostly happens, here comes his Lordship and he saw this lad, with a 

couple of rabbits, you know. ―Aye‖, he says, ―My man, my man! What are you doing here poaching 

rabbits on my land?‖ So the lad says, ―On your land?‖ ―Yes,‖ he says ―on my land.‖ ―Well,‖ said the 

lad, ―I‘ll damn well fight you for it!‖. We have all fought. There are thousands of us in this Canada of 

ours who have fought for land. We have fought for the very country we live in and we have been very 

proud, but that was just a passing effort. 

 

Now, I am going to come, Mr. Speaker, to that topic my hon. friend the Leader of the Opposition likes, 

and that is our good old bridge up at Saskatchewan Landing. I wish to tell the member of this House that 

that bridge is coming along under construction 100 per cent — it is coming along fine in spite of the 

Leader of the Opposition when he said in Swift Current a couple of years ago, ―Don‘t put your money in 

that bridge, folks, because that bridge is obsolete. They‘ll never build it‖, in as many words — he might 

not have said those exact words. But you see, our Federal Minister of Agriculture, ‗Jimmy‘ Gardiner, 

was talking about building a dam and he tried to divert the audience‘s attention away from the bridge to 

the dam. ―You won‘t need a bridge where Jimmy Gardiner is going to build a dam in about 15 or 20 

years‖, or something like that. But, I‘m going to tell you, my friends, and the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition, come up there this late summer, and you‘ll be driving over it about September. You‘ll be 

driving over that bridge you said couldn‘t be built. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — On a question of privilege: I know my hon. friend wouldn‘t want to misrepresent what I 

said. I said, Mr. Speaker, that when that bridge was built and the dam was built, the bridge would be 15 

feet under water, and I think that is correct, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — No, my hon. friend, you always said it was obsolete, too. Well, anyway, when you come 

up there probably in the late summer, please leave your scissors at home, because I don‘t think you will 

have to snip the ribbon. You know, Mr. Speaker, I am going to tell my friends opposite what the Federal 

Government has done when they were in power in this province with regard to the building of bridges, 

and what they have done 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

19 

 

with the C.C.F. Government as far as building bridges is concerned. I know for fact, that, when the 

Liberal Government was in power in this province (I‘m not going to quote figures or years, but I know it 

for a fact), they built five bridges over the Saskatchewan River. For three of those bridges the Federal 

Government put up 90 per cent of the cost, for two the Federal Liberal Government put up 80 per cent of 

the cost, so that left 10 per cent and 20 per cent for the Provincial Liberal Government to put up. When 

we entered into that bridge up there, Mr. Speaker, the Federal Government has not given us one red cent. 

I think it is a downright shame, and my hon. Friend should be ashamed of that condition. It is the only 

bridge up there in that western part of the province, and it will be a good bridge, Mr. Speaker, and it is 

being constructed very good and strong. But when we get that type of condition, and when my hon. 

Friends over there say that our Liberal friends in Ottawa have been good to us, I have got to say ―No, 

they have not!‖ They could have done something with that bridge up there if they had wanted to; but no, 

Sir – they probably would if a Liberal candidate had got in at the election; but he didn‘t so, therefore, 

they wouldn‘t give us a cent. 

 

The same thing applies, Mr. Speaker, when handing out jobs. I have heard some criticism since our hon. 

friend the Minister of Health has taken his seat in this House, about it being handed out on a platter. 

Well, that is a matter of opinion; but I would just like to bring you back; don‘t be like the farmers and a 

lot of the working people of this province who have forgotten the past. Probably you have forgotten the 

past, but I just want to refreshen your memory – that, when Gordon Taggart was knocked out by myself 

in 1944, he was the Minister of Agriculture of this province. Mr. Speaker, the Federal Liberal 

Government, for services rendered, had to provide a position for Mr. Taggart. They did so, and I might 

say probably they have improved his position, both financially and everything else, so that was a good 

move, maybe he did good by it. Then when my hon. friend the Minister of Health, sitting in the present 

House, a year later, knocked out the Liberal member for Swift Current – Roy Graham, the same thing 

happened again. Roy Graham, a very efficient, respected lawyer in Swift Current had a good business 

and a good practice; no doubt he was making a good living – but, no, for services rendered, our Liberal 

friends at Ottawa had to say ―Come on, Roy! We are going to give you a boost‖; and they did. Now he is 

in the big money down there. That is two, and when our hon. friend, who used to sit right where the 

member from Gravelbourg is sitting was finished – Okay, when he gets too old to work, too old to run – 

you know, like the old horse – for services rendered, the Liberal Government said, ―Here, we will give 

you a cushy job for life‖ and they have done just that. 

 

Then, when our genial Opposition Leader comes back from Ottawa and says, ―Well, I am going to make 

this old province go‖. He is doing his best to make it go, too! They had to do a bit of conniving. He was 

getting a bit uneasy and shaky too, you know. ―All right, I‘ll give you my statement‖, said the Leader of 

the Opposition, and he did, and once again, what happened? That former member got a job for life, for 

services rendered: he was made a judge. Now, that is pretty good stuff, and I am going to tell the 

members on that side of the House – oh, yes, there was 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

20 

 

another one – ‗Billy‘ Patterson, good old Billy. It was either the old man‘s home or just a nice easy job, 

so he took the soft job. Well, anyway, it is all right and I am going to tell my hon. friends over there and 

their Liberal friends out in the country that they do not need to worry that our hon. friend, the Leader of 

the Opposition, is looking after himself, too, because, Mr. Speaker, he has nothing to lose, nothing to 

lose whatsoever. You see, now he is the Leader of the Opposition. Okay, he gets a nice little salary, you 

know. Now, if the election comes around and the Liberals don‘t win, well, he can either be probably the 

Leader of the Opposition – although I think maybe they are doing a bit of trading on my friend from 

Gravelbourg for that, Mr. Speaker; but it doesn‘t matter, he has nothing to lose, because if he misses out 

as the Premier of this province, they will either make him a judge or he can go to the old man‘s home. 

 

Mr. Tucker: – I feel a lot better since you have case my horoscope. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: – They will give you a good dowry for the rest of your life. So it is ―heads I win, tails you 

lose‖. He has nothing to lose and that is the way it goes. So don‘t, please, any of you Opposition 

members ever criticize those persons over here about jobs. I think I have given you enough to think 

about for a few days anyway. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, coming back to just a few words on my own constituency of Swift Current. It is true 

we have had a crop failure down there, and I am sorry that the farmers are not too well financed up in 

that part of the country, but for Swift Current city itself, I have very very little to complain about. We 

have built up there with the help and the assistance of the Provincial Government and the Federal 

Government, too, as far as that goes (I give credit where it is due), one of the finest composite schools 

and collegiates in Western Canada. There is no doubt about it; and I would invite any of my hon. friends 

in the House any time they are in Swift Current to just look that school over. It is really something, and 

for that I have to thank to a great extent the progressiveness of our educational system and also our 

Provincial Government. But, as I said, we did get help from the Federal Government also. 

 

I would like to say something about roads – oh, the Minister of Highways has gone out; I wanted him to 

stay in here a bit. We had a crop failure up there as hon. members know. It is true, as far as the main 

highway is concerned, they are not too bad, not too bad at all; but I would like to get a little more 

gravelling done on some of the municipal or secondary roads, and, if it was possible, I was just going to 

mention to bring in a work-and-wage programme which would be all right, too, to help out these farmers 

that haven‘t had a crop, some of them, for a couple of years. However, I‘ll talk with him on the quiet and 

whisper in his ear; he might take notice. I don‘t know whether he will or not. 

 

Now, coming back, Mr. Speaker, to the education and hospitalization tax. I am going to speak only very 

briefly on that, because I took my stand on that, the other night, and you all know how I feel about it as 

far as that‘s concerned. But if you recall, I did speak of some means of raising money. I am just going to 

put a suggestion over on one of the 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

21 

 

things I spoke about the other night, for the consideration of this Government, or if not the Government, 

the consideration of the people as a whole in this province. And that is the lotteries I spoke about. I 

think, as I said the other night, we can raise quite a lot of money in order to take us out of debt and pay 

off all deficiencies and to even build hospitals. Now I am suggesting to the Government to consider this. 

If they don‘t want to consider it, all right, why not let the people of our province consider it? Take it out 

in the line of a plebiscite, or to the municipal conventions and ask them whether they would rather pay 

three per cent tax or introduce lotteries for say about four years. I think it would be kind of curious to 

know how the plebiscite lads undertake that. I believe we would win. I think the people would vote for 

these lotteries. And that is one way where they would accumulate money without being compulsory. We 

do it right along, I think pretty near every member in this House – we buy tickets for this, that and the 

other – it‘s no use putting our head under our shoulders; we do these things. I do; I buy tickets on pretty 

near everything that‘s going. I‘ve never won anything yet. But nevertheless, if something was done of 

that description and run under the state and government control, I think it would be fine. I just put that to 

you for a thought and, surely, if other countries can do this sort of thing, and they have as many 

Christians in other countries as we have here, so there‘s nothing to be ashamed of as far as that is 

concerned. If they can do these things and put their hospitals on a good financial standing and basis, 

then, surely, you and I ought to have the courage to get out and try to do something about it too. Now, 

I‘ll just leave that for a thought. You may do something on it and you may not. 

 

I just want to quote for the benefit again of my hon. friend from Redberry, what people thought in days 

gone by of society as a whole. This is what one chap said – I know you don‘t know him, but you have 

heard about him, and you‘ve read some of his stuff. But he said: 

 

―I painfully reflect that in almost every political controversy of the last 50 years the leisured classes, 

the titled classes, have been wrong. The common people, the toilers, the men of uncommon sense – 

these have been responsible for nearly all the social reform measured which the world accepts today.‖ 

 

You know whose ‗quote‘ that is, my friends? He was one of your old pals, ‗Billy‘ Gladstone. So, why 

don‘t you follow some of their footsteps and teachings and what they advocate? It reminds me just the 

same, you have enthusiasm on your side for your Party, just as we have enthusiasm on this side, and it is 

quite natural but sometimes it goes a little bit too far. 

 

Anyway, I want to tell you another story about enthusiasm. You see, this lad worked in the cotton mills, 

and, of course, on a Saturday they only worked till noon, and then took in a football match. Well, this 

lad is quite a poultry fancier, quite enthusiastic about it, so, after the football match on Saturday 

afternoon, he thought he would take a walk 



 

March 22, 1950 
 

22 

 

around the market in Manchester – and I know that some of you lads who were over there, you know 

Manchester, all right. This lad went to the market, looking around at the rabbits, guinea pigs, chickens 

and everything. He finally sees a cage, and he keeps looking at this bird in the cage, and he looked at the 

other poultry, but he kept going back to this cage. So finally, he said to the proprietor: ―Say, lad, how 

much for that flat-faced cock chicken over there?‖ The proprietor replied: ‗Flat-faced cock chicken? 

That isn‘t a flat-faced cock chicken, lad. That‘s an owl!‖ ―Oh‖, he said, ―I don‘t give a damn how owld 

it is; it‘s the breed I want.‖ So, you see, in his enthusiasm he thought this owl was a new breed of 

poultry and he was going to introduce it, and that is just what I am trying to introduce into some of you 

fellows – a mixed breed of poultry. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess I have said about enough and, in conclusion, I know that a lot of the 

speakers, especially on this side of the House, have mentioned international trade. I am not one to go out 

and condemn and try to get countries of Europe, or even the western hemisphere at loggerheads and at 

one another‘s throats again. I think we have had enough of that kind of stuff. I really do, Mr. Speaker, 

and I say it conscientiously. We have had enough war in our country. We don‘t want to see our children 

slaughtered and debauched in bloodshed in the battlefields of Europe again. We talk about the atomic 

bomb and the hydrogen bomb. Well, those of us who have seen instruments and machines of war, even 

in our day, know what they can do; but it seems to me that every time we pick up a paper, it has got this 

war hysteria facing us – talking about this country and that country, and we must prepare for this and 

prepare for that. Prepare for what? Prepare to be bombed out of existence if we don‘t get down to 

commonsense and some intellectual thinking and do away with these methods of destruction. Let‘s do 

away with warfare and all that it means, and let‘s get together and try to live in peace and harmony. 

 

As I said earlier in my speech, I was, as a child, a student of Socialism, and we were never taught to go 

out and slay our fellowmen and cause destruction, no matter which country it was. We believe in 

construction, as I have already mentioned; and I think it is a mistaken idea when people in this country 

and other countries get it into their heads that the Socialists are nothing but rabid executioners. It is 

about time they settled down and did some really honest-to-God thinking about this matter of peace, and 

I for one, Mr. Speaker, do believe in peace. I never want to see another war, and I know that my hon. 

friends on that side of the House and friends on this side of the House, who were in previous conflicts, 

don‘t want to see it. We have to be honest about it. Let us get down to some sane thinking, because I 

think we should try and take this war hysteria away from the people of our province, rather than putting 

it on their doorsteps. We know what it means if it ever happens. We don‘t want it to happen, and I think 

we should encourage and put all our forces behind it so that it can‘t happen; and if we get intellectual, 

intelligent people of this world striving for peace, eventually we are going to get that peace which we all 

long and wish for. So, Mr. Speaker, with those few words in closing, I wish to say that I shall support 

the Budget. 


