



















































Hansard: March 29, 1950


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Eleventh Legislature 

30th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 29, 1950. 

 

The House met at three o’clock. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 59 – An Act respecting Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

 

Hon. J.A. Darling (Minister of Public Works): – Mr. Speaker, this Bill is an Act respecting the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. As is well known, the Saskatchewan Power Corporation was set up in 

February, 1949, by Order in Council under the Crown Corporations Act. It has been functioning since 

that time under this Act, and under certain sections of The Power Commission Act, and it is thought 

necessary at this time to consolidate the authorities under which this corporation carries on, into this new 

Act. 

 

Many clauses of the Bill are copied almost word for word from The Power Commission Act. There is no 

change in principle insofar, of course, as those sections of the Bill are concerned; but there are several 

new features in the Bill which are required to be discussed at Second Reading, and which I would like to 

deal with entirely. Those sections have to do with an increase in the powers of the Corporation which 

are contained in Clause 8 of the Bill, and, further on, the Bill gives to the Corporation power to amend 

existing contracts with towns and villages, and again a simplification of the procedure regarding the 

acquisition of easements and rights of way. Lastly, the power to the Corporation to finance itself by the 

sale of its own bonds. 

 

Now I propose to deal with those features in the order in which they appear in the Act, or, at least, in the 

order in which I have named them now. 

 

Paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of Clause 8 deal with the powers which are the main function of the 

Corporation; the generation, transmission, distribution, sale and supply of electrical energy, and the 

production, transmission and distribution, sale and supply of steam, and the production or purchase and 

transmission, distribution, sale and supply of gas, either natural or manufactured. It is not till we come to 

paragraph (d) that we break new territory. Paragraph (d) gives the Corporation the power to produce 

coal and processing of oil to provide fuel for use in the Corporation’s power plants, the sale of coal and 

oil not immediately required by the Corporation, and the sale of by-products of oil processed. 

 

Now the Corporation, of course, at the present time operates its Estevan Power Plant on fuel which is 

purchased, under contract, from the Western Dominion Coal Company. There is no indication that it will 

be 



 

March 29, 1950 

 

2 

 

necessary or desirable to change that procedure – at least it is not in view at all; but as I mentioned, 

when I was speaking in the House previously, there is a possibility that lignite coal, for use in power 

generation, might be mined at Shaunavon, and there is a possibility that the Power Corporation might 

find it expedient to undertake the production of coal in that area. I am not forecasting that this will be 

done, but it is one of the reasons for the inclusion of this power in the new Bill, and, of course, the 

power to sell coal is also necessary if the Corporation is going to undertake the production. Now I want 

to say, immediately, that there is no intention that the Power Corporation should branch out into coal 

mining on any appreciable scale whatsoever, but only for purposes of its own generation of electricity. 

But once coal is being mined, there is almost sure to be some surplus, however small, which has to be 

disposed of, and consequently the power to sell is included in the Bill. 

 

With respect to oil, the processing of oil to provide fuel for use in the Corporation’s power plants, I 

might say, at this time, that a private company – the Prince Albert Refineries – is constructing a 

skimming plant on the property of the Power Corporation at Prince Albert, and they are under contract 

to supply the Power Corporation with Bunker C fuel for use in the plant there. This contract is one 

which the Board of Directors of the Power Corporation regard as a very favourable one to the 

Corporation. One of the clauses in this contract is to provide that at any time after this skimming plant 

has been in operation for one year, the Power Corporation may purchase the skimming plant at cost, less 

five per cent depreciation. The skimming plant is situated, as I have stated, on the property of the Power 

Corporation, and the oil is piped directly from the plant to the power plant. There is no expense for 

transportation. The capacity of this plant will be limited, but it will, nevertheless, exceed the present 

needs, at least of the power plant at Prince Albert, and it is quite pointless to have a contract which 

provides that, in the case of eventuality which made it necessary or desirable to do so, the Corporation 

can purchase this plant, unless the Act gives to the Corporation the power to dispose of the surplus 

production of the plant and engage in the processing of oil, and, of course, to dispose of the light ends 

which will result from the skimming. 

 

I might say that another feature of this contract is that the Prince Albert refineries undertake to make use 

of Saskatchewan oil from a Saskatchewan source, and the reason that it is preferable that the skimming 

plant be in Prince Albert on the site of the power plant is that the freight rate on the bunker C oil is much 

higher than the freight rate on the crude oil. Consequently, it is a paying proposition that the crude 

should be shipped from Lloydminster or any other Saskatchewan source to Prince Albert and there 

refined for use in the plant. That, I think, explains the purpose behind clause (d) in section 8, subsection 

(1), of this Bill. 

 

Clause (3) – “the manufacture of poles, cross-arms and other articles used or capable of being used in 

the transmission, distribution and supply of electrical energy, and the sale of such articles.” At the 

present time we are using a great many poles which are produced by the Saskatchewan Timber Board. 

Those are jackpine poles, full-length treated with creosote at Prince Albert. The arrangement is perfectly 

satisfactory, and this provision in here may not come into immediate use; in fact we don’t anticipate that 

it 



 

March 29, 1950 
 

3 

 

will. Nevertheless, there may be an occasion when it will be in the interests of the Corporation to 

manufacture poles and cross-arms for the construction of a line. For example, if our line were to 

penetrate into the north country there, the Corporation might be able to produce the poles on the territory 

adjacent to the line. I may say that in Manitoba, the Manitoba Power Commission do not employ their 

own crews to manufacture poles and cross-arms and so forth, but they have those manufactured for them 

under contract. 

 

Clause (f) – “the purchase, for the purpose of re-sale, of apparatus and equipment used or suitable for 

use in the generation and distribution of electrical energy and the sale thereof.” 

 

For some time, there have been discussions on the possibility and the advisability and the desirability of 

our Corporation undertaking to assist farmers in areas which cannot be reached for a considerable length 

of time with transmission lines – to give to them some assistance to provide their own electrification 

plants on their own farms. We haven’t got very far in the preparation of such a plan. Perhaps it is a 

matter of putting first things first. We have certainly been exceedingly busy during the past year in 

getting our transmission system and our farm electrification system operating, but we have never lost 

sight of those fellows who happen to be located in situations which make it improbable that they will 

receive the transmission line for some time to come. This clause is included in the Bill, therefore, in 

order that the Corporation will have power to put into operation any plan which may be devised and 

which may prove operative to assist those farmers. 

 

A suggestion has been made that this might remain a permanent service, the provision of electric plant. 

The suggestion has been made, and considered, that it might be possible for the Corporation to acquire 

in quantity a standard package plant, which could be shipped to a farm and installed there, and on which 

a repair service or a replacement service could be provided. This is to say, in the event that the plant 

became depreciated and required an overhaul, it would be so standardized that the farmer could simply 

ship his plant in to the Corporation and have another plant returned to him – a repaired plant for, of 

course, a charge. So that it is with that possibility in view, and in order that we may have the power to 

do so as soon as a policy has been devised and proved operative, that this has been included in the Bill. 

 

Those are the additions to the purposes and powers of the Corporation as provided in this Bill. 

 

Now, the question of power to amend contracts. The contracts which have been signed with towns and 

villages from the earliest days of the Corporation up till now, have been of a nature which does not 

permit of amendment with respect to rates, except by negotiation. I think it is a very desirable thing that 

contracts with villages and towns should be standardized; that is, that we should have a standardized 

agreement with all those communities. 

 

It is interesting to move the origin of the clause which is proving, or may prove, an impediment to the 

proper operation, proper adjustment of rates. In the agreement signed with the town of Wynyard on 

September 3, 1929. 



 

March 29, 1950 

 

4 

 

The contract provided that the Power Commission (as it was at that time) should supply the town of 

Wynyard at cost. Now, it must be remembered that in the early days of the Power Commission it had to 

sell itself to communities that were already receiving power from local generating plants, and some of 

those communities, while they may have been well enough served as far as the power was concerned, 

were paying exorbitant prices for it; and the argument of those who were promoting the Power 

Commission was that, by transmission lines from central plants, it would be possible to greatly reduce 

the cost of electricity in those plants. That has proven to be true, Mr. Speaker, and it is true, today, that 

those who are served by transmission lines are receiving much cheaper service than those being served 

by local plants. Consequently, I can only assume that it was with the object of selling the Power 

Commission to those plants that the following Clause was included in the agreement. I will read 

sub-clause (1): 

 

“The Town and Commission agree that the rates for the supply of electrical energy which the 

Commission shall charge the Town and consumers in the Town, shall be those set out in Schedules – 

etc. etc., subject, however to the following sub-clauses of this clause . . . 

 

“The rates provided for in clause (1) of this clause may be altered by the Commission at any time or 

times at its discretion, provided the alterations do not involve any increase in the charges made to 

consumers under the schedule or schedules altered.” 

 

In other words, here was an agreement, signed in perpetuity, which ran on without any period at which it 

expired, which provided that while it would always be possible to bring into effect a rate reduction, once 

that reduction was put into effect it would never be possible to restore the old rate, no matter how 

conditions might seem. Now that clause has continued to be included in every revised form of contract 

right up until the present time. Let me read for the Assembly the clause as it appears in the agreement at 

present in use: 

 

“The rates provided for in sub-clause (1) of this clause may be altered by the Corporation at any time 

or times at its discretion, provided the alteration does not involve any increase in charges made to 

consumers.” 

 

and then still further, sub-clause (3): 

 

“It is understood and agreed by and between the Village and the Corporation that the rates provided for 

in sub-clause (1) of this Clause will be reduced from time to time by the Corporation, as and when, in 

the judgment of the Corporation, such reduction is warranted.” 

 

Now it can be seen how this rigid application of the principle that we may reduce but may never 

increase rates, can interfere 



 

March 29, 1950 
 

5 

 

to the disadvantage both of the Corporation and of the consumer. It is not logical to suppose that the 

Corporation would be willing to take a chance on a reduction of rates, even if conditions appeared, 

temporarily, to justify that reduction, when they knew that under their contract, should conditions 

change, they would never be able to restore a rate which would be economic and which would provide 

for the service. Consequently, it is extremely doubtful that the Clause operates to the advantage of either 

the consumer or the corporation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would not like to give the impression, in fact it would be an erroneous impression, 

that the Corporation is considering an increase in rates. I would still be asking the Legislature to approve 

this clause were we contemplating a reduction in rates; but this clause, with the rate schedules as they 

were drawn up in the early years of the Power Commission, did not foresee the changes in the type of 

load that would develop as years passed. They were thinking in terms of light; principally of light. They 

did not foresee or take into account the spread in the use of such types of appliances as refrigerators, 

ranges, motors for stokers and oil burners and so forth. The coming into common use of those new 

appliances has rendered necessary, not an increase in rates, but an adjustment or a change in the 

construction of the rates which should definitely operate to achieve greater equity as between one 

consumer and another, whether or not it makes any difference whatsoever to the revenues of the 

Corporation. 

 

I am not able to give you an example of that, but I hope that I have been able to give you some idea, at 

least, of the difficulties of continuing with a rate which can give to one consumer an advantage which is 

borne at the expense of another consumer in the same community; and, therefore, with this end in view, 

and without having in mind an increase in rates, this clause has been included. I trust that the Legislature 

will see the justice of giving to the Corporation the Legislative authority to amend those contracts. 

 

I might say that we have in the neighbourhood of 400 such agreements throughout the province. Of 

course, it would be possible I haven’t any doubt, to go over those 400 agreements and by negotiation 

arrive, in each individual case, at some sort of solution; but it is very desirable, that we should have a 

uniformity as between one community and another, and it is hardly to be expected that, in the course of 

400 negotiations, we would be able to achieve that absolute uniformity. 

 

Now I might say that, while the Act does give us the power, simply by notifying the village council or 

the town council of our intention, to amend those rates, and it can be done, public relations are very 

important to the Power Corporation, and we certainly would not trample roughshod on the people of 

those communities in that way. In fact, we might proceed to negotiate just as if we did not have the 

power to amend, but in those cases where we might meet with objection to an amendment we would 

have the legislative authority to bring those few cases in the line with the general agreement, or with the 

standard agreement. 

 

The third feature of this Bill which is a change from the procedure under the Power Commission Act, is 

that it provides for a simplification 



 

March 29, 1950 

 

6 

 

of the procedure regarding the acquisition of easements and rights of way. I might say that easements, 

the securing of easements, has proven to be rather an easy matter insofar as the relationship between the 

Power Corporation and the farmer is concerned. In all the history of the Power Corporation it has never 

been necessary to resort to arbitration to decide upon the amount to be paid for an easement. That is 

quite a record. I think it is creditable both to the Corporation and to the farmers of the province. But 

nevertheless, in spite of the fact that here was an agreement that no one was quarrelling with, that no one 

was disputing, it was necessary to go through a tremendous lot of work to get that easement in legal 

form. First of all a farmer was approached and usually agreed to give them an option to go on his land, 

and they went on and proceeded to build the line. But after they had approached the farmer, the title to 

the land had to be searched; if the farmer were not the legal or registered owner of the land, then the 

registered owner of the land had to be contacted and his consent secured. If there was a mortgage on it, 

the consent of the mortgagee had to be secured. Sometimes estates were involved, estates in Britain, in 

the United States, in Eastern Canada, and consent had to be received from all those people and then an 

agreement drawn up after those consents were received, signed consents, and the agreement was drawn 

up with the farmer on the land. This involved, in some instances, a tremendous amount of work, a good 

deal of correspondence and a good deal of time. Sometimes it was a matter of many months before an 

easement was secured, and the same applied to the securing of a strip of land, the purchase of a strip of 

land along the road allowance, in order to build the power line close to the road allowance. 

 

The Bill provides for simplification of that procedure. It provides that when the Corporation requires an 

easement, it will still approach the farmer as it did in the first instance, and then will file with the 

registrar of the Land Titles Office a notice of requirement, and this notice of requirement, in the case of 

an easement, will simply be endorsed on the title and the deal will be completed. In case of the purchase 

of a piece of land, they will issue a new title for the strip of land in question. Now that should result in 

expediting the work, and when we consider the number of easements which will be involved in a power 

programme, this year, of 2,400 farms some of them with two easements to a mile of line, some of them 

involving only a very short piece of land some of them involving a sum of money exceeding twenty or 

twenty-five, fifty or a hundred dollars, it seems very desirable that this simplified form of securing an 

easement should be incorporated in the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I come now to the last feature which I mentioned – that of giving to the Power Corporation 

the power to sell its own bonds in order to finance its operation. Those will be found in the last part of 

the Bill, in Clause 36, where it provides that the money shall be borrowed by the Provincial Treasurer on 

the credit of the Province. Clause 37 provides the alternative which is that the Corporation may, with the 

approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council, borrow by sale of its own bonds. I might say that this is 

included in the Bill in the hope that it will make possible the speedier development of our power system, 

and that it will make available to the Corporation more money, possibly on better terms (the Provincial 

Treasurer might argue that with me, and he would probably be right) for the purposes of the Power 

Corporation. I might say that this portion of the Bill 



 

March 29, 1950 
 

7 

 

has been drawn up very carefully after a study of the Ontario Act and the act of British Columbia, and in 

a form which has proven to be acceptable to the investors, a form to which they are accustomed. 

 

I would like to draw the attention of the House to Section 40, which provides that the aggregate of the 

sums which may be borrowed under the provisions of Sections 36 and 37 (the two sections I have been 

speaking of) shall not exceed aggregate, if the aggregate net sum is $50,000,000. The purpose of putting 

that sum into the Bill is to avoid the necessity of the Power Corporation coming back year after year 

asking for an appropriation from the Legislature. Anyone who has any intimate knowledge of the 

development of a power corporation must know that in a power programme, a programme of 

development that will extend over five years of planning is much to be preferred to one which is planned 

and put into operation just from year to year. I might say that, at this time, the Power Corporation has 

had to anticipate that this Legislature will approve their five million dollar appropriation in order to have 

a power programme for 1950, at all. We had to assume that the Legislature would approve it, because 

the orders for the material, much of the engineering work, has to be done long before this time of year in 

order that we may be ready to proceed with construction in the construction season. Consequently, we 

are asking the Legislature to make available to the Corporation $50,000,000 which of course, includes 

the twenty-five or twenty-six million dollars, which is already in the capital structure – an addition of 

another $25,000,000 – so that we may be able to plan ahead our future development of the Corporation. 

 

There are ample safeguards in this Bill that will prevent the Power Corporation from striking out on a 

tangent all on its own, without consultation with the proper authorities, and the Provincial Treasurer 

will, at all times, have full knowledge and control of any operations of the Power Corporation. In fact 

the Bill provides that the Lieutenant Governor in Council may appoint the Provincial Treasurer or other 

person or persons from time to time, to be the agent or agents of the Corporation for the purpose of 

negotiating, so that the control will always be there and the Corporation will not be allowed, or 

permitted under this Bill to go out on its own and make purchases without the full knowledge of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council and of the Provincial Treasurer. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I feel that I have described to you the features of this Bill which are radical changes 

from the provisions of The Power Commission Act, and I trust that the Legislature will see the necessity 

of a wider Act with greater powers and freedom to the Corporation in the programme which it has 

before it. 

 

I, therefore, move Second Reading of this Bill No. 59. 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): – Mr. Speaker, there are two main aspects of this Bill 

on which I would like briefly to comment. The first is the change proposed in regard to contracts with 

municipalities. The difficulty about the proposed change there is based upon the fact that, when 

municipalities were selling their power plants to the Power Commission, the terms of these contracts 

was always very carefully discussed between the then Power Commission and the various 



 

March 29, 1950 

 

8 

 

municipalities concerned. At the time of the negotiations between the Power Commission and the town 

of Rosthern, I was then on the Town Council of Rosthern, and I remember very well the discussion that 

took place then between Mr. Thornton and the town of Rosthern. One of the questions involved then 

was whether a larger sum should be paid for the plant or whether it would be better to take a very much 

lower sum and have lower rates applied throughout the future term of the contract. I believe that in some 

case municipalities got very much larger figures comparatively for their plants then it was decided that 

we would take for our plant in Rosthern, because it was thought better to dispose of the plant at a lower 

figure and have lower rates charged in the future for the power. Well, the plant was obtained upon the 

basis of that contract and, certainly, when we entered the contract, we thought we were getting a binding 

contract, whereby the rates could not be raised, but could only be lowered if it was found possible to do 

so. 

 

Now, here we are faced with a Bill, Mr. Speaker, where we are told there are 400 such contracts 

carefully entered into by the representatives of the different municipalities throughout the province and, 

I suppose, in some cases the same thing happened in the case of the town of Rosthern – the plants were 

sold at a lower price in consideration of an agreement to have lower rates in the future. It was definitely 

understood that those rates could not be raised, Mr. Speaker, Now then, it seems to me a rather strange 

thing that a Government can come along and say, “We can tear these contracts up; we can raise the rates 

if we wish, and this contract which you so carefully negotiated on the base of which you probably sold 

your plant for less than you otherwise could have got for it, now becomes of no value whatever”; 

because it is definitely provided in the Bill here, Mr. Speaker, that the Corporation, of its own motion, 

may, in effect, regardless of what is in such contracts charge any rate that it sees fit to charge. I think 

that that is showing a total disregard for the validity of contracts, and a disregard for the rights of 

municipalities, and I think that that right to tear up contracts like that should certainly be subject to some 

higher authority than the wish or the desire of the Power Corporation itself. It should be subject at least 

to it being proved that it is fair to the municipalities, if that could be done. They should have to satisfy 

the municipalities that it is fair, through the medium of this third party, some higher authority – such an 

authority as the Local Government Board, which has power in some provinces to fix rates in regard to 

corporations that supply power. In those provinces they cannot increase their rates without satisfying 

some Board like that, that it is fair that the rates should be increased. I submit that this right to raise rates 

at the whim of the Power Corporation should be subject to being confirmed, and only going into effect if 

it is approved of by such a body as the Local Government Board. I thought perhaps the Power 

Commission might be that authority, but the Power Commission, as it was explained the other day, is 

going to be in such close contact with the Power Corporations that I do not think, Mr. Speaker, that it 

would be fair to the municipalities to have the Power Commission as the arbitrating body in this matter. 

So I think that perhaps the fair body would be the Local Government Board. 

 

I am not going to oppose the Bill on that ground, but I think that consideration should be given to some 

protection of municipalities being given by some other provision, when we come to consider the Bill in 

Committee of the Whole. 



 

March 29, 1950 
 

9 

 

The other point which I wish to mention before the Bill is given second reading, Mr. Speaker, is the 

question of providing that the Power Corporation may borrow money without any control of this 

Legislature, up to $50,000,000. I realize that this may be done with the approval of the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council; but the Lieutenant Governor in Council is not the Legislature, and I feel that the 

right of control over public bodies which use the taxpayers’ money and pledge their credit, should be 

under very close control of the representatives of the people. Now, to meet the difficulty envisaged by 

the Minister of having the programme of the Corporation subject to a vote year by year, and the 

necessity of being able to plan ahead of time, I do not think there would be any great objection to having 

a two- or three-year programme laid before the Legislature and authority given to borrow for that 

programme for two or three years. I can see that that would be businesslike, but it would retain very 

close control on the part of the Legislature over the pledging of the credit of the people of the province, 

which I think should be done. Once this Bill is passed, Mr. Speaker, the Corporation may borrow, on 

these assets that belong to the people of Saskatchewan, without any control whatever of this Legislature. 

I can, of course, ask for, and we are giving the Provincial Treasurer the right to pledge the credits of this 

province in guaranteeing, those loans up to $50,000,000. I do not think that we should give a blank 

cheque to that extent to the Provincial Treasurer and the Power Corporation. In effect, it is giving it to 

the Provincial Treasurer, because section 39 provides that the Lieutenant Governor in Council may, on 

such terms as may be stated in the Order in Council, guarantee the payment of the principal and interest 

of any bonds, debentures and other securities issued by the Corporation under the provisions of section 

37. It is the Governor in Council and not the Provincial Treasurer but the Government will act on his 

advice in such a matter. In effect, we are giving a blank cheque to the Government to pledge the credit 

of the province to the extent of $50,000,000. Now that, I think, is going further than we should be asked 

to go. I am not going to oppose the second reading of the Bill, but I do ask that consideration be given to 

some amendment in the Committee of the Whole that preserves the control of the Legislature over the 

pledging of the credit of the province. 

 

In effect, Mr. Speaker, it is just the same as if we gave the Government the right to spend $50,000,000 

of our money – that is what it does – over whatever period of time they want to spend it. They can spend 

it all in one year or two years or three years, because when they can pledge our credit we have ultimately 

got to pay for it. So we are giving a blank cheque to the Government to spend $50,000,000 on this 

particular project. I realize that part of it may be used to repay or refund debts today that are owing by 

the Corporation, but it provides that aggregate of the sums which may be borrowed, under the provisions 

of section 36 and 37, is fifty million dollars. Now, it is just doubtful to me whether, the way that section 

is worded, a further $50,000,000 could not be borrowed on top of the $27,000,000, that has been 

advanced them already. But anyway, whether it is a further $50,000,000 or a further $23,000,000, I 

think that the Power Corporation should be prepared to come before this Legislature. If it does not want 

to restrict itself to asking for what it wants to spend in one year, it should at least be prepared to come 

with perhaps a three-year programme, and tell us, how much they want to spend, and get the approval of 

the representatives of the people in regard 



 

March 29, 1950 

 

10 

 

to spending the people’s money. I don’t think that they should ask for a blank cheque like this. I think it 

would be better for the Corporation, too, to come to the Legislature at least once in three years, explain 

what they are doing, and get the support of the Legislature for the programme that it is putting through. 

 

Then I think, if there was that protection too, they could probably borrow money cheaper, because one 

of the protections that all investors have in regard to investing in debentures of such an organization as 

this, is that they know that the spending of that organization and the investments of that organization, are 

under careful scrutiny and control by a legislative assembly. I think, actually, it would be in the best 

interests of the Corporation as well as consistent with the ideas we all have in regard to control of the 

expenditure of public money by the representatives of the people, that this blank cheque should not be 

issued to this extent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I say, I am so much in favour of anything that may bring cheaper power to our people, and 

particularly to our farmers, that anything that may help to bring about that end, will, of course, not only 

receive the hearty support of myself, but of everyone who is associated with me on this side of the 

House. I do hope, however, that some consideration will be given to these points that I have mentioned, 

Mr. Speaker, when we get into Committee of the Whole. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): – Mr. Speaker, I should first of all like to thank the Leader of 

the Opposition for the suggestions he has made. I think there is a great deal of merit in his first one – to 

have some authority, such as the Local Government Board, consider any change in contract. 

 

I want to deal very briefly, however, with the second point, regarding his objection to giving authority to 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council to borrow up to $50,000,000. Now may I, at the outset, say that the 

very fact that the Legislature approves this Bill (if and when it does), right there this legislature is giving 

to the Lieutenant Governor in Council the authority to borrow that money. In other words, it is not a 

case of the Cabinet going out on its own and borrowing the money. May I say further, Mr. Speaker, that 

it is not anything like $50,000,000 because, in that there is already $26,000,000 of liability, that leaves 

approximately $24,000,000. We have asked, this year, for an appropriation of $5,000,000; so, if you 

deduct that, that is just an additional $19,000,000 the Power Corporation is asking for the authority to 

borrow – $19,000,000 which is not more than about three-year program which the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition suggested he would not object to. 

 

May I say, Mr. Speaker, that there is nothing unusual about this. I was just looking over the Public 

Accounts for example, and I find that already the Provincial Treasurer has a blank cheque to borrow, in 

the year 1951, over $30,000,000 if he wants to – over $30,000,000 of debentures that mature next year; 

blank cheque authority legislation that was passed years ago, under which the Provincial Treasurer has 

the authority to go out and borrow that amount of money. I feel that we are not very far apart when we 

analyze it all the way through. With five million taken off the $24,000,000 balance that there is, that 

brings it down to $19,000,000 additional 



 

March 29, 1950 
 

11 

 

to the authorization already granted by the Legislature. 

 

Mr. Tucker: – Is it quite clear that this is not in addition to what is already borrowed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: – Yes, it is very clear in the Act that that is to cover all the liability, and then, when we 

get it up to fifty million, we must come back to the Legislature after that. In other words, the Legislature, 

if this Bill is passed, will be giving the Power Corporation, with the approval of the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council, authority to create a total indebtedness up to $50,000,000. 

 

May I say that this is a very usual thing with utilities. In the Province of Manitoba, for example, last 

year, the Legislature granted authority for some $25,000,000 of additional expenditures. Out in British 

Columbia two years ago, they brought forward an $85,000,000 capital works programme. In Ontario 

there is no limit whatsoever; the sky is the limit there with the Ontario Hydro Commission. Now I think 

we have been very very modest; in fact, much more modest than any of the other provinces that I know 

of, and, as the Minister pointed out, the sole purpose of getting this authority in advance is so that we 

can plan this programme. I think all the hon. members want to see the power industry of this province 

developed, and this is one way that we can do it. I want to say that the investor would like, too, to know 

that we have the authority to put more money in to build this up. When we go to meet the investor that is 

one of the things he asks, “Well, what is your programme for the next two or three years?”, and I have to 

say, “Well, I am sorry, I can’t tell you anything more than this year; all we have now this year is three 

million dollars, or five million dollars, as the case may be”. But now we will be in a position to work out 

a programme over a period of what, I expect, will be probably three years, and we will say, “Here is the 

programme. We already have the authority from the Legislature, now all we want is the money from 

you, and we will be able to have power for the people of Saskatchewan.” 

 

The question being put, the motion for Second Reading of Bill No. 59 – An Act respecting 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation, was agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6 o’clock p.m. without question put. 

 


