



















































Hansard: February 20, 1950


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Eleventh Legislature 

3rd Day 

 

Monday, February 20, 1950. 

 

The House met at 3 o‘clock p.m. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

MOTION FOR ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

Mr. John Wellbelove (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, it is well that the speech of His 

Honour dealt with agriculture and with the activities of this Government in regard to agriculture, 

because the whole economy of the province of Saskatchewan is superimposed on agriculture. 

 

It also dwells at some length on the great concern that is being expressed throughout the province and 

throughout the Dominion with regard to our loss of markets. That is also a matter of primary 

importance. As a province we are far removed from tidewater, a landlocked province, and yet whatever 

is transpiring in the markets of the world directly affects our economy. We have got to live by exporting, 

and the fluctuations that occur in world markets are directly reflected back to us here. And so I want to 

dwell for a brief time on some of the things that have transpired with regard to the marketing of our 

main product, wheat. 

 

As most members are aware, the Canadian – United Kingdom wheat agreement expires on July 31st, 

and with it the powers of the Wheat Board as far as the monopoly powers controlling the marketing of 

wheat are concerned. Now I know some members will say, ―Well, we know we are assured of a 

continuance of the operation of the Wheat Board.‖ I was interested in the press report that came from 

Ottawa under date of February 16th, drawing attention to the continuation of the Wheat Board. It then 

commented: 

 

―The speech does not say so directly, but it is understood that the intention is to extend these powers 

for the full life of the International Wheat Agreement, beyond July 31, 1950, when the present 

legislation expires.‖ 

 

There is nothing definite about that, and I was interested in an editorial appearing in the Leader-Post, 

this morning, which draws attention to the fact that the select committee on estimates of the British 

House of Commons is recommending for consideration the re-opening of the Liverpool grain market. 

The editorial goes on then to suggest, in the closing phrase, that that may have a direct bearing on our 

marketing 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

2 

policy. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is a matter that we have really got to pay very, very close attention to, 

and I hope that opportunity presents itself in the House and that we shall have unanimous agreement as 

to what is best in the interests of the growers in this province. 

 

The International Wheat Agreement – that is, the four-year International Wheat Agreement – under 

which we are now partially functioning, expires in the crop year, 1953. People say, ―Well, you are 

assured of $1.80 for your wheat, and under the new exchange rates, $1.95‖; but that is not the case, 

because those importing countries are not compelled to effect delivery only at the minimum price, which 

is $1.50 decreasing each year to $1.20. I realize that there were twenty-five of the importing countries 

that ratified the Agreement and four of the exporting counties, but the tragedy of it is that Argentina and 

Russia abstained. We all recall what happened in 1929, when Argentina threw away a large bulk of its 

stored-up wheat onto the market and crashed the market; and so we are very much concerned in general 

as to what may happen to the wheat growers of this province. The International pool, as you know, as set 

up will accept the delivery of 485,000,000 bushels of wheat, of which Canada puts in 203,000,000 

bushels. That is only a portion of our exportable surplus so the International Wheat Agreement does not 

definitely solve our problem. So it is absolutely necessary that we insist that the powers of the Wheat 

Board be extended so that we can have a satisfactory marketing medium. 

 

We will hear a lot about the hundreds of thousands of dollars that the farmers lost through the Canadian 

– United Kingdom Wheat agreement. On the other hand, we are getting a lot of free advice now about 

pricing ourselves out of certain markets. Well, Mr. Speaker, we never priced ourselves out of the British 

market. If there had been an arrangement made for the interchange of currencies, I believe we would 

still be delivering in considerable quantity to the British market; but the price at which we sold our grain 

to the United Kingdom set up a very favourable reaction to Canada. Argentina, as you will recall, 

insisted on getting its last pound of flesh out of the British people, during that wartime period. We were 

prepared to sell at $1.55 a bushel for the first two years of the contract, stepping up to $2.00 toward the 

latter end of the contract. 

 

We‘ll be dealing a little more fully with regard to marketing through the Winnipeg Grain Exchange at a 

later period, but from now on we‘ll hear a lot about what we have lost and what the Winnipeg Market 

has done for us. But as farmers, never let us forget the Winnipeg price list No. 115 on December 16th, 

1932, we paid the railways 22 cents a bushel (that is from the 22¢ freight rate point), for hauling our 

wheat and we got 21 cents a bushel for the wheat. Never let us forget that! And then from 1930 to 1942 

wheat averaged, at the country elevators, 57 cents a bushel. 

 

Those are some things that, I think, we should bear in mind while we are presenting a united front with 

regard to this matter of marketing of the farm surpluses. 

 

You will recall that, at the request of the United Nations, the Food and Agriculture committees set up an 

International Commodity 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

3 

Clearing House, as proposed, fell down, first, for the simple reason that the United States was not 

prepared to put up the required amount of money to give it financial stability. On the other hand, the 

United Kingdom was not prepared to purchase through the Commodity Clearing House and have her 

sterling piled up there, which was not convertible under the Agreement, and which would be used as a 

backlog against her as far as dealing in the dollar countries is concerned. 

 

So once again, International finance held sway while millions were going hungry. It has been like that 

all through the history of the world. It is estimated that one-half of the world‘s people are living on the 

merest sustenance, and that is a tragedy in our 20th century civilization. It is a tragedy in our 20th 

century civilization to think that we have not yet devised means for distributing the surplus food of the 

world in such a way that millions are going hungry, day by day. Millions of people in Asia have come 

under the sway of Communism. We hear our friends across the aisle here expressing their views pretty 

often and very volubly with respect to Communism. The people of China have come under the sway of 

Communism, I do not think because they have any inborn love for the philosophy of Stalin or Marx; but 

they just like starvation less then they like Communism, and that is what has forced them to their present 

position. 

 

In Canada we have a population of something less than four to the square mile. I was amazed to read a 

comment of Indian‘s representative to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference, held in 

Westminster Hall, that India has 341 people to the square mile. So against that background, the 

statement of Sir Richard Ackland says: 

 

―The essence of the revolution of our times is that for the first time in history, hundreds of millions of 

people throughout the world have ceased to acquiesce in the fact of their own grinding poverty – thank 

God for that! Their more and more insisting demands for their fair share must be met.‖ 

 

Monopoly capitalism or imperial capitalism has not any solution for that problem except recourse to 

arms, and who is going to pay when we have recourse to arms? Some of us know the price we have to 

pay. 

 

As Canadian farmers, we have a few marketing problems right on our own doorstep in addition to the 

marketing of wheat. We have the statement of the Hon. J.G. Gardiner, Federal Minister of Agriculture. 

He says: ―Reduce your 1950 wheat crop by 5,000,000 acres and sow course grains.‖ I think all members 

will remember what was thrown to us just before the Federal election, when we were told the Wheat 

Board would handle coarse grains. Any of you who have visited the Winnipeg Grain Exchange will 

realize that, during the past few years, the wheat pit is closed and the coarse grains pit is just as active, 

today, as ever it was. It is a regular farce to tell us that the Wheat Board was going to handle the coarse 

grains. They are clearing, Mr. Speaker, through the futures market just the 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

4 

same as they always did. I think the Wheat Pool delegates are on the right track when they say, speaking 

through their delegate body, that the marketing policy on coarse grains must be revised to eliminate the 

use of the speculative market. 

 

I remember speaking with the member from Gravelbourg, last year, when we had a resolution respecting 

the marketing of coarse grains through the Wheat Board, and we had a footnote that the Winnipeg Grain 

Exchange be closed. The member, quite rightly, drew it to my attention that, if all the grain was taken 

away from the Winnipeg Grain Exchange, it would automatically close and there would be no need to 

have that particular addition to the resolution. We want to remind him that we knew his Liberal Party far 

better than he knew it. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, it is an insult to the intelligence of the people of the Dominion of Canada, when 

they tell us that the Federation of Agriculture, which is composed of farmer representatives all across 

Canada – here you have, on one side, the grower of coarse grains in the West and you have the feeder in 

the East; to tell us that it is necessary to clear coarse grains through the Winnipeg Grain Exchange to 

stabilize prices is a mere farce. Feed barley, inside of a very short period, has varied from $1.48 to $1.14 

– 34 cents a bushel. Imagine a feeder in the East having a variation in price of 34 cents on feed barley! I 

believe that, if the Federal Government were sincere in their intention, there is absolutely no need to 

clear that feed grain through the speculative market of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, may I ask a question? 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — After I get through. It is not necessary to have a speculative market to set an 

equitable price for feed grains. We can absolutely do without that. What we do need, Mr. Speaker, is a 

permanent Prices Support Act. That is as absolutely essential to us as growers of grain as it is to the 

feeders. Once a feeder knows what he can get his feed for, that price level will be reflected back to us as 

the producers of the grain. 

 

A case in point now with respect to the Agricultural Prices Support Act is the matter of the egg 

marketing. Members will recall that the British Contract called for taking off about 10 per cent of the 

surplus eggs from the Canadian market, and yet, as soon as that contract expired, down crashed egg 

prices at local points from 22 cents to 23 cents per dozen. Yet the purchasing power that supported that 

other 90 per cent was still available, and while the 10 per cent of the contract did not affect the other 90 

per cent, when you had just a mere 10 per cent surplus floating around then it depressed the whole 

structure. We have to stand firm for an Agricultural Prices Support Act. 

 

I would like to deal just briefly with a few statements of a responsible Minister of the Crown with 

respect to marketing and prices and the marketing of our farm products. I tried to follow the Hon. J.G. 

Gardiner in his statements with regard to marketing, but I think of going through the maze of Hampton 

Court Palace is mere kids‘ play compared with 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

5 

the following of the daytime windings of the Minister on the marketing questions. 

 

First, I would like to draw to your attention the article which appeared in the ―Regina Leader-Post‖ on 

June 24, 1949 – this was during the Election campaign: 

 

―There is no evidence to support the contentions of Mr. M.J. Coldwell, Leader of the C.C.F., that 

Canada is losing the British market for food, Agricultural Minister Gardiner said here, last night.‖ 

 

It is rather illuminating to find that the Federal Bureau of Statistics issued figures covering that period, 

compared them with the same period of 1947, and we find that from January to August, 1949, compared 

with 1947, bacon and hams decreased 83 per cent; dried eggs, 56.6 per cent; shell eggs, 70.7 per cent; 

salmon, 94.4 per cent; whole milk powder, 100 per cent; evaporated milk 100 per cent and poultry, 100 

per cent; and that is so much for the election statement. 

 

Now, you come to the Brantford Chamber of commerce statement: 

 

―Gardiner declares Britain officially striking at Canada – Canada was Britain‘s chief source of wheat 

and apples and also supplied considerable quantities of pork, cheese, beef and other foods. During the 

War, Canada became Britain‘s chief supplier of pork, eggs and cheese and also shipped large amounts 

of milk and beef. During the last two years a very decided official effort has been made to drive every 

one of these products, except wheat, off the market.‖ 

 

Try and compare the Regina statement and the Brantford statement. Also study Hansard of December 

10, to watch the mental gymnastics of the Federal Minister of Agriculture. It is very interesting reading. 

 

Than again, we have Mr. Gardiner addressing the Chamber of Commerce in Regina – here is another 

Mr. Gardiner. Now, we will never know whether this was a result of a New Year‘s Resolution or what 

was the cause of it, but he says: 

 

―Britain would remain one of Canada‘s major markets until 1952, and then she would likely become 

Canada‘s best market.‖ 

 

We used to hear of that character in John Bunyan‘s book – ―Mr. Facing Bothways‖; but I am afraid that 

the Federal Minister of Agriculture has that gentleman faded off the map. 

 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

6 

And then we have the matter of surpluses. I won‘t go into these in detail; but we have quotation on 

December 1st, where Mr. Gardiner was in Washington addressing the United Nations Agricultural 

Organization there and saying that Canada had no food surpluses – ―that is absolutely a thing of the 

past.‖ Then we have him before the Canadian Horticultural Council on February 14th; ―Canada is 

producing food surpluses which are needed somewhere‖, (he said), ―and some people are making it 

difficult to move these surpluses to areas where they can be consumed.‖ 

 

So much for Mr. Gardiner‘s stand with regard to the marketing of farm products. 

 

There are some things from our point as farmers, which stand out crystal clear and our ultimate aim has 

got to be an international commodity clearing house. In the meantime, Britain still imports 50 per cent of 

her food products, and we have to hold our share of that marketing at all cost. The recurring uncertainty 

of the Canadian Wheat Board has got to be removed, and all grains marketed under a Grain Board under 

Federal control. A permanent Agricultural Prices Support Act is an absolutely necessity, and marketing 

control, insofar as grain is concerned, can be controlled by quotas. Perishable goods may require some 

control over production, but as far as the marketing of grain is concerned, this can be very well 

controlled by quota delivery. It is rather strange that it took a Labour Government in the Old Country to 

evaluate agriculture‘s place in the economy. Here, in Ottawa, we are muddling around without any 

definite policy with regard to the marketing of our products. 

 

In the north country, they are not as much concerned with the marketing of wheat as we are, but they 

have their marketing problems there. We will recall the stand that the Opposition had with regard to the 

approach of this Government to the lumber industry, the trappers, and to the fisherman; but I can quite 

understand that it is a little difficult for the Liberal mind to just understand our approach to the question. 

I have here an excerpt from a paper which was tabled in this House. Mr. Matte is writing to Mr. 

LaFrancoise under date of October 23, 1942, and this refers to the northern country (Meadow Lake is in 

the north): 

 

―You will recall when I was last in Green Lake, Marcien requested that we spend another $1,500 

clearing the road between Ile a la Crosse and Buffalo Narrows, but I would not consent to this at the 

time. The reason for this is obvious, of course, and that is, because we have already spent a great deal 

of money there, this year. Therefore, I believe it would be advisable to wait until 1943 until we do any 

more. I made this quite clear to Mr. Staines some time ago, asking him to give some thought to the 

matter.‖ 

 

Then we have Mr. Matte under date of January 21, writing to Oscar LaFrancoise: 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

7 

―If there were no prospects of an election, I would recommend that relief be practically discontinued.‖ 

 

And, again, Mr. LaFrancoise writing to the Hon. Hubert Staines: 

 

―While you were visiting your constituency in the month of June, in the company of Mr. Matte, I 

promised you a periodical report on the political situation therein, as well as to give you the reaction of 

Rose Boucher‘s visit which coincided with yours.‖ 

 

I am just quoting these, Mr. Speaker, as I have a lot of sympathy with the Liberal mind that they cannot 

comprehend our approach to this, as we think more of the dignity of man than votes. Mr. LaFrancoise 

writing to Mr. Matte under date of July 18th: 

 

―I spent three days in and around Meadow Lake this week, owing to the fact that several of our 

Athabaska constituents were there, and I wanted to do a little ground, (or should I say ―underground‖) 

work, which I will report when I have obtained more information from other sources.‖ 

 

This Government has made a definite effort to make the trapper and fisherman of the north self-

sustaining, making for independence and building up a little personal dignity without having to reply, as 

he had to under the Liberal administration, on a handout, – Don‘t feed him so much when there isn‘t an 

election, but when there is an election coming on to hand out a little more relief. We wanted to get away 

from that. 

 

I think where we made our mistake, Mr. Speaker, is that we tried to make co-operators out of them in 

two or three years. It took twenty years on these plains to make co-operators out of us fellows, and they 

are only 50 per cent finished with the job yet. I think that is where we made the mistake in the north; but 

I believe those men have as much dignity as we have down here on the plains, and, given a chance, I 

don‘t care whether they are white trappers or full-blooded Indians or whether they are Metis, they are 

men of dignity if they are given a chance. I think it is our duty as Government to see they get the chance 

now they never had before. 

 

Right from the early settlement of the country they were exploited by the big companies that came in, 

and then by the Liberal Party. I recall when the Minister of Natural Resources made a statement just 

before prorogation of the House last Session, with regard to withdrawing from the Fish Board. It was 

rather amusing to watch the faces of the Opposition, and I might say I saw a somewhat similar 

expression at a farm sale where a farmer put a bid on something he didn‘t want, only to find he had it 

knocked down to him. There was a very similar expression 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

8 

to this on the faces of the Opposition members. 

 

When the Minister announced that the fishermen of the north would be given a voluntary opportunity to 

market through the dealers or through the Government agency, I wrote in to get these figures so that I 

could verify my statement. We found there were twenty-one meetings held, and sixteen voted for the 

marketing agency and five for the private dealers. At one of those meetings where there were twenty for 

the private dealers and one for the Government agency, they have since voted unanimously to come in 

under the Government agency as soon as the Government can guarantee to handle their products. At 

Pierceland, they voted 54 against and 14 for, and since that there have been 42 of the fishermen at 

Pierceland who have asked the agency to handle their production at Primrose Lake. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 

find it very, very difficult to reconcile the action of these fishermen of the north with the statements 

made by Liberal speakers on the other side of the House, statements that are recorded in the Journals of 

1949, statements of the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

In the case of the fur trapper, we have heard a lot about the fur trapper and about the compulsion that 

was placed upon him. We area proud of our Fur Marketing agency which was organized in 1945, but we 

have heard nothing but hostile criticism from the Opposition with regard to the Fur Marketing agency. 

What do we find with regard to that? The Minister took quote a bold step in going up into the north and 

calling a trappers‘ convention. They don‘t appreciate that side of human nature. It doesn‘t appeal to 

them. Those of us who had been in the habit of attending farmers‘ conventions know that anybody on 

the platform often gets a pretty rough ride, and that is quite as it should be; but we find here there were 

125 trappers‘ representatives present and there were 48 conservation blocks. There were 30 resolutions 

placed before that convention – I‘ll just quote one or two. We had been told that these fellows wanted to 

market their product through the private dealer. That resolution was debated, and they voted endorsation 

of the Government Fur Marketing agency, and they opposed any reduction in the commission charges. 

These are the men that are doing the trapping – not politicians. Second, they voted decisively against 

permission to sell their beaver and muskrat pelts through private agencies. They requested that 

improvements be made in the conservation areas but they turned down a resolution that the rate of 

royalty be reduced in the conservation areas. 

 

I would like to deal, just very briefly, with the matter of finance, because, in addition to its social 

legislation, this Government is recognized for its business administration. I remember the fiendish glee 

with which the Liberal spokesmen went ‗round the country telling the people that the credit of this 

province was shot, absolutely no opportunity of selling debentures. I realize that the previous 

government coming through the depression and the early part of the wartime period, had quite a difficult 

row to hoe, but yet, in good and bad years, they piled up a provincial debt. It is gratifying to see the 

increased confidence that is being displayed by financial firms in spite of anything our friends can say. 

 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

9 

It is interesting to recall some of the problems that this Government had to face when they took over the 

reins of this province. We had the highest per capita debt of any province in the Dominion of Canada. 

As years rolled ‗round we are now the fourth lowest in the provincial debts in the Dominion, and I 

notice as far back as the month of June, this year, ―Canadian Finance‖, a paper which is not by any 

means sympathetic to this Government, had rather a striking editorial in praise of the Government. They 

headed it up, ―Give the Devil his Due‖. Now how they mixed up the patron saint of the Liberal Party 

with the C.C.F. financing, I don‘t know; but that‘s the caption that they used: 

 

―Some of the daily newspapers have made quite a play out of the new Saskatchewan bond issue which 

sold a few days ago at a net cost of slightly over 4 per cent to the province. Comparisons were made 

with New Brunswick, of which the most recent issue sold at the rate of something under 3 1/2 per cent 

– this was the June issue. The implication drawn from the figures was that the Saskatchewan 

Government, because it was a C.C.F. Government, had scared investors away to the extent that they 

will not buy its securities at as good a rate as those of other provinces whose actual financial condition 

is not better. This is a very superficial judgment.‖ – this isn‘t your Liberal comment; it‘s a financial 

paper – ―It no more reflects discredit on the Saskatchewan Government than it enhances the reputation 

of the writers making the analysis. One has to give credit where credit is due. In a comparison of 

interest rates twenty years ago when the Government of Saskatchewan was perfectly orthodox, the 

records show there was a spread of half a cent or more in favour of New Brunswick then too.‖ 

 

Then this same paper came along with an editorial just the other day – ―Mr. Fines laughs last‖. 

 

―The ripples of quiet chuckling that might be floating across Wascana Lake these last few days, could 

easily be coming from the chest of the Honourable Clarence Fines. He has confounded the critics 

again by placing a bond issue at 3 1/2 per cent. When Saskatchewan had to offer 4 per cent to get 

buyers for its last large bond issue before the January flotation, it expected willing money at 3 1/2 – 

there was a good deal of premature gloating in most of the respectable journals about the fact that the 

C.C.F. Government had been put back in its place. The 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

10 

Saskatchewan government has attracted the investment interest of some very large and important 

American oil companies. This new type of pioneering has made Saskatchewan look like a more 

diversified and sounder risk than it was before. It is true, and that is why Mr. Fines came back from 

Toronto with a few million dollars at a very moderate rate of interest. The moral is that the outward 

complexion of a government doesn‘t have the slightest effect on a lender of money if the internal 

conditions are sound.‖ 

 

I had several other matters that I wanted to deal with, but I will just briefly touch on two. I would like to 

read an editorial from one of our local papers that appeared after the Liberal convention in Saskatoon. 

This editorial is headed, ―Isn‘t it Tough?‖ It continues: 

 

―Now we think we‘ve heard it all. At the meeting of the Saskatchewan Liberal Association held in 

Saskatoon, last week, as reported in the ―Star Phoenix‖, the press was censured for not giving 

sufficient coverage to the doings of the Liberal Party in the Legislature. As almost everybody knows 

there are four daily newspapers in Saskatchewan and each and every one of them is owned and 

operated by prominent supporters of the Liberal Party. We‘ve always been led to believe that political 

success depends largely upon newspaper support and in this respect it would be difficult to imagine 

the setup that could be more advantageous to any party than that which the Liberal Party enjoys in 

Saskatchewan at the present time. Under the circumstances its rather amazing to find the Liberal 

Leader, Mr. Walter Tucker, expressing himself as follows: With all due respect to the press, the true 

atmosphere of the House was not conveyed to the people. I felt the Opposition had the better of the 

debating and I hope a truer picture will get across at the coming Session‖. Mr. Tucker said the press 

had given Premier T.C. Douglas an aura of superiority in mental gymnastics that he hardly deserved; 

the Premier was bested in the debates on many occasions, Mr. Tucker claimed.‖ 

 

Mrs. Thomas Burke, the former president of the Women‘s Liberal Association made this statement: 

 

―Catch Mr. Douglas without a script and he‘s as big a flop as anyone.‖ 

 

The Editor comments: 

 

―We happened to have the Premier in our constituency opening a hospital,‖ 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

11 

and, he continued, ―people who heard Mr. Douglas speak without notes at the opening of the new 

hospital should be in a position to judge how accurate the lady‘s assertion is.‖ 

 

It happened, that morning of convention, I tuned in to CFQC on November 18th, and the commentator 

was telling the public that the Liberal convention was just like the debate on the floor of the Legislature 

between the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition. Well, I knew the Premier and the Leader of the 

Opposition had a fraternal appointment for a gathering at Prince Albert, but I began to wonder what the 

Premier was doing at a Liberal convention in Saskatoon. The commentator went on to make the 

statement that the only difference in the debate was that the Premier wasn‘t there; so I imagine the 

Leader of the Opposition would show to pretty good advantage in that debate. But he went on to speak 

about what the lady had said. He said the lady had stated that one thing was that Government members 

come with their material well prepared. She said, ―I‘ve noticed that, and our men speak in the evening 

when the press are tired, and they are only human.‖ Well now, the lady was entirely wrong in that about 

us monopolizing the afternoon and the Opposition taking the evening, but in her comments to the press, 

and she said the press was only human; well, we knew we weren‘t divine, and I‘ve heard people with 

very decided views with regard to their place of origins, and I thought it was very nice to be assured that 

they were human. 

 

I want to deal very briefly with my own constituency. In Kindersley, which, as you know, is in the 

Kerrobert-Kindersley constituency, we have two larger units functioning, one which was organized 

among the first fifteen, at Kindersley and one at Kerrobert. The Kindersley larger unit, I think, is a 

model which any constituency would be well advised to follow. The people of Rosetown made a trip 

into my constituency and were able to view what was going on at first hand. Two men that were 

opposed to the larger unit came and they went back into the Rosetown constituency, reporting as a 

committee, and I am sure you are all familiar with the results. It gives an opportunity to the boy on the 

farm, that is the larger unit of administration. We have there a dormitory which accommodates 80 

pupils. The board is very moderately priced; I often wonder how they can supply the meals that they do 

at the low price they charge. There are 160 high school pupils in attendance there, 80 resident in the 

dormitory, and a boy has the opportunity of taking his academic course in conjunction with drafting, 

woodwork, sheet metal work, motor mechanics, commercial subjects and home economics. Classes are 

well attended and are increasing every year, and I want to say to the Minister of Education – keep on 

with the good work, because it is appreciated where they have it functioning properly! 

 

In connection with our hospital as many of you saw, they opened a $290,000 hospital and nurses‘ home 

– one of the most modern ones I suppose that we have in the west – a forty-bed hospital. They are 

appreciative of the assistance rendered by the Provincial Government and the Federal Government by 

way of grants. A portion of 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

12 

the excavation was done and the basement run before the Federal Government came into the picture. We 

tried to get the hundred cents on the dollar, but weren‘t successful. I have often wished since I could 

have availed myself of the profound knowledge of Melville in regard to the matter of hospital grants; we 

might have been able to obtain the hundred per cent had I availed myself of that knowledge; but weren‘t 

able to do this. However, we have a wonderful hospital there. Anyone of you that happen to be in the 

constituency which I have the honour to represent, don‘t fail to look over the hospital! 

 

There is one other matter, that is in connection with the car insurance. The Opposition did their best, you 

will remember, to keep us out of the insurance business – yes, to kill it absolutely, and to play into the 

hands of private interest. The insurance business is wonderfully well appreciated there at the present 

time, as well as the hospitalization and the advantages accruing from that; but I was sorry to see in the 

press releases from the Insurance office that a lot of my good Liberal friends have got to learn the 

advantages the hard way. I have no Liberal enemies there when there is not an election on; sometimes 

some of the speakers come in and try to make enemies. The Liberals in there are my friends, but they 

have had to learn through the painful experience of being involved in an accident and receiving 

hospitalization. I am sorry for that; but if fate decrees that that is the only way they‘ll learn, well, all 

success to both systems! 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by Mr. Buchanan: 

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE JOHN MICHAEL UHRICH, 

 

Lieutenant Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 

 

We, His Majesty‘s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious speech which Your 

Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

13 

Mr. Niles N. Buchanan (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — I rise to second the Motion of the hon. member 

for Kerrobert-Kindersley but, before speaking to the particular question before the House, I would like 

to offer, personally, my condolences and sympathy to the families of the two late members of this House 

who are no longer with us. 

 

I knew the member for Gull Lake, personally, having sat on this side of the House with him for five 

years and knowing him in our political organization. I want to say he was always a quite-mannered man, 

unassuming, who took very seriously his duties as a member in this House and in representing his 

constituency. I understand he was prominent in all progressive organizations in his own district. His loss 

will not only be felt here and by the community he represented, but by the family that he leaves behind. 

 

As for the member for the Battlefords – Mr. Prince – I did not know him so well; but I think hon. 

members on this side of the House will agree with me that we always found him to be very co-operative, 

and after the fire and fury of the legislative debates were over in the evening, we could always go down 

town with him and enjoy his friendly chat in a hotel-room or over a cup of tea. I am sure his loss will be 

felt equally in the district from which he came. 

 

To the two members who replaced these men, I want to extend my congratulations on their election to 

this House. I hope they will be able to represent their seats a long time, and I hope they will be able to 

carry on the work as ably and as well as they men they are replacing. 

 

It is a time-honoured tradition, Mr. Speaker, that the Speech from the Throne, prepared as it is by the 

Government, sets out briefly the proposed legislation of the present sitting of the House, and the 

acceptance or rejection of this Speech constitutes a vote of confidence in that Government. 

 

To be accorded the privilege of seconding the motion before us, which amounts to an endorsation of the 

Speech from the Throne, is a high honour which I accept humbly, knowing that it is given on behalf of 

the people I represent, and knowing it has been given to me because of the important part they play in 

this province‘s economy. 

 

I intend, Mr. Speaker, to discuss the particular problems 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

14 

of my own constituency at some length later on in my speech, but I would like first to discuss some of 

the general problems which are not only of interest to the people I represent, but to people all over the 

world. 

 

I believe all Canadians have been proud to welcome our sister province of Newfoundland into 

Confederation. That has been consummated during the past year and, at long last, we are able to realize 

the vision which was held by those men who originally framed our constitution. 

 

Since we last met in Session, the world picture has grown continually worse and worse, particularly 

from the point of view of peace-loving people. We hear over our radios and read in our press things 

which cause all of us great concern. The world is rapidly developing into two armed camps as it was a 

few years before the last great war. Peace-loving people all over the world have cause to become 

alarmed because it is upon us, the people who work, the consumers and producers of the world, that the 

destruction will fall the heaviest, as it has always in the past. On the one hand we see American 

Capitalist Imperialism and, on the other, Communist expansionism, both of which we have reason to 

fear. We read of the developments of the atomic bomb and now the hydrogen bomb. We read of these 

things with concern, because it is not too much to expect that the unleashing of the terrible power 

contained in these things may well set in motion a chain reaction which could destroy the earth. 

 

We hope that some other way can be found and it is the duty of our statesmen throughout the world to 

find a solution for world peace. It cannot be found in arms. If one nation arms itself, the other nation will 

do the same, each trying to become better equipped for destruction than the other, and, finally, the storm 

is bound to break. In our history books, we read of great monsters of ancient times that roamed over the 

earth. Sometimes geologists find bones of these creatures, and it is said they developed protective 

armour, and they developed it to such an extent that they were eventually borne down and destroyed by 

the very armour that they developed to protect themselves against their enemies. Such may well be the 

fate of civilization if we carry on as we are today. 

 

In the Throne Speech debate, last year, the hon. member for Canora (Mr. Kuziak) pointed out the causes 

for the spread of Communism. The hon. member from Kerrobert-Kindersley also mentioned it, in 

passing, just now. Whether we agree with Communism or not is not the question. The question is: what 

causes Communism to grow? Economic conditions are the foundations of all ideology, whether political 

or economic, and it is economic conditions which have caused, which have fostered, the spread of 

Communism, and we will not have effectively stopped that spread and stopped that growth until we 

have faced realistically the problems of bettering the conditions of humanity. Once we have done that, 

we will have done far more than the threat of the atomic bomb or the hydrogen bomb possess in the 

hands of any one country in stopping its development and expansion. Communism thrives on adverse 

economic conditions and all the arms in the world cannot stop it. Had the democracies insisted on 

economic development in China under a democratic government, and rendered the financial assistance 

and advice necessary to give the people of China a decent standard of living, and helped them on their 

way to democracy, we would not now have Communism in that country, such as we have today. It was 

not the invasion of Russian armies that spread Communism across China. The people of China flocked 

to the ‗red banner‘ because, as the member from Kerrobert-Kindersley has stated, they hated 

Communism less than they hated starvation, and 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

15 

it seemed to be their only alternative. 

 

Statesmen the world over must turn elsewhere to find the solution for this terrible problem. We must 

find a method whereby we can ensure that the lowliest people on the earth, as the late President 

Roosevelt stated – ―The lowliest Pickaninny in darkest Africa has the right to the four freedoms, not the 

least of which is freedom from want.‖ Not until that day can we be certain that we have guaranteed 

peace and security for the peace-loving people of the world. 

 

In a world of conflicting ideologies and mad armament races, such as we have today, it is comforting to 

know, Mr. Speaker, that leaders of a large section of the earth, the British Commonwealth of Nations, 

can still come together and seat themselves around a table and discuss, without animosity, their common 

problems and seek solutions which will make for better conditions all over the world. Recently, at 

Colombo in Ceylon, such a meeting was held. At this conference the things which I have pointed out 

were recognized. It was recognized that the Far East could not longer be used for unrestricted capitalistic 

exploitation. It was recognized that these people must be given decent wages, and that industries must be 

set up in these backward countries to give employment to the people. According to press reports, the 

spirit underlying the discussions must have been very different from a few years ago when backward 

peoples were considered fair game for capitalist exploitation. 

 

Even though the world picture is gloomy to say the least, during the post-war period man has acquired a 

new dignity. A new concept of the functions of government has come into being, and is generally 

accepted throughout the civilized world. Instead of acting merely as a referee, governments have more 

and more recognized that they have a responsibility to see that the wealth of their respective countries is 

so distributed that every person has the right to freedom from want, freedom from fear, and the other 

freedoms that have been so often mentioned. And so we have, coming into being today, a new term; a 

new description for the state has resulted from this new concept of the functions of Government – it has 

been termed the ‗Welfare State‘. That state, in every case, has been brought into being by Social 

Democratic Governments – in New Zealand, in Australia, in the United Kingdom and in the 

Scandinavian countries. 

 

Now, it is true that in New Zealand and in Australia the Labour Parties which brought these in, which 

are the equivalent of our own C.C.F. here in Canada today, were defeated, and possibly the Labour Party 

might be defeated in Great Britain; but in these two defeats it was only by a small majority, a small 

margin, and in each case the opposition parties promised to continue to give to the people those social 

services which had been inaugurated by the Labour Government. Not in one case did they state they 

would withdraw any of these services. Mr. Speaker, for any capitalistic party to fulfill such a thing is an 

impossibility, because we all know, opposition members as well as the members on this side of the 

House, that capitalistic parties represent the financial and industrial interests of the countries in which 

they seek election, and the opposition will also concede that the Welfare State can only be maintained 

out of the production of a nation. Now, if we are going to try to give to the people social services, 

adequate social services, such as have been given in Great Britain and in the other countries which I 

have mentioned, then we are going to have to curb the power and tax the profits of these industrialists. 

The Liberal Party or the Conservative Party, either of the capitalistic 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

16 

parties, will not and cannot do this because, if they do, they lose the support of the interests they speak 

for, and, if they do not give to the people of the country in which they form the Government what the 

people have learned to expect as their right, the people will not longer support them on election day. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I say to members on this side of the House, to members of Social Democratic 

Parties all over the world, be of good cheer! We may, time after time, lose elections; we may lose some 

amount of support, but eventually the time will come when the people realize these truths, realize they 

cannot have economic security on the one hand and capitalistic exploitation on the other. The two 

cannot exist in the boundaries of one country. 

 

I have in my hands a chart prepared by the Cleveland Trust Company. This chart was prepared a number 

of years ago. Now, the name, the ‗Cleveland Trust Company‘ should dispel any doubts as to the political 

faith of the institution which has printed this chart. This chart gives a financial or economic history of 

the wealthy (of the civilized or industrial world we call it) since 1790. To quote all the information 

contained on this would be an impossibility, but it starts out in 1790, some 160 years ago, and there, 

invariably, as members closer-by will be able to see by the zig-zag across the line, we find first of all a 

war, followed by a post-war period of inflation and prosperity; then followed by an immediate post-war 

depression; followed by another short period of a little bit milder prosperity; followed again by a deeper 

depress, ending up in a war. This is repeated over and over and over again throughout this entire chart, 

during the past 160 years. The story has always been the same. The only difference is that the periods of 

depression have gone deeper and lasted longer, and the periods of prosperity have reached as high a 

peak and have lasted a shorter length of time, and, of course, the wars have become fiercer as time went 

on. If anybody wants to see this chart they are welcome to do so. 

 

We Socialists are sometimes accused of crepe-hanging, of being forecaster of gloom. On the contrary, 

Mr. Speaker, we are realists. We believe in examining things as they are and learning from them, and 

going on from that basis to the future. We know from past experience that it is impossible for capitalism 

to function without these periods of war and depression which I have mentioned, and we are striving to 

bring about the day when such things will no longer be the inevitable lot of humanity. 

 

I imagine hon. members opposite will take a lot of comfort out of last summer‘s Federal election, 

wherein we lost a number of our Federal members in Saskatchewan. Let them take such comfort as they 

may, Mr. Speaker. The trend in the last three by-elections should dispel any doubt on that point. We 

retained the Gull Lake seat; we increased our percentage of the popular vote in each of the three others. 

The Liberal Party, last summer, promised full employment, among many other things, and yet, today, 

there are almost half a million men, Mr. Speaker, on the unemployment rolls in the Dominion of 

Canada. They promised stable markets and prices for our farm products, and Mr. Gardiner also promised 

to build the South Saskatchewan River dam. 

 

I have a few things here, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to read from the Leader-Post. You know the 

Leader-Post, before the election, is promising all sorts of things on behalf of what the grand old Liberal 

Government will do for the people after the election, and then, after the election, Mr. Speaker, the 

Leader-Post starts running to this Government 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

17 

asking for the very things they promised the Federal Government would do. Here we have an editorial 

dated June 23 of last summer: 

 

―Dr. McCusker has pledged himself to do everything he can to give Regina an immediate and 

adequate water supply through the Saskatchewan River Plan. 

 

One of the ways in which citizens can expedite the solution of this vexing problem is to elect the 

Liberal candidate as a member for Regina next Monday.‖ 

 

And, then again, Mr. Speaker, on June 25, the Saturday before the election, the Regina Leader-Post 

editor writes: 

 

―The project to supply Regina with South Saskatchewan River water via the Qu‘Appelle River and 

Buffalo Pound Lake, to which the Liberal candidate in Regina, Dr. E.A. McCusker, has pledged his 

all-out support, may cost in the neighbourhood of five million dollars. The plan calls for the 

construction of a pumping station on the river, near Outlook. Water will be pumped over the 90-foot 

banks and led by means of a mile-long pipeline to the headwaters of the Qu‘Appelle River.‖ 

 

And so on. They describe how it will be put in. 

 

―It is also hoped that the pipeline from Buffalo Pound Lake to Regina and the second pumping station 

might be considered as a post-war construction project and financed by the Department of 

Reconstruction. 

 

The next Federal Government will almost certainly be a Liberal administration. There is no doubt that 

the water supply problem will be solved faster if Dr. E.A. McCusker is returned, on Monday, as 

Regina‘s next member of Parliament.‖ 

 

Dr. McCusker was elected (though some doubt still exists about whether he was or was not by some 

people in this province); but what about Regina‘s water supply problem? Dr. McCusker has evidently 

failed to impress the people at Ottawa; anyway, the Leader-Post now has whole diatribes in its columns 

against this Government, in its editorial pages, because this Government has not fulfilled the promises 

that Dr. McCusker was supposed to get from the Federal Government at Ottawa. I could go on down the 

line, Mr. Speaker, but in the closing part of my talk I would like to say some things of particular interest 

to my own constituency of Notukeu-Willowbunch. 

 

Notukeu-Willowbunch lies in the central southern part of this province. The 3rd meridian runs through 

the eastern part of it, and it is bounded on the south by the American boundary, on the west by the little 

town of Val Marie, on the east, Willowbunch, and on the north, No. 13 Highway separates it from the 

Gravelbourg and Bengough constituencies. 

 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

18 

Val Marie is in the centre of a large ranching district, and through the spirit of determination and their 

own thrift they have been able to sustain themselves and become an essential part of our provincial 

economy. They raise cattle and are able to live in the conditions which are prevalent there. In 

conjunction with the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act, and the Branch of our own Department of 

Agriculture just newly set up, they have been able to gain for themselves a measure of economic 

stability which would not have been true had not the three of them been working in close co-operation 

with one another. 

 

These people, with the help of our Department of Public Health, have built and equipped a modern 

hospital to fill their needs, and they have an excellent young doctor who is working enthusiastically to 

better the health conditions of the community. It is in the Swift Current Health Region, and I have heard 

nothing but praise for the services rendered through the region and by this doctor and his staff. 

 

These people have also formed an organization, which has existed for a number of years, called ‗The 

Fill-the-Gap Organization‘, for the purpose of doing everything possible to get the gap in the railroad 

filled between Mankota and Val Marie. The completion of this railroad is a necessity to these people, 

and in view of the increase in freight rates allowed by the Federal Government, this should be done at 

once. It is the terminal point of the railroad at this point, and twenty-four hours after livestock has been 

placed on the train at Val Marie they are sixty miles further from market than Val Marie is. So, they lose 

not only in a longer freight haul, but they lose also in the depreciation of the value of their beasts 

through this extra long freight haul. They have for years tried to get the Val Marie – Mankota gap filled. 

it is a definite necessity, and now I do not think there should be any excuse thrown in the way to prevent 

the construction of this line. 

 

Going eastward through the central part of the constituency we come to Mankota. Mankota is a small 

town also at the end of the steel. It is in the centre of a mixed-farming population, and has suffered crop 

failures during the past four years. It has only been the ranchers and those who kept a few head of cattle 

that have been able to hang on. Here, also, is a fully modern hospital, again built with the assistance of 

the Provincial Government. It is equipped to serve the needs of the community. A young doctor has 

been engaged and has been serving there ever since the hospital was completed two years ago. He works 

in co-operation with the doctor at Kincaid, a number of miles to the north, and between the two of them 

they are able to give quite satisfactory medical and health services to the people around these centres. 

 

Time does not permit me to speak of all the fine centres and the good people in my constituency, but I 

would like to mention a few more. 

 

Wood Mountain is famous, with Willowbunch, as one of Saskatchewan‘s first white settlements in the 

old pioneering days. Here we still have some of the ‗old timers‘ who helped to make Saskatchewan 

history. Last summer, the people there, with the financial help of the Department of Natural Resources, 

built a beautiful swimming pool at a site they hope to develop into a park where the old R.C.N.W.N.P. 

barracks used to stand. I would, personally, take pleasure in inviting all the hon. members here to attend 

the Stampede which will be held there, next summer. It is the oldest annual Stampede to be held in the 

entire Dominion of Canada. There 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

19 

you will see some of the finest displays of horsemanship that can be seen on the North American 

continent. You will also be able to go swimming in the fine new swimming pool, and usually, in the 

evening, some of the best baseball teams we have in the southern part of the province put on a ball 

tournament. Once again, I wish, personally, to invite all members to come. 

 

Willowbunch, another town, the largest town in the constituency, is on the extreme eastern side. This 

town was settled in the early days by French Canadian pioneers, and this town still remains 

predominately French Canadian. They still show the pioneering and co-operative spirit which brought 

their ancestors west. They have organized a very successful co-operative and a strong Credit Union. 

They have built, with the assistance of the Department of Public Health, a new hospital, fully equipped, 

and staffed with a fine young doctor and efficient nurses. Their school has been extended with a building 

grant given to them by the Department of Education, and now the larger Unit is considering the 

construction of a new school for secondary education at this point. 

 

Willowbunch has suffered in the past because the Government of this province has been Liberal, with 

the exception of the five years during the Anderson Government, and Willowbunch had voted solid 

Liberal up until a few years ago. As a result of this, Liberal Governments did not feel it necessary to do 

anything for Willowbunch as they would vote Liberal anyway, and they could spend their money to 

better advantage someplace else. Though Willowbunch is the oldest settled place in the province it has 

had the poorest of service in the past. For years they had no road. If farmers drove into Willowbunch 

and it rained they could not get out until the roads dried up. They had an old two-storey frame house 

which was used for years as a hospital, despite the large population; sometimes they were able to get a 

doctor and sometimes not; their school was overcrowded, but, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be able to 

say that this is not he case today. Just a few short months after this Government took over, in the fall of 

1944 to be exact, the Minister of Highways promised that he would construct a road from No. 2 

Highway south of Moose Jaw through Willowbunch town, and south. He promised that some work 

would be done on this road every year until it was completed. Last year, the grade was completed to 

Willowbunch, and it is expected that it will be gravelled this year. I hope that the Minister will find it 

possible to extend that work this year, and work on south of Willowbunch. I want to say to the Minister 

at this time, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Willowbunch are pleased with their road, and it is one of the 

very few roads that have been practically snow-free during the most part of the winter. 

 

I must mention also, Mr. Speaker, a little town also on the end of the steel, the little town of Kildeer. I 

do not imagine there are more than twenty-five or thirty people living in this little town. It is situated a 

long distance from any large centre; their train services is very poor – one mixed train a week. The 

summer before last, the Department of Telephones built a line out there which, for the first time, brought 

them in close contact with the outside world. Being along way from anywhere – over sixty miles to the 

nearest doctor – they have developed a community spirit that is not possessed by many districts in the 

province. This is reflected in their new co-operative store which they built, last year, in spite of the fact 

that this is a poor crop district and sparsely settled. I might say that this store is fully modern, that it has 

every convenience possessed by any large modern store in any city in the province; it is built to satisfy 

the needs of the people of this community. 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

20 

No. 2 Highway, which goes through this community to the Customs Office on the border, is worn out – 

much of it in a very bad condition. It is impossible to drive over it in safety, except in the best of 

weather. Three years ago, a truck slipped over the edge of the grade when the roads were muddy, killing 

a young husband. This cost the Insurance Office over $5,000, to say nothing of the sorrow to his young 

widow and family. In the winter, it is the first road to be blocked and it remains blocked till the last in 

the spring. There is a saying down there that ‗every third flight of the Air Ambulance made in the south 

has to be made to Kildeer‘. I do not know how true this is, but if they were able to get out at all, many of 

the trips now being made into there by the Air Ambulance would be unnecessary. 

 

Just before coming up to Regina for the Session, Mr. Speaker, I received a letter from an undertaker in 

Assiniboia, who also runs an ambulance service. (interruption) Oh, he wasn‘t soliciting business, Mr. 

Speaker, but he was writing about the town of Kildeer. He writes, January 12, 1950: 

 

―I seldom complain and bother people like yourself with any of my worries as I know there are plenty 

of others to do that, but this to my mind, is worth attention. 

 

On Wednesday of this week, I had occasion to visit Kildeer, went by train, the trip was okay, a good 

warm coach, and we made good time and, on the whole, had a good time on the train, and as for 

myself I was very well looked after until I left the following morning. 

 

But that isn‘t the story. It simply made my blood run cold to see the plight of those people in their 

isolated condition, what, if out of a dozen things which we can think of, would happen, well, half the 

hamlet could die without help. And speaking of that, it took over a week to get the body of the late 

Jack White out of there. But my contention is this; as much as I want to see No. 2 north and south built 

up and blacktopped, and No. 13 improved, and all the rest of it, knowing the situation as I have known 

it for thirty-eight years; if I had the power, the first highway money I would spend is to bring that road 

from Rockglen to Kildeer up to standard and gravel it, and then I would put a snow-plow on that 

section to keep it open, if sufficient snow-fencing could not be had to keep it open for winter use; and 

I think that you are absolutely justified in putting this claim to the Government so strongly that they 

will not allow another winter to pass with the present condition existing. 

 

I could tell you stories of my own experience in taking sick people out of there at the risk of my own 

and the life of others, which would stand your hair on end, and still we sit idly by and allow it to 

continue. We do all kinds of things to assist the Indians and others in the north, and 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

21 

allow our own best blood in the land to take it right here at our door. 

 

Please pardon me if this note appears a little along the line of complaining – it is not with that in mind; 

and on the other hand you know that a good road like I mention is not worth a cent to me personally, 

or to my business. I could mention six other roads in your riding which would mean real money to me, 

but that‘s not the idea – further it is not that this idea has just occurred to me, as I know conditions and 

have known them in that district since 1911. If I can be of assistance in supporting you in what I have 

mentioned above, or any other way so far as that goes, do not hesitate to call on me, and this letter is 

not confidential. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

(signed) T.G. Ross 

Undertaker‖ 

 

Now there is the opinion of a disinterested party who doesn‘t even live there, and so, on behalf of these 

people, I want to ask for better communications for them. There are not many people there. It won‘t 

mean many votes, because they are all C.C.F. anyway, Mr. Speaker. I have nothing but commendation 

for the manner in which the hon. Minister of Highways has tackled the problem of Saskatchewan‘s huge 

network of highways. When we consider that we have the largest settled-area of any province in the 

Dominion, and one of the smallest populations, and consider the vast improvement that has been made 

in our highways during the past five years, we must acknowledge that a great job has been done, and he 

and his staff are to be congratulated. Communities now, such as this little community of Kildeer, have 

the right and the reason to hope that, at long last, they may be able to get something that will help them 

out of their difficulties, which, previous to the present Minister‘s administration, they didn‘t even 

consider because they knew it would not likely be forthcoming. The day of the horse and buggy is done, 

and more and more, because of this, we have got to bring our highways up to a high standard of 

construction. It has only been during the past five years that we have had a real snow removal 

programme that could be referred to as such, and the last four winters have been among the worst in our 

history, yet a great part of our highways system has been open. I think snow removal should be done 

primarily to provide people with an outlet to doctors and to hospitals, and any other essential services in 

winters such as we have had during these last four years. Centres that have good hospitals and doctors 

don‘t need outlets to the same extent as do centres such as Kildeer and many other places I could 

mention right in my own constituency. Towns on main line railroads don‘t need their roads cleared as 

badly as do districts in which there are only one or two trains a week. 

 

In my constituency there are no large centres, no daily train service and only the three doctors I have 

mentioned. It is true we have an Air Ambulance, and the value of this service can never be over-

estimated; but the Air Ambulance service cannot take care of every emergency. Just two weeks ago, a 

young mother, living twenty-seven miles south of Assiniboia, was taken in premature labour. She took 

ill at 5:30 in the afternoon, too late to call the Air Ambulance. Roads were 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

22 

blocked on No. 2 south of Assiniboia, so she could not be taken to a doctor. The result was the loss of 

the baby and hours of suffering on the part of the young mother, as there was no doctor in attendance 

and no doctor could be obtained, although every effort was made to get one. Rather than provide better 

service for those points that already have good service (and I could name many of them), I believe it 

would be more in keeping with C.C.F. policy to make every effort to provide service for those points 

that have no service at all; rather than have plows stationed at points where there are railroad and 

hospital services, the people I represent feel that these plows should be stationed at points where they 

can open roads to such places. 

 

The people of Notukeu-Willowbunch are either actively engaged in grain framing, mixed-farming and 

ranching, or are directly dependent upon these activities. There is no labour population there, and what 

is of interest to agriculture in general across Canada is of particular interest to them. They view with 

alarm the loss of the foreign market which looms over them, such as the hon. member from Kerrobert-

Kindersley mentioned. They have sought for an extension of the P.F.A.A. on an individual basis as this 

means salvation to them. Ranchers are anxious to have some extension of the P.F.A.A. principle to 

include them on a provincial basis, so that, in years when they have the drought we suffered in the 

ranching areas, as last year, they will at least be able to pay their taxes and lease fees. Most of them that 

have talked to me, liked the idea of long-term leases which give them more security of tenure than they 

ever had before. They also like to have their rental fees tied to the price of beef and the productivity of 

the soil, but instead of using the average price of the previous year, now being used as the basis, they 

would prefer using the current year, as they expect a drop in the price of beef along with everything else, 

and they point out that as the price of beef is likely to fall year by year and they have to pay, out of a 

lower return, lease fees based on the previous year‘s higher price, this would work a certain hardship on 

them. They would also like to see their taxes adjusted in the same manner. Due to the larger 

Administrative Unit, ranch areas which have never been taxed for school purposes before are now being 

taxed. Most ranchers admit the justice of this, but point out that, because of the isolated location of their 

ranch homes, they are unable to derive the same benefit from the larger Units that are received by people 

who make their living in smaller holdings. In Notukeu-Willowbunch, we do not have a composite high 

school like that mentioned by the member for Kerrobert-Kindersley. When we do have one, then the 

ranchers will be the chief beneficiaries of the larger Administrative Unit, for their children will be able 

to attend these schools at nominal fees such as were also mentioned by the hon. member. Through 

ranching, areas of this province are able to produce and provide revenue that would otherwise be 

nothing but a barren waste. For this reason ranchers must be given every consideration. 

 

Many members here remember the winter of 1946 and 1947, and I remember, practically every day, 

receiving telephone calls from people in Notukeu-Willowbunch. Many head of stock starved to death. 

They starved as a result of no long-term policy designed to give them fodder in emergency situations 

such as that one was. The hon. members here will also remember how emphatic the Minister of 

Agriculture became with his continual talk about feed and fodder banks during that winter. No matter 

where you would meet him, whether it was in the House or in the corridor or in his office, sooner or 

later, he would end up talking feed and fodder banks. Well, this past winter, Mr. Speaker, right at the 

present time, in my own constituency, 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

23 

we are experiencing a far worse winter than was the winter of 1945 and 1947, and yet, as far as I know, 

not one head of livestock has starved to death – not one. It has been worse, and if you doubt it, all you 

have to do is to recall some items that appeared in the press not so very long ago. In Val Marie one 

morning, the temperature was fifty-one degrees below zero. News broadcasts that morning mentioned 

fifty-one antelope in front of the station at that point. Again, at Mankota some one hundred and fifty 

head of antelope were caught on the railroad right-of-way and some of them killed. The antelope is 

among the most timid of wild animals and they will only come in to settled areas as a result of starvation 

in their own feeding grounds. These animals came into settled areas, because that was the only place 

they could find food. They did not do that in the winter of 1946-47, thus indicating that, in 1946-7, the 

feed situation was not nearly as bad as it has been during this past winter. Yet, as I said before, as far as I 

know not one single head has died of starvation because our Minister of Agriculture had the forethought 

and the courage to use his Department for what it should be used – to make it possible for 

agriculturalists to remain on the farm, the ranchers to remain on their ranches, and know that they have a 

certain measure of security in emergency years. These feed and fodder banks have made such a thing 

possible. 

 

Last year, the ranchers of Notukeu-Willowbunch received, in overall assistance from the Department of 

Agriculture, the sum of $31,818.54, Freight assistance was given to the extent of $24,128. Feed grain to 

the extent of $2,943 was given. Freight to assist haying outfits to go to hay meadows was given to the 

extent of $3,203 and a fifty-fifty sharing on forage amounted to $1,544.27, making a total, as I said at 

the outset, of some $31,818.54. This not only put purchasing power into circulation in parts of this 

constituency in the hands of people who had feed close by the stricken areas, but it rendered invaluable 

assistance to the ranchers there who needed it. 

 

Then, too, the Speech from the Throne makes mention of the new Conservation and Development 

Branch in the Department of Agriculture. Las year, this Branch alone spent as much money as was spent 

by the entire Department under previous governments. This Branch is only in its infancy and yet its 

record of achievement is astounding. Last year, this Branch spent $32,450 in Notukeu-Willowbunch on 

community pastures and in assisting Municipalities develop sub-marginal land into useful projects: 

 

Community Pastures $12,000; Provincial feed and fodder projects shared with the Municipalities 

$2,350; Provincial Pasture reclamation project also shared with the Municipalities $6,280; Water 

control, Provincial and Municipal Feed and Fodder projects and so on, making a total amount of 

$32,450 put into circulation in the drought-stricken areas in Notukeu-Willowbunch, not as hand-outs or 

as relief, but towards making some use of it, reclaiming land that was drifting, that was becoming 

absolutely useless. Last fall, I took a trip over the southwestern portion of this province, over practically 

the main ranching area, and I passed over mile after mile of barren waste – land which was used to graze 

cattle, which was drifting prairie land, drifting just the same as summerfallow did in the ‗thirties. From 

the little town of Govenlock I took a trip south and I passed over this same type of land. The roots were 

blowing out of the grass; they were showing; there was no vegetation 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

24 

whatsoever, and I went over a little rise and here I saw mile after mile of stacks of hay, stacks of feed – I 

saw the Spangler Ranch Project. Mr. Spangler is to be honoured for what he did in the past in starting 

the development of this project, but he retired years ago and there was nobody to carry on this work. 

Had an interested government, during the nineteen-thirties, taken over this project and developed it, 

ranchers there would have had a source of emergency feed supply; but it remained for our own Minister 

of Agriculture to take over this project and develop it. Now some thousand acres are under cultivation 

there, all of which receive irrigation through dykes and dams that catch the small water supply that 

comes off with the spring run-off. Last year, some six thousand dollars‘ worth of produce was taken off 

there, and it is right there and it is being used by the people around there to give them security for their 

stock, for their livelihood, to be used in the case of an emergency. 

 

I have spoken before in this House about the larger Administrative Unit. I am pleased to be able to say, 

Mr. Speaker, that now all of my constituency is within the boundaries of organized units. I don‘t propose 

to dwell at length on them, but I do want to point out that the children there now have better educational 

opportunities under this system than they ever had before. In some cases the larger unit has brought our 

taxes up, in other cases they have been reduced; but, Mr. Speaker, in judging these things from a dollar 

standpoint, one is not judging it from the correct point of view. Education should never and can never be 

measured in dollars and cents, from a monetary standpoint. Every child now is receiving high school 

assistance in that constituency. It has been to the advantage of every child who is in need of it, and they 

are able to receive high school assistance. It has brought the advantage of more extensive libraries and 

more educational benefits that could not be provided under the old system. 

 

My only complaint is that the larger Administrative Unit is not extended over the entire province, with 

one uniform mill rate to be spent according to the needs of the various units. I would also like to see a 

provision for voting an area into or out of the unit deleted from the Act. If the system is good – and 

leading educationalists and political parties agree that it is – then it should be given to all the people. As 

long as a provision for a vote remains in the Act, it appears that the Liberal Party will take advantage of 

that provision to stir up resentment against the larger unit, in order to gain political advantage. Education 

of our youth is the responsibility of each generation to the generation that follows, and any men or group 

of men that will jeopardize a children‘s educational opportunities for personal advantage, whether 

political or otherwise, deserves to be severely censured. In other provinces – Alberta, Manitoba, British 

Columbia – to name some of them, Opposition parties have never brought the larger Administrative Unit 

into the realm of party politics, because they recognize that it is a definite step toward better educational 

facilities for our young people. 

 

Our own unit of Willowbunch was voted in under the Act and has been in operation for a year. The 

Board in this unit has not entered upon an extensive scheme of innovations, but has continued to give 

the basic services that were in effect before. In addition, they have extended library facilities so that 

children may now receive the full benefits a good extended library is able to give; school buildings have 

been repaired, a full-time repair man is engaged, and during the winter months he spends his time 

making cabinets and bookcases for schools and teacherages. A good salary schedule has been set up for 

the teachers, and children having to go 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

25 

over four miles to school are allowed a per diem allowance to assist in their transportation or board 

where it is necessary for them to board out. A grant is given high school students, under the same 

circumstances. 

 

This summer, a more extensive building programme is planned. In spite of this and the fact that this is a 

low assessed area, the mill rate over the unit is lower than the average was before the Unit was set up. 

Of course, I expect that, in the next election, the Opposition speakers will pick out those areas where the 

mill rate has been increased and try to make political capital out of it once again, Mr. Speaker. But more 

and more people are realizing their collective responsibility for certain services they are unable to 

provide individually, and because of the co-operative spirit most people of Saskatchewan possess, this 

tactic on the part of any political party does not bear very sweet fruits. 

 

I have mentioned the Air Ambulance Service before. In my constituency, this service continues to be 

one of the most popular things this Government has done. In winter when roads are blocked and traffic 

is at a standstill, where rail service is at a minimum, such as it is in the south-west of this province, the 

Air Ambulance has, time after time, meant the difference between life and death. Every week, I received 

statements of accounts paid by the Automobile Accident Insurance Plan to people I represent. These 

people are mainly people who do not ordinarily travel extensively and, under ordinary circumstances, 

they would not have an automobile accident insurance policy. But, Mr. Speaker, I could go on 

indefinitely enumerating things that this Government has done to give more security to the people of 

Saskatchewan in general and my own people in particular: The Hospitalization Act, free Cancer 

treatment, to name a few of them. 

 

In closing, let me say that, within the narrow confines of a provincial boundary and working within the 

limits of a capitalist economy, over which we have no control, a Socialist would be the last to say that 

this Government has reached the ultimate in social services, in taking responsibility, in foreseeing that 

people have the right to live. It has not and it cannot. The ‗Welfare State‘ cannot be achieved under 

capitalism. Liberal promises of full employment, complete heath insurance, old-age pensions without a 

means test, pensions for the crippled, adequate housing and all down the line cannot, and will not, ever 

be brought into being under capitalism. They never have, and they never will. For this reason, in owing 

full well that in a province it is not possible to bring in the Welfare State, but recognizing the 

tremendous strides that have been made in that direction, I am pleased, and consider myself highly 

honoured on behalf of the people I represent, to second the motion of the hon. member from Kerrobert-

Kindersley. 

 

Mr. E.M. Culliton (Gravelbourg): — Referring to the statistics on accidents in your constituency – 

from whom do you get the statements? 

 

Mr. Buchanan: — From press releases and from the Bureau of Publications. 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — I move adjournment of the debate. 

 

Motion agreed to and debate adjourned. 

 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

26 

DEATH OF J.F. HERMAN 

 

Premier T.C. Douglas: — I regret to inform the House that a former member of this House, Mr. John 

Frederick Herman, formerly member for Melville, passed away, yesterday. There are many of the 

members, who, I am sure, were in the House from 1938 to 1944, and would know Mr. Herman, and 

even those who did not sit in the House at that time will, I am sure, have met him through the United 

Farmers with which he was connected for many years and with the Co-operative movement, or you may 

have met him because he has resided here in the city of Regina for some time. I went up to see Mr. 

Herman, the other night, in the hospital, and at that time there was every indication that he had rounded 

the corner from a very severe heart attack, and we hoped at that time that he was well on his way to 

recovery. Coincidentally, another former member of the House was attending him – Dr. Monroe, former 

Minister of Health and member of this Legislature. Dr. Monroe was very hopeful at that time that Mr. 

Herman was on his way towards recovery. Unfortunately that was not be and Mr. Herman passed away 

yesterday. I would like to just place on the record of the House his biography very briefly. 

 

John Frederick Herman was born at Brantford, Ontario in 1889. He was of German – English parentage 

and received his education at Severn Bridge, Ontario, and at Ferndale, Saskatchewan, and later at 

Moosomin Collegiate. He taught school in Saskatchewan from 1908 to 1911, then turned to farming, 

and it is as a farmer and leader of worthwhile farm movements that he is best known in the province. He 

was president of the United Farmers of Canada from 1934 to 1935. He maintained his active interest in 

organizations devoted to the welfare of the agricultural community to the day of this death. Mr. Herman 

was a candidate in the provincial election of 1934, and for the House of Commons in the Federal 

election of the following year, being unsuccessful in both attempts. He contested the constituency of 

Melville in the provincial election of 1938, as a Social Credit candidate and was successful, and he ably 

represented his constituency throughout the lifetime of that Legislature. He rendered great service to this 

Assembly during his period in it. He sponsored many resolutions in the interests of agriculture and 

displayed courage in his convictions. His opinions always commanded the attention and respect of his 

fellow members. He died yesterday in a Regina hospital at the comparatively early age of sixty, leaving 

to mourn his loss his wife, whom he married in 1922, one son and two daughters. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that members in all parts of the House would want to extend to Mrs. Herman 

and to their family our sorrow at the great grief that has come into their home, and the hope that the high 

honour in which Mr. Herman was held will be something of a consolation in their hour of bereavement. 

 

I would, therefore, like to move, seconded by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Tucker: 

 

―That this Assembly learns with profound regret of the death, yesterday, February 19, 1950, of John 

Frederick Herman, a very capable and highly esteemed member of this Assembly 



 

February 20, 1950 

 

 

27 

from 1938 to 1944 as representative of the Electoral Division of Melville; and, further, that this 

Assembly, in heartfelt sympathy with members of the bereaved family, extend to them its sincere 

condolences in their great loss, with the prayer that Divine Providence may assuage their grief.‖ 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — I would like to associate myself and my colleagues 

with the words uttered by the Premier in regard to the death of Mr. Herman. I did not have the privilege 

of knowing him personally, but I have heard a great deal of his work in the farm movement of this 

province and as a farm leader. It is certainly regrettable that a man of his comparatively young age, a 

leader that we can ill-afford to spare, has been taken from us and we most deeply sympathize with the 

family that has been bereaved and we join fully in what the Premier said in making this motion. 

 

Mr. V.P. Deshaye (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to have the privilege of adding a few words 

to what has been said by the hon. Premier and the hon. Leader of the Opposition with regard to the late 

Mr. Fred Herman. Mr. Herman represented the constituency which I now represent, from 1938 to 1944, 

and while he was the member I had the opportunity of meeting him on a number of occasions. I was the 

secretary-treasurer of the municipality of Kane at the time, and we came to Regina on numerous 

delegations to interview the Government of that date, and we called upon Mr. Herman for this 

assistance. He always readily co-operated with us, and we found him very willing to do what he could 

on behalf of the delegation regardless of what the political beliefs of the members of the delegation were 

that came to Regina. Mr. Herman was a quite-mannered man, and he was very well thought of by 

everyone who knew him. He was a successful farmer and highly regarded by those of his community. 

 

This is another case, Mr. Speaker, of a man passing who has done well for his province and country, and 

on behalf of the people of the Melville constituency I would like to join with the hon. Premier and the 

hon. Leader of the Opposition in extending my sincere sympathy, and the sympathy of the people of the 

Melville constituency, to the relatives and friends of the late Mr. Herman. 

 

The question being put, the motion was agreed to unanimously. 

 

Premier Douglas then moved, seconded by Mr. Tucker: 

 

―That the resolution of profound regret at the passing of the late John Frederick Herman, together with 

a transcript of the recorder tributes, be communicated to the bereaved family, on behalf of this 

Assembly, by Mr. Speaker.‖ 

 

The question being put, the motion was agreed to. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:05 o‘clock p.m. 


