



















































Hansard: March 06, 1950


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Eleventh Legislature 

13th Day 

 

Monday, March 6, 1950. 

 

The House met at 3 o‘clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

Hon. J. H. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are 

proceeded with, I would like to call attention to an error which appeared in the ‗Leader-Post‘ of 

Saturday, March 4th, in two columns – on the first page, and also in the column ‗The Banks of the 

Wascana‘. Judging from this column I am not particularly popular with the writer, but that should not 

constitute a reason for misquoting me. What I said was this: 

 

―I shall fight to the death, if necessary, against any nation or group of nations and that will be the 

first to use the atomic or hydrogen bomb in any future war of aggression or defence.‖ 

 

That is the correction which I wish to make; the word ‗first‘ was left out and also the word ‗future‘ was 

left out. 

 

DEATH OF MR. BICKERTON 

 

Premier Douglas: — I should like to comment on the sad news which has just come to us of the death 

of Mr. George Bickerton, who has, for a great many years been associated with the United Farmers of 

Canada, Saskatchewan Section. Mr. Bickerton‘s death will come as a great shock for despite the fact 

that he had reached the allotted span of three score years and ten, most of us did not think of him as an 

old man. I know, in the course of the last few weeks, he and I have carried on some correspondence, 

most of it written in his own hand, a steady hand showing a clear and decisive mind, the correspondence 

of a man who still was giving a good deal of thought to the problems that beset the people whom he 

loved so much, the farming people of the province of Saskatchewan. Therefore it came as a great shock 

to find that, in the midst of the thought that he was giving to these agricultural problems, he was 

suddenly cut off. 

 

Many of us have been associated with Mr. Bickerton over a long period of years. My first contact with 

him dates back to the early nineteen-thirties when the United Farmers of Saskatchewan were organizing 

the provincial farmers, trying to arrange for feed and seed to be shipped into some parts of the province, 

interested in getting better relief quotas, and above all, organizing the farmers of Saskatchewan to face 

up to some of the basic economic problems that at that time were so badly in need of being tackled with 

courage and with foresight. There is not any doubt, in my opinion, that those years of hard work and of 

travelling over prairie trails in all kinds of weather an all seasons of the year certainly helped to break 

down what was a very 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 

 
2 

marvelous physique and to hasten his old age and probably brought on his death. I, personally, and I am 

sure on behalf of many others in this House, would like to pay my tribute to a very fine gentleman, to a 

champion of the farming people of Saskatchewan and to an extremely fine and outstanding Canadian. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the Premier in words of regret at the passing of 

Mr. George Bickerton. I had quite a bit to do with Mr. Bickerton from time to time in connection with 

my work as a member of the House of Commons representing a Saskatchewan constituency, and 

whenever Mr. Bickerton came to Ottawa I was always very happy to have the opportunity of having a 

good talk with him about the various problems that faced the farmers of the West and Saskatchewan in 

particular. I remember, particularly, his appearance before the Commerce Committee of which I was a 

member, and the very fine presentation that he made to that Committee. There is no doubt that he was a 

very sincere worker for the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan and particularly our farming 

community. During the war, of course, he took on a very onerous and difficult work representing the 

farming community on the National War Service Mobilization Board and, of course, many of us had a 

great deal to do with him in connection with that work and I think everybody found him very pleasant to 

deal and very anxious to do what he thought was right at all times. 

 

I feel that Mr. Bickerton was a very fine type of farm leader. He was thoroughly devoted to the cause of 

the farmers he sought to service, and he endeavoured to be very fair in not over-stating the case and in 

trying to understand other men‘s viewpoint. Actually, I think, at all times, regardless when he was 

working with the United Farmers of Canada (Saskatchewan Section), they had a man who would 

thoroughly study all aspects of any situation concerning our farmers, and a man who would very ably 

present their viewpoint. When a man is so thoroughly devoted as he was to the service of his fellowmen 

and willing to give that service such able and devoted attention, and when a man such as he passes from 

our midst, we must pause for a moment and express great regret and, of course, the deepest possible 

sympathy with those who are bereaved by his passing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of the city of Saskatoon I should like to also 

express regret at the passing of a fine citizen. Mr. Bickerton was for many years resident of the city of 

Saskatoon. He was certainly an indefatigable worker in the cause of everything that he considered 

progressive. He was courageous in his views, he was certainly an honour to any society. Saskatoon 

greatly regrets his passing. It is a loss to this province and to Canada. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I should also like to add my words to the mention that has already been made in 

memory of George Bickerton by the hon. Premier and the Leader of the Opposition, and Mr. Sturdy. As 

one who was associated with the organized farm movement at an early date, it was my privilege to 

become associated with Mr. Bickerton in organized farm activities since he came from my part of the 

province. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I had firsthand knowledge of Mr. Bickerton‘s devoted loyalty to the 

aspirations of the farm movement which he carried with him right to the end. 

 

Mr. Bickerton was an outstanding farm leader, one who was a fluent speaker and who gave unstintingly 

and unselfishly of his service to the 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 
3 

farm movement throughout his whole life. His name, I think, will be associated in history with the 

names of other outstanding farm leaders such as Mr. E. A. Partridge, Mrs. Lucas, Major George 

Williams, and more lately, Mr. Herman. I think the farmers of Saskatchewan are going to well 

remember the outstanding and unselfish services of all of these great leaders, who have given such a 

tremendous contribution to the progressive efforts of the organized farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Without their interest, in all likelihood, the farmers of this province would not be 

receiving many of the economic benefits that they have gained as the result of the work done by these 

outstanding leaders. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I too want to, in this way, add my words of recognition to 

the outstanding services of Mr. Bickerton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, not only as a member of this Legislature, but as a farmer, I 

want to acknowledge my debt to men like George Bickerton, and I think there are many, many 

thousands of farmers throughout this province who acknowledge that debt. I believe, too, that those of 

us who are farmers take a great deal of pride in the fact that one of our real pioneer farmers in the 

province of Saskatchewan lived to serve his fellowmen so well. George Bickerton homesteaded in the 

area west of Saskatoon in the early years of this century. He used oxen to break up his homestead – one 

of the real pioneers of this province; and we can be proud of men like that who have gone through all of 

the hardships and trials of opening up a new country, who encountered all of the difficulties which the 

early farmers of this province encountered, and came through and gave such great service. To his wife 

and son I wish to convey my sincerest regret at the passing of this great pioneer and farmer of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. W. C. Woods (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, as a private member in the Opposition ranks I wish to 

join with those who have already expressed their regret at the passing of Mr. Bickerton. As one who has 

been connected with him for the last eighteen or twenty years on many committees and boards of 

different kinds, I want to say that at times I did not agree with Mr. Bickerton‘s opinions but nevertheless 

I never heard him express an opinion that did not call forth respect. He was very sincere in his desire to 

service the people whom he represented and, as I say, he would go to any length to render such service. 

There has been, in the past number of years, a decline in Mr. Bickerton‘s health, and, possibly in 

fairness to himself, he should have retired a few years ago and enjoyed more leisure than he did; but he 

felt he had a duty to perform and, in spite of failing health, continued to serve to the best of his ability. I 

wish to express my deep regret at his passing. I had not heard of it until the Premier spoke, but I do feel 

not only the loss of a valuable public man, but of a personal friend. 

 

Mr. W. S. Thair (Lumsden): — I also would like to express a word of regret in the passing of the late 

Mr. George Bickerton. It so happened that I was a director of the United Farmers and Mr. George 

Bickerton at that time was vice-president, and I was closely associated with him for some years. He has 

made a great contribution in the interests of the farm people of this province, and over the last twenty 

years I might say that he has spent almost entirely his whole time in the interests an din the welfare of 

the people of this province. I am sure the whole province regrets his passing. 

 

Mr. A. T. Stone (Saskatoon City): — I, too, would like to express a few words of regret. I personally 

knew Mr. Bickerton as a resident of Saskatoon. Though he gave most of his time to 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 

 
4 

agricultural workers, he was always willing and ready to assist the industrial workers at any time he was 

called upon. I am sure that the industrial workers would very much like me to express a few words of 

regret, and I am sure that Mr. Bickerton, while he may not leave behind much earthly wealth, will leave 

a memory of himself as a valiant servant of the common man. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I have listened to the expressions from the different members, and I, myself, was very 

very closely associated with Mr. Bickerton for many years, not only in the association, but as personal 

friends. I do not want to add to what anyone has said but I think, as a mark of respect, we should all rise 

in silence for a moment. 

 

MOTION PROTESTING FREIGHT RATE INCREASE 

 

The Assembly having unanimously agreed to waive the provision of Standing Order 31 relating to the 

forty-eight hours‘ Notice, the Premier, seconded by the Hon. L. F. McIntosh moved: 

 

―That this Assembly strongly protests the recent increases in freight rates granted by the Board 

of Transport Commissioners, and requests the Saskatchewan Government to appeal the decision 

to the Federal Government, urging the said Government to exercise its statutory power of 

disallowances under Section 52 of the Railways Act, disallowing the latest increases pending the 

report of the Royal Commission on Transportation.‖ 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I would like, first of all, to thank the members of the Assembly for 

granting unanimous consent to proceed with this Motion. This Motion says that this Assembly strongly 

protests the recent increases in freight rates granted by the Board of Transport Commissioners and 

requests the Saskatchewan Government to appeal the decision to the Federal Government, urging the 

said Government to exercise its statutory power of disallowances under Section 52 of the Railways Act, 

disallowing the latest increases pending the report of the Royal Commission on Transportation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I brought this in without any notice, and I thank the House for permitting me to proceed 

with it, because the Saskatchewan Government were desirous of appealing to the Cabinet of the Federal 

Government the recent decisions by the Board of Transport Commissioners. However, it occurred to me 

that, before we sent such an appeal to Ottawa, member of the Legislative Assembly here in all parts of 

the House might welcome an opportunity to express their views, and if they see fit and I hope they will 

see fit, to pass this Resolution unanimously so that our appeal would go to Ottawa not as a partisan 

appeal, but as an appeal from people of all political views in this province asking the Federal 

Government to give consideration to our appeal with reference to the increase that has been granted by 

the Board of Transport Commissioners. 

 

I am not going to weary the House with a lot of material. As a 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 
5 

matter of fact, I have not got very much material here. I would like just to remind the members of the 

House and the people of Saskatchewan that this battle with reference to freight rates has been going on 

for a great many years, but as far as the present Government is concerned, we first came into the picture 

about three and a half years ago, when on October 9, 1946, the Canadian Pacific Railway and the 

Canadian National Railway made application to the Board of Transport Commissioners asking for an 

increase of 30 per cent in freight rates. The Government of Saskatchewan joined with six other 

Provincial Governments, namely the governments of the three Maritime Provinces and of the other three 

Western Provinces. These seven Governments, through their representatives and their counsel joined 

together in protesting, before the Board of Transport Commissioners, the application of the Railroads for 

a 30 per cent increase. 

 

I would like at this point, Mr. Speaker, to make it perfectly clear that we have never taken the position, 

throughout the three and a half years that we have been fighting over freight rate increases, that the 

Railways were not entitled to any increase at all. That is not the position we have taken. We have 

recognized that certain costs have gone up, that wages have gone up, and that everything else that enters 

into the cost of running a railroad has gone up. What we have protested is that these grants that are given 

to the Railroads to increase their freight rates are horizontal in character, that they grant an increase right 

across the board. What happens, however, is that in the two Central Provinces particularly, the 

competition of water traffic and trucks necessitates the railways keeping their rates down in these 

Central Provinces in order to compete with water and truck competition; therefore, an increase in the 

two Central Provinces, at least a permission for an increase, does not always mean an increase. The 

railway may find that its competitor does not raise its rate, and then they do not take advantage of the 

increase. In the Maritimes and in Western Canada, where there is a minimum of competition and where 

they have long hauls, they take full advantage of all the increase they are granted by the Board of 

Transport Commissioners. Consequently, over the years every increase that has been authorized has 

become a maximum increase in the Maritimes and on the Prairies, to a lesser extent in British Columbia 

(because there they have some water competition); but in the two Central Provinces very often the 

increase has meant practically no increase at all, and our objection has been that the Board of Transport 

Commissioners, without taking into consideration the varying conditions in different parts of Canada, 

have always allowed these increases right across the board. So our protest was not just against a 30 per 

cent increase, but it was a ‗flat‘ 30 per cent increase to which we objected, stating that, if there was 

going to be any increase then that increase ought to be first on those parts of Canada that now enjoy 

comparatively low rates and less on those parts of Canada that now pay very high freight rates. 

 

As the hon. members know the whole dispute started in October, 1946, and it continued for some time 

with our counsel and our various people from the Government under the leadership of my colleague, 

Hon. L. F. McIntosh, who was then Minister of Co-operatives and under whose department this whole 

question of freight rates came. They continued to make, I think, a very excellent case before the Board 

of Transport Commissioners against the flat 30 per cent increase, but the Board of Transport 

Commissioners, by Order No. 70425 on March 30, 1948, granted a 21 per cent increase to the railways. 

The railways had asked, remember, for 30 per cent and they were granted 21 per cent effective April 8, 

1948, so that the freight rates then became, if we take an index for April 7, 1948, one hundred and 

twenty-one at April 8th. 

 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 

 
6 

When, as the hon. member will remember, the seven Provincial Governments who had been protesting 

the application of the railroads for a 30 per cent increase decided to appeal the decision of the Board of 

Transport Commissioners, as they have power to do under Section 52 of the Railways Act, the Premiers 

of the seven provinces met in Ottawa, and we were successful in getting an audience with the Federal 

Cabinet and we presented our case to the best of our ability. We challenged, we think successfully, some 

of the figures that had been produced by the Board of Transport Commissioners in their report granting 

the 21 per cent increase. We felt then, and I still feel now, that the railways and the Board of Transport 

Commissioners completely failed to make a case for that 21 per cent increase across the board. 

However, in spite of our appeal to the Federal Government, the latter decided not to rescind the 21 per 

cent increase which had been granted. They did agree, however, to appoint a Royal Commission to look 

into the inequities of the freight rate structure. They were prepared to acknowledge, at least tentatively, 

that the freight rate structure of Canada did bear most heavily on Western Canada and the Maritimes, 

that some of our rates had neither rhyme nor reason to them, and that, unless the whole freight rate 

structure were examined and overhauled, this constant granting of flat increases, which fell more and 

more heavily on the marginal areas of Canada would eventually bring great hardship to the agricultural 

population and to the consuming public. For that reason they granted the setting up of a Royal 

Commission to look into the freight rate structure. 

 

In the meantime the Railways, on July 27, 1948, just two or three months after they had received a 21 

per cent increase made application for another increase. This time they asked for 20 per cent. On 

October 12, 1948, after a protest from seven Provinces had been received, the Federal Government 

ordered the Board of Transport Commissioners to review the 21 per cent; but the 21 per cent was 

granted and has continued. On January 11, 1949, the Board began hearing evidence on the new 

application and also on the review of the 1948 award and, on March 5, 1949, the Board finished hearing 

evidence. Then the Board of Transport Commissioners, by Order No. 73213 dated September 24, 1949, 

granted an eight per cent temporary increase. I want to point out that the second application had been for 

a 20 per cent increase. The Board of Transport Commissioners took the position that since a Royal 

Commission was looking into the whole question of freight rate structure, they would grant only a 

temporary or interim increase of eight per cent. 

 

Now, of course, the Railways were not satisfied with that eight per cent interim; they, therefore, went to 

the Supreme Court and asked the Supreme Court to rule that the Board of Transport Commissioners had 

not power to grant an interim increase; that they could grant a final increase or refuse to grant an 

increase, but they could not grant such a thing as an interim increase. The Supreme Court agreed with 

the Railways and so the matter went back again to the Board of Transport Commissioners and the result 

is that the Board of Transport Commissioners, by Order No. 74034 dated March 1, 1950, cancelled the 

eight per cent interim increase and in its place substituted a 16 per cent across-the-board increase. That 

means, Mr. Speaker, that taking the freight index as at April 7, 1948, as 100 (that was before the first 

increase was granted), the freight increase now stands at 140.4. That means that, in a period of two 

years, the freight rates in this country have been increased by 40.4 per cent. In addition to that, of course, 

there have been other increases, for instance, coal and coke which was increased on April 8, 1948, by 25 

cents per ton; then there was a further increase on October 11, 1949, 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 
7 

of another 8 per cent per ton, making a total increase of some 15 per cent per ton. 

 

In the matter of shipping lumber through Churchill, in which we are very interested in Northern 

Saskatchewan, whereas in 1947 it was 29 cents it is now 51 cents and we know that some shipments that 

were to go through that port had been cancelled in consequence. The story is abroad (I cannot vouch for 

it) that gasoline may have to be raised 1/2 cent per gallon because of this recent increase in freight rates, 

and that groceries will have to be raised anywhere from two to three cents per can or per package. 

 

Agricultural machinery, of course, has been hit especially heavily. Farm machinery shipped from 

Eastern Canada to Western Canada, for instance on a tractor weighing 3,747 lbs. that had a freight 

charge prior to these increases of $47.96, the present charge will now be $67.07 or an increase of 

$19.11. 

 

There isn‘t any need for me to stress what these three increases over a period of two years means to the 

people of these prairies. It has been estimated that the first increase of 21 per cent cost the taxpayers and 

the consumers of Canada, and the people who ship on our railroads, $70 million; the second increase, 

$35 million and the third increase, $26 million making a total of some $131,000,000 added to the freight 

bill of Canada. How much of that will fall in Saskatchewan, it is difficult to determine. I have seen 

estimates all the way from $11 million to $16 million. Nobody can work it out with any great degree of 

accuracy. But we do know that, of the $131,000,000 that can be added to the freight bill of Canada, we 

can be reasonably sure that a very heavy share of it will fall upon Western Canada and upon the 

Maritime Provinces where the lack of competition will make it possible for the railroads to take full 

advantage of the increase which they are now being authorized to charge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is something that ought to give all of us a good deal of concern. We talk sometimes 

about the school taxes going up two mills; we talk sometimes about the Provincial Government, because 

of increased costs, having to find a few hundred thousand dollars more, or a million dollars more; but 

when we see added to the freight bill in a period of two years, over 130 million dollars that must be paid 

for, in the main, by people in the more isolated parts of Canada, that must be paid for on everything they 

ship out except their grain, must be paid on their livestock, their cans of cream, on their poultry produce, 

on their timber, on their pit props, on their coal and must be paid, on the other hand, on everything we 

bring in – the fruit and the clothing and the furniture and the machinery, and all the other things we have 

to bring in to carry on operations – this $130 million must find its way inevitably into the cost of 

production of the farmer and of industry and of the small businessman. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, it 

is placing a burden upon our people that it seems to me cannot be borne without very serious effects 

upon our Western economy. 

 

As I said earlier, we are not taking the position that the Railways should not have an increase, but we 

think that some of the case they have made for an increase is not warranted, that some of the claims they 

have advanced cannot be fully substantiated; and we think that, if there is any increase to be granted, 

that increase should be weighted in such a way that it falls on those parts of Canada which for years, 

have enjoyed very low freight rates while other parts of Canada, particularly Western Canada, have had 

to pay exceptionally high freight rates. 

 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 

 
8 

There is another point, Mr. Speaker, which ought to be kept in mind, and it is that, when the Premiers of 

seven provinces met the Federal Government on April 26, 1948, we went there to present the case for 

the so-called ‗have-not‘ provinces. We represented various political faiths, various political 

philosophies; that did not make any difference. There were among the seven Premiers there, a Liberal, a 

Social Credit and C.C.F., and the fact that we were meeting a Liberal Government did not make any 

difference. The man who put up a strong case for complete overhauling of our freight structure was Mr. 

Angus MacDonald, the Premier of Nova Scotia, a former member of the Federal Government in Ottawa. 

But irrespective of party, of differences and of political viewpoint, public men and the people generally 

from Western Canada and the Maritimes have recognized that this freight rate structure has been most 

inequitable and has been most unfair. That is why the Federal Government finally acceded to the request 

that a Royal Commission be appointed. They were not prepared to veto the 21 per cent increase, but they 

were prepared to act up this Royal Commission headed by Mr. Justice Turgeon, and that when they were 

in Regina, the Government here made its submission to them. When they were in Saskatchewan, various 

farm and business and co-operative organizations made their submissions and it is expected that, 

reasonably soon, their report will be read. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit that with a Commission like this looking into the freight rate structure, trying to 

iron out the inequities, trying to place the burden on the parts of Canada that have carried the least of it 

and to lighten the burden on those parts of Canada who carried the most of it; surely, when a Royal 

Commission like that is carrying on such an investigation, is no time to grant another 16 per cent 

increase across the board, because the 16 per cent increase across the board will only further accentuate 

the inequities and the disparities which are now in existence, and the discriminations which are already 

there, with reference to Western Canada. Therefore the Saskatchewan Government feels that not only 

should they ask the Federal Government to disallow this latest increase (which they have power to do), 

but that we should ask them that there be no increase granted until the Royal Commission appointed for 

the purpose of finding out these inequities, had had an opportunity to present its case to the Government 

and to the people of Canada. When they have presented their case, and if they find (as we think any 

person looking at it is bound to find) that there are inequities and there is discrimination against the West 

and against the Maritimes, then any increase that is granted after that will be an increase that is 

weighted, having in mind the disparities that now exist between the various parts of Canada. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say, on behalf of the Government, that we propose to carry this 

matter to the Governor General in Council in Ottawa. We propose to ask him to act, to exercise their 

veto power under Section 52 of the Railways Act, to disallow this new increase which has been granted 

to the Railways. We ask him to do it anyway. We ask him particularly to do it in the light of the fact that 

this Royal Commission has not yet made its report and has not yet had an opportunity of working out a 

pattern by which any additional revenue that the railways might need could be equitably distributed 

among the various areas of Canada in proportion to their ability to carry the additional burden. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, when I started, the Government felt, and I feel, that if we are going to make such 

a plea to Ottawa, and if we are to be joined by the other six or seven provinces of Canada who are 

interested, as I trust we will be, it would strengthen our hand if, in making such a plea, 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 
9 

we had the unanimous endorsation of this Legislature; that, if it becomes necessary again to go to 

Ottawa to meet the Federal Cabinet, we can go knowing that we speak for all shades of opinion in this 

province and that the people of all political thought in the various political parties are behind the 

Government in the fight which they are putting up to prevent a further imposition being placed upon our 

consumers and our producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I am mentioning the fight that is being put up – and, as I pointed out earlier, it has 

been going on over a period of three and a half years – I would like to pay tribute to the people who 

have carried on that fight. We see a little bit about it in the paper, but it has gone on months in and 

months out. I should like particularly to pay tribute to my colleague, the Minister of Municipal Affairs, 

the Hon. L. F. McIntosh, who has been the Cabinet representative in handling this while battle against 

increased freight rates. He has done a tremendous amount of work and has visited Ottawa repeatedly, 

has gone before these very Boards and before the Commission to present the case and to sit in and 

advise our counsel and our other representatives when they were presenting their case. I should like to 

express the appreciation of the Government to Mr. M. A. MacPherson K.C., a former Attorney-General 

of this province and a man who has worked hard in a presenting the case, in cross-examining witnesses 

of the railroads. I notice that some members have put questions on the Order Paper wanting to know 

how much payment he has received. Well, I have looked at the figures to see what he has merited. It has 

meant weeks and weeks of work in Ottawa. It has meant going back and forth and sometimes being 

there almost constantly and going before the Board of Transport Commission, going before the Royal 

Commission and even while there and in Ottawa, spending hundreds of hours in preparing their case. 

 

I should also like to express our appreciation to Dean Cronkite, of the Law School, and to Dr. George 

Britnell of the Department of Economics, both of our own Saskatchewan University, who have given 

very valuable service; to our own Planning Board here, who have done a good bit of the work, and to 

Mr. George Oliver of my own department. These people have worked untiringly for a period of over 

three years in carrying on, not by themselves, but with six other provinces, one of the most heroic battles 

that has ever been carried on for some of the forgotten parts of Canada, with reference to these freight 

increases. As a matter of fact, I would like to pay this particular tribute to Mr. MacPherson. When we 

first started these meetings in Ottawa of the representatives of the various provinces, the lead in a good 

deal of the work was taken by the legal counsel for the Maritimes, the Hon. Col. Ralston, former 

Minister of National Defence and a former Minister of Finance, and anyone who knows Col. Raltson, 

knowing of his drive and his ability, will know that working with him was a pleasure and he was looked 

upon as a natural leader of the legal counsel, and the various Provincial representatives who gathered 

there to plan their campaign before the Board of Transport Commission. As a matter of fact, he and I sat 

up most of one night preparing one of the submissions we were to make, and, a few days later, I learned 

to my great regret that he had passed away in his sleep. 

 

I noticed the next time that I had an opportunity of sitting in with these provincial representatives, Mr. 

MacPherson had replaced, in many respects, Vol. Ralston as the acknowledged leader of the counsel of 

the various provinces, and more and more he has been looked to by the counsel of other provinces as the 

man who has carried the ball in this valiant fight that the Maritimes and the Prairie Provinces and British 

Columbia have put up against the successive freight rate increases. 

 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 

 
10 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to pay these tributes to the men who have helped to carry on this fight, 

and I say to the House now that this fight is not finished. It shall go on, and we will keep on fighting 

until we get, in Canada, a freight rate structure that will not discriminate against the people on these 

prairies. This Motion which I am now moving is only one stage in that fight when we are asking the 

House to support us in appealing now to the Federal Cabinet to disallow this latest increase pending the 

time when the Royal Commission on Transportation shall have made its report. Therefore, I move, Mr. 

Speaker, seconded by L. F. McIntosh: that this Assembly strongly protest the recent increase in freight 

rates granted by the Board of Transport Commissioners and request the Saskatchewan Government 

appeal the decision to the Federal Government, urging the said government to exercise it‘s statutory 

powers of disallowance under Section 52 of the Railway Act to disallowing the latest increases pending 

the report of the Royal Commission on Transportation. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — As I understand it, you are just asking for this eight per cent, this latest eight per cent 

to be held in abeyance till the report is brought down. Is that right? 

 

Premier Douglas: — No, Mr. Speaker, I am asking that the new Order which has just been passed, that 

is Order 74034, a copy of which I have in my hand; that that order be disallowed and that Order is for 16 

per cent increase. As I explained to my hon. friend, the railways asked for 20 per cent. As an interim the 

Board of Transportation Commissioners granted eight per cent. They were dissatisfied and went to the 

Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court ruled that the Board of Transport Commissioners had no power 

to grant an interim increase; they must either grant a final increase or reject an increase. There could be 

no interim increase, and so the previous order was rescinded and this Order 74034 grants them a 16 per 

cent increase on top of the 21 per cent increase, which makes a total of 40.4 per cent. 

 

Mr. W. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to compliment the Premier 

for the bringing forward of this resolution at this time and in this manner. I had been thinking, ever since 

this decision was rendered, as to what we could do to co-operate, on the Opposition side, to assist the 

Government in the work it is doing in this matter. I had thought of bringing in some such solution as had 

been introduced, but I decided that I would not do that until I had a chance to confer with the Premier, 

because had we brought it forward as an Opposition resolution it might have been thought that there was 

some attempt being made to make some political capital out of this matter, and so I thought that it would 

be better to consult before doing anything. So when this resolution was put before me, I at once agreed 

that it was a good thing to let the Assembly as a whole express its approval of the Government going 

further in this matter. 

 

As I said in my speech on the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne, this question of freight 

rates is so important that we should, on no account, let any question of politics divide us so that we fail 

to stand united in support of what is fair to our people in Saskatchewan in the whole of the Prairie West. 

So I compliment the Premier on bringing this resolution forward, and particularly on the way in which 

he has laid it before this Assembly – I have in mind the non-controversial way in which he has put it 

before the Assembly. I particularly appreciated his reference to certain gentlemen who have been 

associated in this work: the Hon. J. L. Ralston, who was doing a very good job when he was taken from 

us by death, and the Hon. Angus MacDonald, Premier of Nova Scotia, who is such a splendid fighter for 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 
11 

the rights of the Maritimes. It is quite a wonderful thing that in this particular matter – we should be 

joined by the people who have shown that they are so well able to uphold a fight like that – I refer to the 

people who have carried on in the struggle for a better deal for the Maritimes. It has also always given 

me a great deal of encouragement that we have been associated with them in that fight, and also with the 

people of British Columbia, who are not backward either in holding together, entirely regardless of 

party, for the things that they think are good for their province. I hope that, in the appeal which will be 

prosecuted to the Governor in Council, we will have the continued co-operation of the Maritimes, of the 

other prairie provinces and of British Columbia. 

 

I think, perhaps, one of the reasons why the Board of Transport Commissioners had rendered the 

decision it has, is the decision of the Supreme Court which seemed to indicate that, under the law as it 

stood, they had to decide on these matters, and they had no right to take account of such a thing as the 

appointment of this Royal Commission. As I understand it, the interim increase granted and overruled 

by the Supreme Court, was given for the reasons that this matter was being dealt with by a Royal 

Commission. The Supreme Court of Canada ruled that this was not proper, so I suppose that the Board 

felt that they were bound to give a decision on the case as they had it laid before them. However, I do 

not think that the Governor in Council is under any such obligation to permit any increase to come into 

effect if it is not proved to be consistent with the over-all policy of the Government, and, surly, it seems 

to me, that the over-all policy of the Government is indicated by the passing of the Order-in-Council 

setting up the Royal Commission on Transportation. 

 

As you, Mr. Speaker, are probably aware, in all the seven provinces our Party indicated it was 

favourable to the work that was being done in fighting for more equitable freight rates. We felt that we 

had to get outside the terms of the Railway Act and re-examine the whole situation for actually every 

time rates came before the Board of Transport Commissioners, we were faced with the undoubted need 

of the railroads to have more income due to their rising costs, and we would again be faced with some 

such decision as we have now. We felt we had to have somebody that would look into the over-all 

picture and try to lay down some new programme which would be fair to us, and that is why the 

Saskatchewan Liberal Party so strongly supported the idea of a Royal Commission being set up. 

Actually I had the great honour at the National Convention of our Party of moving the resolution which 

asked for that Royal Commission to be set up and that motion was seconded, I believe, by the Hon. 

Angus MacDonald, Premier of Nova Scotia. 

 

I feel that I can say that the setting up of that Royal Commission indicated that the Government felt that 

this whole transportation picture should be looked into again from an over-all viewpoint, not from the 

standpoint of just the narrow question of the fixing of rates, but from the viewpoint of whether the 

present situation is going to be fair to all parts of Canada. As the Premier has said, if the railroads come 

before a Board of Transport Commissioners, and indicate that they are not getting enough money to 

carry on, so far as the Board of Transport Commissioners is concerned they are in the position that if 

they feel that a case has been made out for an increase of rates, they cannot direct any subsidy to be 

paid, they must simply grant an increase. 

 

Now, in times past, they have given varying orders. There was one order made by them whereby they 

recognized the fact that the western 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 

 
12 

part of this country was paying higher rates then the central part of Canada, and they gave a higher 

increase in the central part of Canada then they did in the Prairie West, in order to try to equalize the 

burden. Well, when they have given the horizontal increase as they did this time, they certainly created 

an unfair situation, which it seems to me cannot be denied. The Board of Transport Commissioners set 

maximum rates beyond which the railroads cannot go and incidentally on that question, I would like to 

say again what I said in my Speech on the Address, that the Crows‘ Nest Rates which apply to grain 

products, to wheat and cereal grains, shipped out of the prairie west, that the maximum is set there by 

statute under the Crows‘ Nest Pass Agreement rates and is so affected by this increase. As we know, the 

C.P.R. is endeavouring to have that Act of Parliament repealed so that . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Might I suggest to the Leader of the Opposition that when he is dealing with this 

matter, he is anticipating a debate on a Motion standing on the Order Paper. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Of course, I did wish to indicate that this increase does not apply to the freight on grain 

at all, because that is protected by the Crow‘s Nest rates where, of course, we still have that protection. 

Fortunately we have it. I hope that we do not lose it, and I think that we can all stand together on that 

question, too. But in any event, as has been stated, the Board of Transport Commissioners fix the 

maximum rates, and when these rates are so high that the railroads lose business to water-borne freight 

or to freight carried on the highways, then the railroads are permitted and do lower their charges in order 

to get the business away from water-borne and also from freight carried on highways. We on the Prairies 

have not got that protection to the same extent. We have not got the competition from water-borne 

freight and we have not got the same protection in regard to highway competition. The distances are 

greater and, of course, as yet we have not got quite as good roads as they have in Ontario and Quebec, so 

that there is not the effective competition there is in those other provinces. 

 

While I am on that point, I think we should always bear in mind that we should not hamper or restrict 

the development of highway transportation and prevent as much protection as possible along that line, 

which of course, does help in Ontario and Quebec, the Central Provinces. 

 

Now then, if you re always trying to set the level of rates high enough to give the railroads necessary 

incomes and the railroads in the Central Provinces cannot increase their rates due to this competition, it 

means that the railroads in the Prairie West can increase their rates up to the maximum, and they cannot 

do the same no matter what the Board of Railway Commissioners say, in the central part of Canada. 

 

One of the ideas in respect of the Royal Commission that was set up in this matter, was that it might 

examine that undoubted fact and to bring it out that, owing to our geographical position, if you simply 

relied upon rates in order to fix the railroads‘ income you are inevitably going to continue to put higher 

and higher burdens upon the Prairie West, which is not protected by that water-borne and highway 

competition. With respect to the submission of our Government to the Royal Commission on 

Transportation, I have said outside of the House and I say it here, that I compliment the Government on 

this submission. I think it is a splendid submission myself, and I do agree with the Premier that those 

associated in its work are entitled to our thanks and our commendation, particularly Dr. Britnell, the 

Chairman of the Committee 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 
13 

on preparing the submission, and, of course, Dean Cronkite, Dr. Foulke, Mr. MacPherson, Mr. Oliver, 

Mr. Carmichael, Mr. MacDonald, Mr. Hanson and Mr. Neldrun and then, of course, the Deputy 

Minister, Mr. Arneson of the Department of Co-operatives. All of these gentlemen have received quite a 

proper recognition in the foreword signed by the Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative 

Development, and we certainly endorse that because this is a very technical and a very difficult bit of 

work. 

 

I particularly wish to commend the suggestion that this whole thing should not be settled on the basis of 

freight rates, that something, or some consideration should be given to some form of subsidy to enable 

the burden of transportation to be placed more evenly upon all the people of Canada. In this submission 

to the Board of Transport Commissioners it is quite properly pointed out that the C.P.R. railroad was 

built across Canada for national reasons. In connecting up Central Canada with the West, they built 

across non-productive and difficult country. That was for national reasons, which, of course, we do not 

quarrel with at all, because the founders of our country did great work in laying the foundation for our 

country. But in connecting Canada up by an expansive railroad across the very barren country between 

Lake Superior and Manitoba, they were doing work for the development of Canada as a nation. There is 

no reason in the world why the Prairie West should bear almost the entire cost of that railroad which is 

really essential to the very existence of our country, and I was very glad that that was pointed out in this 

particular brief. 

 

I suggested, in the House of Commons, quite a considerable time ago (I think it is just about three years 

ago now), that Canada consists of four economic areas: the Maritimes, the Central part of Canada, the 

Prairies and British Columbia, and that, to join them together into one nation was a national task and the 

nation as a whole should pay the cost of doing it. That idea was recognized in some degree, as pointed 

out in this brief, by the payment out of the national treasury of 20 per cent of some of the costs of freight 

that is moving out of the Maritime Provinces, in the Maritime Freight Rates Act. That Act recognized 

that principle that if the Maritimes were permitted to trade more freely with the United States, they 

would pay less on the goods they have to ship in in the initial costs, because they might get them 

cheaper from the United States and other countries. Then of course, if, on top of that, they had to pay 

higher freight costs in order to reach the markets of the Central Provinces, and also pay higher freight 

costs on what they bought from the Central Provinces, and that would be unfair to them. It was thought 

right that the Central provinces, which benefited by their being part of the Dominion in having that 

market which they otherwise might not have had under our national policy, should pay part of the costs 

of bridging that gap. I have always felt that that Maritime Freight Rates Act was a proper piece of 

legislation; but it seemed to me that the same arguments that applied to the bridging of the gap between 

the Maritime Provinces and the Central Provinces applied to the bridging of the gap between us and 

Central Canada. We know that our main exports and the price of them are fixed by the markets of the 

world, and if it costs us more to get our products there, we cannot increase our selling price of those 

products because the cost of shipping them has risen. This means that the farmer who produces them and 

the other primary producers in the Prairie Provinces get that much less from the sale of those goods. 

Then when we have got to ship so much of our needs into our province, from the central part of Canada, 

again due to national policy, which says that even if we could buy goods cheaper to the South we are not 

permitted to do it, and that we must patronize other parts of Canada – and I am not dealing with the 

reason for that at the moment; it is our national policy; it is designed 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 

 
14 

in order to promote the wellbeing of Canada. But when we have got to deal with other parts of Canada 

to promote the wellbeing of the whole of Canada, then it seems to me that Canada as a whole should 

bear the costs of bridging that gap; it should not be put upon the people in the Prairie Provinces. It seems 

to me that there is an unanswerable case there for the nation as a whole paying part of that cost. If it 

were a difficult river to bridge, if it were anything of that nature, there would be no argument about it. 

The nation would unhesitatingly build that bridge in order to promote commerce between the two parts 

of the country. Now, for example, the cutting of the Chignecto Isthmus to promote trade between parts 

of the Maritime Provinces is being considered. We know that somewhere around $140 million have 

been spent upon the building of the Welland Canal. No doubt we have all paid a part of the cost of that. 

The very building of that canal has helped to keep down transportation costs right in Ontario and 

Quebec, and yet we pay not only part of the cost of building it, we pay for the maintenance of that canal 

year by year. 

 

Now it seems to me that this proposed subsidy should be put upon the basis that this connecting up of all 

the economic areas of Canada should not be left to chance or to the working out of economic principles, 

but it should be recognized that, in connecting these parts of Canada, we have engaged in a national 

project and that the nation as a whole should pay the cost of bridging those gaps just the way we built a 

canal or just the way we built a bridge. If we put it on that basis, it seems to me that we have a case there 

to say that there is about 900 to 1,000 miles which constitutes the gap between the Eastern part of 

Manitoba that is settled, with the settled are of the Central Provinces and that that area is just as much a 

gap to be bridged as a body of water, and we can say that the bridging of that gap is a national obligation 

and that the nation as a whole should pay the cost of bridging it. The bridging of it would bring the 

market of the Central Provinces closer so far as we are concerned, except as we pay part of the cost of it 

in our national taxes, it would bring that market 900 miles closer to us. It would do the same if in the 

same way paid part of the costs of bridging the gap between us and British Columbia. In other words, 

such a policy, as a national policy, would bring all parts of Canada into one closely knit area. It would 

be a good thing for them and for us, because we could reach their markets that much easier and they 

could reach our markets that much easier. It seems to me that that policy would be sounder and less 

costly than any system of tariffs that could possibly be invented. 

 

Toa large extent all the reasons which I have put forward, I think are contained in this brief. The actual 

basis that I put forward should be regarded as a national obligation, that suggestion is not just put in so 

many words, at least in this brief, and that is the only fault that I have to find with it. I would have been 

glad if that had been taken up, but of course, I realize that the experts who prepared this brief were very 

able men and I have not said very much about it. I send my suggestions to the Board of Transport 

Commissioners for their consideration, but I did feel that this brief gave the background and the 

foundation on which was upheld the suggestion I made. For in this brief it is suggested that the cost of 

freight originating in Saskatchewan should be subsidized out of the national treasury on the same basis 

as the Maritime Provinces, and it seems to me that they make out a very conclusive case for that 

viewpoint. 

 

It is not for us to say that the Royal Commission is going to accept that submission. It certainly is not for 

us to say that they will not 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 
15 

accept it. It is not for the Government at Ottawa to say that they are going to accept it, or they are not 

going to accept it, because the whole problem has been placed in their hands. Now, assuming that the 

Royal Commission may accept this submission and may say that the Government should pay a part of 

cost of bridging these gaps, pay a subsidy on freight originating on the prairies, well, if they make that 

submission, then, of course, the increased needs of the railroads to meet the rising costs would be met if 

not in total at least in part, and then the needs of this increase would not exist – at least to the same 

extent. 

 

Now it seems to me that that is the basic approach to this situation and why I so strongly support this 

resolution. This matter has been committed to a Royal Commission which may suggest a way whereby 

this present inequity so far as the Prairie Provinces are concerned (speaking of them just at the moment; 

the same is true, of course, with the Maritimes and B.C. in a lesser degree, but applies to us particularly 

because these others do have some protection from water competition); but having committed this to the 

Royal Commission nobody can say that they are not going to work out some solution whereby the 

burden will be distributed more equitably, whereby the railroads will get more income and whereby the 

very basis of this great increase in rates will be entirely swept away. So it seems to me that the 

Government of Canada might very well say, having committed this matter to a Royal Commission and 

they having it under advisement, studying the matter and being likely to report within the next few 

months, ―We are not going to let any increase come into effect to change the situation until we get their 

findings; until we find out exactly how the situation stands.‖ So it seems to me that in this appeal to the 

Governor in Council, I think that our representatives when they go down there to make the submission, 

will have a very strong argument, and I can assure the Premier of this province and the government of 

this province that, on this question of protecting our people from bearing an unfair share of the 

transportation costs of this country, he has the determined, the united, support of the Liberal Party and, I 

think I can say, of all people in this province regardless of their party, and we wish the Government the 

very best of luck in their submission to the Federal Government. 

 

Hon. L. P. McIntosh (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to support the Motion 

that is now before the House I do so, as the hon. Premier mentioned, as one who has been closely 

associated with the over-all freight rates question since early October of 1946. I was particularly pleased 

to note that the Leader of the Opposition has given his wholehearted endorsation and committed his 

party to the Resolution that is now before the House. I am particularly happy, also, to note that the 

Leader of the Opposition is wholeheartedly in support of the principle of the national subsidy as an 

equalization of the freight rates as between the various provinces of the Dominion of Canada. 

 

Back in October of 1946, one of the first things that the Government did was to set up an advisory 

committee, representative of a cross-section of all the business interests of the province, to advise the 

Government and the Technical Committee on this most vital and important question. From that day right 

through to the present time, Mr. Speaker, the Government of the province has taken the stand that we are 

interested in a freight rate level that would be fair to all sections of the Canadian economy and its 

people, including the railways, their workers, the consuming public, and the primary producer. Now that 

was the stand taken by the Government of the province and supported by the governments of the 

provinces participating in opposition to any undue increases in the general over-all freight transportation 

cost. 

 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 

 
16 

In the past few years, as the Premier has pointed out, we have witnessed a 21 per cent increase and a 

later award that would bring the over-all increase in transportation costs, during the past three years, in 

the neighbourhood of 40.4 per cent in excess of the freight charges in effect prior to March of 1948. 

Now if we would care to add to the 21 per cent and the recent 16 per cent, the increase in the 

international rates, the increase in the competitive rates, the increase in the agreed or sometimes called 

‗special‘ rates, we will then find, based on the 1948 tonnage of freight moving, that the people of 

Canada have been asked to pay an increased freight bill of $200,000,000 in excess of what it was some 

two years ago. As has been pointed out, a substantial portion of that $200,000,000 rests upon the people 

of the Prairie Provinces of Western Canada. A substantial portion rests upon the people of the Maritime 

Provinces. The recent award will undoubtedly bring to the Railways, based on 1949 freight tonnage, an 

additional $25,000,000 of revenue; that is included in the $200,000,000 figure that I have mentioned. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Resolution suggests that we make an appeal to the Governor in Council under 

Section 52 of the Railway Act for a stay of the recent award of the Board of Transport Commissioners. 

Naturally there must be some basis for an appeal, and it is suggested that, in the recent award, the 

Governments of Western Canada and the Maritimes have some basis of appeal: 

 

(1) On the question of the proper allocation of the dividends that are set up on the common and 
preferred stock of the Railway Companies. 

 

It was the argument of this Province, Mr. Speaker, that the twenty-one to twenty-two million dollars that 

is set aside as a dividend should be allocated as between rail and non-rail revenue. That was accepted by 

the Board of Transport Commissioners on the recent award as had they recognized a proper division of 

the dividends as between rail and non-rail revenue, it would have made a difference of about 3.5 per cent 

in the award; in other words it would have been that much lower. So it is generally felt that we have a 

very good case on that account to appeal to the Governor General in Council. 

 

(2) Surplus fixed without any principal therefor. 
 

The Railway Companies, in their accounting system, fix a surplus as a means to go and come on, but 

they have not set out a very satisfactory formula for arriving at the amount of money that should be set 

aside as a surplus from any years‘ earnings. 

 

(3) The failure of the Board to conduct any independent investigation of maintenance cost of 
maintenance levels. 

 

In the evidence that has been brought before the Board by the Provinces, it was pointed out quite clearly 

that, in 1939, the Railways had set aside $49,000,000 as maintenance cost. In 1949, the same Railways 

with a lesser mileage to maintain, set aside $150,000,000 as the cost for the maintenance for their 

railway systems. Now the Board of Transport Commissioners failed to make a thorough investigation as 

to whether or not that particular figure was a right figure for maintenance sots. 

 

The other question is the one discussed both the Province and the Leader of the Opposition: the question 

of a horizontal increase. 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 
17 

The question of a horizontal increase is not before the Royal Commission, and it is hoped that they, in 

turn, will have the necessary technical staff to make a very thorough inquiry into the whole question of a 

general horizontal increase as a principle in rate-making. 

 

I will just come back to this question of dividends. If there was an allocation of dividends as between 

rail and non-rail revenue, we would find that some $5 1/4 million of the dividends would come from 

non-rail revenues. If we do not make an appeal using that as one of the bases for an appeal, it might be 

accepted as a basis of rate-making in the future. The whole question of horizontal increases on long 

hauls hits this section of Canada particularly heavy. That has already been pointed out to the House, Mr. 

Speaker. We are sitting in the middle of a great continent, and, of necessity, we have long rail hauls both 

in the field of consumer goods and also in the field of export goods, and I think it can be safely stated 

that there are no groups of people any place in Canada that purchase the tonnage of consumer goods that 

are purchased by the people of the province of Saskatchewan. That is brought about largely by the 

occupation followed by the citizens of Saskatchewan; so they have a very heavy freight rate bill on the 

movement of consumer goods from the Pacific or from the Central Provinces into the province of 

Saskatchewan. Then they have a very heavy freight rate bill on the movement of the surplus agricultural 

products from here to the markets of the world, and any increase in freight rates beyond the necessary 

level to maintain efficient transportation services bears very heavily and adds additional burdens to the 

agricultural people in their efforts to compete in the markets of the world with their surplus foodstuffs. 

 

I was particularly happy to hear the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition extend congratulations to 

the Technical Committee that has served the people of the province of Saskatchewan during the past 

three and a half years in connection with this question. During that period of time, I think I can safely 

say that the technical staff of the railways and the technical staff of the provinces with which 

Saskatchewan has been associated, and the personnel of the Board of Transport Commissioners and of 

the Royal Commission on Transportation, have spoken very highly of the personnel associated with this 

case on behalf of the Province of Saskatchewan. It is no easy task for technical personnel, who have not 

made a life-study of transportation, to develop their case and advance an argument that will meet the 

argument of those who have spent a lifetime in the field of transportation. I think I can say, Mr. Speaker, 

that the brief presented by the Province to the Royal Commission was generally accepted and considered 

to offer a measure of relief in respect to the problems that our people are faced with in this freight rate 

question. It was generally considered, I believe, by some of the technical staff and others associated with 

this present case before the Royal Commission, that it is among the best briefs that has been placed 

before the Commission. All of this is complimentary to the technical staff that is serving the 

Government and the people of this province in this most vital question. 

 

I do not think I would like this opportunity to pass, Mr. Speaker, without expressing some regret that the 

Chief Commissioner, Mr. Archibald, owing to his physical condition was unable to preside at the last 

case that gave the Railways a 16 per cent boost or hoist in their freight rates. 

 

What has been said by the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition has been well said, and I believe 

this places our case squarely 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 

 
18 

before the House and before the people of the province. I have no hesitation in supporting the Resolution 

that is asking the Governor in Council to give consideration to the stay of the recent award and that this 

whole question remain in abeyance until such time as the Royal Commission on Transportation table 

their findings. I appreciate having the opportunity of seconding the Motion and supporting the principle. 

 

The question being put, the motion was agreed to unanimously. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

AUTOMOBILE ACCIDENT INSURANCE 

 

The Honourable C. M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer) moved Second Reading of Bill No. 25 – An Act to 

amend the Automobile Accident Insurance Act, 1947. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce an amendment to The Automobile Insurance 

Act (Bill 25) to aid or to broaden the Personal Injury Provisions of the Act. It has been our pleasure, year 

after year since the Act was first introduced, to propose amendments which have broadened the 

coverage of the Act, until today, there is very little left that people can be insured for. They are now able 

to receive benefits which four years ago we never would have dreamed would have been possible with 

the premium which we have in effect today. In 1947, the Act was amended to provide, first of all, for the 

collision insurance; then the next year, it was still further amended to provide additional benefits – 

public liability and property damage. Then last year, I had the privilege of bringing in another 

amendment which provided fire and theft insurance, so that we now have in effect, not only the usual 

five-point policy but, in addition, we have the accident policy which is to be found in no other insurance 

policy on the North American continent. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we are broadening still further the benefits of this Act. Provision is being made 

here to alter the benefits in the case of a death of a child. When death occurs to a child one year and 

over, payments at the present time are made to the extent of $125 for funeral expenses. The proposed 

amendment will raise this, and will provide that, in addition, where the child is from one to six years, 

$100 will be payable – I might say, Mr. Speaker, that there is a limit under the laws of Canada of the 

amount that can be paid in the case of death of young children; seven years or over, the parents will be 

paid on behalf of the child, $200; eight years $300; nine years, $400. Previously only funeral benefits of 

$125 were paid, and now we are extending it to include these other amounts. 

 

Then, in addition to that, for a person eighteen years of age or over who is unmarried at the time of his 

death, in addition to the normal funeral benefits that are payable, $1,000 will be paid to the surviving 

parents. Previously the parents had to prove that the child was one who had been caring for them, and 

one who had been assisting in maintaining them, before any payment was made. 

 

Then too, we are changing the basis for computing the accidents so as to provide larger sums to persons 

who may be injured and who had been unemployed for part of the preceding year. Instead of taking it on 

the basis of the year‘s earnings, we are taking it on a lesser amount if the person had 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 
19 

been unemployed just immediately prior to this injury; and then, too, there is an added coverage 

provision here for the payment of $2,000 in cases where bodily injury results within a period of ninety 

days (I believe it is), in the loss of the functions either of the mind or the body of a person to the extent 

that he is permanently incapable of engaging in any occupation. Previously this coverage provided 

payment for amputation cases only. Now it will provide this coverage for persons who may be 

completely disabled in other ways, other than amputation. 

 

There is one other amendment that is rather far-reaching and which is something which was originally 

did not consider to be advisable, and that is in the case of anyone who is convicted under the Criminal 

Code, provision is now being made that we will be able to pay insurance in those cases; that is, that 

conviction under the Criminal Code will not be, in itself, a reason for refusal to make payments under 

the Act. I might say that the idea of this is not to encourage people to get convicted under the Criminal 

Code. If they get too many convictions, they will find themselves without an Operator‘s Licence, 

because I want to serve notice here and now that we are going to clean-up on these people that are a 

menace on the highways and that are constantly causing accidents. We do not feel, however, the way to 

do it is through denying them and their dependants the benefits of insurance, but rather, first of all, to 

surcharge them on their premiums. That has always been a policy of private companies. If a person is 

one who is constantly involved in accidents, we will surcharge them and then, of course, the Highway 

Traffic Board have the power to suspend their licences, and that is being done today. Anyone who is 

convicted under the Criminal Code automatically loses his licence for a period of three months; 

convicted for drunken driving, six months, and so on. Now we intend, if anything to make that even 

harsher rather than to loosen up on the these people who are a real menace on the roads, and who are 

responsible for so many of our accidents; but under the Act as it is, it means that if a person is convicted 

under the Criminal Code they cannot collect a dollar of insurance. 

 

May I give you one example to illustrate this. In one part of this province we had a chap drive onto a 

highway, one day, from a side road; he forgot to stop at the highway and smashed into another car; the 

case was reported to the police and a charge of reckless driving was laid against him. He pleaded guilty, 

was fined his ten or twenty-five dollars and costs, and had his licence automatically suspended and, in 

addition, he was not able to collect any insurance. Not only that, but under the Act we had to take action 

against him to collect the amount of the insurance which we had paid to the other fellow. Now, just 

about the same time on the same highway another person did exactly the same thing, but in that case the 

police laid a charge of failing to stop when coming onto a highway. He pleaded guilty, was fined his ten 

dollars and costs and then immediately collected all his insurance, and, of course, no action was taken to 

try and collect for the other fellow. I think you can see how completely unfair that was. Here were two 

identical cases, but because we had two different police officers laying the charges under different 

sections, in one case the insurance was payable and in the other case it was not. Well, that will be fixed 

up under this amendment and I might say that what we are doing will give the people insured under our 

insurance, exactly the same right as they have with any private company. Today, with any private 

company, conviction under the Criminal Code is not a cause for refusal of the company to pay the 

insurance. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say this is going to cost us some money; the amount I don‘t know – 

probably all these amendments may 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 

 
20 

cost us up to $100,000. I feel confident, however, that the people of Saskatchewan, the automobile 

owners, will be very glad to receive this extra protection, even if it may mean that, some day, they may 

have to pay a higher premium. May I however, hasten to assure you that I do not think that will be for a 

considerable time. We still have over a million and a quarter dollars, I was reading an editorial in this 

morning‘s ‗Leader-Post‘ – I love these editorials, especially when the person who writes them does not 

know what he is writing about. I sometimes get very confused when I deal with all these millions and 

billions that I have to deal with, but the writer of this editorial certainly was even more confused than I 

have ever been. He accuses us of charging to The Automobile Accident Insurance Act certain expenses 

that are not legitimate. For instance, he says we should not spend anything for advertising. We did spend 

$19,427. Well, I went to tell the editor of the ‗Leader-Post‘ that as long as I administer this Act we are 

going to spend for advertising whatever amount may be necessary in order to make the people 

thoroughly familiar with this Act, and not only that but we are going to spend whatever may be 

necessary to do what we can to eliminate accidents. I do not think there is any question that a good 

educational campaign carried on could eliminate a great many of the accidents that there are today, and 

as long as I am administering this Act I propose to start right there at what I believe is the root of the 

trouble, and spend whatever money may be necessary. For example, the editor of the ‗Leader-Post‘ says 

that this ―Safety and Auto-Insurance Guide for Motorists‖ should not be charged to The Automobile 

Insurance Act. Well, we purchased around 250,000 of these, give one out to every person that purchases 

a licence in order that they will know what are their rights under the Act. Now we don‘t refuse to charge 

up to the general Insurance office that which is a legitimate charge against it. For instance, on the back 

of this is an advertisement for the Package Policy; it has been in each one for the past two or three years. 

We charge the regular insurance for this advertisement, they pay for that. What we do charge is 

everything that can be charged to The Automobile Insurance Act legitimately; to the ordinary insurance 

everything that can charged legitimately. Now there are certain things that we cannot segregate. For 

example, to what are going to charge the staff, the manager, the assistant managers, and the secretary? 

Who should that be charged to? There is only one way it can be done and that is through a pro-rata 

system; and that is what we have used, as I explained, last year, in Public Accounts Committee and it 

seemed to satisfy the members of the Opposition and the members of this side; it satisfied everybody 

evidently, except the editor of the ‗Leader-Post‘. I am not particularly anxious to try to satisfy the editor 

of the ‗Leader-Post‘ because when he is pleased and satisfied with what I am doing, then I want to quit; 

it will be time for me to get out of here. The pro rata basis is the premium income. In the past that has 

probably meant that a greater amount has been charged to the Automobile Insurance Act than to the 

General business, but when I tell my friends in this Legislature, today, that in the month of January, this 

year, we wrote $248,000 worth of business, general business; that was the premium income for the 

month of January - $248,000. The highest month ever in the history of the Insurance before, was 

$204,000 last April, and this in the coldest month in sixty years, Mr. Speaker, $248,000 compared with 

$150,000 last year. Now we use that as the basis, the actual amount. For example, the salaries are all put 

on a pro rata basis. In some respects it is not fair to The Automobile Insurance Act; for example we have 

a total of forty-four employees in the Claims Department, but only four of those in the General business. 

Forty of them devote the major part of their time to The Automobile Insurance Act and yet we pro rate 

all these salaries. 

 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 
21 

Mr. E. M. Culliton (Gravelbourg): — Do you pro rate the commission and brokerage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Oh, no. The commission is charged against the Automobile business (that is the 

standard business), not the Automobile Accident Insurance. Now here is another statement. This fellow 

says that we do not pay an expense for under-writing. Well he may not know, but every time one of the 

issuers of motor licences out in the country writes an applicant for insurance the Insurance office pays to 

him a certain amount – not much, but it is five per cent in the case of an operator‘s licence; that is five 

cents extra we give him for the operator‘s licence and ten cents on the other, so that in the case of where 

the premium is $10, there is one per cent of your premium and five per cent of your premium which 

goes to these people who issue the motor licences in the country. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would be very glad and I would invite the editor of the ‗Leader-Post‘ to sit in the 

morning we are discussing the Insurance Department in the Crown Corporations Committee and he 

might learn something about how the books are kept. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Are you going to give us all the information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — I will give you, as I did last year, all the information you want concerning the 

operation of the Insurance Office, and we are proud of it. 

 

I might say this, Mr. Speaker, that there is no organization in this country, no private company in this 

country, that does more than our Government Insurance Office to try to live up to the requirements of 

the various insurance laws. For instance, when we prepare this Annual Report which you got, we do not 

come under the Dominion insurance laws, but nevertheless, when we prepare these reports we put in 

there these things in the exact order in which they are listed in the Dominion. We even take that trouble 

to make sure. I feel confident that the vast majority of the people of Saskatchewan appreciate this 

compulsory automobile Insurance plan and I think that very few today, after it has been in operation 

these years, will agree with the statement, which I would like to repeat, made when this was introduced 

in February, 1946, made by Mr. A. T. Procter who said that ―This is the greatest hoax every perpetrated 

on the people of any province.‖ That, of course was before he was appointed as a judge. 

 

Mr. V. P. Deshaye (Melville): — Did you ever consider (I would just like to hear your reaction to this) 

paying innocent widows and children in the event of the death of the husband when he would have been 

guilty of a criminal offence under the Code? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Well, under the Act, as it was, we had no authority to do this, but now we are 

asking for this authority under this amendment: not drunken driving, but violating the Criminal Code. 

For instance, it might just be momentary thoughtlessness as when a motorist drives onto a highway or 

onto a ‗through‘ street without stopping, (I don‘t think they do it on purpose) or when they speed, 

sometimes pass a car, swerve around or go too quickly round a corner and turn over. Now it may be 

reckless driving, but I am sure with most people it is thoughtlessness at the time. It is not deliberate. 

 

Mr. Deshaye: — If you have a case where a man gets drunk and is killed; he may be killed through no 

fault of his own even if he is drunk; but naturally and normally he is killed through his own fault. 

Nevertheless you have left at 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 

 
22 

home a widow with possibly a number of innocent children who ordinarily would recover under your 

Act, $625 for each child and $3,000 for the husband. Now the position of that widow and those children 

is no different even though the husband was drunk. They are still innocent, and I was wondering if you 

had taken that into consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — That is a very good point. I must say that we have just included here the standard 

policy, or what is in the standard policy, which of course would not make provision for that. I can see 

my hon. friend‘s point and I think it is a very good one. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to quote a couple of examples to show you that this Automobile 

Insurance Act is of real benefit to the people. I have a very good friend in town here, and he is known to 

every member opposite by name, if not personally. He called me up, last year, to ask me what we could 

provide him with the following insurance for. He had a 1949 Meteor car: legal liability of $150,000 and 

$300,000, property damage of $10,000 – $50 deductible collision, complete fire and theft, miscellaneous 

endorsement. I phoned him back after calling our office to get the rate – $19.65. I do not need to tell you 

just what he said except to say that he informed me that he had been paying $79.50, and he is getting it 

for $19.65. 

 

I have here today, a copy of a letter from Edmonton, Alberta. This gentleman said: ―I have received the 

bill for my car insurance: 1949 Oldsmobile Deluxe Sedan – Public Liability limits of $20,000 and 

$40,000; property damage limits $2,000; Collision, $25.00 deductible; Fire and Theft, passenger hazard, 

miscellaneous coverage. I pay $145.88 for this. I am wondering what it would cost me if I lived in 

Regina.‖ Well, we would give him not $20,000 and $40,000 limits but $25,000 and $50,000 limits, and 

not $2,000 property damage but $5,000 property damage, and we would give him all the rest exactly as 

he had it, and, in addition, we would give him accident coverage which would protect him, protect his 

wife, protect his family, protect all the thousands of innocent pedestrians who may not be able to get 

anything out of a public liability claim. We would provide all of that in Saskatchewan for $28.50, what 

he is paying $145.88 for in Edmonton! 

 

Mr. Deshaye: — Mr. Provincial Treasurer, I do not deny that there certainly is some justification in 

your rates, but at the same time, the element of risk might be higher in the city of Edmonton than in the 

city of Regina, might it not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — The element of risk is a great deal less in the town of Melville, for example, than it 

is in the city of Regina, and yet you pay exactly the same premium in Melville as you do in Regina with 

most companies. Now, I know that there are one or two companies that do make a difference, but most 

private companies charge you exactly the same. 

 

Mr. Deshaye: — Would you charge the same rate for Edmonton as you would for Regina? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Oh, no! I am not suggesting for a moment that we would do this for $28.50 in 

Edmonton. Our rate might be $30 or $32, but it certainly would not be more than 10 or 15 per cent 

greater. 

 

Now, in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out that in practically every province of Canada 

this year, there has been an increase 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 
23 

in automobile insurance rates. Only in Saskatchewan have the rates remained the same. We have not 

changed our rates here. We have left them as they were. We are actually giving the people lower rates 

though giving these increased benefits under our Act. In reality it means that we are giving our people 

lower rates. Once again Saskatchewan leads, as we have led for several years in the field of insurance; 

so, too, again this year, we will be leading. 

 

I am confident that the people of the provinces have come to accept this insurance as a permanent 

feature. I think my hon. friends opposite would agree that if, by any chance of fortune, our places should 

be reversed and they would come over here, and we went over there, this is one thing that; I know the 

people would not let them. I feel sure and I hope that the Leader of the Opposition will give us that 

assurance – not that the people need it, not that there is any chance of them getting over here; but I do 

think that it would remove this question from the realm of politics if the Leader of the Opposition would 

give us his assurance that they are wholeheartedly behind this, that no longer does the Liberal Party 

consider this to be the ―greatest hoax every perpetrated upon the people of this province‖. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Before the hon. gentleman resumes his seat – this probably should have been asked 

under the other Act, but I am sure that he would welcome this question. He mentioned some of the 

penalties in the way of cancellation of licences that they are carrying out today. Now, there is one thing 

that he did not mention and I just wondered if he would like to tell the House anything about it – that is 

the man who seems to be making or getting into one accident after another; I have heard of a man 

having 30 convictions for infringements of The Vehicles Act. I just wonder if there will be a time when 

a man simply is regarded as not fit to operate a car. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, we have been getting our records – that is one of the things we have 

been able to do through the card index system that we have established in connection with the operation 

of the Insurance Office. What we are doing is taking each individual operator and each individual car 

and are not able to classify operators into these various categories; and what the Insurance Office will do 

after they surcharge them each year, and another accident occurs, then this will be reported to the 

Highway Traffic Board. The man‘s history will be made available, and the Highway Traffic Board have 

been instructed by myself that, in those cases where there are people who are a constant menace, they 

would have my wholehearted approval if they would take away their operator‘s licence from them and 

keep them off the road forever. I agree with my hon. friend that there are people who have no right to be 

driving cars. I saw in the paper here, the other day, where a man had had seven or eight convictions. As 

far as I am concerned he has had his last ride. Any man that has to get into courts that frequently has no 

right to be driving a car, because he is a danger not only to himself and the people in his car, but a 

danger to every other motorist and to every pedestrian. 

 

We have recently reorganized our Highway Traffic Board and are establishing a Safety Division and, 

this year, we are going to basking the Legislature to appropriate certain sums of money for a safety 

campaign. We want to extend the work that we have done, last year, largely through the Insurance 

Office staff, and we feel confident that we are going to be able to lick this increasing accident rate. I 

might say that, of the figures 

  



 

March 6, 1950 

 

 

 
24 

I have seen so far, we in Saskatchewan have the lowest increase of any of the provinces of Canada. 

Actually, if you consider the number of miles driven, it was a decrease in the accident rate, but I am still 

not satisfied; and I can assure the Leader of the Opposition that that is one thing that we are certainly 

going to put an end to as quickly as we can. 

 

Mr. Deshaye: — That increase in rate will only be based on convictions and not on accidents, will it? A 

man may have half-a-dozen accidents and still not have his rate increased if he was not at fault. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — No. 

 

Mr. Deshaye: — I just wanted to clear that point up. 

 

The question being put, the Motion for Second Reading of Bill No. 25 was agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:00 o‘clock p.m. 


