



















































Hansard: March 31, 1950


 

1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Eleventh Legislature 

32nd Day 

 

Friday, March 31, 1950. 

 

The House met at 3 o’clock p.m. 

 

ON ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. J.A. Darling (Minister of Public Works): – Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer to reports in the 

Leader-Post of March 30 regarding remarks which I made in the House on Second Reading of the Power 

Corporation Bill. If I may just read one short paragraph here with regard to the processing of oil at 

Prince Albert: 

 

“Freight rates on Bunker C oil, he pointed out, were considerably higher than the rates on crude, hence 

it was a paying proposition for the Corporation to take over the Prince Albert refinery and process 

bunker oil there.” 

 

That was followed by an editorial in today’s Leader-Post: 

 

“The proposal to purchase the refinery in Prince Albert also may indicate the entry of the C.C.F. 

Government into the oil business, with broader fields in mind than supplying fuel oil to this local 

power plant.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have here the transcript of my speech, and if I may read what I said in that connection, it 

is as follows: 

 

“With respect to oil, the processing of oil to provide fuel for use in the Corporation’s power plants, I 

might say at this time that a private company – The Prince Albert Refineries – is constructing a 

skimming plant on the property of the Power Corporation at Prince Albert, and they are under contract 

to supply the Power Corporation with Bunker C fuel for use in the plant there. The contract is one 

which the Board of Directors of the Power Corporation regard as a very favourable one to the 

Corporation. One of the clauses in this contract is to provide that at any time after this skimming plant 

has been in operation for one year, the Power Corporation may purchase the skimming plant at cost, 

less five per cent depreciation. 



 

March 31, 1950 
 

2 

 

“The skimming plant is situated, as I have stated, on the property of the Power Corporation, and the oil 

is piped directly from the plant to the power plant. There is no expense for transportation. The capacity 

of this plant will be limited, but it will, nevertheless, exceed the present needs of the power plant at 

Prince Albert, and it is quite pointless to have a contract which provides that in the case of an 

eventuality which made it necessary or desirable to do so, the Corporation can purchase this plant, 

unless the Act gives to the Corporation the power to dispose of the surplus production of the plant and 

engage in the process of oil, and, of course, to dispose of the light ends which result from the 

skimming.” 

 

On orders of the Day: 

 

Mr. J. Benson (Last Mountain): – Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I 

would like to draw the attention of the House to what I consider to be a rather important matter, so far as 

the province of Saskatchewan is concerned. You all know that we have had a livestock exhibition in 

Regina here during the last few days, and I want to refer to some of the wins that have been made by 

some of the residents of the constituency of Last Mountain. 

 

First of all, ten-year old Wayne Murray, of Gibbs, won the Junior Calf Club championship. Wayne also 

won the Aberdeen-Angus special award for junior classes, and also the Robert Sinton beef cattle trophy 

for the championship steer or heifer fed and exhibited by a boy or girl. He ran second for the cup 

presented by Burns and Company Limited, for the champion Aberdeen-Angus beef animal of the show. 

He sold his steer, which weighed a thousand pounds for $560. 

 

I want, also to refer to Neil Murray, of Gibbs, Saskatchewan, who exhibited the grand champion 

Aberdeen-Angus bull, “Craven Revolution Lucifer,” and this bull was sold for $760. 

 

I want, particularly to refer to William Harrison, of Dafoe, Saskatchewan. Dafoe happens to be in the 

constituency of Wadena, but Mr. Harrison lives in the constituency of Last Mountain. Mr. Harrison 

came to this country as a young man from Cumberland, England. He happened to be born in the same 

community where I was born, so I have a particular affinity towards him. Now, Mr. Harrison is a 

topnotch shorthorn breeder in this province. In the Regina show, 1949, he won the grand championship 

with his shorthorn bull, “Norse Gift”. In the present Regina show he won first in senior yearling class 

with his shorthorn bull, “Norse Pride”. He won first in the intermediate yearling class with his shorthorn 

bull, “Norse Footprint”. He won the grand championship for the shorthorn bull with this same “Norse 

Footprint”. He also won the Stilborn trophy for the best shorthorn at the show, and he won the Longmuir 

trophy for the best group of three shorthorns at the show. But this is not all. At the Royal Show at 

Toronto, last fall, 



 

March 31, 1950 
 

3 

 

Mr. Harrison won first for the best shorthorn bull; he also won first for the best shorthorn female; and he 

also won the grand championship award for the best shorthorn at that show, and in addition to that he 

won the shorthorn trophy donated by the Shorthorn Society of Great Britain and Ireland. I think this is a 

record that has never been equalled. I suggest that we owe a great deal in this province to livestock 

breeders such as Mr. Harrison, who has really put Saskatchewan on the world map so far as good 

livestock is concerned. 

 

Visit of 

 

The HON. A.A. ROBERTS 

 

High Commissioner for the Union of South Africa 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): – Our province is being visited by the Hon. A.A. Roberts, High 

Commissioner for the Union of South Africa, and I think there is a general feeling in all parts of the 

House that, since this is his first visit to the capital city of Saskatchewan, he should be given an 

opportunity of speaking to the Legislature and that the members should have an opportunity of hearing 

him – especially that he should have an opportunity of speaking while the proceedings are being 

broadcast so that the people of the province may know something about one of the fellow nations of the 

British Commonwealth of Nations. Therefore, with Leave of the Assembly, I should like to move, 

seconded by the Hon. Mr. Lloyd: 

 

That the proceedings of this Assembly be now suspended, in order that the Assembly may welcome 

the Honourable A. Adrian Roberts, High Commissioner for the Union of South Africa. 

 

The question being put, the motion was agreed to. 

 

Speech of 

 

The HON. A.A. ROBERTS 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, Hon. Members, I want to thank you, Sir, for this honour which you have 

conferred upon me and my country. I am deeply sensitive of that honour. I was touched by the fact that 

when I came into this magnificent building of yours, I was met by a guard of honour of Boer War 

veterans. There could have been no more fitting symbol of the stage at which we have arrived today, 

than that gesture; that those men who, fifty years ago, went to my little country to fight against my 

father, that they could, today, extend me the hand of friendship. That I should feel that warm feeling of 

friendship towards them and that I should be proud to call them my friends, is a very good sign for the 

future of our Commonwealth. 



 

March 31, 1950 
 

4 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I have said, I am greatly sensitive of the honour which you have conferred upon me by 

permitting me, by inviting me, in fact, into this sanctum sanctorum of Saskatchewan. I thank you for the 

opportunity of expressing my sincere appreciation to you and to hon. members and to the people of 

Saskatchewan for the wonderful welcome which they have given me ever since I came into this 

progressive province of yours. I had heard a great deal about this hospitality, this reputation for 

hospitality. In the Free State we also are proud of that same reputation; but I can assure you that when I 

go back to my own country I shall be able to point to the prairies as the home of hospitality. 

 

I rejoice, also, Mr. Speaker, in this opportunity of conveying to you, Sir, and to this honourable House, 

the greetings of my Government. I am glad, also, to have the opportunity of conveying a message of 

goodwill from South Africa to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

My country is passing through dangerous and difficult times, and it is being subjected to much 

ill-informed criticism; but, Mr. Speaker, I want to say here and now, we in South Africa subscribe 

wholeheartedly to those democratic principles which are the mainspring of action and the common 

objective of our great Commonwealth. In spite of all that you may have heard to the contrary, there is no 

policy of oppression in South Africa. The effectiveness of our democracy is, in a sense, itself the cause 

for these disturbing reports that you, from time to time, may hear from and about my country. We have 

as many critics and as many differing opinions in the Union of South Africa as you will find in any 

country where there is freedom of thought and freedom to express thoughts. We permit not only that 

freedom of thought, but we, freely, permit any citizen, any person in the country, to express his opinions 

and to do his utmost to bring about a change in the policy or the whole of the Government, providing 

only that it is done by peaceable and democratic means. 

 

I welcome this opportunity, also, Sir, of endeavouring to secure, possibly, a better understanding of 

those great problems with which we are faced in my country. It would not be fitting that I should go into 

any great detail, but I do believe that it may be of interest to you and be of value to my country if I gave 

you some idea of our greatest problem – the one about which you have no doubt heard most – the 

problem of our mixed population. The Union of South Africa, which comprises an area of some seven 

hundred and fifty-two thousand square miles, has a population of some 11,400,000 people. Of those, 

there are some 2,400,000 Europeans. Those Europeans consist, to the extent of about fifty-six per cent, 

of people of Dutch and French origin largely, and about forty per cent English-speaking; but if I may 

throw out a suggestion with the presumptuousness of one who has made only a very superficial survey 

of this great land of yours, I wonder whether that imaginary – I say imaginary – small racial difficulty 

which I have sensed in Canada between the French-speaking and the English-speaking, whether that 

would not readily disappear if you put forth what we in South Africa have put forth in an effort to know 

each other, by learning each other’s language throughout the length and breadth of the land about which 

I have spoken. Every person is entitled to use his own language and to get service from every public 

servant in either of the official languages – 



 

March 31, 1950 
 

5 

 

English or Afrikaaner. I am happy to be able to say that at least eighty per cent of the European 

population, and possibly more, are today bilingual; but our difficulty comes from the fact that we have, 

in addition to this comparatively small group which has to supply the skills, the “brains” of the country, 

the initiative, and which has to bear the greatest part of the tax burden; in addition to this section of the 

community, we have some 950,000 mixed population – that is what we call the “colours” – descendants 

of slaves from all over the world. They are rapidly advancing in civilization and are playing a very 

important role in the country, but they still remain a problem – the problem of continuing to raise them 

and helping them to take their appropriate niche in the economy of the country. 

 

Then we have more than three hundred thousand Indians who came from India, and who supply, also a 

good deal of skilled labour, and who include among their numbers very astute business men, but whose 

outlook on life is very different from that of the Europeans; and they do present a problem because of 

the almost inevitable friction that arise owing to their feelings towards religion. The future of that 

section of the community is at the present moment being discussed at roundtable conferences between 

my Government and the Governments of India and Pakistan. But the biggest problem of all is the 

problem of the Bantu races and it is perhaps appropriate that I should, even at the risk of boring those of 

you who have read, possibly, a considerable amount about this subject; it is worthwhile for me to tell 

you something of the Bantu. 

 

The Bantu consists of 8,100,000 dark-skinned people who were not the original inhabitants of the 

Union, but who came down in invading hordes, one wave behind the other destroying the wave in front. 

They are not a homogeneous group; they speak at least ten different, distinctly different, languages apart 

from many dialects. They have traditional hostilities which prompt them, whenever the opportunity 

presents itself, of hitting at each other’s throats, even today. For the most part they are completely 

primitive and illiterate. It is impossible to say how many of them there are, because they come and go 

into and from the European areas. They supply the unskilled labour. Now that mass presents our great 

difficulty and we have, for at least a hundred and fifty years, been doing our utmost to raise them to their 

proper place, which we know they will eventually take in the setup of South Africa. 

 

The present Government is, at the moment, investigating the best means of more positive action in 

assisting these Bantu races in South Africa, to develop within the thirty million acres of the native 

reserves which have been set aside for their exclusive use. Consideration of allowing the Bantu and the 

Europeans to mingle all over the country and becoming inextricably mixed geographically and 

economically, has been the tendency in recent times. They are now encouraging the educated among the 

Bantu to take their legitimate place as leaders among their own people instead of being tacked on to the 

end of the queue of the Europeans. History has demonstrated to us clearly, in other countries and in our 

own country, the inevitability of dangerous frictions when you have races who are, in their physical 

makeup, in their cultural background, and above all, in their way of living and thinking, so widely 

different. 

 

But, Sir, I would like to impress one more thought on you, 



 

March 31, 1950 
 

6 

 

and that is that, in spite of the somewhat gloomy picture, our country is full of sunshine, and although 

there are many things that we would like to do, certain laws that we would like to write, still there are 

duties that we must and shall, in the future, perform; but at the same time the Bantu, taken by and large, 

are happy people, undoubtedly better-off than they were before we came. There is no doubt about that. 

That may be accounted for by the success of our frantic endeavours to check soil erosion, to introduce 

methods of agriculture into the country, to prevent them from lapsing back to their old habits of thought, 

to get them away from the hold of the witch doctor whose hand is always stretched out like an evil 

shadow over the country. The Bantu have a capacity for happiness, and the struggle that we have is not 

to prevent these people, who are alleged by some to be oppressed, from leaving the Union; the difficulty 

is to prevent others from the neighbouring territories from coming in. It is estimated there are at least 

two hundred thousand who have no right to be there, who come from outside. And the same with the 

Indians. We cannot buy their departure, they will not go; they are prepared to pay large sums of money 

to come into the country. 

 

On the question of our position in the Commonwealth let me say this. Speaking as one, as I have 

indicated, who was born in the Free State of a family that, for three generations, devoted all its energies 

to building up this little model State, as we then regarded it, I can claim that we have built a nation 

which has proved in two great wars, its right and its ability to take its legitimate place in this 

brotherhood of nations which we call the Commonwealth. We shall also endeavour to continue to 

discharge our duty towards these people who have been placed in our care. I do not want to burden you 

with figures but I would like to mention just one figure. Since 1920 to this current financial year, there 

has been an increase in expenditure, directly from State funds in education of the Bantu from the figure 

of £377,102 to £5,300,000 in this current financial year. 

 

Finally, Sir, I would like to point out that we elected, of our own free will to remain in the brotherhood 

of the Commonwealth, and whatever we may call ourselves in the future, we shall continue to remain in 

that Commonwealth. Our lot is bound up with yours and we shall be proud to stand shoulder to shoulder 

with our elder brother, Canada, in the long struggle for freedom and prosperity that lies ahead; for that 

peace on earth and goodwill among men which, I believe, we shall achieve and shall achieve much 

sooner than most of us fear. 

 

I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Premier Douglas: – Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all hon. members will want to join with you, Sir, in 

extending a very hearty welcome to the High Commissioner from the Union of South Africa, and to 

thank him very much for the very splendid message which he has brought to this Assembly. 

 

In these troubled times throughout the world, the peoples of the British Commonwealth of Nations have 

been brought closer together because so many of our problems are similar; the ideals we hold in 

common have to be defended and have to be extended. One of the things that impressed me when I had 

the privilege of attending the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference 



 

March 31, 1950 
 

7 

 

at Westminster, a year ago last fall, was the fact that we had gathered there the representatives of 

thirty-eight parliaments, representing over 525,000,000 people in the world, bound together, not by 

force, not held together by bayonets, but bound together by common ideals, a common loyalty to the 

Crown, and a common objective for world peace and world security. Because of that common idealism 

we are always glad to welcome any representative of any part of the British Commonwealth of Nations. 

 

When we sometimes tend to become pessimistic, as we often are, about the possibility of building world 

peace out of all the warring nations of the world, it is a good thing to think of countries like South Africa 

and of Canada where people who formerly were at war today are living together in harmony and in 

peace. As the High Commissioner has pointed out, it is a fine gesture that, today, on the floor of the 

House, we have some of the South African veterans who reside here in the city of Regina. My own 

father fought in the South African war, marched into Pretoria with the Argyle and Sutherland 

highlanders; and yet men like him and thousands of others throughout the British Commonwealth of 

Nations today have nothing but the highest admiration for the people of South Africa. In our own 

country of Canada, with the French-speaking and the English-speaking, we have demonstrated over a 

long period of years that, in spite of differences that may have existed in the past, in spite of 

antagonisms that there may have been, we are working out together a common idealism and a 

community of interests. 

 

I should like, Sir, on behalf of all who are here, to extend our thanks to the Hon. A.A. Roberts for the 

fine address that he has given us. I am sure we are pleased to hear something of the problems which his 

great country has to face. Most of us are not as familiar with these problems as we ought to be, although 

I would like to tell the High Commissioner that I think one of the books that has been probably most 

widely read in this province in the last twelve or eighteen months has been Alan Paton’s book, “Cry the 

Beloved Country.” It may, of course, only be giving one side of the picture, but it has familiarized many 

of our people with South Africa through the eyes of a very splendid writer and a very fine humanitarian, 

and I hope, and I am sure, that the remarks which the High Commissioner has made today to this House, 

and through this House to the people who are listening in on the radio, will do much to further a better 

understanding of the problems of South Africa, will give to us a more sympathetic understanding of 

what they are trying to do. I would like through you, Sir, on behalf of the members of the House, to 

extend to the High Commissioner and to Mrs. Roberts who is with him here today, our very best wishes 

for a happy stay here in the Dominion of Canada and an earnest hope that, at their earliest possible 

convenience, they will come back to visit us in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): – Mr. Speaker, I would like to join the Premier in 

extending a very hearty welcome to the Hon. Mr. Roberts and Mrs. Roberts on their visit to our province 

and to our Legislature. 

 

I think that probably there is as warm a feeling of friendship and comradeship towards South Africa on 

the part of Canada, as may be found any place in the whole world, because we felt that you have had 

somewhat 



 

March 31, 1950 
 

8 

 

similar problems to ourselves in regard to having your country based upon two great races as we have, 

and just as we have tried to build a nation on the basis of those two great races, preserving their 

language and the rights which they hold dear, so you have tried to do the same in South Africa. We have 

watched your work in that regard and the success that has accompanied it with a great deal of interest 

and a great deal of admiration. 

 

Of course, too, there has been the feeling that we had to admire the chivalry with which you responded 

to what happened following the ending of the South African War. It was a moving demonstration of 

great chivalry. The people of South Africa had been at war with the rest of the British Empire (as it was 

at that time), and they had fought bravely for three years against almost impossible odds. In that 

connection, I think it was a very happy thought that the grand old Canadian veterans who took part in 

that war on behalf of Canada should have turned out and demonstrated the good will that we all feel 

towards your great country, by coming to welcome you today, and sitting on the floor of our Legislature. 

I certainly want to say that we are very glad to have them with us here today. 

 

To continue in regard to events following the South African War, the final arrangement was a model, I 

think, of enlightened statesmanship on the part of the great leaders of Great Britain at that time. Their 

attitude and their feeling that your great leaders would respond to what was proposed to be done was a 

great demonstration of the wisdom of trusting the goodwill, the higher instincts in human beings, if you 

are ready to trust them and not place reliance upon force. It was fully realized that when the Union of 

South Africa Act was passed you were only a few years away from a war which you had fought for three 

years, as I say, with great gallantry and courage, against almost impossible odds; but yet, such was the 

faith of the great leaders of Great Britain at that time in your great leaders that it was felt that more could 

be achieved towards the better interests of both countries if they continued to work together. The great 

venture of faith, as you might call it, in one another, has borne rich fruit, not only in your country, but in 

its example to the rest of the world. 

 

When the first great war came, your great Prime Minister as he was then – General Smuts, later Field 

Marshal Smuts – went over to England and took a very important part in regard to the conduct of the 

war on the part of the British Empire and Commonwealth. Later he took a great part in the laying down 

of the first attempt to establish a world organization devoted to the preservation of peace – the League of 

Nations. There was in Canada the greatest possible admiration for the work that was done by him, and 

also the great part played by your people, such a short time after being at odds with the other parts of the 

Commonwealth, in throwing your lot in so unhesitatingly with that of the other members of the British 

Commonwealth. On this account there has been the greatest possible amount of admiration for your 

country and for its leaders. 

 

When the Second World War descended upon us and when the time came that the British Empire and 

Commonwealth had to stand alone for some considerable period, we admired the way in which South 

Africa, which was menaced perhaps more than any other country except Great Britain herself, with her 

more or less limited resources, showed that her people were ready 



 

March 31, 1950 
 

9 

 

to defend their country and to stand shoulder to shoulder with the rest of the Commonwealth. They 

proved they were worthy descendants of the people who were ready so bravely to defend themselves in 

what they thought right back in the days of what we call the “Boer War”. And so there is the greatest 

possible admiration for your country in the hearts of all Canadians, and we welcome you very sincerely 

today. 

 

I would like to make one reference to this family of nations that we all belong to; I think that you have 

had quite a part in helping to preserve that family. The fact that you, so shortly after being engaged in 

war with other parts of the Commonwealth, decided that you would go along with them as part of the 

family, I think may have had quite an effect a few months ago when the question arose whether or not 

India would choose to remain in the family – the Commonwealth family – because I think those people 

felt that if you felt it was a good thing to stay within the family, then perhaps they should not leave it too 

readily. Who can tell, when this whole issue was trembling in the balance, whether the example of South 

Africa may not have been decisive as to whether India and Pakistan should remain in the family of the 

Commonwealth. 

 

Those of us who now realize the part that family can play in promoting the cause of world peace and so 

on, cannot help but realize the part that the Far East must play, cannot help but feel that the decision of 

India and Pakistan to remain in the Commonwealth may have been a decision fraught with great good to 

the future of mankind. So perhaps the decision of your great men to stay within the Commonwealth of 

their own free will, may have had a great effect upon the future of mankind. Therefore, your country in 

so many different ways, in the time of the first war playing your part, sending your men to take part in 

the formation of the League of Nations, and then again taking our part, a very splendid and gallant part – 

in the second war, and then again, the example that you set in regard to staying within the family – in all 

of those things your country has perhaps had an effect on world affairs far beyond what one might 

expect from a nation of your relatively small population. 

 

We do welcome you, and I think I can say this. I happened to be a Canadian delegate at the United 

Nations Assembly in 1947. You will remember, at that time, there was a great deal of criticism of South 

Africa in regard to her attitude towards German Southwest Africa. The attitude of the Canadian 

delegation and the attitude of other delegations within the family of nations known as the 

Commonwealth, was this: that, whether or not they might be in complete agreement with the views of 

your statesmen, if there was criticism to come it should not come from within the family; that within the 

family there should be the greatest possible attempt to understand your viewpoint and to try to 

appreciate it and, at all costs, not to make your path more difficult. 

 

I felt proud of the great family that we belong to when I saw the attitude towards your great country at 

that time, and you can rest assured, Sir, as we go along down through the years together, working for the 

things that we both believe in – the improvement of the lot of mankind, the preservation and promotion 

of the peace of the world, and those great ideals which your great leader Smuts and your present great 

leader Malan all so heartily believe in – that in that work you will find that Canadian leaders 



 

March 31, 1950 
 

10 

 

will be marching by your side, happy to belong to the same family. We do most heartily welcome you. 

We hope that you and Mrs. Roberts will enjoy your stay in our country and that you will take back to 

your own homeland with the happiest of memories. 

 

Mr. Speaker: – Mr. Roberts, on behalf of the Legislature, I wish to say that the short address you have 

given us this afternoon, which went over the air, will bring about a clarity in the minds of many people 

whose only source of information has been from the press, which as you say, and I am sure from your 

remarks, have not always correctly interpreted the situation that exists in your country. I hope that when 

you and your good lady go back, you will take back the message from Saskatchewan that we are very 

pleased at, and very grateful for your visit, and we hope some day it will be repeated. 

 

The business of the Assembly then was resumed. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11 o’clock p.m. without question put. 


