



















































Hansard: February 23, 1950


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Eleventh Legislature 

6th Day 

 

Thursday, February 23, 1950. 

 

The House met at 3 o‘clock p.m. 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed, from Wednesday, February 22, 1950, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion 

of Mr. Wellbelove for the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): 

 

Mr. Speaker, in taking part in this debate, I remember what the Premier said two days ago, when the 

Leader of the Opposition took part in this debate: he said he had had to listen to the same speech over 

and over again. Well, it is too bad he is not in his seat now, but I can assure him that, yesterday, was the 

twelfth or thirteenth time in the last six years that I have listened to the same thing, only with the 

difference that he has now taken a refresher course in Socialistic policies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this occasion I would like to take the opportunity of congratulating the new member for 

Gull Lake, the Minister of Public Health. I was down there for a few days and did my best to keep him 

away from here, but in spite of that he is here and I am glad to see him here. He is not a newcomer to 

Assemblies of this kind; he is an old veteran. I have read many of the speeches that he made in the 

House of Commons and with some of the things he said I agree, and with some of them I do not agree. I 

would like to make a few remarks which are not applicable to him personally by any means. When he 

was brought in as Minister of Public Health, Mr. Speaker, the Cabinet once again reached a baker‘s 

dozen and the Planning Board is still carrying on in this province and taking the work away from this 

Cabinet. The Hospital Services Commission is doing the work of that Branch of the Government‘s 

business, the Bureau of Publications is working overtime preparing propaganda to disseminate among 

the people of Saskatchewan at the taxpayer‘s expense; our broadcasters have been employed by this 

Government to put this propaganda and the principals involved in them over the province to the people – 

at the taxpayer‘s expense again. It is a lovely set-up, Mr. Speaker, so long as the taxpayer can afford to 

spend. Now it is getting somewhat monotonous so far as the people of Saskatchewan are concerned, and 

it won‘t be long, Mr. Speaker, before you will have just the same reaction to that type of propaganda the 

Government puts out at the people‘s expense, of Socialistic propaganda of the same type as Watson 

Thomson and ―Nosey‖ Parker aggregation used to produce. It is just exactly the same thing, only there is 

a little more finance to it; but the purpose and the result is supposed to be the same. 

 

Now then, I would like to say a few words of congratulation to my deskmate here, the new member 

from Cannington (Mr. McCarthy). He ought to be proud and I am glad to have opportunity of being able 

to sit with him here because, after all, he is the highest-priced member in this House. There has never 

been a man come into this House, Mr. Speaker, who can say he is worth a million dollars. I say that 

without any fear of contradiction. 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

2 

The people of that constituency were promised $800,000 to keep him out of here – and that was not all. 

They were promised market roads, improvements to the summer resort of Kenosee Lake, and a 

swimming pool – I think to wash themselves up. When the C.C.F. are up there, the Lord knows they 

need washing up! Nevertheless, the people of that constituency repudiated, threw this million dollars 

aside and said, ―We want Ross McCarthy.‖ That is the greatest tribute that can be paid to any man, and 

the people of the constituency know him, appreciate him as a man and friend, and regard him as an 

honourable citizen of the community, and I certainly wish to extend my heartiest congratulations to him. 

I wish him well so long as he remains a member of this House which, no doubt, will be as long as he is 

able and willing to carry on the duties. 

 

My mind goes back, Mr. Speaker, to the second Session of this Legislature, when the hon. Provincial 

Treasurer delivered his Budget Speech. This is what he said – I took it down because I thought perhaps 

if the Lord let us live long enough we might be able to read it back to him. He said this: ―I can wish 

tonight for nothing else but that this Government will be in power for the next fifteen or twenty years, or 

maybe longer.‖ What an optimist! Well, we had to sit down and take it at that time. We could do nothing 

else. We were licked and we were licked properly – just as badly and just about the same way as this 

bunch across the floor of the House will be licked, next election. We saw them bowed in the Dominion 

election last summer, Mr. Speaker, and you know that was a terrible catastrophe that overtook the 

Socialistic Party in Canada at that time. It was a catastrophe, because we had in their group in the House 

of Commons 32 members, and they come back with 13: thirteen members all over Canada. And only 

two of these thirteen, Mr. Speaker – and that should sink home with my friends (I can see the Minister of 

Agriculture or Ag-Rep. Research grinning, but it is a flat grin) that only two of these thirteen members 

represent rural constituencies in the Dominion of Canada, and these come from the province of 

Saskatchewan. Not one solitary member, except these two, was elected by a rural constituency. 

 

Mr. Walker: — You are wrong. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am not wrong. In Manitoba the two seats are urban. I know what I am talking 

about, and anytime you would like to have a little information on this subject you come over here and I 

will give it to you. That is the situation, Mr. Speaker. What does it mean? Well, it means that the rural 

population of this province of Saskatchewan and of all the provinces in Canada has repudiated them, and 

the same indications were visible in the province of Ontario, in 1948, when every member of the C.C.F. 

who ran in a rural seat lost his deposit. Today they are not a farmer-labour party, Mr. Speaker; they are 

nothing else but a tag end of the labour unions who are in politics in this Dominion of Canada, today. 

That is all they are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Was that a Provincial election in Ontario the member was referring to? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, that was in the election of 1948. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, the hon. member should know that there are no deposits in Ontario. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, that is pretty handy for the C.C.F. because they don‘t like to put up any money 

anyway. They don‘t believe in capitalism, and any man that has a hundred dollars in his pocket would be 

a 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

3 

capitalist as far as the C.C.F. is concerned. 

 

Well, that is the situation; but not one of them, Mr. Speaker, was able to be elected in the rural seat in 

Ontario and this same indication was plainly visible in this province. There is no question about this. 

There is one thing which really puzzles me. I cannot understand the sense of some of these people in the 

northern part of the province of Saskatchewan. Last summer, when we had the Dominion election, the 

city of Regina did a sensible thing. They kicked out the outstanding spearhead of the Socialist Party in 

this province of Saskatchewan and put a doctor, a very honourable gentleman, in his place. You all 

remember the following day, or even election night; I heard over the radio a call of distress from my 

hon. friend, the Junior Member for Regina (Hon. Mr. Williams). That was a call of distress, Mr. 

Speaker. What did Regina get out of that election? We got a blacktop road up to Regina Beach. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — And no water. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Hear that Minister of Transportation over there! Just as soon as the election was over 

in Regina, these two members saw that we had to do something, so they sent for the Minister of 

Highways and he said, ―We‘ll have to build a road so that these fellows can get up to Regina Beach and 

not get any dust on them‖; so we gave them the blacktop road. So the city of Moose Jaw, seeing the 

sense of this action, did the same thing and put a Liberal member into the city of Moose Jaw. Well then, 

the people got the blacktop road from Moose Jaw to Long Lake, which, of course, will help them along 

in the scheme of things. These are things we should not forget. 

 

For my friend from Notukeu-Willow Bunch, (Mr. Buchanan) I will have all the respect in the world. He 

did a marvelous job in a sense; but it is a very difficult task to make a speech on nothing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Don‘t apologize. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Seeing absolutely nothing in the Speech from the Throne, he could not make a 

speech on it. I was going to get up in the middle of the speech and ask if you had made a mistake in 

permitting one of his resolutions on the Order Paper; but then I listened carefully and because he was 

talking about Federal matters all the time, I want to say this. He just had one thing, and that was rent 

controls. Well, that has been a very difficult matter, Mr. Speaker, and this Government is certain that 

they will take care of it; but I don‘t think they will have very much to do, because I think, if this 

Government stays in power and carries on like they have done, there will be lots of vacant houses in the 

province of Saskatchewan. The people are going away from here all the time, and I don‘t think we will 

need to worry about that in the next three or four years, because we have a warning from the Attorney 

General of this province that there won‘t be an election until 1953. 

 

Well, then, we have our friend over here from Notukeu-Willow Bunch, and he may be a mighty nice 

fellow at that. But there is one thing I would like to make a note of in that address, Mr. Speaker, and it is 

this. It is a very tragic thing, that reference in his speech about the lady losing her baby. Now, I am not 

going to criticize the Government for that, but I could not help thinking that, if the situation had been 

reversed, and we had been there, probably we would have had a special broadcast on the radio blaming 

it on the Liberal Government for their neglect in not looking after the welfare of the people of this 

province. These things will happen, and they are the fault of no one. But don‘t forget this, Mr. Speaker; 

when you were 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

4 

sitting over here, my friend from Canora was carting along a camera all over the countryside to take 

pictures of some of these happenings and then using them in an election. There is one thing he did say 

which I appreciate, and he is honest about it. he is not a ―hybrid‖ Socialist, Mr. Speaker; he is a full-

blooded Socialist, and he says, ―I would be the last one to say that the ultimate in Socialism had been 

reached.‖ Well, that shows clearly that he is honest about it, and we can‘t call him a hybrid. 

 

The Premier, yesterday, had a difficult time and a difficult subject to deal with. It should not have been 

difficult for him because he has repeated it so many times; so that makes it necessary for me to repeat 

some of the things you heard from me before, Mr. Speaker. He painted us a very rosy picture of some of 

the Crown Corporations. he has not only done that in the province of Saskatchewan, but he has even 

been out in British Columbia telling the people there that they should follow the example of this 

Government and make some money – easy money. he told them that there was only one Crown 

Corporation that had lost money. 

 

I am not going to spend very much time on this, but I am going to reply to some of the things that he 

said. This was at Powell River, June 1st, 1949: ―Only one of the Crown Corporations lost money. The 

total investment in that one Crown Corporation was less than one per cent of the total investment.‖ He 

told nothing about the other 99 per cent, or where Saskatchewan Industries Limited – the tannery and 

shoe factory of about 25 men, and the woolen mill are. I was asked why they wanted a woollen factory. 

Well, I think I should have said something else in there. I am afraid I might break the rules of the House, 

Mr. Speaker, so I am not going to say anything. 

 

Well, now, I am going to give you a few figures here. I am going to give you the figures of seven Crown 

Corporations that we have checked over in this House in the Crown Corporations Committee the last 

few years. They are the Brick Plant, Shoe Factor, Tannery, Woollen Mill, Government Airways, Box 

Factory, Fish Board – and I am going to add one to these, and make it eight. In the last two years the net 

operating loss on these seven Crown Corporations was $695,363; interest on the capital investment at 

four per cent which cost this Government $211,364. They did not even charge for auditing expenses for 

these Crown Corporations; they were paid out of the public Treasury. There you have another $60,472 

in probably two years. We can add the eighth Corporation which are the Bus Lines. for the two years 

there is a loss, including interest, which should have been paid but wasn‘t paid, of $84,730, making a 

total operating loss and interest not paid of $961,929. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, surely the hon. gentleman is not making that statement in good 

faith. That statement is not correct. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am making it, then you can sit down and figure it out. the capital invested in this 

Crown Corporation and the seven corporations, Mr. Speaker, is $2,642,052, in the Bus Line, $1,230,000, 

a total in the eight corporations of $3,772,052. That is the history of the eight Crown Corporations. And 

let me clarify myself; I am not starting anything. You can go to work and disprove my figures if you 

like. The only change in the auditor‘s statement is that, two years ago, it took almost $38,000 – odd out 

of the public treasury and gave it to the Fish Corporation as a grant, and this has been added to the other 

losses. It is a two-year statement, Mr. Speaker, and in the case of the Box Factory where there was a 

small 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

5 

profit last year, this was offset against it. It was deducted; and where there was a loss last year where 

there had been a profit before, the loss was deducted form the profit and was offset in that way. My 

figures are correct and they are there. We can do nothing, Mr. Speaker, for the Planning Board. It is the 

‗‖brains‘ trust‖ operating these money-making corporations. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They are not worth anything, anyway! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What a businessman would do when he gets a bunch of dead horses around him, 

supposed to make money for him and failing completely, he would put them on a commission basis, and 

if they could not make any money they would not get any salary and then they could not eat. Then, I am 

sure, they would make a little money out of these Government corporations. At least it would have the 

effect of having them earn their money by the sweat of their brown, anyway. That is what they should 

do. All this thing is a bunch of parasites on the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

that is all I want to say about the Crown Corporations, and I think that is plenty. for the time being 

according to the sort of a mild statement of the Premier, yesterday, I have no hope that the coming 

information through the auditor‘s statement which will be laid before the Committee in a few days will 

indicate any better conditions this year. I think, if any thing, perhaps they are worse. As a matter of fact, 

I would suggest to my friends over here, who are so wise to their thinking and who are so particularly 

critical of someone else. We have been criticized every day about the unemployment in Canada, we 

have unemployment in Saskatchewan. Sure we have. Why don‘t you operate your Salt plant? Why don‘t 

you open your brick plant which you went out and threw away $40,000 on last year? The Prime Minister 

himself admitted it to me, and he said, ―I guess that‘s just about it.‖ That was his expression when I told 

him. Now, why don‘t you do this? This Government started these things to give employment to our 

people. What‘s wrong with them speaking to these enthusiastic Socialists? and I know we have some 

genuine ones over there. I am not so sure about the Premier – he is hiding; but after yesterday I would 

not say he was a Socialist any more. For a fellow who talks the other way today from what he did 

yesterday, I would kind of believe that he has turned into a hard-bitten capitalist. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is some question about it. There has been some really serious attempt made in 

this province to try to convince the people of Saskatchewan that this Government is not Socialist. ―We 

are not Socialist because we have stuck to a programme of planned economy in a Co-operative 

commonwealth Federation.‖ So, Mr. Speaker, that did not say they didn‘t say so in 1944. You did not 

speak that way when you were sitting on this side of the House. Then it was pure unadulterated 

Socialism that you stood for. George Williams and the Quintuplet‘s sitting here four years from 1934 to 

1938, never made any bones about it, Mr. Speaker; they stood for purely the same Socialistic concepts, 

for state administration and economy such as they have in Russia; and that is the only Socialism in 

existence on the face of the earth today. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — What about Sweden? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If I did not know any more about Sweden, I would never open my mouth. They have 

been paddling that fairy story for 10 or 12 years now. We have not got as much Socialism in Sweden 

today as we 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

6 

have in the Dominion of Canada; and I know what I am talking about – you don‘t. When this 

government was elected in 1944, they immediately set out with grim determination – to do what? They 

set out to make the people of this province more susceptible to accept the real works, when they got 

ready to give it to them, of Socialism. I remember one of the first things, Mr. Speaker, that happened. 

The Provincial Treasurer over here I think will remember the seed grain story – ―Saskatchewan‘s Seed 

Grain Story‖; that was of many different colours and stripes – just like the Socialists: one is pink and 

other one is red and other is only 25 per cent and some of them on 2 1/2 per cent. That is what it was. 

And that story was distributed how? through the Postal services? Oh, no! Through the public schools, 

Mr. Speaker, through the public schools, I remember my leader, Mr. Patterson, sitting here in this seat 

and he got up and protested, and the Premier got up and said, ―Ha, ha! That‘s nothing to be excited 

about; you are going to get lots more of it. You will have something to get excited about before we get 

through with you.‖ Oh, yes, Mr. Speaker, what was the next step? Why this Government came out, went 

to Manitoba and hired that mountebank Communist Mr. Watson Thomson. He was a Communist, and 

every person in Canada knows he was a Communist. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Who was he working for when we hired him? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You answer the question because I did not hire him. You did. Then what, Mr. 

Speaker? We had a group of fellows here who collaborated with him. We had Watson Thomson, 

Edward ‗Red Nosey‘ Parker, we had a gentleman by the name of Wirick, R.D. Henderson, T.C. 

Caulfield and the editors of the ―Living Newspaper‖ Edward Parker, Bill Harding, Irene Leman, and 

Hilda Butler. Talk about storm-troopers! These were the storm-troopers to put the Socialists doctrine 

into the hearts and minds of the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. That‘s what they were, and 

they did it under the direction and chairmanship of the Minister of Education. They kept on and kept on, 

Mr. Speaker, and I have a whole file here. I could spend the whole afternoon on this, but I just want to 

recite what leads up to what I am going to say. They paid that mountebank Watson Thomson $6,355 for 

approximately 15 1/2 months; $1,520.00 travelling expenses and then when they kicked him out (which 

they had to do) they piled him up and put him on a train and sent him to Vancouver, and they paid the 

express on his contents. Yes, that‘s what they did. Well, Mr. Speaker, that shows what the foundation of 

Socialism was in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

There is lots more here that I could say, but I am not going to take up my time for that, but I have got 

something more to say. I am going to lead up to it, because I noticed that, yesterday, the Premier made a 

special effort, not for the first time yesterday – it was done in 1948, 1949 and 1950 because the blackout 

of Socialistic is too costly. Of course on the other side of the House, Mr. Speaker, this was promoted in 

1947 because there was an election in 1948. They have talked about everything else but Socialism and it 

they have tried to keep it on ever since. Now then, I remember the Premier asking a member on this side 

of the house if he had ever read the Russian Constitution, and the answer was ‗no‘. Well, if he had asked 

me, Mr. Speaker, I could have said ‗yes‘, because I have read it. How did I happen to get it? A 

gentleman in my town had it mailed to him and he handed it to me and said, ―Will you read this?‖ I said, 

―Sure, I would do it,‖ and I spent some time and read this thing. Well, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you that 

in the Russian Constitution, the words ―Socialism‖ and ―Socialist‖ appear 49 times but the word 

―Communist‖ appears only twice 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

7 

in that document, and then only with reference to the political party and not with reference to the 

economic organization of the country. 

 

I want to read you these two short paragraphs, and then afterward I will tell you where they come from: 

 

―The . . . State of today suppressing the working classes and protecting the pirate gains of bankers and 

stock exchange speculators, Is the arena for the most reckless private enrichment and the lowest 

political profiteering. it gives no thought to its people and provides no high moral bond of union. The 

power of money, the most brutal of all powers, holds us in chains. The industrialists, great and small, 

have but one end in view – profits. Our economic principles are to provide the necessities of life, not 

to secure the highest rate of interest but to secure the highest rate on capital. All large businesses must 

be nationalized. All banks must be nationalized. Deliberately an organic order will come from the 

advice of the best brains untainted by money power and big business.‖ 

 

Here is the next one: 

 

―We are undertaking to build a new society. Power has become more and more concentrated in the 

hands of a small irresponsible minority of financiers and industrialists. contradictions and conflicts are 

the essence of capitalism because an economy governed by the motive of profit is, by its very nature, 

in conflict with the needs of the people and in contradiction with the objectives of a progressive 

society. Private banks belonging to the era of private enterprise which is fast fading will be taken over 

and incorporated in the national banking system.‖ 

 

And, so, Mr. Speaker, this is two Socialists speaking, representing the two Socialistic systems: the first 

one comes from Hitler‘s Germany and the next one is taken out of the book ―Make This Your Canada.‖ 

 

Again the Premier, yesterday as on every occasion for the last two years picked up his chance to try to 

make the people believe that the only saviour from Communism is what he called ―Democratic 

Socialism.‖ There is no such thing as a Democratic Socialism in the world. There is not one who talks 

more about Democratic Socialism than Mr. Stalin, or Mr. Tito, Mr. Gromyko or Mr. Molotoff. Leaders 

of democracy in European countries had to flee their countries and come over here to seek asylum in the 

free nations of Canada and the United States. That is the situation. There were two men who did not get 

here: one was the great President Benes of Czechoslovakia, and the other the Prime Minister of that 

country, Mr. Masaryk. One of them died of a broken heard, and the other one jumped out through a 

window. 

 

I remember the indignation professed, last year, by the Premier of this Province, when one of my 

colleagues, sitting back in the seat here, made some reference to this matter. ―Why,‖ the Premier said, 

―there isn‘t a man in this House worthy to tie the shoelaces of a man like 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

8 

Mr. Masaryk.‖ Well, Mr. Speaker, I don‘t actually disagree with that statement. Nevertheless, what was 

the reason for the tragedy that these great men had to end their days in the manner in which they did? 

How did they come to do what they did? Mr. Speaker, there were only 34 communists sitting in the 

Czech. parliament in a House of approximately 220 members. how then was it possible for communists 

to take control? Because Socialists were Communists; they were real Socialists, they were not hybrids; 

they were real Socialists in disguise. Tat was the position, and I challenge any member in this House to 

prove to me and to this House that in every nation in Europe where the Communists have got final 

control without the Socialists so-called, milk-and-water Socialist shave come first and the Communists, 

the real Socialists, have come afterwards. The Socialists have preceded. 

 

In spite of what the Premier of this province says – I was just going to mention china – who was the real 

Socialist in China? I am going to tell you my friend now, if he checks back on Chinese history he will 

find who was the real Socialist in China, Dr. Sun-Yat-Sen. Where is Mrs. Sun-Yat-Sen today: one of the 

spearheads in the Communists movement in China today; that‘ where she is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is socialism. I know these men don‘t like to listen to me, they would wish that I was 

someplace else. Why all the mealy-mouthed Socialists in the whole of Saskatchewan and Canada and 

every other country have all got their own definitions of this creed. I have one definition here taken from 

the 14th edition of Encyclopedia Britannica and it says this: ―The Communist Manifesto drafted by Karl 

Marx and Friedrich Engels, and issued in the year of revolution, 1848, is generally regarded as the 

starting point of Britain‘s modern Socialism. The distinction between Socialism as represented by the 

various Socialist and labour parties of Europe and the New World, and communism, represented by the 

Russians and the minority groups in other countries, is one of tactics and strategy rather than of 

objective. Communism is, in other words, Socialism pursued by revolutionary means and making its 

revolutionary method a canon of hate. Communists, like other Socialists, believe in the collective 

control and ownership of the vital means of production and seek to achieve, through state action, the co-

ordinated control of economic forces of society.‖ 

 

Well, isn‘t that clear enough? Mr. Cole, what doe she say – G.D.H. Cole, professor Cole, who until very 

recently, was the chairman of the British Labour Party in Great Britain, and he said this in an article he 

wrote under the title ‗A Socialized Civilization‘. These are his words: 

 

―The characteristics of centralized planning and control which are common to the Nazi-German and to 

the Soviet Union, they are not accidents, they are the direct outcome of certain technical conditions 

and are indispensable in some measure to any twentieth century society that is to rest on a solid 

foundation. They have to be accepted a parts of the order of our daily work, and upon them we ought 

to build as best we can being the possessors of great scientific powers which we have not yet learned 

the art of controlling and subordinating to the nobler human desires. Even man as he is, even these 

forces as they are, it is inevitable that any society capable of standing 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

9 

the test of the struggle for existence under 20th century conditions shall have built into its very 

foundation the complement of centralized planning and control as exemplified both in Nazi-Germany 

and the Soviet Union.‖ 

 

Now that is G.D.H. Cole‘s definition of Socialism. I have another definition of Socialism here, Mr. 

Speaker, which I will read to you. it is very short and right to the point. Oscar Wilde said: ―Socialism is 

a system which can only be put into operation in heaven where they don‘t need it, or in hell where they 

have it already.‖ That definition might be a little more easy to pick up. 

 

Premier Douglas of this province – I respect his position as much as anyone – told you in the Forum in 

Regina here, not so long ago, that capitalism and free enterprise produced riches and luxury for the few 

and misery, dearth and privation for the many. Two months ago Mr. Mosher, the great labour leader in 

Canada, spoke at, I think, Calgary, and he said this; that Canada today was the best place in the world to 

live and work, but he said it could be made a still better place. I agree absolutely with Mr. Mosher. 

Under capitalism and free enterprise we‘ll prove this, Mr. Speaker, that it will be made a better place, 

just as soon as we eliminate this old moth-eaten creed of Socialism which is trying to entrench itself in 

this western land. 

 

These fellows don‘t like to be called Socialists, that is why I use it all the time; but we have a memory 

and it used to be said that the good that people do is interred with their bones and the evil they do lives 

after them. We had a group of people sitting on this side of the House when we were in power, and one 

of them was Mr. Valleau, with all due respect to Mr. Valleau – a fine gentleman and I have nothing to 

say against him personally, whatever; but he made a speech when Carl Stewart, from Yorkton, was 

sitting here and he asked him to elucidate a little longer the platform of the C.C.F. Party, and here was 

the answer he gave to Mr. Stewart on March 2, 1944. He said: 

 

―We propose to take over the larger corporations, the banks, the larger insurance companies, the 

saving from profits realized by the larger corporations would under Government ownership go into the 

public treasury, and would not be withdrawn from circulation. The profits could be used to improve 

the position of the people and provide them with a better life,‖ said Mr. Valleau. ― Life insurance 

policies will be continued in force after the C.C.F. Government takes over the insurance companies. 

After all, $700,000,000 in life insurance was lost during the depression, and I was one that lost, too; I 

lost one policy.‖ 

 

Well now that is clear enough – I am not arguing the point, I am only putting this on record. 

 

It is only one year ago, last summer, Mr. Speaker, since they had a Convention in Winnipeg, and that 

was a National Convention, and here is some of their platform. In some respects their convention has 

gone even farther than the Regina Manifesto. This socialist document called to 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

10 

make a public ownership of banking, insurance, transportation, communication and electric power; a 

second step – there was to be socialization of mining, the pulp and paper industry, and the distribution of 

milk, bread, coal and gasoline. This programme adds to the list of those things to be socialized 

immediately the primary iron and steel industries, meat packing plants, farm implement factories and 

fertilizer factories. What can be left, Mr. Speaker? They have stood on the floor of this House on several 

occasions and declared that hits Socialistic Government platform is the same as the Labour Party‘s in 

Great Britain. Mr. Strachey said, last summer, that the socialization of land in Great Britain has by no 

means been abandoned; he said the only reason that it had not been put into effect was the fact that it 

would mean disruption of production. But it is coming. Everyone knows that the socialization of farm 

land in this province was not abandoned by this province but it kept running up against the constitution, 

but just wait until this group with this political philosophy preached form the other side of the House 

ever gain control of the Dominion House, then, Mr. Speaker, there will be no hold-back from putting the 

platform as a whole into concrete operation. 

 

These are the things that I want to remind this House of. After putting this Government and this party on 

record so clearly and so concisely, there is no getting out of this thing. We all know that putting into full 

effect the Socialistic programme is not possible in the province of Saskatchewan; but there is no doubt, 

and it has never been disowned by this party in the National sphere that the socialization of land is one 

of the thing sin that programme that can not be put into effect until control of the National Government 

has been taken. I have said on numerous occasions in this House, Mr. Speaker, that there is no difference 

between Socialism and Communism when it is put fully into effect. Well now, why do I say that? 

Because I know – I take the word of these men who have pioneered this Socialistic movement in the 

province of Saskatchewan an din other countries of the world and I quoted to you that Mr. G.D.H. Cole 

says so, and Sir Stafford Cripps says so, Joe Stalin says so, John Strachey says so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on April 23, 1934, Mr. Woodsworth was speaking in Winnipeg and he said this: ―The 

doctrines of the C.C.F. are the doctrines of the United Front towards Communists, and all that keeps us 

apart is a difference of tactics and suspicion of insincerity.‖ That is Mr. G.S. Woodworth – he was not a 

hybrid; he was a Socialist and he said he was. Now then, what did he say here? Some people shouted, 

―This is Socialism‖; ―This is Bolshevism‖; and he said, ―Maybe it is. What about it?‖ That was reported 

in the ‗Border city Star‘, December 12,1942. Mr. M.J. Coldwell, Leader of the National Party says this: 

―Profits and ownership have to go,‖ reported in the Leader-Post, December 23,1942. Mr. Wince, 

M.L.A., said: ―The C.C.F. must be broad enough o include extreme leftists and extreme rightists. This 

condition of the class struggle is the basis of our economic system‖ – Toronto Evening Telegram. I am 

not going to quote the Minister of Reconstruction, because he is not in his seat. Mr. Nollet, the Minister 

of Agriculture in this province, when he spoke to the Regina ‗Forum‘ here one Sunday, said this: ―Price 

control is not the whole solution, but it would give us a breathing-spell on the road to Socialist or 

planned economy.‖ Is he a Socialist? If you had been anyone that came into this House in 1946 or 1947 

when some of these debates something like this were going on, Mr. Speaker, there was a group of 

Socialists here, and they were so pro-Russian that they could not get any work, and if anybody doubts 

that, I am going to read the pages out of Hansard for them, for that particular Session, to prove my 

statement. 

 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

11 

The ―C.C.F. News‖ on November 11, 1943 had this to say: ―The approval of the church‘s conditions 

provided the C.C.F. respects private property is not revolutionary. Well, if the C.C.F. accepts these 

conditions it may be adopted into the church, but the C.C.F. will then be dead.‖ That is the ‗C.C.F. 

News‘. If they adopt the principle of respecting private property then they will be dead. Sure, the will be 

dead, because that is the spearhead that they follow. I can still go a little further. Sir Stafford Cripps, 

speaking in the House, in London, February, 1946, made this statement: ―No country in the world, so far 

as I know, has thus succeeded n carrying through a planned economy without compulsion of labour. Our 

objective is to carry through a planned economy without compulsion of labour.‖ Since that time, Mr. 

Speaker, that same Sir Stafford Cripps put through a Bill, in the House of Commons in London, the 

Labour Government, that conscripted under that bill 675,000 persons in Great Britain. That is Socialist 

legislation for you. 

 

This paper I am quoting from there, Mr. Speaker, is the ―Scottish Co-operator‖, October 23rd, 1948 and 

this article that is written by Mr. Frank Bestwick, Labour M.P. in the British Parliament at the present 

time. He said this – it was at a social gathering and he mentioned that Field Marshall Viscount 

Montgomery was holding for the other day about the menace of Communism and someone said, ―If we 

were asked, what is Communism, what should we reply, Mr. Field Marshall?‖ The Field Marshall at 

once, from the fund of his own knowledge, enlightened the enquirer as follows: ―When I was in 

Moscow I saw Stalin, whom I know very, very well, and we had some interesting discussions. I said to 

him, ‗Mr. Stalin, what is the difference between Communism and Socialism?‖ Stalin replied that in a 

Socialistic stated everyone worked for the State and was paid according to what each had earned. Under 

communism we also work for the State but we are paid according to need. So I said to Mr. Stalin, the 

Field Marshall went on, have you got Communism in Russia? ―Oh, no!‖ he said, ‗We can‘t afford it. 

There is only one country in the world which can afford Communism and that is in the United States of 

America, because the productive capacity of United States is sufficient to supply everything that every 

human being in that country needs.‖ Now that is all we have on Mr. Stalin. 

 

Mr. Strachey was in Toronto in 1946 (this is dated, June 27, and I think some of his leading lights of 

Socialism from the province of Saskatchewan were down there to meet him; and, you know, Mr. 

Strachey was an out-and-out Communist at one time and he wrote a book just like my friend George 

Williams. He was asked questions about Socialism and he said he was not quite as strong about 

Socialism as he used to be, but he was finally asked whether he thought the Russian Government was a 

real Communist Government. Mr. Strachey said, ―The Russian Government, is not a Communist 

Government. I have no doubt that the Russians would say so themselves. It was the government that has 

not progressed to Communism that was practising Socialism.‖ 

 

And again, there was my friend George Williams – and he was a friend of mine and I respect him: he 

was not a hybrid, he was a genuine Socialist. He also wrote a book in which he said: ―The Communist 

Party is the spiritual head of the Socialist movement. Communism can best be described as the new 

religion of Socialism.‖ And here is another quotation: ―One cannot join the Communist Party unless one 

renounces all ethical religion, and all Russian officials must be Socialists!‖ That was said by Mr. George 

Williams. What about your friend Carlyle King. Certainly you won‘t repudiate him; you won‘t 

backtrack on him will you? Well, I am going 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

12 

to read you what he says. In this publication, printed in Regina here, ―Saskatchewan Commonwealth‖, 

November 1, under the heading ―Communism‖ he makes this statement: ―When the Bolshevik group 

seized power in Russia in 1917, Lenin suggested calling the party Communist, and this suggestion was 

adopted. This calls to mind the chief difference between the Communist Party and the democratic 

Socialist parties of Europe and America. It is a matter of the best method to be used in achieving 

Socialism . . . the objective of the Communist is the same as that of the Socialist.‖ And just so someone 

cannot accuse me of cutting this sentence short, Mr. Speaker, I am going to read the rest of it. He said, 

―We believe in the raising of the standard of living of all of the people through the community 

ownership of the means of mass production and the planned development of the community‘s economic 

life.‖ You are not repudiating Carlyle King are you? 

 

Now then, Mr. McLeod, a member of the Legislature in the province of Ontario, he came in here to help 

the Communists in Regina to help the C.C.F. in Regina; now this was done in a round-about way but 

that is what happened. In the last election of June, 1948. He said this: ―There was no Communism even 

in the Soviet Union – that was a Socialist country. Socialism was the first stage of communism, and 

Communism was the last stage of Socialism.‖ That is a complete assertion. Mr. Lloyd George said this: 

―We cannot trust the battle of freedom to Socialists. Socialism had no interest in liberty. Socialism 

means the community in bonds. if you establish a Socialist community it means the most 

comprehensive, universal and pervasive a tyranny as this country has ever seen.‖ That is Mr. Lloyd 

George. 

 

Now, I will come closer to home and certainly no Socialist, not even a hybrid Socialist, will repudiate 

this gentleman. Mr. Douglas went to New York. I think that he went there to see his friend Dr. . . . , who 

is the Director of the League for Industrial Democracy in the United States – a Communist organization 

who was investigated by the Un-American Committee of the Senate several times. He was here to a 

Convention in 1946 or 1947. Mr. Douglas, the Premier of this province, went down there to New York, 

and conferred with this man, and the first thing he did was to go into the ―Town Hall‖ – which is the 

same as your ―Forum‖ here in Regina – and he made a speech, and he just took the hide off all the 

capitalists in New York city. But anyhow, he made another speech of which I have two reports here – 

one from eastern Canada and one from the province of Saskatchewan – and here is what he said: ―There 

were only two great ideologies in existence in the world today; the one was Communism which offers 

security in return for freedom; and capitalism, which says we can retain our Freedom but we must 

forego all freedom in regard to social security.‖ He said there was only two. How true! I hope he will 

say this to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. I hope he will be just as frank with the people of 

this province as he was with the Americans in New York City. He said, ―Two great ideologies exist in 

the world today.‖ I think this establishes once and for all, Mr. Speaker, that when this group across the 

country talk about the Co-operative Commonwealth, and when they talk about Socialistic Democracy, 

and Socialism, they are just trying to hide the true nature of the ideology and the philosophy they are 

trying to put into operation. There is no doubt about that. I think they should tell the people in 

Saskatchewan who trusted them, took them for being genuine, not hybrid, Socialists, and dissatisfied 

today, because they have retreated, they are back-tracking; and the people who never were Socialists but 

were only social reformers, they have betrayed them because they have gone far beyond where they 

expected them to go. As a matter of fact what we have seen in Saskatchewan will prove how far they go. 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

13 

They did not tell you that they were going to put in the Regina Manifesto in regard to the socialization of 

land. But, Mr. Speaker, they come at it in another, round-about way. So far as this Government can 

devise, through this Government today you have socialization of land. At any rate no person can go out 

and buy a piece of land from this Government, pay cash and get a title. If that has been changed, it has 

been changed lately, and I would be extremely glad to find that it has been changed; but it is a fact, and 

has been a fact, so far as I know, up to this time. 

 

I want to say a few words, Mr. Speaker, in regard to the Education Tax. I know the Provincial Treasurer 

will like this because, after all, I know he sheds tears every time he has to collect a dollar of that tax, 

because he does not want it; and I know the members on the other side of the House think of this as a 

―stinking‖ tax. But the Premier of the province made another speech in which he said this: ―Taxes: a 

main tax when we took office was the sales tax. We said to the people before election – we cannot take 

it off immediately but will do so immediately we can develop other resources of revenue. We now have 

removed 60 per cent of the tax. We took the tax off all meals and all food, off everything sold in grocery 

stores, drugs, school-books and, today, there is only 40 per cent of the tax left. We cannot take it off 

because we need the revenue, but the main tax has been reduced on that basis.‖ Well, Mr. Speaker, I 

wish I could find some way that I could apply his method of arithmetic to some of my business on the 

farm and we could beat the Income Tax Department all the way. Two years ago we were told, first by 

the Provincial Treasurer (I never heard it said by the Premier) that the reduction in this tax was 40 per 

cent. They have added 10 per cent each year for the last two years and now they have 60 per cent. They 

took off 60 per cent now there is only 40 per cent left. Well, the peculiar thing about that, Mr. Speaker, 

is that 40 per cent brings in more than twice as much money as the 100 per cent did a few years ago. It 

might be interesting to know that perhaps there was not 60 per cent., or even 40 per cent of the tax 

reduced by any action of this Government because, in the original Act, there were many exemptions – 

bread, flour and milk including buttermilk, cream, butter, eggs, sugar, fresh meat, fresh poultry, fresh 

fish, water, coal, wood, newspapers, gasoline taxable under the gasoline Act, farm implements and cars, 

farm machinery, grain and mill feed, binder twine, fishing nets, cars, farm machinery, grain and mill 

feed, binder twine, fishing nets, agricultural products (including livestock) produced within the province 

when sold by the producer, railway rolling stock, ties and steel rails. Well now, that is clear enough so 

the articles on which the education tax was removed, Mr. Speaker, after all are small articles and what is 

the biggest loss of removing taxes off the meals in restaurants and hotels. I have no objection to that, but 

certainly when it comes to pickles, spices, etc. that purchase at anytime is not as great as we would be 

lead to believe. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, is he denying the statement which was prepared by the officials of the 

Government in the Taxation Branch, by men who were employed by the Government for the last ten or 

fifteen years? Is he denying the figures which they gave us? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, just as soon as the hon. gentleman sees fit to let me 

have these figures I shall give him my answer to that question. The tax has been used for purposes for 

which it was never intended under the Act. On every platform in the land, on the radio, in this House, on 

the street corners and everywhere else, we were told of the benefits gains by this tax. When the Royal 

Commission was appointed to investigate the tax here is what Mr. Justice Martin has to say: ―The 

Commission desires to state most explicitly that 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

14 

every dollar derived form the Education Tax since its enactment, has been and is being expended for 

educational purposes in accordance with the provisions of The Education Act, Chapter 9 of the Statutes 

of 1937.‖ this was the condition which existed under the Liberal interpretation of the Education Tax, and 

I think you will all agree that Mr. Justice Martin is a man the people in the province of Saskatchewan 

will believe, and will be willing to accept that as being a fact, not just can‘t. However, at the present 

time, that is not so, to my mind, because millions of dollars have been taken out of this fund for the 

purpose of constructing buildings at the University of Saskatchewan; that money should be going to pay 

more salaries to the teachers and more grants to our schools in the province of Saskatchewan. That is 

what it was there for, and there is not a man on either side of the House who was not firmly convinced at 

the time the discussion took place in this House, on second reading and in Committee, that that was the 

true intent of The Education Tax Act when it was passed by us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Why did you not abolish it then? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You are the one to do that. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am not through with you yet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Good! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Now I am going to read you a letter from one of the people of my constituency. An 

implement man handed me this letter, dated October 3, 1949: 

 

―Dear Sir: 

 

We have been advised by the Taxation Branch of Saskatchewan Treasury Department that fertilizer 

attachments cannot be granted exemptions from the two per cent Education Tax during the present 

year 1949. This matter is to be given further consideration early in the new year. It will, therefore, be 

necessary to collect Education Tax on all attachments until such time as you are advised that they are 

exempt from this tax.‖ 

 

I wonder if fertilizer attachments on a drill or on a one-way are not a farm implement, Mr. Speaker. I 

just wonder. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Ask the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — It is not under your Act. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It‘s the Treasury Department, your Department. That‘s the way the Treasury 

Department operates. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — It is not the Treasury Department. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I would like to ask something of the Minister of Agriculture, now that he is engaged 

in revamping and renovating, and trying to elevate the standard of living for the people of 

Saskatchewan, and has hired all kinds of men to help him – agriculture representatives. 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

15 

He is carrying on a small P.F.R.A. in the province, and I hope he will make a success of it. From what I 

have seen up in Western Saskatchewan, North-Western Saskatchewan and even in my constituency, 

three is a great need for something to be done. I am not so happy as my friend from Willowbunch to be 

able to say that I have had $32,000, spent in my seat. I have not got 32 cents in my seat. When they 

handed to the hospital grant they gave me $300 a bed for the Imperial hospital and they went up about 

22 miles away to Watrous, and gave them $1,000; that is the fairness and the policy of the C.C.F. 

Government. Well now, let me get back to what I was talking about. The Minister of Agriculture is now 

trying to elevate the province of Saskatchewan‘s agriculture up to a higher level of prosperity and I thin, 

if he had about fifty or a hundred million dollars, he could put all the seats in the province on the 

Government payroll and get something done, and he would have a little more left than what it takes to 

start with: he would have some workmen. I am not criticizing but I would like to ask him does he know 

whether the grass seed, when he is contemplating the regressing of land, is under the same ruling as the 

fertilizer attachments in regard to the Education Tax? I would like to know, Mr. Speaker. I think they 

must be, because the same Treasury Department looks after it; they have plenty of time to figure these 

things out and if they have not got time they can hire another fellow. That is the position we are in, Mr. 

Speaker, but after all, before the lection in 1944, there was not a single voter in this province of 

Saskatchewan who did not believe that it was the policy, and part of the platform, of this Government to 

take that tax off. We did not promise that. We had to put it on, and we never said we would take it off. 

They said that. I will tell you what the Provincial Treasurer said in his first Budget Speech in 1945-46: 

 

―We hope, however, before another Session to bring in certain recommendations which will remove 

the nuisance feature of the tax. We also hope to eliminate the more obviously regressive features of the 

tax through its progressive removal from all commodities that are recognized as necessities. At the 

same time we hope to convert the tax into what would be in effect a selective excise tax on luxuries, 

semi-luxuries and non-essentials.‖ 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, they have had six years now with an excise tax on luxuries and non-essentials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And you‘ll hear some more of this. You have had six years now with an excise tax 

on luxuries and non-essentials: 

 

―Such a programme would involve the ultimate removal of this tax form foodstuffs, clothing, 

hardware, lumber and materials of production.‖ 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask him in all seriousness, what has been done? 

The member for Swift current had the courage to speak up against this tax when he called it the ‗stinking 

tax‘, and I think maybe he was right, after all the promises that we would not have to pay it/ 

 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

16 

What has this government done for these poor farmers, Mr. Speaker. They were crying over the ―poor 

farmers‖ in this province and they were going to do so much for them. They have been crying over the 

housing situation and the cost of building and how one poor man in this day and age could not even start 

to build a house for himself on his farm, or even repair his buildings and all that sort of thing. What have 

they done? Have they taken off the Education Tax on building materials? Have they taken off the 

Education Tax on fertilizer on all gas for farm purposes? No, Mr. Speaker, have they taken it off on 

heating oil – yet there is no tax on coal? If they were being fair they would take it off some of these 

things for the benefit of the farmer. Have they taken it off weed killer chemicals, grasshopper poison 

bait, chemical spray? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Sure you should keep up. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If it has been removed, good for you and I commend you for it. 

 

In the House of Commons, a little over a year ago, Mr. Coldwell was up and he criticized the Dominion 

Government because they still retained the sales tax on building materials. I suppose he thought that 

would go over the air and appear in the newspapers and someone would say that and they would not 

make any statement to the contrary. Well, as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the Dominion Government 

took the sales tax off all building materials and all farm machinery and implements of production two 

years ago, almost 2½ years ago now. Half of this province, Mr. Speaker, have not had a crop, some of 

them not for five or six years. If there was need to do something the least this Government could do that 

is in their power to do, is to remove a burden which makes a profit which skyrocketed to about six and a 

half million dollars, last year. There is no credit coming to this Government for doing anything for the 

farmers. They have shown conclusively, not just now but for the past five years, that they have no 

concern for the farmers, and their will has been directed towards some other things which are of no 

benefit to the farming population of this province. The people of Ontario, which is always considered to 

be a farming province, saw that and understood that before the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

finally got the hang of the matter and decided for themselves: that that is one thing that is inherent in 

their policy, that the farm population of the province of Saskatchewan can look forward to no assistance, 

no consideration for this C.C.F. Government. 

 

I want to say a few words in regard to education; there are just a few things here that I want to get my 

mind clear on and the only way it can be cleared up is from the other side of the House. As a member of 

the House, Mr. Speaker, I think I am entitled to the facts as they are, not greeting one statement from 

one man and one statement from another man. On February 5, 1947, replying to a question form Mr. 

Hooge, Education Minister W.S. Lloyd listed the names of proposed larger school units where 

applications had been received asking for a vote for the establishment of a larger unit. These were 

Willowbunch, Moosomin, Regina, Melville, Canora, Wakaw, Yorkton, Tisdale, Indian Head, Gull Lake, 

Watrous, Elrose, Rosetown, Rosthern and Lloydminster. Now then, on February 19, 1946, Mr. Hooge 

asked the following question, answered by Mr. Lloyd. (Now this is from the Votes and Proceedings). 

 

―1. From what proposed Larger School Units were petitions received asking for a vote to be taken 

before the Unit was established? 

 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

17 

answer: Petitions for a vote were received from one or more school districts in every one of the sixty 

proposed Larger School Units, but in only fifteen proposed Units did the number of petitions approach 

or reach a majority as required by Section 3 of the Act.‖ 

 

I want the gentlemen whom I am about to quote now, also to admit that he is wrong or made a mistake. 

This is from a speech made on Wednesday, December 17, 1947, by Premier T.C. Douglas in a radio 

broadcast. He said that not a single larger Unit had been set up without a vote of the rate-payers in 

question. Now I want to go back to the dates of these things. Here you have February 5th, 1947, and 

February 19th, 1946, and, 1947, a quotation from the Votes and Proceedings February 19/46, the Regina 

‗Leader-Post‘, February 5, 1947, and here you have the broadcast on Wednesday, December 17, 1947, at 

the end of the year. Now then, is the Minister of Education not giving the correct information, or is the 

Minister who is holding the responsible position of Premier of this Province making a mistake, or is it 

something else which is not allowed to be in this House? I want to know, and as a member of this House 

I have a right to know and the people have a right to know. It is time this ‗double talk‘ was stopped, Mr. 

Speaker; you bet it is time it stopped. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Larger School Unit Act was on the statute books when this Government came in. And 

your platform which was in every place in the land was this: ―We will foster and promote . . . 

implementation of the permissive legislation now on the Statute Books‖, and nothing else. What did you 

do? When you came in you just chucked that platform into the waste-paper basket like you did with 

everything else, and you come in here with this dictatorial measure that said, ―You shall do so.‖ We 

protested. My Leader sitting here was called a scoundrel by the Minister of Education, and I was 

included in the same definition. What were we protesting for? We were protesting because there was not 

provision in that law that would give the people who were interested in the future of education of this 

province an opportunity to express themselves on the subject. That is what we were fighting for; that is 

what we are fighting for today. Because we were protesting it, which was all the little group over here 

could do, the Minister came with an amendment to the Act, and he finally grudgingly consented that 

there could be a vote taken with the consent of the Minister. That was the 1945 Special Session Act. It 

was later on in the regime of this Government that provision was made for a vote by petition by the 

people in the district. Now then, how many school districts, where the Unit is provided have been voting 

and have been permitted to vote? That is, what we have been asking. We have one answer from the 

Minister, and we have a statement over the air that is entirely different and of contradictory nature from 

that of the Premier of this Province. Now, these are the sort of things we want to know. These are the 

things that the people of this province want to know. They finally become convinced that there is no 

faith in the pronouncements of this Government when one man says one thing and another says another. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, when I get up on the floor of the House to speak, all the Ministers sitting 

over there whom I like to talk to are hiding out on us. They don‘t want to listen to me for some reason or 

other. It is a remarkable thing the only one that did not do so is the Minister of Education. He and I can 

face each other across the floor of the 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

18 

House and not blink an eye; neither him nor me. And I admire him for it, because he can talk straight. 

These other fellows sneak out. 

 

Now then, I want to speak a little bit about the mineral rights . . . I will get after the Minister of 

Agriculture on some of the Resolutions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I will get after you, too. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I haven‘t any more time to spend on you, this afternoon. Let us talk a little about the 

mineral rights. The Minister of Natural Resources came into the House here bringing in an Act – The 

Mineral Rights Act – which provided for a five-cent tax on every acre of land in which the mineral 

rights belong to the registered owner. He was frank about it; he was honest about it, and he said there 

was another way we could do it – we could confiscate these rights, but that it was better to do it this way 

in the long run. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, this question of mineral taxation is before the courts and it is 

out of order to debate it at the present time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the point of order is well taken. 

 

Mr. Culliton: — On a point of Order: It is out of order to debate the legislation as law, but it is not out 

of order to debate what the Minister said on the introduction of the legislation. The member has a perfect 

right to refer to the statements made by the Minister when this legislation was introduced providing he is 

not dealing with the legislation itself or the constitutionality of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — My ruling is that the matter is sub judice – before the courts. 

 

Mr. Culliton: — Then, Mr. Speaker, I must appeal from your ruling. (The question: Is the ruling of the 

Chair sustained? – having been put, Mr. Speaker‘s ruling was sustained on division by 26 votes against 

19.) 

 

Mr. Danielson: — (continuing) I should have thought of this before; I could have got some of the 

Ministers into their seats so that they could have heard some of the things I said about them. 

 

I want to talk about a pipe-line now; that is not before the Courts, is it? Yes, I know it was before the 

C.C.F. congregation in the Regina Dominion election last summer, when they told the people of 

Saskatchewan, and the co-operative-minded people of the province, that they were going to be shut off 

from that pipe-line with their gas and their product and any of the other things they had in Alberta. The 

gentleman who made that statement is a C.C.F. – is a Socialist. He sat in the House of Commons when 

that bill was before that House, then he comes out here and tries to tell the people of the province that 

such a thing is going to happen to them which he knows could not happen, and would not happen. I wish 

the hon. Minister, six years ago, had told the farmers rightly and clearly what was going to happen to 

their mineral rights. That is all I have to say about that. 

 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

19 

Now then, we will talk about Old Age Pensions for a minute. I cannot spend very long on it, because I 

do not think it is necessary. The Dominion Government is paying $30 out of the $40 and this 

Government is paying $10 a month. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, they are paying exactly the same 

now as the Government of Saskatchewan did before 1926 and 1931 when the pension was $20 a month 

and the Liberal Government of this province paid half of it and the Federal Government paid half; so 

you have nothing to brag about, nothing to brag about at all! But this Government has the luck of the 

world. After 1947, Mr. Speaker, the Dominion Government increased the old age pension, taking effect 

from May 1st. That was $647,000, of old age pensioners money coming from the Dominion 

Government that went into the coffers of this Government in the province of Saskatchewan and held 

away from the pensioners of that day. 

 

If I wanted to I could take up your time by doing some reading. Surely, Mr. Speaker, I am entitled to do 

it because the Premier himself read a book here, yesterday. The Attorney General, two years ago, read a 

whole radio speech that he had delivered three months before and half of the one he was going to deliver 

the next week. So you should not be too hard on me. 

 

This, now, Mr. Speaker, is from the Minister of Ottawa, Mr. Martin. I am going to read it to you. 

December 30, 1947: 

 

―My attention has been drawn to recent newspaper reports in the daily press in Saskatchewan quoting 

Premier Douglas as having made a statement in respect to old age pensions paid by the Provincial 

Liberal regime in that province, and which are wholly incorrect. The correct facts and figures are 

available to Premier Douglas either by reference to the periodical reports on old age pensions which 

appear in the Labour Gazette or by reference to his own departmental officials. If Premier Douglas 

were to take the trouble to check the accuracy of his statements with either of these two sources, he 

would find that he is making allegations which are not in accordance with the facts. I can only 

conclude from his failure to do so, and from his constant repetition of incorrect figures, he is not 

interested to have the correct information placed before the public and I am, therefore, asking you, if 

you would be good enough to take whatever steps you may consider to be necessary to acquaint the 

public of Saskatchewan with the true facts of the situation. 

 

Here are the facts. Prior to the advent of the C.C.F. Government in Saskatchewan in June, 1944, the 

Liberal Government was paying an average old age pension amounting to $23.08 per month, very 

nearly the maximum payable at this time under the Old Age Pension Act and the Federal wartime 

Order-in-Council which fixed the maximum pension payable in any one case to $25 month. The 

Federal Order-in-Council referred to which was passed on August 10, 1943, and which raised the 

basic pension from $20 to $25 a month, made it possible for the Saskatchewan Government to replace 

the $1.25 provincial supplemental allowance, which they had been paying at their own expense since 

July 1, 1943, with the larger supplemental pension 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

20 

of $5.00 per month paid jointly at the expense of the Federal and Provincial Governments. This $5.00 

supplemental pension went into effect on September 1, 1943, and took the place of provincial 

supplemental allowance of $1.25 monthly in all cases. Then in those cases, however, which for some 

reason did not qualify for the larger Dominion-Provincial supplemental pension the Liberal 

Government in Saskatchewan continued the provincial supplemental. 

 

Yet, with these facts available to him, Premier Douglas makes the statement that the time the party 

came into power in Saskatchewan, average old age pension payments amounted to only $17.25. What 

did the C.C.F. do, when they came into office? For the quarter ending June 30th, 1945, after the C.C.F. 

had been in power for a whole year in Saskatchewan, the figures show that the average old age 

pension had risen slightly to $24.63 per month, which was a raise of $1.55 monthly, as compared with 

the quarter ending June 30, 1944, the last quarter for which the Liberal Government was in power. But 

even this slight increase was more apparent than real, because it was due to the fact that it was just on 

the eve of the C.C.F. Government coming into power that the Federal Government passed an Order-in-

Council increasing income ceiling for old age pensioners from $3.65 to $4.25 annually. This made it 

possible for the C.C.F. Government on coming into power to absorb the Provincial supplemental 

$1.25, which the Liberal Government would have still been continuing in some cases into the amount 

of the pension itself. This made it jointly shareable by the Dominion and Provinces. The higher 

income ceiling authorized by this second Federal Order-in-Council accounts for the slight increase in 

the average pension paid during the first year of the C.C.F. Government in office. 

 

The only effect of this transfer from supplementary allowance to the slightly higher old age pension 

payment was to transfer 75 per cent of the cost involved to the Federal Government instead of paying 

it entirely out to Provincial funds. For almost a year after the C.C.F. Government came into power, it 

is fair to say that the position of the old age pensioners in Saskatchewan remained essentially 

unchanged except for the slight advantage occurring to them as result of the Federal Order-in-Council. 

In May 1945 the C.C.F. Government introduced a Provincial supplemental allowance of $3.00 per 

month, straight from its own funds. It also introduced medical services for old age pensioners in the 

early part of the same year. It as not the first Government in Canada, however, to have implemented 

such a programme for old age pensioners, because both British Columbia and Ontario had a medical 

service scheme for old age pensioners in effect since 1942. With these adjustments made in 1945, the 

situation with respect to old age pensions in Saskatchewan then remained the same until April, 1947, 

by which time the average old age pension paid in Saskatchewan was actually three cents less than it 

was two years earlier, 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

21 

when the $3.00 per month Provincial supplemental was originally introduced. 

 

In April, 1947, (and this is what I want to bring to the attention of the House) the Government had 

been advised of the Federal Government‘s intentions with respect to amendments to the Old Age 

Pension Act did increase its provincial supplemental allowance from $3.00 to $5.00 per month. This 

meant that the Provincial contribution for both pension and supplemental together was raised from 

$9.25 per month per pensioner to $11.25. Prior to the C.C.F. Government and under the previous 

Liberal Government, it had been $6.25 per month for pensioners. All these figures take account of the 

fact that the Province received re-imbursement from the Federal Government of 75 per cent of the 

amount paid out in the Old Age Pension Act itself, but theirs is the entire cost of any Provincial 

supplement to the old age pensions in any case. When the amendment to the Old Age Pension Act was 

passed by the Federal Government on July 1, of this year, it provided for an old age pension of $30 per 

month, of which the Dominion would contribute $22.50 a month and left the Province free to pay as 

much as they wished to do. 

 

Had the C.C.F. Government under this legislation done no more than it had se tout to do in April of 

this year, it would have maintained its contribution of $11.25 monthly and this added to the Federal 

contribution of $22.50 per month, the combined pension would have amounted to $33.75 per 

pensioner per month. The C.C.F. Government did not maintain its contribution, however. As soon as 

the Federal Act was proclaimed in September of this year, and the agreement signed between the 

Province of Saskatchewan and the Dominion Government, the C.C.F. Government promptly reduced 

its contribution from $11.25 per month to $7.50 per month per pensioner, thus depriving the old age 

pensioners in Saskatchewan of the entire increase that the Federal Government had made possible 

through its amending legislation. 

 

The effect of this latest move on the part of the C.C.F. Government in Saskatchewan is that the 

Government pocketed the entire increase of $3.75 per month per pensioner, which the Federal 

Government had intended as a means of improving the position of the pensioners themselves. The 

Saskatchewan Government claims that, by this action, it will save an estimated $675,000 per year at 

the expense of the old age pensioners of that province. Not only that, but the C.C.F. Government, in 

taking advantage of the more generous Federal Terms of contribution under the amending Old Age 

Pension Act, abolished in September the provision it had made in April for a $5.00 supplemental 

allowance at the expense of the Province, and then it even went as far as to a abolish the supplemental 

allowance retroactive to May 1st. 

 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

22 

In other words, the $5.00 supplemental allowance which the Saskatchewan Government announced in 

April of that year was paid at the Provincial expense for exactly one month. All the Provincial 

supplemental allowances which have been paid by the Saskatchewan Government since May 1st, 

1947, will now be claimed back from the Dominion to the extent of 75 per cent of the total cost 

involved under terms of the Federal amending legislation which makes solely the pension amendment 

retroactive to May 1st, 1947. 

 

These facts, I think you will agree, speak for themselves. They give clear picture to which the extent 

the C.C.F. Government has given aid to old age pensioners at their own expense, and the extent to 

which they have endeavoured to claim credit for the more generous nature of assistance which was 

made possible through the effort of the Federal Government.‖ 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. member to tell us from what he was 

reading? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I told you when I started to deal with this subject. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Was that all the letter from Hon. Paul Martin? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — All but just one paragraph . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Ted Davis probably wrote it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Now then, Mr. Speaker, a similar situation, not to such a great extent, has taken 

place in the province of Saskatchewan in regard to old age pensions, this time. Last spring, due to the 

effort of the Opposition and pressure of public opinion, there was a provision made for $5.00 

supplementary pension for the old age pensioners, and that was paid by this Government here. Then they 

went to work, and what they did was this. They took $2.50 out of the supplementary pension and 

provided the $2.50 to supplement the $7.50 to make up the $10.00 increase in the basic pension of 

$10.00 a month up to $40.00. That left only $2.50 and that $5.00 was the basic pension. When this 

matter was before the House in Ottawa, Mr. Martin pleaded with the provinces, made a particular stand 

in this matter, that this had nothing to do with a means test or anything else, and he pleaded with them to 

continue the supplementary pension in full, as they were now doing. Every province in the Dominion of 

Canada, Mr. Speaker, so far as I know, did that, and some of them even increased it, except the C.C.F. in 

Saskatchewan, except this Socialistic Government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — On a question of privilege, Mr. Speaker, that is not true. There are only two 

provinces besides the Province of Saskatchewan that are paying supplementary allowances in the 

Dominion of Canada. So the statement that all Provinces in Canada continued . . . 

 

Mr. Culliton: — Mr. Speaker, you cannot raise a point of privilege except in respect to yourself, and the 

point of privilege is not well taken. 

 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

23 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Minister, I understood, was correcting a statement affecting his Department. 

 

Mr. Culliton: — I beg your pardon, with all due difference, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister was 

referring to two other provinces. The point of privilege refers to a statement made by yourself, and you 

cannot raise a point of privilege in respect to anything else. There is no point of privilege at all. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, here is what I said: ―Every province in the Dominion of Canada, in so 

far as I know . . .‖ I did make that statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You don‘t know very much. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That‘s all aright. sometimes you wish you knew as much. They heeded Mr. Martin‘s 

suggestion and continued the supplementary payment in full except the Government of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, which Government, with its slogan ―Humanity First‖, cut it down 50 per cent, to one-

half. The Minister over there gets up on a point of privilege and he says, ―That is not true. There are only 

two Provinces in Canada that pay supplementary pensions,‖; but is there any sense in that statement? I 

think he is wrong when he says there are only two provinces in Canada besides Saskatchewan that pay 

supplementary pensions, and I know he is wrong. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Alberta, B.C. and Ontario. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I know just as much as you know. If he minds his own business until I am through, 

then he can talk all night. Here is the point, Mr. Speaker. We had this thing going in principle exactly the 

same as it was in 1947 when $675,000 was withheld as a retroactive payment coming from the 

Dominion Government. This was an ingenious device. I will again repeat what I said a moment ago, that 

Mr. Martin, when he made this statement on the floor of the House, pointed out that any supplementary 

pension paid in any province had nothing to do with a means test, that is, the total income that a 

pensioner could have. There are two pensioners in my constituency that have an income of $1,080 a 

year; they are both over 75 years of age. These people need something more to live on and their house is 

in very poor condition. These two old people are entitled under the Act and under the regulations if they 

are interpreted in a human way, to the $2.50 supplementary a piece a month, but they cannot get it. I 

imagine there are hundreds and maybe thousands of people who are similarly affected in Saskatchewan. 

On March 20, 1948, (I have a copy of the Gazette, Mr. Speaker), this Government went to work and 

passed an Order-in-Council stopping themselves from paying any supplementary pension to any person 

who has any income in the amount of $1,080 going into one family, where they are both drawing a 

pension. Here is paragraph 8: 

 

―The maximum supplementary allowance payable in the case of a married couple living together and 

both in receipt of an old age pension under the Old Age Pension Act of Canada, shall be $5 per month 

each or such portion thereof so that the joint total income of such pensioner, including pension 

payment and supplementary allowance pension payment shall not exceed $1,080 in any calendar 

year.‖ 

 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

24 

Voice: — Shame, shame! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Now that is a slick trick, Mr. Speaker. There is no excuse here. There cannot be any 

excuse because this Government put this Order in Council on the regulations under The Old Age 

Pensions Act to stop themselves – not the Dominion Government or any other Government – from 

paying. 

 

I just want to say to the hon. Provincial Treasurer, with his tremendous and buoyant revenues which are 

flowing in from liquor profits, Education Tax and all of these things, couldn‘t he scrape another few 

thousand dollars to give to these poor people $2.50 a month? B.C. are paying $10 a month bonus. They 

are paying $50 a month pension in B.C. Alberta is paying it. 

 

Now this is a fact, Mr. Speaker, and it is one of the points that I want to bring to the attention of this 

House. Clean up your house, and clean up your Statutes, and then come down and do business on a fair 

and open-minded basis with these poor people! 

 

I got two of these – two letters sent out by the Minister of Social Welfare just before the Dominion 

election. One was dated May 31, and the other June 30, 1949. I am not going to tell you who got them, 

because they all got them; you cannot trace them because they all got them. This one says: 

 

―You will undoubtedly have heard recently that the old age and blind pensions have been increased 

from a maximum of $33 per month to a maximum of $42.50.‖ 

 

Now that is all right – $42.50; but you are not paying that, not paying $42.50. You are only paying these 

fellows $40 a month. As a matter of fact, in the case I mentioned it is only $39.94. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. Out of the 470 blind pensions paid, 390 are 

getting $42.50 a month besides their medical services. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I did not mention the blind pensioners at all; I am talking about the old 

age pensioners . . . 

 

―Your increase in pension will be payable retroactive to May 1st, but unfortunately the agreement with 

the Federal Government providing for increased old age pensions did not reach us in time to include 

the adjusted pensions in May with the May cheque. Any additional pension due for the month will be 

forwarded as early as possible in June. 

 

We are disappointed, of course, that the Federal Government did not authorize an increase in the 

allowable income so that every pensioner might benefit more equally. In other words, the income 

ceiling under which your pension was established remains the same.‖ 

 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

25 

I am complaining, I confess; I think the Dominion Government did wrong that they did not place the 

income fairly. I am honest about it, and I am going to say so. I had a short talk with four or five Federal 

members that I met during the summer and I told them so plainly, and I hope that the Dominion 

Government will increase it; but that has nothing to do with the proposition that we have here. It says 

here: 

 

―In other words, the income ceiling under which your pension was established remains the same.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, it remains the same on account of this Order in council that I read to you, which the 

Government passed to stop themselves from paying it. That is the most definite reason. 

 

Here is another one: 

 

―We enclose cheque representing the increase in your pension for the month of May that is calculated 

in accordance with the Dominion Old Age Pension Act and regulations thereunder, and this also 

includes whatever supplementary allowances may be due and which are paid in all or in part in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. It is our hope that the old age pension will eventually be raised to $50 per 

month without a means test. In the meantime, we hope that this additional pension, together with the 

free health services, compensate in some small measure for the high cost of living which now exists. 

 

With best wishes for your future health and happiness. 

 

Yours sincerely, 

 

―John H. Sturdy‖ 

 

Minister of Social Welfare‖ 

 

Mr. Tucker: — There is nothing about your own Order in Council there though. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No. I guess you don‘t remember that at all. 

 

These people are so sympathetic; they were so concerned about the plight of the old age pensioner. Then 

why in the name of commonsense did they cut off their $2.50 and leave the $2.50 less and then pass an 

Order in Council that would stop them from paying it if they did not want to? That is the question I 

would like to get answered. That was the ‗million dollar baby‘. 

 

I have endeavoured, as a member of the Opposition, to criticize this, and I hope I have been able to 

make myself understood. 



 

February 23, 1950 

 

 

26 

I want to say that this old moth-eaten creed of Socialism imported into this western country from Central 

and Eastern Europe is on the way out, and the prophecy of being sitting on the Treasury benches for the 

next fifteen or twenty years made by my friend in 1945, on the floor of the House, is not going to be 

fulfilled; and he has got to build many blacktop roads to Regina Beach and the United States, and to 

some fishing ground or swimming pool for his friends in Regina, if he is going to be able to sit there for 

that length of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I definitely shall not support the motion. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — I move the adjournment of the debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to and debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 6:05 o‘clock p.m. 


