



















































Hansard: February 16, 1950


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Eleventh Legislature 

 

Thursday, February 16, 1950. 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation for the opening of the Second Session of the Eleventh 

Legislative Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan, His Honour the Lieutenant Governor (Hon. J.M. 

Uhrich) entered the Chamber at 3 o’clock p.m., and was pleased to open the Session with the following 

Speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker and Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is My privilege and pleasure to welcome you to the Second Session of the Eleventh Legislature of the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

During the past year fundamental constitutional changes have taken place in the Dominion of Canada. 

Appeals to the Privy Council have been abolished. The Canadian Parliament has acquired the power to 

amend our Constitution in every respect, with the exception of minority rights, such as language and 

education, and with the further exception of those matters which are exclusively under provincial 

jurisdiction. A Dominion-Provincial Conference has been held for the purpose of working out an 

amending procedure for The British North America Act. My Government will continue to co-operate 

with the Dominion and the other provinces in seeking an amending procedure which, while safeguarding 

the rights and privileges of minorities and certain basic human freedoms, will at the same time permit 

sufficient flexibility to allow the changes that are necessary if the needs of the Canadian people are to be 

met adequately. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan welcomes the invitation extended by the Prime Minister of Canada to 

attend a Dominion-Provincial Conference this autumn. At that time My Government will continue to 

press for the implementation of the social security and economic proposals which were advanced by the 

Federal Government at the Dominion-Provincial Conference on Reconstruction held in 1945. 

 

During the past year My Government has continued with the building of a social and economic 

framework designed to produce more equitable opportunity, fairer distribution of income and greater 

social security for the people of this Province. 

 

The recent loss of overseas markets for agricultural products and the termination of the long term 

agreements, resulting in a reduction of farm income, are cause for grave concern. The decision to 

abandon the national marketing of certain commodities and to place the responsibility on provincial 

governments and producers’ marketing agencies will inevitably result in further confusion in the field of 

marketing, and will increase the uncertainties facing Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

In the opinion of My Government, farm commodities should be handled through national marketing 

boards, and the Government is prepared, upon request from the Federal authorities, to submit for your 

approval the necessary provincial enabling legislation. 

 



 

February 16, 1950 

 

 

2 

Failing any action by the Federal Government to adopt such a policy, the government will proceed to 

give aid, to the full extent of its power, to the farmers of this Province. To this end, a Board has been 

appointed under The Natural Products Marketing Act of 1945 to operate in conjunction with the federal 

Agricultural Products Marketing Act of 1949. 

 

The programme for the improvement of agriculture will again be directed toward overcoming some of 

the natural hazards and uncertainties facing this basic industry. Progress made in this direction during 

the past year will have a very significant effect upon the stability of farming in the Province. During 

1949 over 20,000 acres of under-utilized land were developed for feed and fodder production, and more 

than 15,000 acres were prepared for irrigation. A total of 3,000,000 acres of land has been scientifically 

classified, most of which has been disposed of on a long-term basis. 

 

While the main emphasis of agricultural activities is directed toward receiving the basic causes of 

agricultural instability from natural hazards, the emergency problems which face the industry each year 

have received continued attention. Emergency assistance has again been provided to enable farmers to 

obtain fodder at the lowest possible cost. 

 

As a result of co-operation between the various agencies concerned, a successful campaign of 

grasshopper control was carried on during the past year. It is estimated that control measures in 1949, 

saved at least $50,000,000 of crop. You will be asked to approve expenditures for a similar programme 

for 1950. 

 

In all these projects for farm improvement, this work has been accomplished through co-operation 

among the Provincial Government, municipalities and groups of farm people. Municipal governments 

are using the services of the Provincial Government, and are receiving grants to secure their own seed, 

feed and fodder reserves, and to develop community projects. Members of water users’ organizations are 

working together with Provincial Government technicians for the more efficient use of our limited water 

resources. Conservation districts are drafting long term plans for development of natural geographic 

areas of the Province. Farm people, municipalities and the Provincial Government are now equal 

partners in the conservation programme for permanent farm improvement. 

 

During the past year there was crop failure in some parts of the Province. The Government, in co-

operation with the municipalities, immediately took emergency action, and a Work and Wages 

programme was implemented, with sixty-four rural municipalities and Local Improvement Districts 

participating. 

 

The Government has continued to encourage the development of the natural resources of the Province. 

The value of Saskatchewan’s 1949 mineral production will exceed that of 1948. An important factor in 

the expansion of mineral development is The Provincial Prospectors’ Assistance Plan, which has been in 

operation for the past two summers. Prospectors operating under this Plan have been largely responsible 

for the very promising finds of radio-active minerals which are now in the early stages of development. 

 

Saskatchewan has three potentially productive uranium fields. Discoveries of gold and base metals have 

resulted from the growing interest of mining firms in Saskatchewan. It is significant that more mineral 

claims were staked during 1949 than in any previous year. 

 



 

February 16, 1950 

 

3 

There is an intense search for oil taking place in the Province. The policy of the government has been 

directed toward insuring that the maximum exploration will take place, and that the rights of the people 

of Saskatchewan will be safeguarded. In addition to royalties, approximately 25% of the oil and gas 

rights on all crown lands are retained for the people of this Province. Practically the whole of the 

remaining surveyed section of the Province is being explored. Extensive geophysical exploration has 

been carried on, and a large-scale drilling programme has been planned for 1950. 

 

Investigation is being carried on in order to determine the feasibility of further industrial development in 

the fields of ceramics, magnesium sulphate, potash and wood utilization. 

 

Forest production is being geared to meet the requirements of a sustained yield policy. Through 

intensified forest management and forest conservation programmes, production is gradually being 

brought into balance with the annual tree growth. 

 

Certain legislation and amendments, which will aid in the development of the natural resources of the 

Province, will be presented at this Session for your approval. 

 

During the year continued progress has been made in the construction of new school buildings and in the 

establishment of vocational programmes in additional centres. This progress is due to the desire of 

Boards to provide improved educational facilities and to the availability of Government grants and 

loans. The scholarship fund, established in 1949, has assisted nearly six hundred deserving students to 

further their education. There has been a marked increase in adequate programmes of musical activities 

in classrooms, in the use of classroom radios, and of visual education facilities. During the year the 

School of Agriculture building, the Soils and Dairy Laboratory, the Medical College building and the 

Gymnasium have been brought into use. These buildings have done much to remove the congestion at 

the University, and to provide greatly improved services, particularly for agriculture and education. 

 

Amendments to the Teachers’ Superannuation Act will be introduced, which will provide an increase in 

the retirement pensions of our teachers. 

 

The programme directed toward increasing the hospital facilities in the Province has been continued. 

There have been many additional hospital beds provided and new hospital districts established. 

Emphasis in the past year was placed on the training of public health personnel. There has been a 

progressive increase in services under the Hospital Services Plan, and preventive work has been 

strengthened. 

 

To meet the demands for modern community preventative services, plans are being formulated to 

organize the rest of the Province progressively into health regions. 

 

You will be asked to approve further expansion of mental health services, including the construction of a 

new training school for mental defectives with an ultimate capacity of 1,000 beds. 

 

Provision for increased grants to Tuberculosis Sanatoria and hospitals will be presented for your 

approval. 

 



 

February 16, 1950 

 

 

4 

My Government’s objective in the field of health is to develop the most complete programme possible 

pending the enactment of federal legislation which will make support available to the Province of the 

establishment of a comprehensive programme of health insurance. 

 

The past five years have marked a new era in social services for children. Family welfare services have 

been provided so that families may remain together wherever possible. Higher standards of care have 

been established for children who must be cared for outside their own homes. With all these increased 

services, the Provincial Government has continued to bear the major financial responsibility and has 

relieved the municipalities of much of the burden of financing child welfare services. 

 

There has been a continued extension of the Corrections Programme for juvenile and adult delinquents, 

along the lines recommended in the Laycock Penal Commission report. Punitive, restrictive and 

custodial methods in the treatment of delinquents have been largely replaced by rehabilitative and 

training methods, and by the extension of probation and parolement. The results have been gratifying. 

While there has been an increase in gaol populations elsewhere in Canada, in Saskatchewan there has 

been an actual decrease during the past year, enabling the Moosomin Gaol to be discontinued. Regina 

Gaol has been converted to a Borstal type institution, and a modern school of correction for boys will be 

opened in 1950. A Corrections Act will be introduced to permit an extension of the treatment approach 

to the problem of delinquency. 

 

The Deserted Wives’ and Childrens’ Maintenance Act will be repealed, and a new Act, based on modern 

social practices and needs, will be introduced. 

 

Four Veterans’ Co-operative Farms were organized during the past year, and additional farms are in the 

process of organization. One Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifty veterans are now occupying Provincial 

crown lands, and further settlement will continue. 

 

From an examination of man-days lost through strikes, and the number of occasions the Government has 

been called upon to do conciliation work, it is interesting to note that the Labour-Management situation 

in the Province is even better than in the previous year. Certain amendments to The Trade Union Act, 

The Workmen’s Compensation (Accident Fund) Act, and The Apprenticeship Act will be presented for 

your approval. 

 

My Government was gravely concerned with the recent developments and announcements in the field of 

rental control. Believing the flat increases allowed were, in many cases, too drastic, steps were taken to 

insure that these increases did not take effect in the Province of Saskatchewan. You will be asked to 

approve The Lease-held Regulations Act, which will prevent undue hardships, and provide for a more 

equitable adjustment of rents. 

 

Legislation will be introduced for your approval which will give to women of the Province the right to 

act on juries. 

 

The programme of improved highway maintenance and construction will be continued. Plans for 1950, 

when implemented, will greatly extend the mileage of highways constructed to a standard that provides 

all-year travel with a minimum of snow removal. Excellent progress has been made with the 

construction of the Saskatchewan Landing Bridge, which will be completed during 1950. 

 



 

February 16, 1950 

 

5 

Rural Municipalities will again be assisted with grants toward their road building programmes. The 

Government has given every co-operation to the Federal Government in connection with the proposed 

Trans-Canada Highway. It is anticipated that the required agreement will be finalized in the near future, 

so that construction of this roadway may commence this year. 

 

The Saskatchewan Power Corporation has continued its programme of rural electrification, providing 

electrical services to nearly 1,200 farms. The total number of services added was over 6,600. At the 

same time the power system has been extended to forty-seven towns and villages, involving the 

construction of over four hundred miles of transmission line. 

 

You will be asked at this Session to approve a new Power Corporation Act and a new Power 

Commission Act. This legislation will better enable the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to continue its 

vast programme of electrification, which brings so many amenities of modern civilization to the farm 

and village. 

 

In Saskatchewan the Co-operative Movement continues to lead all other provinces in the volume of 

business transacted. Last December the Government convened the first annual conference of those 

interested in Co-operative Farms and the co-operative use of farm machinery. The demand for this type 

of organization continues to grow, and indicates the interest which is manifest in co-operative farming. 

 

You will be asked to consider a new Co-operatives Association Act designed to meet the growing needs 

of co-operatives of different types. 

 

The public accounts of the last fiscal year, together with the estimates for the year beginning April First, 

1950, will be submitted. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session, with full confidence that you will favourably discharge 

your duties and responsibilities in the best interests of our Province, and may Divine Providence 

continue to bless our Province and guide the Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

His Honour then retired from the Chamber. 

 

The House adjourned at 3:30 o’clock p.m. 


