




















































Hansard: February 21, 1951


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

THIRD SESSION — ELEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

15th Day 

 

Wednesday, February 21, 1951. 

 

The House met at 3.00 o'clock p.m. 

 

BUDGET ADDRESS 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, a year ago, in rising with the traditional 

motion that you do now leave the Chair and that supply be granted to His Majesty, I prefaced my annual 

budget review with some brief remarks upon the disturbed state of international affairs. At that time the 

cleavage between East and West had already deepened into the "cold war", and the attention of the 

Western democracies was already turning to renewed measures of collective defence. And yet, I think it 

true to say, it was still the world's hope that a third global war could surely be averted through the 

organization, and through the moral authority, of the United Nations. Thus our immediate concern last 

spring was focused upon the continued imbalance in world trade and its effect upon economic prospects 

for Saskatchewan. 

 

In the period since then, armed conflict has actually broken out and we are faced with the imminent risk 

of a third world catastrophe. The fighting, thus far, has been largely localized in Korea, but as the 

Secretary of State for External Affairs has pointedly expressed it, — "The peace of the world is in the 

balance, and we are walking on the edge of a volcano which is rumbling alarmingly." 

 

I need not elaborate at this time upon the most direct effects of this critical situation. They are already 

visible throughout the nation as a whole and in our own province. The recruitment of our own young 

men for the armed forces, the organization of civil defence, the shortage of strategic materials, and the 

fiscal problems of a tremendous defence programme are already familiar to us all. Our own grave 

concern, too, has already been reflected in the debates in this Assembly. 

 

The economic repercussions of these developments upon our economy during the past year, and in the 

prospect ahead, are extremely complicated. A year ago we were concerned with ominous signs of 

recession in shrinking overseas export markets and declining farm prices, in prospects of reduced capital 

outlay, and in growing numbers of unemployed. As far as the national scene was concerned, much of 

this sluggishness in the economy had vanished by the late spring. Industrial activity had gathered 

momentum, and it reacted strongly to the outbreak of hostilities in Korea in June. From then to the end 

of the year, national indexes of industrial production, wholesale prices, employment and labour income, 

and the cost of living all moved rapidly upward. The sharp contraction of export trade to overseas 

markets was more than balanced off by a tremendous increase in the flow of goods to the United States, 

and with an improvement in the foreign exchange position, the Canadian dollar was unpegged last 

September. In the overall picture, the gross national product, which measures the value 



February 21, 1951 

 

 
2 

of current production of goods and services at prevailing prices, reached a record total of $17.7 billion 

during the year. 

 

Unfortunately the farm sector of the economy has not kept pace with the general industrial boom. The 

general wholesale price index rose in December last to 175.7, up more than eighteen points over the 

corresponding month in 1949. In contrast, the index number of wholesale farm product prices for 

December was 144.3, up 1.8 points from November, but down 3.5 points from December, 1949. The 

field products index, which is of particular importance to Saskatchewan, stood at 104.2, up slightly from 

November, but 24 points below the previous December. For the year as a whole the price index has 

stood somewhat below 1949, and the resulting squeeze between rising costs and stationary or declining 

prices has created a difficult situation for many of our farmers. 

 

In the most recent months, of course, the threat of war has strengthened the world need for our 

foodstuffs. Consequently, despite the continued dollar shortage, the demand for our grain — both within 

the framework of the International Wheat Agreement and on the open export market — now suggests an 

improved price outlook for the period ahead. But as the past year's experience demonstrates, the 

potential gains to Saskatchewan farmers from any improvement in price will never be realized if they 

are immediately wiped out by a more rapid inflationary advance in domestic operating and living costs. 

This is the real and continuing plight of the western farmer today, and responsibility for it rests clearly 

with the Federal Government. 

 

During the 1950-51 crop year, Saskatchewan farmers increased the province's physical output of grains 

of all kinds by 120 million bushels. Their cash receipts for the calendar year, however, have been far 

below those of 1949. Several familiar factors contribute to this situation. First, the initial price to 

producers of No. 1 Northern Wheat, basis in store Fort William-Port Arthur, was lowered from $1.75 to 

$1.40 commencing August 1, 1950. The recently announced 20-cent additional interim payment is 

welcome news, but its effect will not be reflected in income figures until the end of this year. Second, 

the severe August frosts sharply reduced the average grade of wheat in the Province so that it is now 

estimated that only 50 per cent of the crop graded No. 4 or better. To the lower price for the poorer 

average grade was added the further effect of wider price spreads between grades, particularly between 

those at the lower end of the scale. Further, adverse weather conditions delayed harvesting and severely 

curtailed marketing during the latter half of the year. And finally, grain participation and adjustment 

payments for the year were only a slight fraction of what they had been in 1949. 

 

In contrast to the grain situation, cash income from the marketing of livestock increased in 1950 despite 

an over-all decline in volume. The strong demand for beef from the United States has been the dynamic 

factor which has reacted upon the whole price structure in the animal products market. It is expected that 

current high price levels will be more than maintained in the year ahead and farmers may be expected to 

increase production in these lines. But as most of the honourable members will be aware, the output of 

beef cattle or even hogs cannot be increased or decreased at will. The necessary expansion in production 

can only be achieved when a strong basic industry with stable markets and adequate prices has been 

solidly established. 



February 21, 1951 

 

 
3 

The same problem of an unstable market situation raising the continual threat of unmarketable surpluses 

was raised last spring in regard to a variety of other farm products. Eggs were a striking illustration. 

These temporary market difficulties were reflected in declines in the physical output of a number of 

farm products in the province. Here again, toward the end of the year, demands were strengthened and 

the emphasis now is upon the need for increased output of nearly all foodstuffs and farm products. 

 

The detailed comparative figures on volume and value of production, with your permission, Mr. 

Speaker, are again being tabled as an appendix. I might, however, summarize the over-all picture in 

terms of total income and gross value of production. The preliminary estimate of cash income of 

Saskatchewan farmers for 1950 is now placed at $405 million, a drop of about 27 per cent below the 

previous year. This includes cash income actually received from the sale of all farm products. 

Adjustment payments made under The Prairie Farm Assistance Act in drought and frost stricken areas 

amounted to $14 million, about the same as in the previous year. However, a very rough estimate of the 

gross value of our total agricultural output in the 1950-51 crop year, which takes into account the 

additional income yet to be received, approximates $690 million, possibly an all time high. 

 

This very high level of output, Mr. Speaker, bears witness to the continuing strong potential of the 

agricultural resources of this province. It is a potential which, despite the hazards of nature, is capable of 

producing a huge volume of basic foodstuffs. These are the foods needed now for military purposes. But 

in the long run, they are even more important in the constructive struggle to win and protect the peace of 

the world, with freedom from want, and freedom from fear, and with freedom from communist and 

fascist dictation. This government regards the conservation and development of this potential as a real 

contribution to that struggle, and as this budget will indicate, our policy is consciously directed toward 

these ends. 

 

A major portion of the capital investment which takes place in our province necessarily flows into the 

agricultural industry. Over-all data from the thousands of individual farm operators are lacking, but the 

continued high level of expenditure on farm equipment is suggestive of the trend. In 1949, the latest year 

for which figures are now available, Saskatchewan led the country in purchases of agricultural 

machinery. Sales valued at wholesale prices in Saskatchewan reached $60 million, an increase of $13 

million over the preceding year. 

 

Increasing investment in farm improvements is also reflected in the sharp jump of loans secured under 

the Farm Improvements Loans Act. Loans disbursed increased to over $16 millions in 1949. Similarly, 

loans outstanding from the Canadian Farm Loan Board increased narrowly, but mortgage indebtedness 

due to the larger loan companies again showed a substantial decrease as farmers discharged a further $3 

million in mortgages. There may indeed be a tendency for some people to doubt Saskatchewan's future, 

but I assure honourable members that they are not to be found among our own farm people. 



February 21, 1951 

 

 
4 

Neither are they to be found, Mr. Speaker, among those who have been awake to the flow of investment 

into the development of our natural resources. None but the wilfully blind or hopelessly ignorant can 

deny that the exploration and development of our mineral potential, for instance, is proceeding today at a 

pace wholly undreamed of less than ten short years ago. During the year 1950, the Dominion Bureau of 

Statistics estimate of the value of mineral production in the Province climbed to an all time high of more 

than $36 million — an increase of 9 per cent over the previous year and yet, to be sure, only a faint 

inkling of the tremendous development which awaits our province. The most spectacular feature, of 

course, has been the greatly expanded programme of oil exploration. Output itself reached a new record 

of one million barrels in 1950. Actual expenditure in development climbed to $8 million. It is estimated 

that over 44 million acres of land were covered by various kinds of preliminary surveys and more than 

140 exploratory or testing wells went down in search of oil. Plans for 1951 call for an even higher tempo 

of activity, and we look forward with confidence to the day when the 1950 record output will be 

dwarfed in comparison. 

 

Attracting almost equal attention has been the rapid development of the metallic mineral resources of the 

Pre-Cambrian shield in the north. Government assistance for prospecting was continued in the year 

under review, particularly to stimulate interest in the southern part of the shield and also to aid the 

further training of native Indians. The programme of geological surveys introduced three years ago was 

continued and the report of one survey party has indicated the presence of a fourth uranium field. During 

the past year mining companies spent nearly $2 million in the search for and the proving up of 

discoveries of radioactive ores. Three companies are now actively engaged in underground operations 

and a fourth has announced similar plans for the spring. Uranium development in 1951 will undoubtedly 

surpass the 1950 level by a considerable margin, and at least two uranium mines will be in a position to 

announce a mill construction programme. 

 

Along with radioactive minerals, the search for the all-important base metals will be greatly accelerated 

in Northern Saskatchewan this year. Copper, zinc and nickel will be explored for, especially in the area 

west of Flin Flon. Plans are now being finalized by some of the country's largest mining concerns to 

explore more intensively, and to develop known discoveries of base metals. They are being actively 

aided by this government, for as everyone knows, these are critical materials in time of war, no less than 

a basic need of peacetime industry. 

 

In other fields the output of coal and industrial minerals, including sodium sulphate, sand and gravel, 

sodium chloride, clay and clay products and so forth, have registered good gains. The most important 

new development during the year was the location of a substantial new bed of potash ores in the eastern 

part of the Province. This new discovery is closer to the surface than the former find in the Unity area. 

Close and continuous study is being given to feasible methods for the further exploration and 

development of this resource. The first permit covering 100,000 acres has now been issued, providing 

for an expenditure of $235,000 during the next three years, and a minimum investment of $1,000,000 in 

plant if commercial production is found feasible. Again it takes on added importance as war conditions 

threaten possible shortages and the reduction of imports of this strategic material. 



February 21, 1951 

 

 
5 

It will be of interest to note two major items with regard to public corporations in the industrial minerals 

field. The first was the decision taken last spring to replace and modernize the clay products plant at 

Estevan. This has involved the replacement of obsolete equipment and the installation of modern 

processes to increase the output of high quality structural materials at low unit cost. It is felt that with 

proper plant and equipment this operation will more than pay its own way. At the same time it will 

utilize one of our more abundant natural resources and open the door to further development of the 

ceramic industry in the Province. Further, it provides a necessary material if the construction programme 

for schools and hospitals, for public institutions and commercial establishments is to go forward. It may, 

in fact, be converted to the production of brick refractories if defence demands so warrant. The other 

division of Saskatchewan Minerals, the salt cake plant at Chaplin, has earned substantial dividends for 

the province in 1950. In the last quarter of the year, market demands grew to huge proportions, due in 

part to the stimulus of the U.S. defence programme. Despite the barrier of high freight rates, high quality 

Saskatchewan sodium sulphate is now moving to tidewater on both the east and west coasts, and as far 

away as Florida. Capacity is now being expanded in order to meet the demands of this wide market area. 

 

In other fields of resource utilization, Mr. Speaker, conservation and long-term management 

programmes have been continued as government policy. I noted a year ago that the cut of standing 

commercial timber was being progressively reduced in line with the objective of sustained yield. The 

depletion of timber was thus brought down from 60,000,000 to 43,000,000 feet in 1949-50 with a 

consequent decline in value of output. The most interesting development during the year, however, was 

the increasing close study into the possibilities for pulpwood and pulp production from the province's 

forests. Each year timber stands in more favourably located provinces are being rapidly depleted. 

Consequently, the value of our own forest resources is increasing steadily and the possibilities for their 

economic utilization are being enhanced Through the Natural Resources Department and the Forest 

Products Corporation, the government has this matter under constant review, with careful study of 

changing trends in the volume of wood supplies, in power and chemicals available, in transport 

problems and economic markets. It will welcome any private investment capital in this field on fair and 

reasonable terms and assure it of adequate earnings and yet protect the interests of the people of the 

province. 

 

Commercial fish production during the year was narrowly lower in volume but the value of the catch 

was well maintained. Fur production moved up during the year with an aggregate value of over $2 

million. The results of earlier conservation measures are now reflected in the increased take of beaver 

pelts. Adverse weather and low water levels, however, reduced the muskrat catch. The conservation 

programme has found increasing favour in the north country. Over 3,500 trappers are now taking part 

and the number of conservation areas has been greatly increased. The government marketing services, 

handling fur and fish and operating a number of strategically-located trading posts throughout the north, 

also enjoyed a highly successful year. They are now contributing substantially to the stability of the 

northern region. 

 

As in previous years the increase in development expenditure in our primary industry has been matched 

in other directions, particularly through higher levels of investment in the public utilities. Crown 

Corporations assume a particularly significant responsibility in this area, and through progressive 

enterprise contribute greatly to the pace of economic 



February 21, 1951 

 

 
6 

development. In the air, Saskatchewan Government Airways achieved a record year and earned a 

substantial surplus. Safe and dependable transportation into the far north has helped immeasurably to 

unlock the resources of that vast and hitherto almost inaccessible region. During 1950 we had seventeen 

planes on regular scheduled flights. The flow of mail and passengers almost doubled and air freight 

increased by 29 per cent. The publicly-owned bus lines further consolidated their position in the 

transport field. They operated over a total of more than three million bus-miles and rendered a 

particularly timely service during the crippling rail strike last summer. The rate schedule was held 

unchanged despite the fact that sharply increased costs of operation cut into net earnings. 

 

With regard to rail transport, revenue carloadings declined by a small percentage. Here the major 

problem facing the province was again the issue of higher freight rates. The abolition of special 

livestock rates was a particularly serious blow to farmers with plans for increasing the output of animal 

products. Again the other provinces joined this government, in challenging applications from the 

railways for still further general rate increases. It is our earnest hope that the report of the Royal 

Commission on Transportation, due to be issued shortly, will open the way for a genuinely better deal 

for the Canadian West in this critically important matter of rail transport. 

 

I need but touch lightly at this moment upon the provincial corporations in electric power and 

telephones. During 1950, the Telephone corporation again handled a record volume of business and net 

earnings advanced to the highest level in history without any change in rates. This is, of course, in 

marked contrast to the larger private telephone systems of the country, such as the Bell Telephone and 

B.C. Telephone which secured substantial rate increases during the year. A new record of over 7,600 

new connections installed was established by our system, and the list of those waiting for service was 

thus substantially reduced. 

 

In electric power, the total output of central electric stations of the province, excluding northern hydro 

installations, rose to 397 million kilowatt hours. This indicated an increase in over-all provincial 

consumption of 12 per cent, over the previous year. Significantly, however, the records of the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation itself indicate an increase in demand upon the provincial power 

system of over 20 per cent, in the past year. The number of customers rose by more than five thousand. 

Of these, two thousand were additional farm customers connected under our expanding rural 

electrification programme. New generating capacity is being installed at key stations and further 

progress achieved in the projected province-wide grid of high tension transmission lines. The expansion 

of this programme so necessary to the overall development of the province, and yet initiated only six 

short years ago, represents a large capital commitment in the period immediately ahead. 

 

During the year, detailed studies of the growth of power consumption and the organization of generating 

and transmission facilities to meet the expected demand were undertaken, and the outlines of a future 

programme mapped. This session, too, measures will be proposed to facilitate the extension of 

government assistance under the rural electrification programs. Our long-term programme is aimed at 

bringing the benefits of 



February 21, 1951 

 

 
7 

electric power to thousands upon thousand of our farm homes. I may say, too, that it envisages a 

closely-integrated provincial power system based upon major steam plants and the ultimate utilization of 

hydro potential both at the Fort a la Corne site and the future South Saskatchewan dam. With regard to 

this latter, we have given the federal government a firm assurance of our desire to co-operate fully in the 

development of both the power potential and the half-a-million acre irrigation proposal. I might add, that 

we do not expect to have to follow the lead of the Province of Quebec or the Province of Manitoba with 

any power expropriation proceedings. 

 

Turning now to secondary industry, for which the projected irrigation and power development of the 

South Saskatchewan has particular significance, — I note that the growth of manufacturing has 

continued at an encouraging rate. The most recent estimate — that for 1949 — indicates that the gross 

value of output from the vegetable and animal product industries, from textiles, wood and paper, iron 

and non-metallic minerals, chemicals and so forth, reached the order of $240 million. Although the 

figure is not large in comparison with many other provinces, it represents an increase of 35 per cent over 

the 1944 level. The people of this province can look forward to steady progress in the period ahead. A 

positive step was taken by the government during the past year with the establishment of a central 

Industrial Development Office, charged with the direct responsibility of encouraging the establishment 

of new industry in the province. It will co-ordinate studies and be assisted by the several agencies of the 

government whose work can contribute to the solution of the many complicated problems involved. In 

particular, at this moment, we believe that some part of the nation's defence expenditure, under existing 

circumstances, should properly be channelled into the establishment of defence industry in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it should scarcely be necessary for me to emphasize once again that the economic 

development of our province has been proceeding under three forms of organization, public, private and 

co-operative. Data for the period under review indicate that this three-fold participation is being 

maintained. A record number of new companies was capitalized, and a large number of outside 

corporations was added to the register to carry on business in the province. Co-operative association 

increased their assets, and boosted their volume of business to a record of $282 million. The turnover of 

business transacted by the government corporations rose to $27 million. This is a small sum by 

comparison but as I have stressed before, the publicly-owned enterprises play a role which cannot be 

measured only in terms of dollars and cents. 

 

I think a further striking illustration of this fact is evident in the operations and influence of the 

Government Insurance Office. It is interesting to note the very wide publicity campaign given to the 

recent report issued by the Legislative Research Committee from North Dakota, and the concerted 

attempt made to smear Saskatchewan's automobile accident insurance plan on the basis of that report. It 

is suggestive to say the least, that detailed stories were transmitted across country-wide press wires even 

before copies of the report were made available to us in Saskatchewan. And it is not unexpected that 

little publicity was given to the very significant conclusion that costs under a statewide insurance plan 

could only be matched by the "least expensive private insurance" currently 



February 21, 1951 

 

 
8 

being written, and that if private enterprise could not do the job, "the State" and I quote "might be 

compelled to seek other means to assure its citizens reasonable insurance rates." 

 

I feel, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan stand behind their own insurance plan and their 

own insurance business. The service it is rendering and the increasing business it is attracting speak 

volumes for that fact. In less than five years the separate automobile accident insurance fund has paid 

out $1,577,000 in personal injury insurance to 8,844 persons. Since April, 1946, total benefits of $6 

million have been paid to 33,000 claimants. The reserve fund, built up and set aside purely for this plan, 

stands at $833,000 enabling premium rates to remain the same despite increasing costs of vehicle and 

repair parts. The principle here is solely one of maximum protection at actual cost. 

 

In the general insurance business, 1950 was a record year for the office in every respect. Assets now 

exceed $4 million, and record surplus earnings of $242,000 will be turned over to the Government to 

come back to our people in public services. There is, of course, no estimate of the savings accruing to 

the province through the reduction of rates by private companies enforced through the competition of 

Government Insurance. But some measure of this social role of a public enterprise can quickly be gained 

by comparison of the rates in Saskatchewan with those across the country generally. Here again, despite 

the loud protestations, the facts surely speak for themselves. 

 

Even apart from this kind of social contribution by the public enterprises, it has now been demonstrated 

that they can be operated to earn substantial dividends for their shareholders, the people of this province. 

Only two suffered net losses in the year just closed, and earnings in the aggregate reached three and 

three-quarter million dollars. This represents an increase in the rate of return upon advances from the 

provincial treasury from 7.8 per cent, in 1949 to 8.8 per cent, in 1950. 

 

Despite the serious decline in farm cash income, to which I have already referred, the tempo of overall 

business activities during the year, as measured by cheques cashed in clearing centres, rose narrowly to a 

new high of $2.54 billion. Similarly, retail sales were well maintained in 1950, the estimate rising 

slightly to $517 million. In large part activity was stimulated by the flow of capital investment, not only 

into the agricultural industry, but also into the non-farm sectors, including primary industry, utilities, 

manufacturing and construction. The preliminary forecast for capital and repair expenditure in the 

province in 1950, as measured by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics, reached a record high of $282 

million, up from $265 million in the previous year. Current surveys indicate that capital expenditure 

actually realized in 1950 exceeded $300 million. Unless the exigencies of the war situation enforce a 

widespread curtailment, prospects for capital outlay in the year ahead are equally good. The 

announcement that Ford Motor Company is establishing a million dollar distribution plant in the Capital 

City is an encouraging sign. All these facts, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, surely give the lie to those who, for 

narrow, petty purposes indeed, seek to undermine confidence in the province with shouts that private 

capital is being driven out of Saskatchewan. 



February 21, 1951 

 

 
9 

During the past year, fiscal relations between the province and municipalities on the one hand, and the 

province and the Dominion on the other have been receiving further close attention. With respect to the 

former, it now appears that the overall financial position of the municipalities has been improved. As the 

Annual Report of the Department of Municipal Affairs indicates, a larger number of municipalities 

recorded surpluses at the close of their financial year. The recommendations of the Britnell Committee 

on municipal finance have already been discussed in this Chamber. Attention, of course, has been 

concentrated upon the specific proposals. But I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that every member of this 

Assembly should also apply himself to the very detailed account given in that report of the extensive aid 

already provided to the municipalities. The measures taken by this government to increase actual grants 

and direct payments and to relieve the municipalities of many heavy fiscal burdens are commended fully 

by the Committee. Further, the government has already indicated its intention of implementing as many 

of the recommendations as possible over the period of time actually proposed in the report. 

 

We had expected that discussions at the Federal-Provincial Conference last December would have 

cleared the gray for us to do much more. This Government, and a number of the other provinces, had 

hoped for discussions in those meetings which would range over the whole field of the "Green Book 

Proposals" advanced at the 1945 Conference on Reconstruction. In particular, we had hoped for the 

much-needed re-examination of the financial resources and burdens of each of the provinces, and the 

recognition of the principle of fiscal need. This was the principle so powerfully urged and fully 

documented by the Rowell-Sirois Commission. We contended then, as we have always contended, that 

that principle is still the only adequate financial basis for a satisfactory federal-provincial-municipal 

structure in Canada. Without it we cannot hope to see established the minimum national standards of 

social security, of educational opportunity and of public services, which the great potential productivity 

of our nation fully warrant. 

 

I had hoped to have a thorough consideration of a comprehensive social security programme, including 

medical and health insurance, adequate welfare standards for the aged and physically handicapped, 

broader unemployment insurance and income protection for our farmers. And we had prepared extensive 

outlines of capital investment programmes, including many projects designed to stabilize and increase 

the physical output of our provincial economy. All of this, we suggested, was all the more necessary if 

we were to have in Canada an effective mobilization of the people, whether for war or for peace. 

 

In all of these expectations, I need hardly relate, we were sadly disappointed. The federal government 

took a very firm view that greatly increased defence expenditure prevented it from any commitment, 

except two: these were a renewed tax rental agreement and a programme of old age security and 

assistance. It agreed also to the request from almost all of the provinces for a constitutional amendment 

which will enable them to levy a retail turnover tax. This latter of course is scarcely a real concession to 

the provinces. Its chief value to us will be to improve the efficiency and reduce the administration costs 

of sales tax collections. 



February 21, 1951 

 

 
10 

With respect to old age security, the federal plan calls for universal pensions of $40 per month at age 

seventy, with costs to be borne by the national government. In addition, old age assistance on a means 

test basis is to be granted at age 65, on a co-operative sharing arrangement between federal and 

provincial governments. While we welcome this new proposal, it should be noted that if we continue our 

present programme of medical benefits and supplementary payments, it will actually increase the 

financial burden upon the province. 

 

Honourable Members will probably be interested in the terms of renewal for the tax rental agreement as 

advanced at the Conference. These were very simple. The new proposal covers the five-year term 1952 

to 1957. Two options were presented but it is clear that the second of these was offered only as an 

encouragement to the Province of Ontario to enter an agreement. For the remaining nine provinces the 

new annual guarantee is the minimum as established under the 1947 agreement adjusted to a new level. 

This adjustment takes account of changes in population between 1942 and 1948, and increases in the 

gross national product per capita between the same years. This formula has unfortunate effects for 

Saskatchewan because the very sharp decline in population which took place between the consensus of 

1941 and 1946 had not been made up by the year 1948. Consequently, the population adjustment works 

seriously against us. Although the guaranteed minimum under the new offer is higher at $19,831,000, 

the percentage advance is not nearly as large as for other provinces. Thus, the increase for Saskatchewan 

is 29.7 per cent, while that for other provinces begins with 39.3 per cent, for Manitoba ranging upward 

to 66.8 per cent, for British Columbia. 

 

As before, in determining the actual payments for each year of the agreement, the guaranteed minimum 

is adjusted for changes in population and gross national product per capita subsequent to 1948. Some 

technical changes have been introduced into this escalator clause. These made the payments more 

responsive to current economic changes, but eliminate the direct influence of government policy with 

regard to indirect taxes. Under the formula, the estimate of per capita payments actually to be received 

by Saskatchewan places this province third from the bottom of the list, just above the two rich central 

provinces but below British Columbia, Alberta and Manitoba, and far behind the Maritime provinces. 

r 

This, I suggest, is a strange distortion of the principle of fiscal need. It should be borne in mind if any 

comparisons are attempted, whether with previous years or with other provinces. Were we to receive a 

sum more proportionate to the fiscal needs of this province, — needs stemming from the high cost of 

services for our sparse population end from the disabilities imposed upon economy by national policies, 

— we might then be in a position to assist our municipalities still further, or, in the alternative, to budget 

for desirable surpluses. 

 

The Public Accounts for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1950, have been tabled. These show total 

revenues of $52,313,301, and expenditures of $52,059,105 leaving a surplus of $254,196. Only 

$4,000,000 of the liquor profits was used to make up the surplus. Had we used all these profits, as is 

done in other provinces, our surplus for the year would be shown as $5,366,653. 



February 21, 1951 

 

 
11 

During the past three years the province has had surpluses of $2,746,953, but if we add the remaining 

liquor profits amounting to $12,578,000, total surplus in the three year period would amount in all to 

$15,325,000, an average of over $5,000,000 annually. 

 

During the current year, the inflationary conditions of the past several years have continued at a greatly 

accelerated rate. Since January, the cost-of-living index has risen from 161 to 172.5, an increase of 11 

1/2 points compared with an increase of 1 1/2 points in 1949. This has resulted in a further reduction in 

the purchasing power of the dollar, which has been reflected in higher costs for the maintenance of our 

institutions, and for the cost-of-living bonus being paid our civil servants. This has also been particularly 

noticeable in our hospitals, and together with the increased number of patient days has resulted in 

greatly increased hospital costs. To this extra expenditure you will be asked to approve a supplementary 

vote of $2,000,000 for the hospitalization plan. Other supplementary estimates of $497,021 on revenue 

account were tabled this afternoon for your consideration. 

 

Revenues for the most part have continued at a reasonably high level. Public revenue tax and gasoline 

tax collections are approximately the same as those of last year. Motor license fees, the Dominion 

subsidy and the Education and Hospitalization Tax revenues to date are higher than anticipated. The 

present indications are that we shall show a fairly substantial surplus again. 

 

I should like to turn now to the budget for next fiscal year. The details of estimated revenues and 

expenditures have been tabled, and show as estimated surplus of $243,960. This surplus is made up as 

follows: 

 

Estimated Receipts $58,221,810 

Estimated Expenditures $57,977,850 

Estimated Surplus $243,960 

 

Estimated expenditures exceed those of the current year by $2,957,090. The increase is due entirely to 

the increased cost of living. For in the terms of the January, 1950, cost-of-living index next year's budget 

amounts to only $54,100,000- less than our last budget. 

 

I stated last year that revenues were not expected to increase materially, and, in terms of the 1950 value 

of the dollar, they have not done so. Expenditure estimates for 1951-52 have consequently been held to a 

level which this province can fully afford. Indeed, as I have just indicated, the estimate for 1951-52, if 

put in terms of the 1950 value of the dollar, are lower than the 1950-51 estimates. The Saskatchewan 

Government, like all Saskatchewan families, has been caught by the spiralling cost-of-living. We are 

spending, on the face of it, more dollars, but are not getting as much for each dollar spent. 

 

On the other hand, we have not kept, nor do we intend to keep, government expenditures down to the 

point where the well-being of our people is jeopardized. It has always been this government's belief that 

it has a responsibility for a healthy and expanding economy. The first place to start, obviously is to 

provide for the health and well-being of the people of 



11a 

 

 

Saskatchewan. This we quite consciously set out to do in our first term of office. By 1948 we were 

spending $23 per capita on health and welfare, as opposed to $12 per capita in 1944. By 1948 we were 

spending over $9 per capita on public education, as opposed to the $5 per capita spent by the previous 

administration. 

 

But always, I should like to repeat, while doing our utmost to foster the health, well-being and 

productivity of Saskatchewan citizens, we have done so within the limits of our resources. Never has 

this government incurred a deficit; indeed our financial health is indicated by our excellent credit 

position today. 

 

This year's budget, then, reflects the "humanity first" policies undertaken during our past six years in 

office. Expenditures on health will be roughly 28 per cent of the total budget; expenditures on welfare 

approximately 11 per cent; and expenditures on education will constitute the same 16 per cent that they 

did in the last two or three years. Expenditures for the protection of persons and property will take up 

approximately 3 per cent of our receipts; and expenditures for transportation and communication 

approximately 11 per cent. These figures, reflecting as they do our overall policy for 1951-52, are 

roughly the same as those for the last two years. The really significant policy changes are to be found in 

the estimates of the Departments of Agriculture and Natural Resources and in our Capital Budget. For it 

is this government's announced intention, having made tremendous strides during its first term of office 

in its education, health, welfare and rehabilitation programmes, to devote the second term to increasing 

the utilization of our tremendous agricultural, mineral, forest and industrial resources. 

 

But before turning to this aspect of next year's budget, I should like to review briefly the dollar increases 

in the revenue budget. In the field of health, whereby the way Ontario spent in 1949 only 11 per cent of 

its budget as opposed to our 28 per cent, certain increases in expenditure are proposed. The Hospital 

Plan is to receive roughly $1,500,000 more to assist its operation. I explained a year ago that increased 

hospital costs and a higher utilization of hospital beds accounts for the hospital deficit. 

 

I also explained that this government is reluctant to increase the hospital tax. Increasing prices for 

almost all necessary commodities continue to push up hospital operating costs. It should be noted, 

however, that we are taking every possible measure to ensure that these costs are held as low as possible. 

The budget for the Hospital Administration and Standards Division has been increased from $88,000 to 

$109,000 for next fiscal year. This is the Division which establishes hospital standards and assists the 

hospitals in reducing operating costs; consequently every dollar spent by this Division can materially 

assist in reducing the Hospital Plan deficit. 

 

Provision is also made in the Department of Health budget for the establishment of two more Health 

Regions. Here is one of the most significant, forward-looking health programmes on the continent; one 

which is attracting wide public attention. Through local initiative, municipalities can band together for 

the purpose of providing their people with superior preventative health programmes, and with a partial 

or complete health insurance programme. This government is ready and anxious to assist in the 

formation of Health Regions, as evidenced by a 19 per cent increase in the 

 

 



12 

 

budget for Regional Health Services. 

 

I should point, too, to the increase of $15,470 in the budget for the Air Ambulance Service. This is to me 

provide for the establishment of a second base of operations — in Saskatoon. All members will 

welcome this improvement in our Air Ambulance Service. 

 

In the Department of Social Welfare $129,490 is being provided for the opening of new Home for the 

Aged in Saskatoon. The need for such a home has been evident to the government for some time, and 

we are happy to be able to open this home next fiscal year. I should like to point out that every 

institution of this type does much to relieve over-crowding in hospitals, by providing a home for senior 

citizens who are unable to care for themselves, but who are not ill enough to warrant hospital care. 

 

I should also like to announce that the government is proposing to close the Girls' Hostel in Regina, an 

action made possible by our foster-home programme. The money saved will be used by the Child 

Welfare Branch to improve its services to all the under-privileged children in Saskatchewan. 

 

In the field of education, budgetary increases reflect an improvement in certain education programmes. 

An increase of $14,500 in the budget of Normal Schools is provided for; $25,000 more will be paid into 

the Teachers' Superannuation Fund; and $21,000 more is being made available for the administration of 

education in Northern Saskatchewan. There is also a 21 per cent increase in the budget for Regional 

Libraries, the pilot project in Prince Albert Region having already significantly improved library 

facilities in that area. This is a programme which has attracted the attention in library circles throughout 

Canada and the United States — once again giving evidence that Saskatchewan is the pioneer province 

in education programmes. Significant too is the extension in the Apprenticeship programme, designed to 

provide improved training in the skilled crafts for our young people. We will be spending next year a 

gross of $124,500 in the Apprenticeship Branch, as opposed to $87,700 this current year. 

 

Having reviewed that aspect of this budget which deals with human resources, let me turn to the 

measures which are designed to increase and improve the utilization of our physical resources. I have 

already referred, Mr. Speaker, to the very satisfying expansion in our economy over the past year. Much 

of that growth is due to the confidence of private and co-operative capital both in the resources of our 

province, and in the effectiveness of this government's operations. 

 

The capital budget for 1951-52 is designed to give further stimulus to this expansion. It provides for a 

$2,700,000 capital expenditure in our telephone system. Power facilities, so necessary to both industrial 

and agricultural development, are growing by leaps and bounds. Next year alone the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation will undertake a $7,000,000 capital expansion programme — as part of this 

government's effort to catch up on the omissions of previous administrations. Capital expansion in other 

crown industries, and financed out of next year's capital budget, will amount to over $500,000. 



February 21, 1951 

 

 
13 

These are the signs of an expanding economy — a growth in both private and government investment 

capital, a government which enjoys a good credit position, and an expansion in those industries such as 

power and communication, which are essential to both agricultural and industrial expansion. 

 

Adequate transportation facilities are another important factor in the growth of the economy. This 

government has done more than any previous administration to improve the provincial highway 

network. Next fiscal year we will be spending $2,5,000,000 out of Capital Account and approximately 

$2,500,000 out of Revenue Account for highway construction. This expenditure on our highway system 

is designed, of course, to improve the heavy traffic arteries. The Provincial highways constitute a basic 

asset of Saskatchewan's transportation industry — they are used by agriculture, trade and commerce, and 

primary, and manufacturing industry alike. Our secondary highways are of primary advantage to our 

farmers — being used principally for the marketing of agricultural commodities, and to facilitate local 

trade. Finally, the improved highway network has done much to increase tourist traffic in this province. 

Recent figures indicate that 11 per cent more tourists visited Saskatchewan in 1950 than in 1949. 

 

I should like to turn now, Mr. Speaker, to the measures we shall take next year for the development of 

our agricultural industry. Next year's expenditure on revenue account will be $2,600,000, the same as 

this current year, but more than five times the sum spent in 1943-44. 

 

In addition to these expenditures on revenue account we will spend $750,000 on agricultural 

development from capital account. The basic philosophy of this government is that farmers should be 

assisted in obtaining farm units which are more economic. To do this, the Department of Agriculture 

provides, through its highly efficient Agricultural Representative Service, technical advice to farmers on 

how to increase or diversify agricultural production. In addition to this service, the Department is 

currently employed in developing underutilized areas in local farming communities — areas which are 

owned by the Crown or by municipalities. To develop these areas is to provide to the local community 

feed and fodder resources which are so seriously lacking. To develop these areas is to increase the 

agricultural production of each community. 

 

I should like, Mr. Speaker, to outline for members some of the measures we are taking today which are 

designed to help keep many, many farmers off relief rolls tomorrow — if drought and depression should 

strike us again. These measures, to which I refer, are largely designed to increase feed and fodder 

production, which will in turn permit us to diversify our agricultural production through increasing the 

livestock population. For let it be remembered that only 13 per cent of our total occupied farm land is 

suitable for a continuous grain crop type of farming, and 42 per cent suitable for grain growing if seeded 

down periodically to hay or grass. 

 

Next year approximately $235,000 will be spent on reclaiming abandoned land and developing 

underutilized land. To do this, the Department of Agriculture will undertake irrigation projects, 

community pastures and the regrassing of abandoned lands. The government will also suspend some 

$175,000 on drainage projects — draining lands in both the older and more recently settled areas as a 

further guarantee to farm security. 



February 21, 1951 

 

 
14 

In addition to these crown-land projects, direct provincial assistance will be made available to 

associations of farmers to help them bring water to privately-owned lands. In conjunction with and 

working with the farmers in each Agricultural District, the Province will spend approximately $340,000 

on this programme in 1951-52. 

 

The same approach is being taken in our "Earned Assistance Programme". Groups of farmers band 

together to help themselves by increasing the production of underutilized lands. The Provincial 

Government assists these groups on projects which they are unable to undertake by themselves. 

$150,000 will be spent next year to assist in reclamation work, the creation of feed and fodder banks, 

local drainage work and small irrigation projects. 

 

I should refer, too, to our policy of making new lands available for agricultural use — limited though 

these new lands may be. In 1951-52 we will spend over $500,000 clearing, breaking and draining land 

for new farm units. 

 

I said before, Mr. Speaker, that the great agricultural potential of our province can play a significant role 

in the critical world struggle for peace, with political freedom and economic justice. The programmes I 

have just reviewed reflect the conscious plans of this government to protect, conserve and increase that 

potential. 

 

Turning now to the development of other resources, I need only to reiterate the tremendous progress 

made last year to demonstrate the effectiveness of this government's programmes. I confidently expect 

that the year ahead will be an even healthier expansion of our economy. We will spend nearly 

$56,000,000 toward the completion of our forest inventory — an inventory which will enable us to 

advise commercial interests enquiring as to Saskatchewan's potentialities We will spend nearly $17,000 

of our forest management programme — a programme which is designed to ensure sustained forest 

yield rather than uneconomic depletion. 

 

The Department of Natural Resources will also spend $60,650 on developmental research on industrial 

minerals, and $17,000 will be spent on the Saskatchewan Geological Survey in 1951-52. Prospectors 

will receive nearly $10,000 assistance in their work of opening up the north, and the same sum will be 

spent on mining roads. 

 

Other promotional efforts and general assistance programmes are to be found throughout the Natural 

Resources budget — for example nearly $30,000 on road construction and maintenance in the north — 

$10,000 on the Northern Communication System, so essential to general resource development; and 

various sums for geological mapping, aerial photography, and so on. I repeat, Mr. Speaker, that these 

programmes have shown results — results which were not forthcoming before this government came to 

office. 

 

I should like to turn, now, Mr. Speaker, to a review of our borrowings and debt position. During the 

present fiscal year three debenture issues were sold, amounting in all to $20,000,000. 

 

The first issue of $5,000,000, dated May 1, maturing in 1968 and bearing interest at 31 per cent was sold 

by the syndicate at par. This issue was over-subscribed and an additional $3,000,000 was sold at the 

same price. 



February 21, 1951 

 

 
15 

In August, arrangements were completed to call the $3,000,000, 4 per cent issue, maturing in 1953, and 

the $5,000,000, 4 per cent issue maturing in 1954. These issues were callable at par. From their sinking 

funds and from consolidated funds we paid $2,000,000. For refunding the balance, the sum of 

$6,000,000 was borrowed in U.S. funds through private sources. Debentures were issued for 20 years at 

an interest rate of 3 1/8 per cent, and were sold by the syndicate at a price of $99.50 to yield 3 1/8 per 

cent. These debentures are callable at any time at par on 30 days notice. The first $4,000,000 was 

borrowed while the premium of 10 per cent on American funds was still in effect, but before the transfer 

of the next $2,000, 000 had taken place, the American dollar had been freed on the Canadian market and 

the premium had declined to 5 per cent. We have placed in a reserve account the premium of some 

$500,000, from which we shall pay the premium on any interest payments due. 

 

In January arrangements were made to borrow another $3,000,000 to complete the present year's capital 

programme. This sum was borrowed privately, also in the United States. Debentures maturing in 1966 

were issued with a coupon rate of 3 1/8 per cent, and were sold at 99.00 to yield 3.20 per cent. These 

bonds are callable after four years at a price of 101 and after nine years at 100.50. This issue was so 

satisfactorily placed that further arrangements were made to extend the amount of this loan to 

$6,000,000. 

 

Saskatchewan citizens should all feel a very keen sense of pride in our ability to finance on such 

favourable terms, especially at a time when the whole bond market has been undergoing very drastic 

change. In the past year, the price of Dominion Victory Bonds has dropped from 103 to 100.12 — a 

drop of 2 7/8 points. This resulted in increasing the interest rate from 2.70 to 2.99 per cent. It was only 

natural to expect that this would adversely affect the price of provincial bonds, and raise the rate of 

interest on any further borrowings. The situation has become so serious that several provinces have 

delayed their borrowing program, rather than pay the higher interest rates. Earlier this month one 

province brought out a 20-year issue at par with a 4 per cent coupon. 

 

I feel confident that Saskatchewan will save a considerable amount through having borrowed 

$12,000,000 on the American market during the past year. First of all, there is a substantial saving in the 

interest rate — perhaps 1/2 per cent, which amounts to $60,000 annually. Secondly, there is the profit or 

premium on American funds, amounting to $800,000. This, of course, cannot be determined definitely 

until later. With the tremendous development taking place in Canada there seems no reason why we 

cannot confidently look forward in the near future to the day where the value of the Canadian dollar will 

not only equal but exceed that of the U.S.A. I am confident that long before the date of maturity of the 

bonds issued, the present position will be reversed, and we shall not only have the $800,000 as an actual 

rather than a book profit, but will be repaying the loan with American dollars purchased at par or at a 

discount. 

 

Last year I placed on the record during my budget address the prices of bonds in different provinces 

from 1942 onwards. A study of that table shows that in 1945 the interest rates on Saskatchewan bonds 

were 2 per cent above those of any other province in Canada. By 1948 the spread 



February 21, 1951 

 

 
16 

had dropped to 1 per cent. Today, our bonds are trading at a lower rate of interest than those of some of 

the other Canadian provinces, and are in no case 1/4 of 1 per cent above any other province. The price of 

every provincial bond, except Saskatchewan's, is lower than a year ago. 

 

When I delivered my first budget address in 1945 1 said, "Saskatchewan will always scrupulously 

honour its fair and just obligations; it will meticulously safeguard the savings of those who invest in the 

resources of the province; it will act in accordance with justice at all times." That policy has been 

followed. No government, in any province of Canada since Confederation, has done more to meet its 

obligations and remove the burden of debt from its people. This has been done by gradually getting the 

province in a pay-as-we-go position. While it is true that the province has borrowed money in recent 

years, it has been largely for refunding and for self-liquidating projects. At the same time the 

dead-weight debt has been and is being paid off at an unprecedented rates. 

 

Honourable members will be glad to know that we are no longer indebted to the banks. At the end of the 

last fiscal year we paid off the last $900,000 and were, for the first time since the province was formed, 

free of debt to the banks. The Treasury Bills' position continues to improve. I would like to remind the 

assembly that in 1944 the Treasury Bills' statement totalled $107,500,000, including 9,765,000 owing to 

the banks for many miscellaneous purposes as well as $16,468,000 owing to them for 1938 seed grain 

advances. I am sure that every member in the House will be delighted to learn that our total Treasury 

Bill indebtedness is now down from $107,500,000 to $37,351,000, all of which is payable to the Federal 

Government, over a period of 26 years, and on over $30,000,000 of which there is no interest payable. 

 

Notwithstanding the fact that during the year we borrowed $20,000,000, I am pleased to report that our 

debt position has improved again this year. Actually, the net debt shows a small increase of $29,860 

from $147,913,814 to $147,943,674. However, during the year, there has been a further reduction in 

average interest rates from 4.20 per cent to 4.05 per cent. Moreover, because of an increase in 

population from 858,000 to 874,000 the result is a reduction in our per capita debt from $172 to $169. 

 

 April 30, 1944 Dec. 31, 1949 Dec. 31, 1950 

Bonded Debt $125,244,954 $127,426,428 $128,818,440 

Treasury Bills  92,910,900 42,481,155 37,851,261 

Contingent Liabilities 20,016,607 1,326,793 1,379.447 

GROSS DEBT $238,172,461 $171,234,376 $168,049,148 

Less Sinking Funds $23,919,341 23,320,562 20,105,474 

NET DEBT $214,253,120 $147,913,814 $147,943,674 

Per Capita  $254 $172 $169 

 



February 21, 1951 

 

 
17 

The improvement in our debt position is reflected in the estimates tabled today. The amount required for 

debt changes is down from $8,590,490 to $8,322,780, a reduction of $267,710. This reflects the lower 

interest rates at which money is now being borrowed, the improved Treasury Bills' position and the 

replacement of dead-weight debt by self-liquidating debts, such as power and telephones. 

 

The net debt of the province has been reduced by over $66,000,000 since 1944, during a time when 

capital expenditures of over $62,000,000 have been made. As I indicated last year, not only has the 

quantity of the debt improved, but so also has its quality. The following table of gross debt shows this: 

 

 April 30, 1944 Dec 31, 1950 

Self-liquidating Debt  $50,705,461 $57,113,509 

Dead-weight Debt  187,467,000 110,935,639 

 $238,172,461 $168,049,148 

 

From this table, it can be seen that while the total gross debt has been reduced by $70,000,000 the 

dead-weight debt has actually been reduced $76,532,000. 

 

It should also be pointed out that the reduction in the amount required for debt charges has been 

accomplished in spite of an increase from $997,210 to $1,1718,200 in the sinking fund instalments 

required. On all new bond issues in the past year provision has been made for a 3 per cent sinking fund. 

This is in accordance with the policy announced last year, and will result in the province having 

sufficient revenue in the various sinking funds to repay the major part of the debenture issue on 

maturity, rather than having to refund the entire amount as has been the case in past years. This new 

policy has been greatly appreciated by the investors and has undoubtedly helped to create a demand for 

Saskatchewan bonds of recent issue. 

 

From what has been said already, it can be seen that our anticipated revenues next year must be 

somewhat higher than were expected this year, in order that we may balance the budget. I am happy to 

announce that this can be done within the framework of our present taxation structure, and that there will 

be no new taxes or increases in any of the existing taxes. I feel confident that our expanding economy 

will enable us to carry out the progressive programme envisaged by this budget. There are those in our 

midst who advocate a reduction in government spending at this time. This can only result in holding 

back the economic development which is now taking place in Saskatchewan, or in reducing our social 

welfare, health and education programmes. The government is not prepared to agree to either of these 

alternatives. 

 

Rather, we believe that present conditions demand that we should make adequate provision for the 

development of our resources in order that our economic structure may function to its utmost capacity. 

We believe, too, that in a social democracy the welfare of the people is most important. And so the 

present budget makes provision for both of these principal objectives. Because of this, I feel confident 

that it will meet with the approval of the people of this province, whose servants we are. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that you do now leave the Chair. 


