




















































Hansard: February 19, 1951


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

THIRD SESSION — ELEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

13th Day 

 

Monday, February 19, 1951 

 

The House met at three o'clock p.m. 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed, from Friday, February 16, 1951, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

Mr. Howe for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne, and the proposed amendment thereto 

by Mr. Korchinski. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate I, first of all, 

would like to express my regrets at the absence of my seat-mate, the member for Kinistino (Mr. Woods), 

who, as we all know, is sick in the hospital, and all of us who have had the experience of being in the 

hospital know that it is not a very good place to be. We all hope that he will be with us sometime before 

this Session is over. I know we will all be glad to see him. 

 

I also wish to congratulate the speakers in this debate up to this time, and they have done very well. 

They have had a little tussle now and then, disagreed on certain points, and I expect before we finish 

here, this afternoon, they will do so again. I even want to congratulate the Premier — not on what he 

did, but what he tried to do. 

 

I want to say a word in regard to my own constituency. The constituents of Arm River, Mr. Speaker, did 

not have a very good crop. It could have been worse, however; in some parts of the district it was a fair 

crop. We suffered, like other places in the province, from the frost, but one way, I think, we are better 

off than probably most parts of the province, and that is that all our crop was safely harvested, and that is 

more than can be said of a large part of this province. 

 

Now in going on to what I have to say this afternoon, I just want to clear up a few things that have been 

disputed very strongly and decisively on the floor of this House. You know there have been many things 

said this Session, Mr. Speaker, that have left us in a fog, so to speak — the debate has not been 

absolutely clear. 

 

A few days ago, speaking on February 9, the member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) made some 

reference to increases in telephone fees, that is, connecting fees on the rural phones; and this was very 

strenuously objected by the Premier, for one, and I think one of the other members as well. The Premier 

said this: 

 

"On a question of privilege, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. gentleman has said that the statement which I made 

was incorrect. The statement that I made was that there had been no increase in rental by the 

Telephone Corporation. That statement is true; that statement is correct. Any increase by rural 

telephone 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
2 

companies is not an increase by the Saskatchewan Government Telephone Corporation. My hon. 

friend ought to know that and I take exception to the hon. gentleman." 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the matter that was brought to the attention of this House by the member from 

Cannington was based on a question asked last Session in this House; and the question, asked by the 

member for Kinistino, was this: "At what dates were increases in charges for use of telephones made, 

and what were the amounts of such increases?" Here is the answer: "On March 1, 1949, there was an 

increase in telephone charges at Regina and Saskatoon of 25 cents per line per month on resident 

service, and 75 cents per month on business service, as both cities had grown beyond the 10,000 line 

classification". And here is the next part of the question answered: "On January 1, 1950, all rural 

connecting fees were restored to their normal classification, and they are now at the proper relationship, 

one to the other. This resulted in a $2 increase per rural subscriber per year at all exchanges, with the 

following exceptions Biggar, North Battleford and Yorkton." Now I don't have to read the rest which 

only explains why these three particular places were excepted from the increase. 

 

Now then, this is not what the member from Cannington said, Mr. Speaker. It is what the Government 

told us. It is what the Government said. But in spite of that, we have not one two or three of the 

Ministers jumping up on their feet and trying to make out that the member from Cannington was stating 

something that wasn't true, and that is what I object to, Sir. I object to it very, very strongly. This is not 

an individual case in this House; time and time again it has been resorted to by the members opposite. 

And I would like to know what right they have — or is that political ethics so far as the C.C.F. is 

concerned? It must be a new classification of political morality in this Party. I would like to know when 

the government answers a question, and then gets up and declares on the radio, and on the floor of the 

House, that this thing isn't so, that it isn't true. Now I think that should straighten that matter up. The 

next time the Premier jumps on his feet to discredit a statement by another member of this House, let 

him have the facts. 

 

A few days ago the member for Canora (Mr. Kuziak) — (that is the birth place of the C.C.F. if I 

remember correctly) — was speaking on the floor of this House, and on that occasion he did his level 

best — he was backed up by that Premier at that time — to put the interpretation on the speech of the 

member from The Battlefords (Mr. Maher) that all the Crown Corporations were going to be "thrown 

out the window". That is the statement he made, and he was determined, and repeated over and over 

again, that that is what the member from The Battlefords said. He knows better; he absolutely knows 

better and so does the Premier. 

 

Let us see what was said on that occasion, Mr. Speaker. The member from The Battlefords was speaking 

here — I forget the date exactly — but he said this, on page 27, and there are three debates in this file I 

have right here: 

 

"I would take such utilities that are providing service. I will give the Government credit that now that 

all private operators of buses in this province have gone, the Saskatchewan Transportation Company 

should be continued, 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
3 

the same with the Government Airways in the north; but, they should be operated on a proper basis, on 

the same basis as the Power Corporation is operated — charging interest, and paying in addition to 

that, municipal taxation, and put it on a proper basis and let any surplus from your Saskatchewan 

Transportation, particularly, be used for the purpose of expansion of bus lines to places in the province 

that have not any facilities, and secondly, for the reduction of the cost of transportation. Well then, that 

brings us down to what is left — and what is left? The big losers, as far as I am concerned, Mr. 

Speaker, the big losers". 

 

And here is a sentence put in brackets, which says, "I am sorry, the Premier has left the House". He had 

to leave; but when the Premier interrupted the speech the other day, Mr. Speaker, he was so sure of it so 

he must have been in the House — but we didn't see him. But the member from The Battlefords goes on 

then, and says: 

 

"Well then, that brings us to what is left — the big losers. As far as I am concerned, Mr. Speaker, I 

would throw the whole caboodle of them out through the window". 

 

"Hon. J.T. Douglas: — We know that. 

 

"Mr. Maher: — All of those corporations that are losing money, like the woollen mill and so on; I do 

not think they are of any value to this province at all, and I would suggest that if the Government did 

things like this and got this economy back on a proper basis, that this province would progress and we 

would have a great amount of capital to provide employment for the people in this province. 

 

Now that is the statement which was distorted and confused in every respect, not only by the member 

for Canora (Mr. Kuziak) but by the Premier as well. Let that be a lesson to them to not come back again 

to the same thing. 

 

I want to say another thing, Mr. Speaker, so far as the Liberal Party is concerned — and I am speaking 

for the Liberal Party today. As the member from The Battlefords said, every private bus corporation that 

was giving service had been put out of business in this province; but the people of Saskatchewan need 

have no fear so far as the Transportation and the Airways, or any other service which is of general 

benefit to the province of Saskatchewan is concerned — they will be continued, they will be improved, 

and they will be of better service to the people of the province, when the time comes — which is very 

close at hand — when this Government will be relegated to the place where they should be. I will give 

that assurance to the people of this province that there is not a service that they have today that will not 

be maintained, extended, and in every way made to meet the needs of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. They need have no fear about that. 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
4 

The member from Canora, Mr. Speaker, made another statement. He said: 

 

"In spite of the fact that there had been many members on this side of the House who had been 

speaking during the debate, there had not been a single constructive suggestion made by us on this side 

so far as the business of this province was concerned". 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if that is the mentality of the gentleman over there I can not help it, but let me tell 

you this, that he voted down two constructive suggestions. He voted down an amendment from this side 

of the House to turn the Public Revenue Tax back to the municipalities where it belongs and where it 

should be. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank: — Who put it on? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, you can answer that question when you get up. That was one of them — and 

the next one was that the Crown Corporations should be paying taxes on the operation of their facilities 

and their business places in the province of Saskatchewan. That was another one. Then Mr. Cronkite, or 

whoever wrote that report — there were a number of them and I am not going to elaborate on the long 

title that this report has; but I think he was probably chief architect of that report, and I am not criticizing 

the report, Mr. Speaker. I think it is a good report, and he very emphatically says that that should be 

done, and he says something else that I am going to touch on in reply to the hon. Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. I sat here and listened to him, and when I got back to my room — I haven't got all of the report 

— I cut the leads out of this big file they sent out, in order to get all the recommendations, so I have 

them and he stated this: That the recommendation was to the effect that a two-cent tax on gasoline 

should be put on in order to make up for the loss of the Public Revenue Tax. Then he pointed to the fact 

that certain groups of municipal men, all over this province, here and there, had passed a resolution 

asking that the two cents a gallon additional tax on gasoline be put on in order to be able to do away 

with the Public Revenue Tax. 

 

Now this Cronkite report doesn't say that at all, Mr. Speaker. Again the facts are twisted and distorted. It 

doesn't say that at all! It says that the two cents per gallon on gasoline should be put on so as to build 

more highways. That is what it says: not to make it possible for the Public Revenue Tax to be turned 

over to the municipalities. Now let us be clear on all this — and maybe the people of the province will 

have a clear conception and a clear idea of what these things mean. They certainly do not get it from the 

debate and the statements that have been made here in this House by members on the Government side 

of the House. 

 

The member for Gull Lake (Hon. Mr. Bentley), speaking the other day, of course, made a real old-

fashioned election stunt speech in this House. I could just imagine that he was back in the old 

schoolhouses, probably with a little kind of a moving picture machine, and then speaking to people that 

would not probably be informed, and anything that he said would go down, would be believed and be 

accepted as being the facts, no matter what he said. I will get to some of the things that he said before I 

sit 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
5 

down. Just for the time being, I want to point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that he accused the Leader of the 

Opposition of voting against a motion moved, by the hon. member for Weyburn, when he was the Rev. 

Mr. Douglas, and member for Weyburn in the Federal House, that would have raised the price of wheat 

from 70 cents to $1. This is one of the "phony" motions that have been made time and time again in the 

Federal House, just purely for nothing else than propaganda purposes, nothing else, Mr. Speaker; and I 

am going to mention probably one or two more before I get through here. Now what took place in the 

House of Commons? 

 

Mr. Tucker was speaking here and he said: "This is the question before the House, (and this is March 13, 

1942), the question before the House is simply one of approving the principle by which we raise the 

initial price from 70 cents to 90 cents. The hon. member for Weyburn (Mr. Douglas) has moved an 

amendment respecting this wheat as follows: 

 

"that this Bill be not now read a second time, (that is the Bill raising the initial price from 70 to 90 

cents) but it be resolved that the disregarding by this Parliament of the modest representation made by 

western agriculture for a parity price for all agricultural products and an initial wheat payment of at 

least $1 per bushel for No. 1 Northern, basis Fort William, is contrary to the peace, order and good 

government of Canada." 

 

The Bill that was before the House, raising the initial price from 70 to 90 cents was "contrary to the 

peace, order and good of Canada". 

 

"That amendment", (now this is Mr. Tucker speaking), "that amendment is sufficiently comprehensive 

that if my hon. friend had been much interested in the bonus he could have introduced a suggestion 

that they were favourable to this being achieved, by at least a bonus plan". 

 

"Mr. Douglas (Weyburn): — The legislation provides that. 

 

"Mr. Tucker: — The foundation is well laid in Western Canada for my hon. friend to get a great deal 

of credit for coming out for $1 wheat. I did not say that was the reason for moving this amendment but 

it will be for the people of Western Canada to judge when the time comes. What would be the effect of 

voting for this amendment? It would be that the attempt to raise the price from 70 cents to 90 cents 

would be defeated. 

 

"Mr. Douglas: — Oh, Oh, No! 

 

"Mr. Tucker: — Oh, of course it would. The motion for second reading would be defeated and the 

Bill would be killed. It would not go to the Committee. Who would provide that Bill unless the 

Government were 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
6 

willing to bring in another Bill? It would be killed and the price would remain at 70 cents. 

 

Mr. Coldwell: — That's right." 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Coldwell said that — the Leader of this farmers' champion sitting over here. 

That is the history, here. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — They have lied about it for seven years. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That isn't the only thing they have done that about. That was what happened, Mr. 

Speaker, the principles involved are exactly the same. It was on October 30, 1947, that the Premier made 

a speech at Kindersley and he said this, outlining the developments under the C.C.F. administration: 

 

"That the Liberal Leader, Walter Tucker, had not noted on the amendment in the Federal House asking 

for an increase from $30 to $50 in the old age pension. Mr. Tucker claimed he was paired — Mr. 

Douglas quipped he was 'scared'." 

 

You know what a genius he is, Mr. Speaker, and coming from a man who is Premier of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, what a pass public life in this province has come to. Now let us look at the facts. I want 

to ask the Premier now, and he can answer this question: Did Mr. Coldwell vote for that motion? Did 

Mr. Castleden vote for that motion? Did the gentleman, the present Minister of Public Health, vote for 

that motion? Did you? Now, answer that question or else shut up. You can't tell this House, or the 

province of Saskatchewan, that you voted for that motion; but that is the impression you leave here, in 

this statement. That is C.C.F. public morality, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to say that, in regard to that wheat price change from 70 to 90 cents, Mr. Speaker, it was only an 

initial payment. That is what we farmers believe in; that is what we worked for, and that is what we will 

continue to work for, because, after all, I don't think there is any farmer in Western Canada who thinks 

that we, as producers of grain or wheat, principally, in the years to come, will be able to get from any 

Government that sits in Ottawa, any more. There are only approximately 300,000 farmers in Canada, 

wheat farmers — probably that is a little too high — and we are going to be able to go to the Dominion 

Government and say, "here, we want the price and so and so and so", there is not going to be a bigger 

price and a bigger initial payment than what the world's market and conditions indicate can be paid. 

Therefore, we don't ask for that. We say that we are prepared to support a Wheat Board, to take our 

wheat and sell it at the best possible prices and divide it at the end of the year and give us what is 

coming to us. That's what we are going to do. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is what we are asking for. At last, Mr. Speaker, I have been in the farm 

movement for the last 40 years, and 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
7 

for the last 30 years very actively so. I was a Wheat Pool delegate once; I was a member of the old Grain 

Growers' Association, and I am a member of the Farmers' Union, today. 

 

Now then, there is another matter that I am going to speak of in a moment, and I don't mind telling you, 

Mr. Speaker, I am rather reluctant to do this thing, because the member for Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. 

Wellbelove) is a man for whom I have a very high regard. He has been sitting in this House now for 

several years and I was surprised — I was astounded, the other day, when he sat in his seat and declared, 

not once but three times, that the hospitalization and larger school units, and any other social legislation 

that has been put into effect by this Government (he claimed it has been put into effect by this 

Government), the people were going to lose it if the C.C.F. Socialist Government ever goes out of 

office, and he said this: 

 

"They voted against these Bills — every one of them. They voted against the Bill setting up the 

hospitalization." 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am sorry, but I have to repudiate that statement. When I heard that thing I went 

home for the weekend. I took off the 'Votes and Proceedings' for all this, and I went carefully over them 

and I took my jack-knife and I cut out the pages covering this very subject, and I am going to tell him 

now. But first, Mr. Speaker — I read a book one tine written by a man they called Adolf Hitler — the 

book' a title was 'Mein Kempf", and he talked about the big lie — and if you repeat something often 

enough, and make it worthwhile, and big enough — the people will eventually believe it; and you know 

there is a lot of truth in that. I think that is the philosophy practised by this Government. They tell it and 

tell it again to the people, they talk themselves into believing it — and hope, with enough repetition, 

they can talk the people into believing it. 

 

Mr. John Wellbelove (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — On a question of privilege, Mr. Speaker. Is the hon. 

referring to the cancellation of the 1935-'36-'37 seed grain? It is a little difficult to catch what you are 

referring to about the recorded vote. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Now, Mr. Speaker — and even when he said that we voted against the cancellation 

of 50 per cent of the 1938 seed, he is wrong. He is wrong there, too. 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker, I never made that statement in the House; but 

if you look up the records, '35, '36 and '37, you will find that every Liberal in the House voted against it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Who voted for cancellation of the '38 seed — 50 per cent of us? 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — '33, '36 and '37 seed grain. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That statement, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely wrong — absolutely wrong! I have it 

here. I have here the hospitalization . . . 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
8 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — You'd better not contradict Herman — he knows his stuff. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I have another one here that was on co-operative development — and the vote was 

unanimous. The larger school unit vote — there was never a recorded vote taken on it. We passed the 

Larger School Unit Act, Mr. Speaker. We did — and how could we stand up and vote against the 

principle which was accepted by the Liberal Party — our own party? There were more hospital services 

in the province of Saskatchewan before this Government came in than there was in any other province 

of Canada, per capita. Now that was all brought about by the municipalities and by the Government of 

this province. How could we stand up and vote against the extension of a Bill that we passed to put the 

same thing into effect, Bill No. 69 — just a few months before the fall Session of 1944, when this 

Government put the Health Act into operation. 

 

These things had always been accepted by us and voted for by us on the floor of this House. And if you 

will look back over the statutes, there they are every one of them. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, there is the Health Services Bill, No. 558 — there were absolutely no votes against 

that Bill by any member on this side of the House, and the member for Kerrobert knows it. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Another false statement. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And here is another, he says again . . . 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — Mr. Speaker, is he quoting me as saying there was a recorded vote against the 

hospitalization. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, you certainly did. 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — I am just going: to send for a copy of my transcript . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And I was astounded, but, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — I demand that you take that back . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — But, Mr. Speaker, we did vote against some Bills. We voted against The Trade 

Union Act, because we know that it was discriminatory in the state in which it was put through this 

House. We voted against what you call The Farm Security Act, Mr. Speaker, and I think maybe, many 

of you on that side if you had it to do over again would vote against it too. As a matter of fact there is 

nothing left of it. All the farm security in the province of Saskatchewan, today, in what the Liberal Party 

put in — every bit of it, Mr. Speaker. That is the situation. 

 

Now then, I wish to say a few words in regard to the speech by the hon. Minister of Education. He tried 

to make a good case, and he did make a good case out of a bad situation. There is no doubt about that, 

and what he lacked in logic and fact, he tried to make up by being emphatic and pounding his desk. I 

heard over the radio there was a speaker who had attended some banquet — it wasn't the Board of 

Trade, I think it was the Chamber of Commerce — these fellows over here do not believe in that; but he 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
9 

tried to tell a story he had heard there and it was a long and winding story, but finally he said, the moral 

of the whole story is this — "argument weak — yell like hell!" That is just what I mean about the hon. 

Minister of Education. 

 

However, there was one thing he did admit and that was that there are more supervisors in the schools at 

this time than there was at this time, last year. Now that is some confession to make. And then he went 

to work and said that he believes (and I think he is sincere in this — maybe he is right too) that a 

supervisor, or as some people call them 'sitter', but I call them supervisors — it is a little more dignified; 

he believes that they can do a better job under the supervision of a qualified teacher, than what a teacher 

could do who only had a week or two, or even a few days, or five or six weeks or something of Normal 

training. That is what he said. Well, that may be true. In other words, the substance of his speech is this 

— things are bad now, but they could be worse. 

 

Now I would like to ask him to give an explanation, sometime when he speaks in this House, why all 

these schools in my district are practically all closed; why, in some places there — I know of one place 

— for 24 miles there isn't a school open. We can start east of Elbow and we can take the whole south 

route of my constituency clean down until we get to Craik, and up till Christmas time there was only one 

school open there, and I think I am going to say this, as I was told by one who knows — that school 

would be closed up at Christmas time. Not a one is open — not a one. It is the same over the whole 

prairie part of Saskatchewan up between here and Saskatoon. What has happened, Mr. Speaker, is that 

these people have been compelled to leave their farms and go into the towns and settle in the towns. 

That is why the Minister of Agriculture has no little pigs on the farms any more; he hasn't got the butter 

— of course, margarine takes its place now, that he talked about last year. That is one of the reasons for 

the decrease in farm production, Mr. Speaker, and it is something they can try to disown the 

responsibility for; but it is there, and there is nothing that has been more conducive to depopulating the 

farm country and bringing them into the towns than the closing up of the rural schools up and down the 

length and breadth of this province. 

 

The Minister of Education said another thing — and it was not the first time I heard it. He said that for 

once the Federal Government should have come to the rescue with more money. Do you know, that is a 

very handy thing for the C.C.F. Government. Every time they have made a failure in some the things 

they try to do, they lay the blame to the Dominion Government because they haven't handed them more 

money. But that wasn't what they said in 1943 and 1944, Mr. Speaker. What did they do? They came out 

straightforward said they would assume the responsibility for education in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Here is what they said: 

 

"The British North America Act, which is Canada's constitution, makes education a provincial not a 

municipal or local responsibility. All along the provincial government has been evading their duty. It 

provided grants to schools, outlined courses of study, and provided free inspection of schools, but it 

has left the main burden of maintaining school services upon the municipalities and the local school 

boards. The main burden does not belong there. The C.C.F. Government will accept the responsibility 

which rests upon it by the Constitution". 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
10 

And, again — and I read this for the benefit of the Minister. He spoke in Estevan, February 6. 1945, 

after he had put in his Larger School Unit Act, and railroaded at least 14 school districts into larger 

school unit incorporation. He said this: 

 

"The ideal way of financing education in Canada would be to secure the money from Canada and 

spend it where there is need for that money, the hon. Woodrow Lloyd, Minister of Education, told a 

gathering of teachers and parents held in the Legion Hall." 

 

Then Mr. Lloyd continued: 

 

"We can't do that. We can't go that far in Saskatchewan, of course, but we hope to make education a 

provincial responsibility for it is quite as important to each individual that somebody else's child be 

educated, as well as his own." 

 

I have no axe to grind with that last sentence at all. That has been recognized in the province of 

Saskatchewan ever since there was a province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. But, again as late as 1945, 

on February 6, he re-emphasizes the policy of this Government, that education is the problem and the 

responsibility and the duty of the Provincial Government. Now, how has he carried out that duty? Very, 

very unsatisfactorily, I would say. He forgot about it. That was only to win votes — fool the people of 

the province. 

 

Now then, there is an amendment moved to this motion before the House, Mr. Speaker, and I would like 

to say a few words in regard to the amendment. But before I do that, what I have done so far, Mr. 

Speaker, has been to straighten out and to correct some of the distorted and untrue statements that have 

been made in this House by members on the other side of the House. This has been done and I want to 

say . . . 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — On a point of privilege . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — When I get through here he can speak . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member is rising on a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — The statements made by the hon. member that I had said they had voted against the 

hospital scheme and they had voted against the larger unit scheme, and he also said that if you repeated a 

lie often enough it is believed. I knew at the time he was making the statement that he was wrong. I have 

checked my address, Mr. Speaker, if you will allow me just to repeat — this all I said with regard to the 

larger unit . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — On a point of order, he is making a speech now . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — He is correcting a statement. You sit down now. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, that is the treatment we can expect from . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member is rising on a point of privilege to correct . . . 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
11 

Mr. Danielson: — He is going to read his speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — To correct a specific statement that you made. 

I 

Mr. Danielson: — This specific statement I made, Mr. Speaker, was that he said that we voted against 

the Hospitalization Act, the Larger School Unit Act, and that we had voted against cancelling farm 

debts. I said all these things are false. 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — I must ask that those statements be withdrawn, Mr. Speaker. It is not mentioned in 

my speech at all that I ever said you voted against the hospitalization plan. I did say that you voted 

against the cancellation of seed debts. You have only to look up in the Journals to see a recorded vote 

there — you will see, in the 1947 Journals, you, yourself were out of the House, but every Liberal that 

was in the House voted against it. What I had to say, Mr. Speaker, was very brief with regard to the 

larger unit: "I have never seen yet one member of the Opposition stand up in his place in this House and 

pay any tribute to the magnificent work that is being carried out by the larger unit scheme." 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order . . . 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — And I must ask, Mr. Speaker, that the statement be withdrawn. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I said in this House that he made the statement that, on the floor of the House, we 

had voted against all these measures, and that the people should know we voted against the 

hospitalization scheme, the larger units, and he mentioned, specifically, on the floor of this House, that 

we had voted against the Bill which cancelled debts, and that is not true. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member for Kindersley has quoted from his own speech exactly the same as 

you have quoted from some of the other speeches, and if we accept your quotation from one speech, 

then we must accept the hon. member's quotation from his own speech. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, he said on the floor of the House, also "look up the Journals of this 

House." I have looked up the Journals, and here they are, and the printed documents of this House go 

before any member's speech, and here they are. I can give him the pages of the printed Journals of this 

House now, if he wishes. 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — I asked, Mr. Speaker, that those statements be withdrawn on my behalf. Character 

assassination may be a thing in which they ply their oars, but we want that withdrawn. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If I am going to withdraw any statements that I made, Mr. Speaker, I have to do so in 

spite of the printed records of this House. Here they are. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If the hon. member made statements which the hon. member for Kindersley has utterly 

denied and supported his denial by his 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
12 

own speech which has been recorded by mechanical means, then I think the hon. member for Arm River 

should withdraw it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, in spite of the decision, I do not like the decision of this House and I 

have to withdraw it, but the present records of this House stay, of these statements which I made. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member is withdrawing? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I withdraw the statement, but I say to members of this House . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — . . . the hon. member for Arm River, I am asking him to withdraw a statement . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I am asking the hon. member to withdraw a statement which he ascribes . . . Order! 

 

Mr. Tucker: — And I am arguing a question of privilege in this House . . . and it has to do with this, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — When I have done explaining the position. The hon. member for Arm River made a 

specific charge against the hon. member for Kindersley. The hon. member for Kindersley has produced 

his own speech (Interruption) Well, if you are not going to accept . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — We want fair play in this House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition will take back that allegation. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, I have nothing to withdraw. I said, "We want fair play in this House". 

Surely I have got a right to say that? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition was casting aspersion upon my ruling in this House 

and my standing in this House and I asked him to withdraw it. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, I know it was a question of privilege. You would not permit me to speak 

on a question of privilege and I said, "We want fair play in this House", and I say it, again, Mr. Speaker, 

we want fair play in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition knows very well that when the Speaker is making 

the ruling it is not within the province of any member of the House to interrupt until he is finished, and 

your parliamentary experience should surely tell you that. What I was explaining is this. 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
13 

The hon. member for Arm River made specific allegations against the hon. member for Kindersley 

which he rose on a point of privilege and said were not true. Then he quotes from his own speech, which 

I think the hon. member for Arm River is prepared to accept. As far as records of the House, there was 

no mention of records of the House, no records. As I understood it, all that the hon. member for 

Kindersley asked was that the hon. member for Arm River withdraw those statements to which he took 

exception. That has nothing at all to do with records of the House. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — The hon. member for Arm River stated that he withdrew the statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If you wouldn't make so many interjections I might hear the hon. member. If the hon. 

member has withdrawn I am satisfied. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, that in that case, then the records of this House are 

not correct. The votes and records of this House are not correct in so far as what took place when these 

Bills passed through the House, and that is something the Government will have to take its responsibility 

for. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. I do not want to interrupt my hon. friend, 

to continue this debacle, but I may point out that my hon. friend completely misunderstands the point 

raised by the member for Kindersley. He is not objecting to the records of the House. He simply said 

that he did not in his speech say that my hon. friend had voted against the hospital plan. He didn't any 

that. He is not saying anything about the votes or the records of the House, in all fairness to our friend. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, now the Premier can sit down. He is not in this thing. In his speech, 

and he admits it is his, on the floor of this House, this afternoon, he said that we voted against the 

hospitalization scheme. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He didn't say that. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And he referred back to the Journal of the House. 

 

Mr. Wellbelove: — Mr. Speaker, I didn't say the Opposition voted against the Hospitalization Act. If 

you look up my speech and look up the records of the House . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What about the larger school units or the cancellation of debts? There was the two 

coupled together. Well, I have a chance to straighten out some of these things here and I think I have. 

The member for Kindersley will never convince me that black is white. I want to say to this gentleman 

over here, the Premier of the Province of Saskatchewan, when he sat in this House a couple of years ago 

he said deception disappeared before facts. Deception should disappear before the truth, and that applies 

to what I said, practically every word that I said, here this afternoon. 

 

Now then, Mr. Speaker, there is an amendment before this House which simply says that this 

Government should change its policy in regard 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
14 

to farm land, and that they should plan it so that the returned man, and all people who want to buy land, 

can purchase this land, pay for it and become the owner of that land; any land that is fit for farming — 

cleared land. Now that is what the amendment says. This Government has refused, so far at least, to put 

that policy into effect. The retuned man, today, sits out on his land and thinks that he is really the tenant, 

and all he has got is a paper showing that after 10 years he will then be permitted to exercise an option 

on that land. He does not know what that land is going to cost him. He and his family are out there 

trying to build up a home, and a certain amount of produce or the earnings from that land go to the 

Government. I am not going to quarrel over that, but I do take objection to putting a man who went over 

to Europe during the last war, and fought for us and came back in that position. I am sure there are 

thousands of veterans in the Province of Saskatchewan today who would be glad to be placed in the 

position where they would know definitely where they stood, know where they are. The least that this 

Government can do would be to get an assessment commission, a body of men, a disinterested impartial 

body of men who know something, to go out and assess this land and say, "Now, that land is worth 

today so much," and that would be the basis of the price the returned man should pay when the end of 

the 10 years comes. Now, he is going to go along and farm, he and his family and children work on their 

place. He's up in the air. He does not know; he's got no figures to shoot at at all. He does not know even 

whether he is going to be able to get that land in 10 years or not. If someone comes in and says, "Here, 

I'll give you $5 more an acre for that land", he may have to get out. We don't know. He does not know. 

That is the position of your returned man in the province today. 

 

What about our young men? There are thousands of them, today, who would like to go out and start a 

farm. Can they do so? Oh, no! They can't do so because the policy of this Government in regard to 

legislation they have passed has made it impossible for the fellow to buy a piece of land unless he has all 

cash to pay for it. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — (Interruption) 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There's another country heard from now. You'd better go back to the boiler shop! 

 

That is the situation; but, I do not suppose there is anything we can do about it, because these men sitting 

across the floor of this House have worked this socialistic policy and there's no doubt in the world, Mr. 

Speaker, that they have skipped along adventuring, if this Government is permitted to continue to rule 

the province of Saskatchewan, to eventual nationalization of the land. The Minister of Agriculture a few 

weeks ago sent out a letter to all the municipalities in this province that I know of in regard to the 

Utilization Board land and he said this: "As from this date" (that's the date of the letter) "all land in your 

control now which originally belonged to the Land Utilization Board, the control of that land is now 

vested in the Department of Agriculture." And he said this: "That any lease plan at the end of the term of 

the lease has to be reported to the Department of Agriculture as well." Now, back in the did days when 

we had some dry years the Land Utilization Board set up land titles. There was a tremendous amount of 

tax owed on this land and municipalities had title of 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
15 

this land, Mr. Speaker. In the tax proceedings nobody would want it, and that was not all bad land. It 

was good land, many, many thousand acres of good land. And then, of course, the law is that, if a 

municipality gives title to a piece of land through tax sale proceedings the Public Revenue Tax is 

payable to the Government from the municipality. The municipality did not have the money so, in order 

to help the municipalities out we said this: "That any land, sub-marginal land, if you want to turn it over 

to this Utilization Board, the Public Revenue Tax will be cancelled." That is why this land passed into 

the hands of the Land Utilization Board. But what did we do? We said this: "We do not want to set up a 

big administrative body to take care of this land. We will return this to your control and you will carry it 

for $1 a quarter-section per year." That was the lease — $1 a year, with the provision, of course, that this 

land is not put back into grain production; tear up and use it for anything else. Of course, Mr. Speaker, a 

great deal of it was light land, subject to drifting and so on. And that is the contingent of service, the 

Department of Agriculture under the present Minister, who has taken an interest, and the municipalities 

are taking an interest, and that land has now been seeded to grass. Much of it, however, has gone back to 

grain production because new types of machinery, new material, have removed that land into a category 

where drifting is not such a menace. It is cultivated, today, so all the trash and weeds and stuff remains 

on top of the land, and consequently, it is being set for grain production. Now, then, all that land is taken 

away from the municipalities and vested in the Department of Agriculture. There are many farmers in 

my district, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is leaving the impression that municipalities own 

this land. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, no, Mr. Speaker, I made that absolutely clear, and there is no need for the 

Minister of Agriculture bringing that construction to bear on anything I said. But now here, the fact is 

that many of these lands seeded to grass, the farmer, particularly if he wants to have livestock, has 

leased 40 acres, 30 acres, 20 acres, 10 acres apiece, and there has been inestimable benefit to the farmers 

in the municipality, to be able to come in there and harvest that grass, then with the other seed supplied 

that they could rake up on their own farm they have been able to get through. But now, even that has 

been taken away and brought into the Department of Agriculture, and there will be more government 

cars running around, there will be more supervisors, more agriculture representatives, and all that thing; 

more inspectors to run all over the province to control, to check on this land, which is a waste of money 

in the first place, absolutely a waste of money. So there is another thing, that again is another step along 

the road that this Government has never given up. They say they are the same as the Labour 

Government in Britain, and that the Labour Government did great business. Time and time again I have 

heard that statement from members opposite and from the Minister. Well, till a short time ago, the 

Minister did not want to be confluent with the Labour Party over there. 

 

He was asked about this and he said he definitely now professes that socialization remains a fixed policy 

in the policy of the Labour Government in Great Britain. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Point of privilege, Mr. Speaker. 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
16 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I am not standing for any more interruptions from the hon. member. He 

can speak any time. He'll have a time to speak here again. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, 

 

Mr. J. Wellbelove: — When the hon. member withdrew he said it was in spite of the records of the 

House. I wish to draw to Your Honour's attention to the Statutes of 1947, chapter 55, addressed to 

residents of rural municipalities and local improvement districts, the cancellation of the 1935 and 1936 

and 1937 seed grain. In the Journals of 1947, page 119, if Your Honour would refer to that in your 

leisure, you will find that every Liberal in the House voted against the cancellation. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — All I can say to that is that when I get back I will make a complete search of the 

Journal. Now, I want to go on with this, if he does not find some more Journals while I am talking. I 

want to say this, in regard to this amendment. After all, as far as the returned man is concerned, Mr. 

Speaker, I do not think it makes very much difference, because I am stating right here and now that so 

far as the Liberal policy is concerned, which will be the next government of this province, then the 

sooner he comes along with his election he mentioned the other day, the better. And we are going to 

fight it on Saskatchewan issues, not on Mr. "Red Dean" or Endicott et al. We are going to fight it on 

Saskatchewan issues, and I want to say to you and to every member of this House and to every returned 

man in the province of Saskatchewan — and I speak for the Liberal party when I say this — that when 

we return to power every penny, every nickel, every dollar that this Government has collected in rent or 

any other impost from the returned man on this Crown Land will be applied against the purchase price 

of that land. And they do not need to be afraid they will lose one penny of it. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — It won't be long now, either. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It won't be long either. That's the promise of the Liberal Party. And it saves a lot of 

quibbling, a lot of chewing. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Do you doubt it? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That grin on your face is pretty thin. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words in regard to the 1950 crop. The Premier 

was very critical of the Federal Government, of course; that is the only thing he can be critical of. There 

is nothing to commend in his own camp, in his own Government, so he has to try and find fault with 

everything that the Federal Government does and the Wheat Board, and he said many things. But he said 

that the Federal Government should have paid so much more money than what they did and he said that 

they went out and borrowed money in 1949, when they paid the 20 cent premium. He said another thing, 

that the Federal Price 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
17 

Support Act should have been applied to take care of this 1950 crop. Well, I want to answer that very 

carefully, because he knows, I think; if he does not know . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, this is a question of privilege. I made no such statement. I said that 

in 1946, the Rt. Hon. James G. Gardiner promised that the Agriculture Price Support Act would be used 

to compensate the farmer if they had to take less over the 5-year pool series for their wheat than the 

world market price would have brought. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has made another speech and that's all right; I do not 

mind that at all. He knows that Mr. Gardiner has never made the statement that the Prices Support Act of 

$200 million voted was applicable to wheat. Never did say that. And time and time again that has been 

pointed out. That was applicable to bacon, to eggs, to cheese and things of that kind. It was never 

applicable to wheat. 

 

There is another difference. There is a distinct difference between the 1950 crop and the 5-year pool, 

Mr. Speaker, and it is this. When the initial payment was made in 1949, the terminals, the ships on the 

sea, at Vancouver, all over south-west of Canada, were full of wheat in the possession of the Wheat 

Board. They had the wheat there. It was a good grade; it was in marketable condition; there was a world 

demand for that wheat. Millions of bushels were on the sea, on the open sea to go anywhere. Well, we 

had a guaranteed price — not only for 1949, but for 1950 crop. That is what we had — a guaranteed 

price, Mr. Speaker. Now what about the 1950 crop? When they set the price of this crop, Mr. Speaker, 

the crop was not even harvested. There are 16 million bushels of that crop lying under snowdrifts in 

Saskatchewan, today. That is an estimate, of course. Is there no difference between these two situations? 

Why, I think that it is silly to try to compare the two. 

 

But something has happened since. The Dominion Government, in spite of the Minister of Agriculture 

who told the farmers that they were not gong to get any more for their feed wheat, came along and gave 

us another 20 cents. I think the Minister of Agriculture has placed himself in exactly the same position 

as the Premier did, in 1948, when he made a speech, and he told the audience in that speech that he 

would present any farmer with a leather medal or a Cabinet minister's head on a platter, stuffed with 

celery (he had to put something in it, otherwise there was nothing in there), who had received one cent 

in equalization payment, at that time. Well now, the Minister of Agriculture is in the same position. He 

goes out and tells the farmers, (and he is a responsible Minister of the Crown) that "in my opinion" (he 

said) "when you get that price for that wheat, you have had it — that is all you are going to get". 

 

Now that is the situation. I classify myself as a farmer, Mr. Speaker, and all nonsense aside, of that 1950 

crop — and I have feed wheat on my farm — there is the tremendous fact that over one-half of the crop 

is unmarketable wheat, and we know this, that if it had not been for the Wheat Board we have today, we 

would have got nothing for that wheat. If there was any time that farmers should thank God for the 

Wheat Board, it is 1950-51. 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
18 

The Dominion Government now comes forward and says to the farmers of Western Canada, "Here is 

what we will do. You do not need to worry. When the end of the crop year comes, we will take that 

wheat and turn it over to the Wheat Board at a certain price, and we are going to pay you out in cash no 

matter how much of that wheat is held back in Canada". The proposition is this, and the opinion of a 

responsible body of men is that that wheat will probably take two or three years before it is all marketed. 

That is done for the benefit of the farmers of Canada, and I think it will meet with universal approval so 

far as that action of the Wheat Board is concerned. 

 

Now that is all I have to say about this 1950 crop, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Premier Douglas: — My hon. friend said a moment ago, that I was wrong in saying that Mr. Gardiner 

had ever related the price of wheat with the Agricultural Prices Support Act. I have the place in Hansard 

now. I don't want to interrupt my hon. friend, but I will read it if you like — it is on page 4906 of 

Hansard for August 15, 1946, or I will send it to him across the floor, whichever he likes. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He can read it if he likes. I am sure I can go down to my room in the hotel, Mr. 

Speaker, and bring out statement after statement not only by Mr. Gardiner, but by the Minister of Trade 

and Commerce, that the Prices Support Act applied to everything except wheat. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — And the Wheat Board covered wheat. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And if he can contradict that by a statement from the Minister on the floor of the 

House, I think he should do it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I am not accusing my friend of being dishonest. I am simply pointing out that Mr. 

Gardiner made this promise on the 15th of August, 1946, on page 4906 of Hansard, when Mr. Coldwell 

asked him what would be done to compensate the farmers for the cost of production, if it went up, under 

this fixed price under the Anglo-Wheat Agreement, and he said: 

 

"I want to point out that under the floor price measure (that is not the proper name but it will do), we 

stated to the House that $200 million was being provided for the purpose of taking care of any 

adjustment in connection with what might be known as parity on other farm products. At the same 

time we stated to the House that similar arrangements would be made, if necessary, through the Wheat 

Board in connection with grain" 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! It proves exactly what the member from Arm River has said — exactly. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Exactly. That is exactly what I said. 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
19 

Premier Douglas: — Except that we did not get it — that's all that is wrong with it. We did not get it. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You proved yourself wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I am not in a position to adjudicate how one person reads and interprets a quotation 

from Hansard and how another does. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There is not one syllable of what the Premier said now, that contradicts my 

statement. It only endorses it and confirms it; that's what it does. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Except that we did not get it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Again, here is some of those 'weasel' words, as I call them. The Premier has not 

forgotten them. He is trying his political tricks and they won't work now. 

 

Now I want to say a few words, Mr. Speaker, in regard to the five-year pool. I want to say there is not a 

political party in Canada, except possibly the Labour-Progressive party, or the 'third force' or whatever 

you call it . . . 

 

Mr. Kuziak (Canora): — That's a Liberal force. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And I say the C.C.F. — Socialists, the Liberals, the Tories, the Social Credit, all 

endorsed this five-year contract with Great Britain. There is not a farm organization in Canada, today, 

that did not endorse it, and I have them on record right here. I could take an hour, Mr. Speaker, to read 

these, and I can read you an excerpt here where Mr. Coldwell, in the House of Commons, got up on his 

feet in the House, and accused Mr. Gardiner of practically stealing his policy. He said, "long-term 

contract has always been our policy". So there we are; but I shall not take up more time. Had we known 

five or six years ago, as we know today, you and I may have done things differently. If we knew what 

was going to happen five or six years in advance, it would be easy. I am not criticizing these men who 

drew up this contract — not by any means; but on the floor of this House there has been a serious 

attempt made to try to place on the Dominion Government a certain responsibility for not getting the 

'have-regard' clause complied with by Great Britain, at least not up to date. That has been done; that 

attempt has been made. 

 

Now then, let us see. It is very interesting to read some of these things, and I have this right from the 

Wheat Pool. They made a presentation to the Government, and in that presentation they quoted Mr. 

Strachey. In his Winnipeg speech, Mr. Strachey referred to the fact that the agreement provided floor 

prices in the third and fourth year of the agreement, of $1.25 and $1.00 per bushel, respectively. In this 

connection he declared — I am going to read it in order to get the proper relation: 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
20 

"In Winnipeg, on February 25, Mr. Strachey quoted the 'having-regard-to' clause (which everyone is 

familiar with) . . . 

 

and he said this: 

 

"Now these mean more or less the same. They mean that the fact that we have bought our wheat from 

you, this year, below market prices, and that we may do so again next year, will be one of the factors 

to be taken into account on the actual prices we pay in the third and fourth year. 

 

"I and my Government, and I am sure this also applies to the Canadian Government, would resist any 

attempt toward adding to or subtracting from this definite statement written in paragraph two, sub-

section ten of the Wheat Agreement." 

 

The facts are, of course, that after the conclusion of hostilities it was generally expected that wheat and 

other prices would decline, following the pattern of World War No. 1. It was also expected that the 

United Kingdom Government expected they would be able to buy wheat in the third and fourth year of 

the agreement at prices less than $1.55, just as the Government of Canada expected that prices would 

decline, and in 1945 they established a floor price of $1.00 per bushel. 

 

In his Winnipeg speech Mr. Strachey referred to the fact that the agreement provided for floor prices in 

the third and fourth year of the agreement of $1.25 and $1.00 per bushel respectively. In this connection 

he declared: 

 

"It has been said, if the world price of wheat fell to the point where we in Britain could buy our wheat 

elsewhere for less than the floor price fixed in the agreement that in that event the British Government 

would refuse to pay the Canadian farmers the floor price and so let down the Canadian farmers. I 

would like to say now this is a monstrous suggestion, as it is monstrous to suggest that any British 

Government would ever break the terms of a solemn agreement, such as this, and in this I am quite 

sure that I speak for the Conservative Opposition in the House of Commons as well as for my own 

Government. 

 

"And I reiterate that it is an inescapable obligation of the British Government to pay at least those 

prices however low they may go, so I trust we shall hear no more of the suggestion which, to put it 

plainly, is causing question of the British Government." 

 

And then Sir Stafford Cripps, what did he say as regards wheat? 

 

"We shall continue to depend on Canada for the greatest part of our supplies through the four-year 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
21 

contract signed in 1946 and which expires in 1950, and we have recently agreed on $2.00 per bushel 

for the 1949-1950 season. We think that there is a possibility of the price falling below the $2.00 level 

before the end of the contract, either because of general improvement in the supply situation or the 

condition of any International Wheat Agreement which may be concluded in the near future. If this 

should be the case, the Canadian farmer will be in a very favourable position by virtue of the fixed 

prices on which we have agreed. This might be a fair compensation for the earlier years when he was 

selling us wheat below the world's prices. It depends, of course, on how far the price actually falls, but 

in any case we have agreed to discuss this matter further with the Canadian Government sometime 

toward the middle of 1950." 

 

That is what Sir Stafford Cripps said, and I have lots more of the same thing here, by British Ministers, 

in which it is conclusively proven that they accepted in good faith the 'have-regard-to' clause in the 

British Wheat Agreement. So there is no question Mr. Speaker that what Mr. Wesson said in that regard 

is not tending to improve the happy relationship between Canada, and particularly the Wheat Pool of 

Western Canada, and the British Government. I am not one of them, but I point out to you that, after all, 

the agreement was accepted in good faith by every farmer organization and by our Wheat Pool, and they 

collaborated with the Liberal Government in all the policies of the sale of our wheat since 1942. Now 

that is a statement of fact which no one can deny. They have approved this thing, and they themselves 

feel as strongly on this thing as any farmer in Saskatchewan. But let me tell you that whether anything 

comes out of this thing or not, the farmers in this province and in Western Canada as a whole will just 

straighten up their backs and grow more wheat and get rid of those mortgages. That is what we are going 

to do. 

 

I just want to read to you, Mr. Speaker, the excerpt from the very last paragraph of an editorial appearing 

in one of the farm papers of Western Canada for January: 

 

"The attitude of the British Government in defence is the main policy of the land . . . We must 

consider the sincere effort made by the Canadian people who helped the British people through their 

crisis cannot be matched anywhere in the world nor by the farmers of Britain themselves." 

 

That is the statement that this farm journal expresses with regard to what has gone on in the last few 

years. 

 

Now I am not going to say any more about this, but I am confident that, insofar as the farmer is 

concerned (I have said this on the floor of the House before, and I repeat it again, I don't think they are 

farmers on that side of the house, I think they are awful), Mr. Speaker, I can say that we farmers would 

not complain if every bushel of wheat had been made as a present to Great Britain, but we do complain 

that we do not believe we should have been the Santa Claus to stand the jar. 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
22 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — What journal was that quotation from? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — One from Alberta. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — What date? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — For January — there is only one a month. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — What farm journal is it? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The "Farm and Ranch Review." It is not a C.C.F. journal; it is one of these 

"capitalist" journals. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It does not seem like it, it supports co-operative farms. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I want to speak a few moments, Mr. Speaker, on the topic which was so interesting 

to listen to by the Premier, the other day. He, of course, finally came to the point with regard to the 

calling of an election whether the Canadian people or the British people or the United States people 

should be in Korea or not. The remark which I noted about this, Mr. Speaker, is that I did not know what 

was the reason for this outbreak at this time, and I am not absolutely sure yet, and I may be entirely 

wrong in what I am going to say; but you know I have been in this House for eighteen years and I have 

been interested in politics for the past forty years, and I have certain ideas, and I have seen the 

manoeuvres of political parties in Saskatchewan for many years; but I am going to say that a man has a 

right to express his own opinion so long as he does not insult anybody else. The Premier, of course, is 

facing an election sooner or later — and the sooner the better as far as we are concerned; and he knows 

well that if he can patch up the cleavage between the Labour-Progressive Party and the C.C.F. Party in 

this province that there won't be one C.C.F. member on that side of the House after the next election. 

 

(laughter) 

 

Mr. Tucker: — That is a very hollow laugh. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And they have tried in the rural seats and even in the city of Regina. There are 

people in the city of Regina who know something of the situation in this city, as well as in other cities in 

the province of Saskatchewan, who say that if this "peace group", these out-and-out Communists put in 

their own candidates and then corral the vote (and they vote where they are told to vote), then the C.C.F. 

will be out and they will be staying out, too. We have about the same spirit here as we had in 1947, Mr. 

Speaker, when the Minister of Agriculture, the Minister of Reconstruction and Mr. Hanson said 

everything in this House, Mr. Speaker, that the rules of this House permitted them to say, and we have 

the same man in office, who says the same things about the United States now through jealousy, the 

same animosity against the United States that has always been inherent in the C.C.F. Party, and they 

have brought it out in the open now. Mr. Coldwell, speaking in Halifax on July 11, 1947, said this: "I 

wish an ocean separated Canada from the United States and the pollution of its economic system. 

Through it has developed capitalism, and contains the seeds of another depression and another war." 

And the Premier got up and referred to MacArthur as one with illusions of grandeur, and his bosom 

friend Dr. Endicott felt they must give them food, and the Premier spoke on the floor of the House, one 

afternoon, and the next morning a telegram came from Dr. Endicott, and then Nelson Clarke and Dr. 

Endicott spoke in the City Hall and commended the stand taken by the Premier. They are "fellow 

travellers." 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
23 

Now it isn't very long, Mr. Speaker since we had this — it was only last spring that we had the "Red 

Dean" here in this province, and all the friends he had with him, and according to press reports he was 

entertained in this Chamber. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Everyone who comes here is entertained. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And the next day speaking in the City Hall, the "Red Dean" got up and commented 

on the wonderful reception and the wonderful friendship he had met in contacting the Government of 

this province of Saskatchewan. You will see how quick these fellows are to commend these fellows so 

they will "carry the ball" for them. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, their animosity to the United States and their jealousy and their mistrust and the 

prejudice which they hold with regard to that nation has been well known for a long, long time and it is 

on record which they cannot get away from it as we have the Journal for this House. I want to tell you 

what Mr. Attlee thinks about people of that kind. On June 28, 1950, in a speech to a group of farmers he 

said this: "Communists are mischief-makers who will disturb Europe." Speaking to about 25,000 

agricultural workers and their families he said: "There are some who do not want the United States to 

gain control over Europe. When you find anyone doing this, look at him carefully, as you will likely find 

he is a Communist or a fellow-traveller. Those people do not want to see those people restored to health. 

They want to see Europe sick, as they think it will give a greater chance for Communism." Now that is 

Mr. Attlee. I think Mr. Attlee knows pretty well what he talks about. 

 

This thing in Korea looks discouraging at times but at other times it looks very good for peace and to 

clean up the mess that is in there. MacArthur has been accused of being the cause, the "Czar" or the 

"Dictator" and has not taken the advice and the direction of the United Nations in his actions in Korea. 

Now that thing was brought up in the British House of Commons, Mr. Speaker, and here is what it says 

— "In the House of Commons reply last night, Britain's Deputy Foreign Minister said that General 

MacArthur's actions in Korea had been completely in keeping with the United Nations' objective and 

direction." Then he said this, when an Opposition Member raised the question of MacArthur's strategy, 

and referred to the statements made by Mr. Shinwell, when Mr. Shinwell said, "he had gone too far in 

this direction". Then Mr. Davies said, "there was absolutely no truth in it," and this was backed up by 

Mr. Bevan, the Minister of Foreign Affairs in Great Britain. This was on December 7, 1950. 

 

Then again Trygve Lie made a statement to the press, a day or two ago, in which he says: "I have been 

informed that constant consultations are taking place between the United Command and all member 

nations participating in the United Nations' actions in Korea, with regard to matters of military policy, 

including any question regarding the 38th parallel." There is the answer to the Premier, there is the 

answer for him now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — That is not what Pearson says. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He never made one statement to contradict that; never once has his statement been in 

contradiction, Mr. Speaker. 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
24 

The Minister of Public Health, the other day, made a certain statement in regard to this party on this side 

of the House regarding the Co-operative Movement in province of Saskatchewan, and I think these 

assertions and I think these statements come with vary ill grace, Mr. Speaker, particularly from a man 

who has been engaged in that work — and I give him credit for knowing something about it. He should 

know better than that. There has never been an act of legislation, nor an organization which started in 

this province, like the Co-operative Movement, that had the support like it has had from the Liberal 

Party in this province, and I would like to have you mention a one. You will remember that, during the 

few years in which I have been sitting in this House, I, myself, introduced into this House eighteen Bills 

to set up new Co-operative organizations or amend Acts governing existing organizations, and amending 

Acts giving the co-operatives in this province, particularly the Wheat Pool, more scope for their 

activities. I remember quite well the amendment to the Pool Act which gave them the right to use the 

commission reserves for formation purposes. I remember very well, Mr. Speaker, there was 

representation from Winnipeg to Vancouver when this meeting was on. We had the "Quintuplets" then, 

as we called them, sitting on this side of the House. There was no open opposition from the Quintuplets, 

the C.C.F. members of that House, in that Committee; but there was one thing that was noted — if there 

was any opposition they were always supported by these fellows. The Leader of the Party at that time, 

walking out of the House, came up to me and said, Mr. Danielson you will never get that Bill through 

the House," and I said "Who said so?" He said, "We say so". I said, "All right, but if you use this as an 

election issue in 1938 (this was in 1937) you are going to be disappointed." And the Bill went through. 

But when he goes out and says we have a "hatred;" and we have "obstructed," that the Liberal Party has 

obstructed co-operative activities in this province, Mr. Speaker, that statement is simply not true. The 

man who said it should know better. 

 

The Liberal Government helped to finance the Saskatchewan Co-operative Elevator Company. Then, 

after the first war, they helped the Saskatchewan Co-operative Creameries and in 1934, the Liberal 

Government passed a Bill through the House turning that organization back to the farmers again. Now 

we, everyone of us, assisted in the organization of the Wheat Pool. Our leader was one of the most 

ardent supporters, and I do not know how many contracts were signed up, but I think it was pretty nearly 

the top of any organization in that movement. 

 

We had an inquiry into farm implement prices in this House back in 1936 and 1937, and Mr. Campbell, 

the then Minister of Agriculture in Manitoba attended the hearing at that time and after the thing was 

over and the Report of the Commission was submitted to this House, we recommended (and I had 

something to do with this recommendation, Mr. Speaker), that the Provincial Governments of Manitoba, 

Alberta and Saskatchewan supply the funds to set up the Canadian Co-operative Implement Company 

and enable them to organize, and that was done. 

 

I remember when the Livestock Pool got into trouble through no fault of the farmer. We hastened to 

conduct the organization and the Saskatchewan Livestock Growers did very well, Mr. Speaker; for 

instance, they took a bunch of money and opened up an office in Vancouver. But I remember the day, 

after I came in to this House, when I went into the hotel in Regina, and here was the President of the 

Livestock Pool, I will not mention his name 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
25 

here, but he said this to me: "Here is our position: We have enough money to pay up our staff at the end 

of the month, and if we can not finance this, we have to close up". So I took him up to this House. I saw 

the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Taggart, discussed the matter with him, and he said he could see no 

place where there was any money that they could assist with. I said, "Do you mind if I go up and see the 

Premier?" I did go up, and before I left, Mr. Speaker, they was money forthcoming not only through his 

instrumentality and his contacts, but there was money from the Government, there was money from the 

Wheat Pool, money from the Refinery, and money from the Co-operative Federated Limited. That is 

why you have that organization operating today. 

 

Then there was the question asked in the House, Mr. Speaker — I have not got the date on this page, 

yes, it is Monday, February 21, 1944. The question was this: "Has the Dominion or Provincial 

Government financed or assisted in any way in the expansion of any company operating in 

Saskatchewan, since the beginning of the war?" .Answer — 

 

"The Provincial Government has no information as to the assistance given by the Dominion 

Government. Assistance has been provided by the Provincial. Government as follows: 

 

"Sask. Co-operated Livestock Pool, April 15, Loan, $2,200; July 7, 1939, Loan $10,000; Aug. 14, 

1939, Loan, $1,100; Canadian Co-operated Implements Ltd., May 16, 1940, grants to Sask. Co-op. 

Wholesale Ltd., to meet organization expense in connection with the C.C.I.L., $2,000;" 

 

(and that is a grant, Mr. Speaker. This isn't a loan — it is a grant) 

 

"Sask. Forage Crop Growers' Co-op. Marketing Assn., $350, and a grant of $1,500, in 1941; Fish-line 

Co-op. Cannery, payment to Marshall-Wells & Company, for certain materials, $645; expansion of 

demonstrator, and so on, salaries, $40.38; secured in advance, $545, making a total of $1,231." 

 

Now these are things that the people do not know anything about, so I am just telling that for the benefit 

of my friend over here. There has been no organization that has tried to organize themselves to better 

their own conditions in the province of Saskatchewan, for the last 18 years that I have been here (and the 

history was here before that time, Mr. Speaker), without they had the support, the encouragement and 

the active support, not only with sentiment but with materials and substances to get going and be able to 

carry on with the purpose for which they were organized, and I challenge any person to contradict the 

statement that I have made. 

 

He was trying to confuse some of the things in connection with the wheat and the prices that the farmers 

got for wheat, and that we were the enemy of the Wheat Board. Yes, Mr. Speaker, that is all right to say 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
26 

it, but it is another thing to prove it. It is always easy to say — I can say almost anything. 

 

Premier Douglas: — And do! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — But I am prepared to prove what I am saying, Mr. Speaker — not the way the 

Premier did when he sent out and got Hansard a little while ago. Not by any means. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Which proved everything I said. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I think I can show the hon. member for Gull Lake that it was not just exactly the way 

he says . We know the 1935 and 1936 crop incurred a loss. There was a loss. Mr. Bennett was then in 

power. There was a loss on that crop, Mr. Speaker, according to the reports, of $11,858,000 — a little 

more in fact. In 1936-37 there was no Wheat Board operating except for a very, very short time in the 

beginning of the crop year. 

 

I want to draw to the attention of the member from Gull Lake that on September 6, 1935, Mr. Bennett 

announced the Wheat Board price for that crop and he set the price on September 6, 1935 at 87 1/2 cents 

a bushel payable by the Wheat Board. On that very day, the September options closed on the Winnipeg 

market at 88 5/8 cents a bushel, Mr. Speaker — 1 1/8 cents above the price, The September option was 1 

1/8 cents higher than the price set for the Wheat Board by the Government. I think I am doing an 

injustice to Mr. Bennett here, Mr. Speaker, when I think about this thing. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He set it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He appointed a board to set that price, and I know one of the directors of the Wheat 

Pool was at that meeting because he told me so himself, but there were others. I do not know the number 

exactly; but they were the ones that set the price, and they set this one. I do not know whether he is a 

farmer or not, but I had a meeting with one of the Wheat Pool directors (I am not going to mention his 

name) and he told me that himself, and I know that there was a board set up by Mr. Bennett to set that 

wheat price. Then the member who sits over here — I am not going to ask him, he probably would not 

admit it. But it is a fact, and I am stating it on my own responsibility. 

 

Then, as I said, in 1936, the Wheat Board operated for a few weeks. There were over 30 million bushels 

of wheat delivered on the Winnipeg market, to the Winnipeg Inspection Department and only 637,000 

bushels were designated to Board. There is one thing it has taught the farmers and the Government as 

well, that you cannot operate a Wheat Board with an open market. I do not think anybody can deny that 

as a fact. You cannot operate the Wheat Board and an open market side by side; so the Wheat Board was 

closed, but an order-in-council was passed saying that . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — They should have closed the market, not the Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You wait. 

 

(Interruption) 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
27 

That had the effect, Mr. Speaker, of setting a fall price of 90 cents for the wheat, but that did not make 

any difference because the average price in September in 1936, Mr. Speaker, was $1.02 a bushel on the 

open market. The average price for the next month was $1.25 a bushel, and the high point was $1.45. 

Now then for two years, for two solid years, the wheat on the open market was from $1.45 7/8 to $1.02 

for two full years. That was the top and the bottom. That is figured on the average monthly prices. Now 

that was the history. But then we come to 1938. Now, then, on August 8, 1938, the Wheat Board, or the 

Government — if you want to accuse them of doing this thing, all right. They set the price, the Wheat 

Board, at 80 cents a bushel, and the September option that same day was 74 1/8 cents a bushel. It was 5 

7/8 cents a bushel lower than the price that the Wheat Board set for the whole crop, on the day the price 

was set. Now this is history, and there is no need of being in doubt about it; it is all recorded clearly 

enough. 

 

Now then, the 1938 crop, Mr. Speaker. The loss to the Government of Canada was $61,425,000 on the 

1938 crop. That is what the Wheat Board gave to the farmers more than the Wheat Board got for the 

wheat. 

 

In 1939 there was also a Wheat Board, but they only took 5,000 bushels — that was the limit from any 

one farmer — and the Wheat Pool, your Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, operated a pool itself, under which 

they got a guarantee from the Dominion Government of 60 per cent of the price of the wheat. I had put 

5,000 bushels in the Wheat Board and all my other wheat, which had been nearly 10,000 bushels that 

year, went into the pool that the Saskatchewan pool operated, and I want to say that I got slightly better 

prices for that — I think about 6 cents a bushel more — than the Wheat Board was able to pay out. Now, 

then, that crop, Mr. Speaker, gave us a loss of $8,226,000 to the taxpayers of Canada, on that crop, and 

that was only 5,000 bushels from any farmer. Now that is the history of this thing. 

 

Now then, we come to the famous crop of 1940-41. There was a Wheat Board operating then, and they 

distributed to the people of Canada — to the Western Provinces — $26,666,102 over and above the 

initial price that they paid for that crop. 

 

Then we come to the 1941 crop. That was the 1940 crop, this is the 1941. We got a final payment on 

that of $15,638,000. And then we come to the 1942 crop which, of course, my friend the Leader of the 

Opposition was supposed to have voted against, $1.00 wheat. 

 

Premier Douglas: — And did. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He has been accused of that, which has been proved absolutely false, incorrect and 

false. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Oh, no, here is the Hansard. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — In which Mr. Coldwell says that the Leader of the Opposition was absolutely correct. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear, hear! And they have been lying about it for eight years. Why stop lying about it 

now? 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
28 

Mr. Danielson: — We wanted the dollar wheat, Mr. Speaker and we got dollar wheat. We got $1.01 1/4 

a bushel when we got the final payment. In 1943, the Wheat Board distributed $37,591,000 to the wheat 

farmers of Western Canada in final payments. 

 

In 1944-45, the last year previous to the wheat contract with Great Britain, it distributed to us 

$67,238,000 and some hundreds. That is the record. We have had poor crop years in which the 

Government paid to the farmers of Western Canada $1,560,000 more than they got for the wheat. The 

taxpayers of Canada paid that money, Mr. Speaker, when it became a part of the total debt of this 

country. And in the next five years the Wheat Board paid out in the final payment to the farmers of 

Canada, $167,239,000. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to tell you something here that I have never said before. I have not done 

it for the reason that it may be considered as playing politics with a co-operative institution. On October 

8, 1948, we had a big co-operative rally in the town of Davidson. Banquet tables were set for 158 

persons; they were all there. We then adjourned to the town hall and our president, Mr. Jack Wesson, 

delivered a lecture, or a speech, and the topic was, "The Wheat Board and the Future". And. this is what 

he said, Mr. Speaker: 

 

"The Wheat Board and its Future". (This is within quotation marks). "The continuation of a Liberal 

Government in this country is the only assurance of the functioning of the Wheat Board." 

 

Premier Douglas: — Will the hon. member permit a question? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That was one year before the election. It was on October 8, 1948. 

 

Premier Douglas: — What is that quoted from? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It is quoted right from me sitting there taking it down and it is quoted from my local 

paper. And I went to the editor of the paper, who was there, and I said, "Have you got this quotation 

right?" He said, "Sure". 

 

Premier Douglas: — Is my friend quoting from any press statement? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is all the press that was there. 

 

Premier Douglas: — May I ask my friend what press it was? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You asked all you want. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You mean you have not got any proof. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I have lots more proof for anything I say than you ever had, than anything that you 

ever quoted, and that is going some. I could not approach yours. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You are depending on your memory, aren't you? 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
29 

Mr. Danielson: — That is what he said, and there are many, many people there besides myself heard it. 

I leave that to this House. 

 

I do not think Mr. Wesson, Mr. Speaker, spoke along political lines at all. I do not for one minute think 

that he did; that was not his business. There we were facing an election, 1948-49 (this was in the fall of 

1948), and he looked at this as a business man, as a practical man, a man with a lot of responsibility on 

his shoulders to more than half the farms in the province of Saskatchewan. He looked at it in this way — 

"We are going to have an election. With the outlook in the political field there is no proposition that we 

need to figure on that the Conservative Party will be able to form the next Government, and there was 

less possibility of the C.C.F. Party forming the Government." That, I am sure, was his attitude; he 

looked at it in a practical way. I think all he had in his mind, he did not give anything for the Liberals, 

C.C.F., Tories or anybody else. He just said this is a practical outlook on a practical problem. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — What made you go out and work for Diefenbaker then? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I can tell my own good friend now he will find just the same thing in "Mein Kempf" 

— that is big lies; but after all, Mr. Speaker, that is none of his business. I am not asking him — he 

might have voted for Nelson Clarke for all I know, but I would not accuse him of doing that. But he 

hasn't any more brains than to do that with me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — They were scratching each other' s backs. What about Social Credit? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There was another thing that was said by my friend from Gull Lake (Hon. Mr. 

Bentley) when he spoke about co-op income taxes. Then he accused my friend here, the Leader of the 

Opposition, of voting to put taxes on the co-op organizations in the province, or all over Canada, I 

suppose, for that matter, not only in the province of Saskatchewan. I do not think, Mr. Speaker, that 

there is any subject, today, that has been more unsettled, has more befuddled and misled the people of 

the province, and many others as well, than this very topic. I have a letter here, one that is very short, 

and I am going to read it. It is written to the "Star-Phoenix" in Saskatoon: 

 

"The pure, clear, concise and attractive story of the growth of Saskatchewan Federated Co-operatives 

from 1921 to date, and especially their explanation of the co-op philosophy was, I thought, a splendid 

example of the fact under discussion on the subject of Saskatchewan's application of the principles of 

self-help practised by the Rochdale pioneers. However, when you stated that Co-ops enjoy an 

advantage over other businesses in having to pay only a nominal tax on profits, I would like to suggest 

to you that a further study of the law in question governing taxation of co-operatives would reveal a 

different story. In fact, you will find that the people who work together in a co-operative business are 

actually penalized in a way no other business is. 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
30 

"At another point you stated Co-ops are permitted to hold back profits reduce working capital or 

expansion. Actually, the officials of a co-op have no such power, but the members can and do vote 

such savings into surplus." 

 

Now, here is a gentleman who says he can show that there are co-ops that did not make any profit that 

have been assessed income tax. Well, Mr. Speaker, this gentleman who writes this letter is a director. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — A director of what? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — A publicity director. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Who is he? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Come over here and I will give you his name. 

 

In the old days, before 1928-29, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool paid income taxes. They paid $103,107, 

and they also paid income taxes to the Saskatchewan Government, they paid them to the Ontario 

Government. Mr. Charlie Dunning brought in an amendment to the income tax which has been known 

as section 4P, which straightened that matter out, and the $103,107.69 income tax which they had to pay 

to the Dominion Government was paid back to the Wheat Pool because the amendment vas retroactive 

to cover the year in which this was paid. From then on, Mr. Speaker, there was no tax. The Wheat Pool 

was not assessed, and no co-operatives were assessed until we go along until about 1938-39, in there, 

when an agitation started that the co-operatives should pay taxes. 

 

In 1940 and in there, the tax was again brought up. As a matter of fact it became an issue at that time, 

and the co-operative organizations (not only the Pool but others) went to work and set aside every year a 

certain amount of their profits, or their earnings (they are not supposed to have a profit; they call it 

earnings) to provide in case that they would be required to pay income tax they would have the money 

to pay it. And a large amount of money, Mr. Speaker, was piled up by the various organizations for that 

purpose. The case was supposed to be referred to the courts, but it was not, but it was not finally decided 

to do so. A Commission was appointed and that Commission was acceptable, I think, not only to the 

Government of Canada but to the co-operative associations as well. One of the men who was a member 

of that Commission, and a very good member, was your Deputy Minister of Co-operatives here in this 

Government. He has been here for many years, and I doubt if there is another man in Canada who has a 

better grasp and a better understanding of the functions and purpose of co-operative organizations and 

businesses. I might point out, too, that the recommendation in that report was unanimous by that 

Commission. 

 

Well, the matter was supposed to be before the courts but the Commission took over. I think it was best 

to hand it to the Commission. Of course, Mr. Speaker, when you take a matter to the court you either 

win or lose, and that was the case here; no doubt about it. And if the court had decided that section 4P 

did not exempt the co-operatives, which I think even the co-operative organizations admitted, then they 

would have 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
31 

been liable for income tax. Well, I think any government, whether it is the C.C.F. or Tory or Liberal or 

what they are, would have an extremely difficult time, Mr. Speaker, particularly in wartime, to say that 

in spite of the fact that the co-op is declared to be liable for income tax, we are not going to collect it. 

They could not do that. But with the Commission, the decision was that the co-operative was not 

assessed for income tax until 1942. 

 

Now then, what happened then? Well, except the amount of money that they had to pay for that year, 

one year back, it was simply released to the people of Western Canada and every other place where that 

payment would have been paid if the Income Tax Department did not have claim to it. So, when that 

was done, it released this money to the shareholders or the patrons of these co-operatives. Between the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the U.G.G., the Alberta Pool and the Manitoba Pool, $15 1/2 million was 

released and distributed among the members of these organizations. I got $357 myself in cash, Mr. 

Speaker. That was my share of it. And, in addition to that, there was a certain amount of money held 

back for the purpose of paying back the equity in the pool and in these organizations to people who had 

quit farming. 

 

Now then, I have something here — I cannot find it; but I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the amount 

of money that was released, as I said, was $15,500,000. Now then, what is the position now of the co-

ops so far as income tax is concerned? It is simply this; it is as plain as anything in the world. The Act 

says that there shall be paid in income tax not less than 3 per cent of the capital employed in the 

business, but if there is no profit there is no tax to pay, Mr. Speaker. If they pay it, it is a capital levy, It 

is not an income tax. Now that is something we should never forget. In the regulations (it is very clear, 

and I know something about this thing) if you borrow money from the bank, that is a current expense — 

the interest on that money is a current expense. Everything else, depreciation, taxes, light and fuel and 

everything else, is deducted before the net is ascertained. Now, then, there is another provision in the 

income tax, Mr. Speaker, and it is simply that, if you pay any interest on capital employed to somebody 

else, you do not pay it to the Government. If the co-op pays 3 per cent on capital employed, to me — I 

have about three or four hundred dollars in my co-op, it is not a large amount, but it is all to me — then 

there is no tax. And that is the situation, that is the law. So long as you have paid 3 per cent on the 

capital employed. 

 

The proof for that, Mr. Speaker, is the system that is in vogue in this western country today. How is this 

elevator company able to advertise in the press, holding out the prospect of a dividend to their 

customers, or patrons? They are not a co-operative. As a matter of fact there is not a bit of distinction 

between a co-operative and another line elevator company on that score; there is not at all. They pay that 

out. Who would get it if they did not pay it? Why, the Government of Canada would get it, Mr. Speaker, 

in corporation income tax, and my friend the Provincial Treasurer is out 5 per cent on that bill; but that 

is the law. 

 

Now then, my friend the Minister of Public Health over there, said, in the House of Commons one time, 

that interest on share capital in the co-ops was undemocratic. That is the word he used, "undemocratic." 

Well, I want to 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
32 

tell him (but he has no time sometimes) he should have picked out the Statutes of the Province of 

Saskatchewan and I am sure my friend the Minister of Municipal Affairs would enlighten him on that. 

One of the first things that is provided for in that Act, after all the expenses and depreciation and taxes 

and everything has been taken off, is the small interest on capital — on share capital. It is set out right in 

the Act. But surely he would not accuse his friends over there of being undemocratic. Of course, I will 

say that they inherited that provision in the Act from a capitalistic government that was sitting over there 

before; probably that is the reason. But anyhow, that is a fact. 

 

Now then, here is the situation. The Government of Canada, Mr. Speaker, even went further than I have 

stated. First of all when the Act was drafted, it said that patronage dividend of that interest on employed 

capital was to be paid out within six months; then they lengthened it out to twelve months. One year 

after, a delegation of western cooperatives went to Ottawa to see the Minister of Finance, and what did 

they do? I am not criticising what they did; that shows that they were on the job. They got these words 

"paid out" changed to "allotted", Mr. Speaker, and it means that they do not even have to pay out this; all 

they have to do is to put it to my credit. And that is all for that, Mr. Speaker. I got this $357 I mentioned, 

back in 1946. A year ago last spring, I got a letter from the Department here in Regina, and it said this: 

"I wish you would come in. There is something wrong with your income tax." And I went in there and I 

said (I had my old form with me), "What is it?" "Well," he said, "Here is a slip. Do you see this?" And 

there was a little slip like we get from the Government here on our indemnity. He said, "You got so 

many dollars from the Wheat. Pool that year, and your tax, including the arrears of interest and 

dependency and everything was $26.76." That is what I had to pay, you see. They allotted that to me but 

I paid the income tax, and that is in accordance with the Income Tax Act, and the regulations of the 

Income Tax Department. So, there is nothing to prevent any co-operative to allot me 3 or 4 or 5 per cent 

interest. As a matter of fact, in our own co-op at Davidson we have only a membership, Mr. Speaker. 

That membership is $20. We should have $1; we will probably make it that. When we put it at $20, 

provision was in the Act in this province that you had to have a $5,000 paid-up capital in order to go into 

business, and that is the reason we put it at $20 instead of $1. The rest of that whole capital that we have 

is loan capital. We pay 4 per cent on that, not 3, and some of it that we use for building purposes for a 

term payment, we pay 5 per cent on. It is all going to the farmers. Now, then, at our next meeting we 

said to the shareholders, Now, you have so much coming in interest — we pay interest on the 

membership as well as on the loan capital — 40 cents in share capital does not make one iota of 

difference, and we want to keep that but we will increase your equity in the association by allotting it to 

you. We can keep the whole thing, and there is no income tax to pay." But, if they vote it into surplus 

without allotting it to the men that it belongs to, then there is an income tax, Mr. Speaker. And there is 

not a co-op association in the Province of Saskatchewan, if they organize their business on a proper 

footing, that needs to pay a dollar income tax. 

 

I have not got it here, but I have a little bit of a handbook that the Pool gave out, (I am sorry I do not 

know what has become of it) in which they explain very, very clearly, Mr. Speaker, that that is the case. 

They say this, a very sentence in this statement is this: "Any 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
33 

contractual obligations — a contractual obligation offsets the 3 per cent". That means that if I do agree 

to pay a certain interest on the working capital, and if that is 3 per cent or more, there is no tax to pay. 

But if there is no profit, if there are no earnings, as this gentleman said in this letter I read here, then 

there is certainly no tax to pay because that would not be an income tax, Mr. Speaker, it would be a 

capital levy. That is the situation, I know what I am talking about, but my friend here, the Leader of the 

Opposition, was attacked for voting for a Bill of that kind. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Misrepresented. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There is nothing to that, Mr. Speaker. It is absolutely a misstatement that has been 

promulgated and repeated and spread about for political partisan purposes by everyone on that side of 

the House. It is just a bunch of — well, I am not going to say the name that I would give it; the rules of 

the House would not permit it, Mr. Speaker. There is just as much truth in that as that statement read out 

of Hansard here a few minutes ago. 

 

The Minister had to bring out this old, old argument — you know, there is moss on it now, it is an old 

one — about the 5 per cent profit on war production that these big, capitalistic concerns refused at the 

beginning of the war. Well, Mr. Speaker, this is another thing that is make-believe. That was printed in 

the press. The Government found, when they got down to business, that it was not working, that the plan 

was not working, and I am sure a man with the brains of some of these gentlemen sitting across here 

knows that it was not working. Then, what did they do? In 1939, Mr. Speaker, the Excess Profit Tax, 

(not the Corporation Tax) was put at 60 per cent. The Government put it at 60 per cent. That was in 

1939. In 1942, they put it at 100 per cent. In 1945, after the war was over, they reduced it back to 60 per 

cent, and then, in 1948-1947, it was put back to 15 per cent and during all this time . . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — And then they did away with it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Now just a minute, I'll come to that. I am not going to hide anything. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Look what your Labour Government did. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am going to answer that question when I come to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here is what happened. That was the excess profits tax — 60, 100 per cent, back to 60, and 

back to 15 the last year and a half. On top of that, Mr. Speaker, there was the corporation income tax of 

30 per cent added on after the excess profit tax and income tax — 30 per cent on that. Again, Mr. 

Speaker, when this money was distributed throughout the length and breadth of Canada to people who 

had money invested in every industry and in every enterprise (they could not function if they did not), 

they again were assessed income tax on the revenue or interest they got from this investment, stocks and 

bonds and shares or whatever they were. They again were assessed on this. 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
34 

Britain and the United States discontinued excess profits tax in 1947. Canada discontinued their excess 

profits tax on January 1, 1948, ten months after Great Britain and the United States dropped their tax. 

Now then, there is no use stopping there. Let us be honest about this thing. Great Britain is again 

imposing excess profits tax. There is no doubt in my mind that the United States is doing the same thing, 

and I am going to say to you that I firmly believe that Canada will be compelled to do the same thing on 

the next budget that is brought down. This is a matter of business; this is a matter of policy, for the 

greatest good, to the greatest number and the greatest welfare of the nation as a whole. That is what has 

happened. But these fellows have gone about, and I have heard it in every schoolhouse; and these 

simpletons come along to somebody here and there, "Well, what about this 5 per cent?" You know what 

we had to do, Mr. Speaker, we had to pay income tax, and we had to pay what they called "savings" too, 

and we have now been paid back some of that and we have still some to come. So we all contributed. 

But there was excess profits tax, corporation tax and then on top of that, my friend the Minister of Public 

Health, who got some of the windfalls from some of these big capitalistic corporations, he had to pay his 

income tax on it too. So that is just so much wind, that is all; so much imagination. There is absolutely 

nothing to that charge, Mr. Speaker, and I want to clear that up because it may be of benefit to someone 

or it might make someone hesitate to come up with some kind of a wishy-washy statement again. 

 

I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that I shall now vote for the amendment and oppose the motion. 

 

Mr. Arthur T. Stone (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, the member for Arm River always claims to 

be a good co-operator; but I notice he did not leave me any air time, and he left me very little time to say 

what I have to say before 6 o'clock. 

 

I want to join with the last speaker to express my regrets at the member from Kinistino being unable to 

take his seat here in this Session, and wish him a speedy recovery and hope that he will take his seat 

before this Session has ended. 

 

I have been rather interested, Mr. Speaker, in the discussion on wheat — about the initial payment and 

the 25 cent bonus on the five- year pool; and I have noticed that lawyers, teachers, even a minister of the 

gospel, and some farmers have discussed wheat, and I do not see any reason why a labour man should 

not get in on this discussion. I am quite sure that if the farmers were not confused before this Session 

started, they ought to be by the time it is through. 

 

I believe you will agree with me, Mr. Speaker, that 1950 was rather an eventful year, especially for 

Canadians. It began in the spring with a disastrous flood in Winnipeg, with the sympathy of all the 

nation and a good part of the United States going to those unfortunate people in that flood-stricken area. 

Then we had the rumblings of war — finally we were at war. Closely following that was the railway 

strike which tied up the transportation from one end of the Dominion to the other, and after that, of 

course, we had those disastrous early frosts which damaged what looked to be one of the best crops we 

have had here for a long while. 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
35 

Then after that was the crime of crimes — the stealing of the Stone of Scone. When I see the expression 

on some of my friends from the "Land of the Heather", they look to me very much like the cat that 

swallowed the canary, and I look very suspiciously upon them. 

 

We spent most of 1950 saying "good-night" to Irene, and the rest of the time we were suspiciously 

looking for any kind of a box in case the "thing" might be in it; but I think the catastrophe that hit the 

majority of our people most was the sky-rocketing cost of living. A great deal has been said about that 

already in this House, and I will be very much surprised if a great deal more isn't said about it before we 

go home. 

 

I am going to take a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, to talk about the railway strike, because I think there 

were two significant points that came out of that strike. One was the almost — I won't say 100 per cent; 

but the almost vindication of the railwaymen's stand when they received the decision handed down the 

arbitrates, Judge Kellock. And the second was that this dispute was a part of the intense class-struggle 

that is taking place all over this North American continent. 

 

In regard to the first point, it seems incredible that the Conciliation Board, which sat about ten months 

before the day of the strike, and which had all the data, the material and the same statistics that the 

arbitrator had at his disposal should bring down a majority report which was practically negative to the 

one the arbitrator brought down, and I think, to a large extent, a big share of the blame for the railway 

strike can be placed on the members who brought that majority report down. 

 

I said it was a part of the intense class-struggle that was going on. We have noticed that those who own 

the means of production have gone into the pockets of the defenceless people; they have pilfered and 

brought these people down to a state of poverty — I speak of those on fixed incomes, on small pensions, 

people who have thriftily put a little aside for their old age. These people have been brought down to a 

state of poverty. 

 

The next group, of course, were those who were able to put up some kind of a fight, and it was only 

natural that the railroad workers should be a good group to start on, because the railroad workers have 

been, at no time, "problem children." They have always been more or less a well- behaved member of 

the family. You can remember back to the beginning of the first war, the late MacKenzie King was able 

to get the cost-of-living bonus foisted on to the railroad workers and by doing so he more or less was 

able to get the rest of the workers to accept it. And so, the railroad workers were considered a pretty easy 

group to start on. Having brought them to their knees, then it would not be much of a task to bring the 

rest down to that level. That, of course, as you know, did not take place; but, it was significant that the 

same arguments of propaganda — the papers and the radio, and the financial interests who were pouring 

out heaps and heaps of propaganda at that time, are the very same people, today, who are opposing the 

25-cent payment on the Wheat pool. That propaganda, of course, began just at the time the men were 

getting their strike ballots. The appeal to the men, then, was not to take notice of their leaders, not to be 

led astray by their leaders, but to accept the reasonable offer thrown out by the 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
36 

railway companies. This was about the only offer they had made, after trying to negotiate for over a 

year; but, of course, the man did not listen to the propaganda that was going out, and they backed up 

their leaders almost 100 per cent. Those people did not know, of course, that it wasn't the leaders that 

were pushing the men; it was the rank and file who were pushing the leaders, and when the vote was 

known, then the propaganda turned around to the leaders. After blasting them they then appealed to 

them and their reason not to go off the deep end. 

 

We realized, of course, that people who had these propaganda organs at their disposal made a pretty 

good job of cementing public opinion against the railway workers. We did not want to do what we did 

do. We did not want to hinder the farmer from harvesting his crop, or the fruit growers, or some of those 

workers who were forced out of employment at that particular time; but we had a battle on our hands, 

and we had to go through with it. Our only fear now is that from some quarters there will be an effort 

made to break up that national organization. 

 

I would like to express, from the worker's point of view, how glad we are that the Farmers' Union has 

taken on a new life and is gaining strength in this province. We say that because we find that everybody 

else seems to know the farmers' problems, and seems to know what is best for them better than the 

farmer does himself. How true that is, too, of the workers. We find here a presentation from the 

Canadian Manufacturers' Association, whose head office is somewhere in eastern Canada, telling this 

Government that they know what is best for the workers better than the workers in this province know 

themselves. So I say we are glad to see the farmers building up their own organization, and we hope that 

it is not merely enthusiasm. I remember when those of the old United Farmers' organization were 

looking up ways and means of building up their farmers' union, they thought maybe a study of the 

labour unions, who had appeared to have a certain amount of success, might help them. Well I do not 

believe that the farmers can get very much from the labour organization, but one sure lesson they can get 

and that is that they must learn, definitely learn, to take a licking, and take plenty of them, and to come 

up again with their chins out looking for the next one. I think that that is what has built the labour 

organization better than any of the lessons that I can think of. 

 

We — and when I say "we", I mean the labour organizations cannot quite understand why the farmers' 

organization has turned thumbs-down on political action. We can't understand that, because we believe 

that it is the only effective weapon that the farmer has at his disposal. I know that "political action" does 

not mean what my friends on the other side infer that it does mean; political action does not mean that a 

group of workers ally themselves with any particular party. Political action means that you should make 

a study of your problems on the political field, know who your enemies are, support the ones who are 

your friends and defeat your enemies; and throughout Canada that programme is going on slowly but 

surely amongst the workers. 

 

We have four definite points that we expect from a government. One is a decent standard of living, and 

that is based on the cost of the necessities of life which we have to buy, in a reasonable relationship to 

the wages which we are able to demand. The second is security in old age. 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
37 

We believe, in fact we, know, that there is a very small percentage of wage-earners who are able, after 

raising a family, to put anything aside for old age. Our third point is a national housing programme. We 

think it is a disgrace that any worker in this nation where there is a plentiful supply of building materials 

— we think it is a crime that any worker should have to live in a shack or an unmodern dwelling. Our 

fourth is an over-all social security plan. 

 

When we size up those four points with the Government at Ottawa, what do we find? Well, we find, of 

course, as I have already said with regard to the first one, that our standard of living is going down day 

by day. The cost of living has risen tremendously; it has risen to such proportion that we have had 

something which has only happened once before. The four major groups — Trades and Labour Council, 

Canadian Congress of Labour, the Catholic Syndicate and the Running Trades — have all gone hand-in-

hand to Ottawa to demand immediate action on this question. The only time that happened before was at 

the passing of the Railway Bill just back in September, when Mr. St. Laurent asked to make sure that 

this would not be effective to all workers. 

 

What is their history as far as old age pensions go? Well we find our old age pensioners not as well off 

as when they were receiving $25 a month, and we feel that a government should do more than they are 

for our old age people. Our national housing programme is actually a disgrace. They have not even 

scratched the surface. They have not even provided houses for our returned men, let alone civilians. 

They have not even tried to do anything about our slum areas. I do not know whether I need to say 

anything about an overall security plan, outside of the fact that we are farther away today than we were 

when the late MacKenzie King brought it out in 1919. 

 

Those are our four points, as far as organized labour is concerned. And I say I think, too, that the farmer 

has plenty of political problems. I can think of one or two myself. I think I can remember parity prices 

back in 1919 and 1920, when the Progressive Party was formed. I think it is quite a political question. I 

would say freight rates was another question which is a problem to the farmers. I believe that export 

markets would be another problem, and I believe that tariffs is also another one. As long as we have the 

farmers disorganized — and it does seem to me that they are badly disorganized politically for, go 

across the length and breadth of the Dominion and you will find that they are all shades of political 

colour; and as long as they remain that way then I think the industry of agriculture is going to be where 

it is today — right on the bottom of the heap. I think almost any other industry can go down to Ottawa 

— the soft drink or the chocolate bar — and get anything they want, but the industry of agriculture 

seems to me to be out of luck. It is rather surprising, Mr. Speaker, when you think of the need for food in 

this world, the nations and the peoples that are needing food. You would think that the industry of 

agriculture would be given top priority instead of the position they are in today. 

 

Now, my time is getting short, but I was rather amused and I thought how correct, when I heard the 

"Capitol Reports" two Sundays ago, Warren Baldwin ended up his report from Parliament Hill by saying 

this: 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
38 

"The one thing that pleases me about this Government in Ottawa is the way they lay their cards on the 

table, face down." 

 

I thought, how true! And I thought how true this party is, here in Saskatchewan; and I am pretty sure if 

the people called that hand tomorrow, they would not know whether they were going to get a bobtail 

straight or a pair of deuces. I am quite sure they would not get any more than a pair of deuces. 

 

In spite of what my friends say over there, and they will deny the fact, they cannot convince me that, if 

they were ever to get into power, they could do away with our Crown Corporations, and I think our 

people should be warned of the fact. What will happen if they get here on this side? What will happen to 

our Power Corporation? What happened when it was in the hands of the Liberals, and how can our 

farmers expect to get rural electrification of it is back in the hands of private individuals? I think they 

should be told, too, what to expect of their transportation system when it is handed back to private 

corporations, and the kind of service that they can expect — the kind of service they got when that side 

was over here, I think our people should be told, too, about the services — our Fur Marketing Services, 

our Fish Service; and they also should be told something about our timber industry, and expect the same 

old stuff of allowing individuals to go in and exploit our timber. 

 

A lot of fun has been poked at our clay industry in this House, by the Opposition; but I want to say that 

clay is one of the minerals, at least, that we know we have plenty of and it is of good quality; and the 

Liberal Government sat here for years and did not do a thing about it. Now we are doing something 

about it, and I believe that we will bring our clay industry up to where it ought to be in this province. 

 

I am pretty certain that the hospitalization plan will be destroyed. When the Leader of the Opposition 

says he is going to decentralize it — what does he mean by that? I would say that he means to throw it 

back to the municipalities. If the municipality happens to be a fairly wealthy municipality, then they will 

have some kind of a hospitalization scheme; but if they are not that fortunate, of course the individuals 

will have to go without. We could carry decentralization a little further. We could carry it to the medical 

care of old age pensioners and the blind pensioners, and that, too, could be, and likely will be, thrown 

back to our municipalities. We should warn our people of these things. I am very sure that our 

automobile accident insurance plan will be destroyed — I am quite sure of that — and our Government 

Insurance Office. After all, the people who are behind the Liberal Party would not stand to have an 

insurance office in this province that maintains normal rates, whereas; on each side of us the rates have 

gone up. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I see the time is getting short and I am only going to spend two minutes on the 

amendment. I do not think the amendment is worth a great deal more of my time. I can remember, a few 

years ago, quite vividly as if it was only yesterday, when the five Liberal members and a certain soldier 

representative, spent days and days blasting away at this Government because it was introducing co-

operative farms. "Here's the start! Here you are. Here is the Communist communal farming where the 

State takes over all the produce and gives the individual enough to keep 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
39 

body and soul together." We heard that for days and days; but the fact remains that co-operative farming 

has proven a worthwhile venture in this province, and it is here to stay, unless, of course, we are 

unfortunate enough to have the Liberals on this side of the House. 

 

As I say, Mr. Speaker, I can remember that quite vividly, and I believe that the amendment is only going 

to aggravate the situation in this province. It does seem to me that there is a problem — a very serious 

problem — a problem of more and more land getting into the hands of fewer and fewer people, and it is 

time this Government did, or tried to do, something about it. To sell land outright to an individual would 

not guarantee that that piece of land would not become a parcel of this big unit, and so, Mr. Speaker, I 

do believe the amendment would only aggravate the situation, so I will vote against it and I will support 

the motion. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to 

pass on to the member for Kelvington (Mr. Howe) and the member for Elrose (Mr. Willis) my 

congratulations on the speeches they made, in this House, in moving and seconding the Address-in-

Reply. 

 

I would also like particularly to mention the speech that the Premier made, and to congratulate him on 

making that speech, as well as the Minister of Education (Hon. Mr. Lloyd) on the speech he made. I 

could go over the whole list of members on this side who have contributed to this debate, and they 

deserve congratulations; but I wanted particularly to mention those few. 

 

I am sorry I cannot congratulate the members of the Opposition for the speeches they have made, but 

that is not because they have not tried. It is very difficult to make a good speech when you have 

absolutely no case for it in the first place, and, therefore, they are pretty disjointed, and very often, Mr. 

Speaker, pretty loud too. 

 

There has been some talk about the next election, and no doubt my hon. friends over there would like to 

know when the next election is going to be. Well, I want to remind you, Mr. Speaker, that you and I sat 

over there on those benches for six years, and as far as I am concerned, personally, if the circumstances 

arise, I do not care if my hon. friends sit over there for another six years. Of course, there may be an 

election this year or next year, or in 1953; if circumstances arise however there might be good reason, 

and my hon. friends would be the first to admit it, for postponing the date of an election and going for 

six years. They could not argue against such a case. That has been done before. But I want to tell them 

that I argued against it and I would argue against it again. There is another thing too. We have not got 

any Carl Stewart to pull the chestnuts out of the fire for us, like the Liberal Government had at that 

particular time; and he got his reward and is still pulling chestnuts out of the fire for them. 

 

I was amused at my hon. friend from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) when he said that nothing was more 

conducive to clearing the population out of rural areas than to close the schools. This is typical Liberal 

logic, 



February 19, 1951 

 

 
40 

Mr. Speaker, absolutely typical Liberal logic — not realizing that because of other things, some of 

which were touched upon by my hon. friend from Saskatoon (Mr. Stone), the people had left the 

community so that there were no children left there in that community to go to school, or certainly not 

enough to make it within reasonable cost to operate a school. But it is a very common thing for the 

Liberals to take cause and effect and just shift them around, and try to make a case out of it. But that 

won't have much effect throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The hon. member for Arm River also talked about patching up the differences with the Labour-

Progressive Party. Well, the Liberal Party is the one that does that periodically — patches up their 

differences with the Labour-Progressive Party; and if there is, in Canada, any place a 'fifth column' for a 

political party, then the Labour-Progressive is the fifth column for the Liberal Party in Canada. They 

have shown it in the past by serving the Liberal Party and dividing the votes in constituencies like 

Windsor and other places in Ontario; they have shown it by coming out with their advertisements across 

Canada, and everyone knew, in days gone by, in those old days when the Liberals were being victorious 

in this province, where to find the leader of the Labour-Progressive Party (the Communist Party, as it 

was known at that time) on election night — at Liberal headquarters, celebrating. 

 

That is all I want to say tonight, Mr. Speaker, and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

The assembly adjourned at 6 o'clock p.m. 


