




















































Hansard: February 20, 1951


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

THIRD SESSION — ELEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

14th Day 

 

Tuesday, February 20, 1951 

 

The House met at three o 'clock p.m. 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed, from Monday, February 19, 1951, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of 

Mr. Howe for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne, and the proposed amendment thereto 

by Mr. Korchinski. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I wondered for a little while 

whether or not I would be able to get away today at all, but anyway we finally got into the debate again. 

One of the outstanding things about this debate is the amount of time that the members of the Opposition 

have spent in discussing matters outside of this province. I would point out to the hon. members 

opposite that on this side of the House the Premier took less than one-third of his time making a 

statement in regard to international affairs, and with that statement I am proud and quite happy to be 

associated. On the other side of the House, one member in particular, the member for Redberry (Mr. 

Korchinski), used 90 per cent of his time (and his time was quite a bit) on international affairs. The 

newspaper report of the speech that the hon. member for Arm River made yesterday is over one-third of 

it on international affairs. It is an exceptionally good report considering the kind of a speech it was. And 

so I think we can only draw one conclusion, Mr. Speaker, and that is that the members of the Opposition 

would rather talk about anything else in the world than their record as a Liberal Party in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In this Debate they are following the regular Liberal line of carping criticism and fault-finding, The hon. 

member for Arm River yesterday chided the member for Canora (Mr. Kuziak) because the member for 

Canora had said they had not made any positive constructive suggestions Then he points to the fact that 

they moved an amendment to take off the Public Revenue tax and pay taxes on the Crown Corporation 

property, and classified that as a constructive proposal; a constructive proposal to take two million 

dollars away from revenue and to put nothing in its place. That was as destructive as anything that they 

have suggested. They make suggestions to reduce revenue; they make suggestions to increase 

expenditures; they make all kinds of suggestions, some of which they hope will be adopted, and being 

adopted, will get the Government into difficulties, financial or otherwise. 

 

The member for Melville (Mr. Deshaye) wanted a lower licence for farmers and lower insurance on 

account of the winter roads. The hon. member is still living back in the good old days of Liberal 

government when the roads closed up with the first blow of snow in the Fall of the year, and stayed that 

way until the sun took the snow away in the Spring. He does not know, and neither does the member for 

Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) apparently, that there are thousands of miles of roads being kept open by 

the Department of Highways and also thousands of miles being kept open by those poor down-trodden 

municipalities in the province with whom they 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
2 

sympathize so much. The road situation is much different from what it was. I believe it was the member 

for Melville who regretted that this Province was not matching dollar for dollar the health grants, the 

grants for construction of hospitals in this province. I want to remind my hon. friends, and some of them 

were sitting in the House, in 1934, when the then Hon. Dr. Uhrich, who was Minister of Public Health, 

promised to the Association of Rural Municipalities that his Government would bring in State Medicine. 

What did they do about it? They took Liberal action, and did nothing. They did nothing about it at all. 

The Federal Government, the Liberal Government at Ottawa, did not make any grants for the 

construction of hospitals until the example of the C.C.F. in this province forced them to it. That is a fact. 

My hon. friends try to laugh that one off, but it isn't easy to laugh that one off throughout the Province of 

Saskatchewan. No Liberal government in the Province of Saskatchewan ever gave a nickel to help 

community-built hospitals. That was started when a C.C.F. Government came into office in this 

province. Let my hon. friends not forget that. And because the Liberal Party, when they were in power, 

never did anything to help students in this province continue with their school, the hon. member for 

Cannington thinks that that gives him complete free licence to get up and say that the present student aid 

is not enough. See, that is Liberal philosophy. If the Liberals have not done anything and then somebody 

else does something, they are fully competent and fully licensed to get up and grumble and complain 

about it even though they did nothing about it in the first place. 

 

The hon. member for Melfort (Mr. Egnatoff) got out the C.C.F. Handbook of 1933 — I don't think he 

told us whether it was the original or the Liberal reprint. 

 

Opposition Member: — They were the same. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, they were a little different in a rather important way. And he quoted 

about social ownership of resources. I am not too sure that it will have any good effect on my hon. 

friends opposite, but I do not think we should ever give up hope that some of them might learn what 

social ownership really means. They jump to the conclusion, not because they have not been told 

differently, that social ownership means that everything is owned by the State. They never got that 

information from any Democratic Socialist. That is something they cooked up in their own imagination. 

Trestrail is one of the persons that did the cooking-up. Social ownership is not one type or form of 

ownership. Social ownership is many forms of ownership; and it does include private ownership, and it 

does include co-operative ownership. Would my hon. friend for Arm River say that co-operative 

ownership is anti-social? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I would not say anything foolish like that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I don't think he would dare. Social ownership includes municipal 

ownership. Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Arm River said he would not say anything foolish like 

that. It is a good job he added the two words "like that". The power plant in the City of Regina is 

socially owned. The Saskatchewan Power Corporation is socially owned. You see, even the Liberals, 

when they cannot help themselves, believe in a certain amount of social ownership. I suppose we could 

call the Wheat Board social ownership of the facilities 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
3 

of marketing Canadian wheat for the Canadian wheat grower. And so, when we talk about social 

ownership — we are not talking about one kind of ownership, but definitely about a type of ownership 

which is in the best interests of society and, therefore, leaves the least opportunity for exploitation of 

either labour or the consumer. On the other hand, what is monopoly capitalism? Monopoly capitalism is 

the ownership of the means of production to such an extent that it gives to those owners a power and a 

responsibility far beyond what any irresponsible individual should have, far beyond any individual who 

is not responsible to the people should have. 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Does that apply to oil? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — My hon. friend says, "Does that apply to oil corporations?" There certainly 

is monopoly ownership in the oil business to a considerable extent. There is no question about that; but I 

want to give you a rather classical example of monopoly capitalism. We have all heard about the 

Duponts. This is taken from the Toronto Star of December 23, 1950: 

 

"Members of this Dupont clan dominate the one billion dollar Dupont company, which makes 1,200 

products, including nylons, cellophane, paints, gun powder and atomic bombs. Furthermore, through 

stockholdings they dominate General Motors Corporation, the world's largest producer of automobiles, 

and the U.S. Rubber Co., one of the world's largest sources of rubber products, as well as other 

corporations. The empire dominated by the clan has financial assets of five billion dollars." 

 

That is an example of monopoly capitalism, and what does it do? I just managed to get a little clipping 

from the Co-operative newspaper about General Motor's Manager, President Charles E. Wilson . . . 

 

Mr. Dundas (Qu'Appelle-Wolseley): — From the "Commonwealth"? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, this is from the "Consumer". My hon. friend from 

Qu'Appelle-Wolseley does not believe in the "Co-operative Consumer" nor in co-operation. And this 

article says Charles E. Wilson, President of General Motors, does not get paid off in peanuts, but if he 

did the world's largest company would have deposited 5,861 — 5 cent bags on his desk for each and 

every hour he worked in 1949. 5,861 — 5 cent bags of peanuts every hour if he got paid in peanuts. In 

other words, it is $293.05 an hour — and my hon. friends sitting opposite are helping to pay it: $586,000 

for the year. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He has got Cadbury and Shumiatcher beat. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — My hon. friends never talk about that, but they sometimes talk about wages. 

They talk about labour getting too high wages, and I would like to point out here that under the present 

system of monopoly capitalism, where this monopoly capitalism actually controls government in many 

cases, and on the request of those monopoly capitalists, the price controls are thrown away. And so from 

1946 to 1950, the price index rose 46.7 points. The cost of living 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
4 

index went up 39 per cent — over one-third higher in 1950 than in 1946. The Liberal Party has got to 

accept responsibility for this. They cannot blame anyone also for it at all. They took one dollar out of 

every four out of the pockets of people who are on fixed incomes when they allowed that price increase. 

And here is what it did to the working people. All manufacturing industries, the average weekly wages 

in 1946 were $30.00 — I will forget about the cents; in 1950 they had increased to $44, an increase of 

nearly $14 per week, an increase of actual dollars of 46 per cent compared with the 39 per cent increase 

of the cost of living. But when you take that increased cost of living into consideration did the workers 

in the manufacturing industries get a 46 per cent increase? No, their real increase was 5 per cent, not 46 

per cent. Glass products workers — they had an increase of 16 per cent in real wages between 1946 and 

1950 because their increase in actual wages was enough to keep ahead of the increasing cost of living. 

The coal miners had a decrease of $3.20 in actual purchasing power per week. On steam railways the 

actual decrease of real wages in purchasing power, between 1946 and 1950, was $2.44 a week. They did 

not get an increase at all. And some of my hon. friends like to make capital out of the railway strike. 

There are a lot more figures that could be quoted. 

 

The farmer did not escape either. In this period from July 1946 to July 1950, the 6-foot combine 

increased 40 per cent in price. The 4-cylinder tractor, rubber tires, increased 44 per cent. And rural 

electrification, which my hon. friend the Leader of the Opposition is so much exercised about, did not 

escape either. Electrical fixtures and equipment increased in that period over 56 per cent. That is not 

doing much to help rural electrification, or any other kind of electrification in this country. According to 

the Bank of Canada's 'Statistical Summary' for May, 1950, 450 of Canada's largest companies had 

profits in 1938 of 208 million dollars. By 1950, it had gone up to 473 million dollars. That shows what 

is taking place when monopoly capitalism runs the government of Canada as they are doing at the 

present time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one other thing that struck me as peculiar in this debate was the fact that the Leader of the 

Opposition seems to think that we should not criticize any of our institutions. This was particularly 

evident in connection with the Wheat Board; but I would like to remind the Leader of the Opposition 

and all members opposite that this is a democracy and that democratic institutions thrive on critics; that 

criticism is a necessary part of democracy. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, that is their only excuse for 

being over there. They have no hope of ever being over here. And so I do not think that when we 

criticize the actions of the Wheat Board, that somebody should rise and say "Oh, you mustn't talk about 

this thing or maybe they will do away with it, and take it away from us altogether", or that the Leader of 

the Opposition should get up and try to name the Premier of this province as one who was working in 

such a way that he was going to destroy the Wheat Board. That is resorting to the old tactics of calling 

names when you cannot meet criticism, and that is not new to the Liberal Party either. Not at all. They 

have been doing that this session, and I remember a former Minister of Highways who called a couple of 

C.C.F.'ers in a public meeting, (and these two C.C.F, supporters were veterans of the first World War) 

— called them Fascists and Nazis, and that Minister of Highways refused to allow those members to get 

up and answer the charge. That was during the last World War when the Fascists and Nazis were our 

enemies. 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
5 

The resort of name calling has always been a resort of the Liberal Party when it runs out of arguments. 

There was the case of a prominent Liberal up near Hudson Bay, who thought he could get away with 

calling a school teacher Communist and saying that that person was not fit to have a certificate as a 

teacher. Thank God we have some British justice here yet, and the result was that the man who called 

the names was called into Court and had to pay damages for calling those names. And so, when we talk 

about the Wheat Board, I do not think that people should start calling names. But let us take a look at the 

record. My hon. friend over here seemed to be very enthusiastic about the Wheat Board. He said if it had 

not been for the Wheat Board we would be getting nothing for this crop. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, sir, I did not say that. I said that if it had not been for the Wheat Board we would 

be getting nothing for our feed wheat. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — All right, Mr. Speaker, if he will sit down and give me chance. He talks 

rather fast, and I jotted it down as quick as I could, but that is just as good. He said that if it had not been 

for the Wheat Board operating today, the farmers would have got nothing for their feed wheat, or words 

to that effect. What I am trying to establish is that the member for Arm River now is apparently quite 

enthusiastic about the Wheat Board, and I do not think he would deny it. But we will take a little stroll 

through the records of this House . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You are welcome to do that, boy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Here we go back to 1937 or maybe we should say "here we go gathering 

nuts in May". Back about that time in March, 1937, there was a motion before the House, a great long 

motion. The Turgeon Commission was sitting at that time and the Liberals were enjoying themselves 

hiding behind the Turgeon Commission, saying "Oh, now, we must wait to see what they are going to do 

about it". And our C.C.F.'ers, our 'quintuplets' of which we were so proud, were here in this House at 

that time, and they moved an amendment to put at the end of this motion a statement to make it clear 

that we in Saskatchewan wanted the Wheat Board to handle the 1937 grain crop. And this is the 

amendment, moved by Mr. Williams, seconded by Mr. McAuley, both of whom have now passed on: 

 

"That the amendment be amended by adding the words 'that the 1937 grain crop be marketed through 

the said Canadian Wheat Board.' 

 

Looking down the list of those who voted against the motion I see here Messieurs Loptson, Danielson, 

Dundas. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Nothing wrong with that at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — My hon. friend wants to look it up. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The wheat was down to 45 cents a bushel then. 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
6 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Look on page 107 of the Journals of 1937. And then, Mr. Speaker, we will 

go to 1938 . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Not a thing wrong . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — And in this case . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Grin all you want to. You did not grin yesterday. They won't grin day after tomorrow 

. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — In this case Mr. Hantelman had moved a motion asking for a National Grain 

Board and for a minimum fixed price of not less than the cost of production as established by the 

research bureaux of the Universities. Now, that was not satisfactory to my hon. friend for Arm River, so 

he moved an amendment, seconded by Mr. Hummel who has long since passed into oblivion in the field 

of politics, and this amendment again takes refuge in the Turgeon Commission. A year later, they are 

still hiding behind the Turgeon Commission. They say, 

 

"Pending the completion of the report and its submission to the Government of Canada, by the Hon. 

Mr. Justice Turgeon as a commissioner appointed by the Government of Canada to enquire into the 

whole question of the marketing of grain, this Legislature is of the opinion that any specific 

recommendation regarding any action to be taken by the Parliament of Canada would be premature 

and inadvisable at the present time." 

 

What a beautiful way of getting out of the tough situation of responsibility. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well that's what they were appointed to find out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again one of our quintuplets moved an amendment — 

Mr. Williams, their leader — and the main part, the spice of this amendment was to add the words: 

 

"And the said Board to accept delivery and market the 1938 crop." 

 

Looking down the recorded vote, among the "yeas" and the "nays", in the "yeas" we have the five 

quintuplets and in the "nays" we have Messieurs Loptson, Danielson, Culliton — Dundas apparently 

wasn't there that day. So again they voted against a clear-cut amendment asking the Federal Government 

that the 1938 crop be marketed through the Canadian Wheat Board. These hon. gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, 

are only in favour of the Wheat Board in my opinion for one reason, and that is because they dare not 

take any other stand today, because it would be political suicide. 

 

Coming on to 1939 — I hope this is not getting monotonous to anybody here — here we have an 

amendment by Mr. Hantelman to the original motion which in this case was moved by Mr. Danielson, 

and seconded by Mr. Demers, two of the Liberal members. Among other things the amendment said 

this: 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
7 

"The Board to accept delivery of and market the 1939 crop, paying to the growers at the time of 

delivery a fixed minimum price, said price to be established at not less than the cost of production, 

plus an adequate standard of living as established by the Universities of Manitoba, Alberta and 

Saskatchewan." 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the "yeas" we have this time 15, and I am proud to say that your name is there. I am 

proud to say that the member for Kelvington (Mr. P.A. Howe) has his name on that list. Also the 

member for Last Mountain (Mr. J. Benson), and my name is there also. Among the "nays" we have 26 

and there we have Messieurs Dundas and Danielson. Before that time my hon. friend for Saltcoats (Mr. 

Loptson) had gone into temporary retirement. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you will remember, I think, that was the year when we had what was known as the 

Bracken Committee, a committee of western agriculture, here in the prairie provinces, the Western 

Wheat Committee; and that committee made certain recommendations, and so later during the Session 

of 1939, I remember so well that our Leader at that time, Mr. George H. Williams, spoke to the member 

for Arm River who had a motion on the Order Paper, pleaded with him to accept the recommendations 

of the Bracken Committee, put those recommendations in a motion, and it would be unanimously passed 

by this House. But that was not accepted, so the only recourse that we had was to move in an 

amendment those recommendations of the Bracken Committee, and among other things they asked for a 

setting of a guaranteed price of wheat of at least 80 cents for No. 1 Northern, basis Fort William, and the 

continuation of the Wheat Board for 1939 and 1940. When it came to the recorded vote on that question, 

we find 13 voting for the motion, and we find 29 voting against the motion, which included Mr. Dundas 

and Mr. Culliton and Mr. Taggart — Mr. Taggart, who was a member of that Committee and who when 

he was on the Committee voted for the recommendations, and then he comes into this House he votes 

against them with Mr. Danielson. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Tell us what the motion was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I have read the important part of the motion. It was that they were voting 

against 80 cents a bushel, and they were voting against the principles of the Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Read the motion to the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I do not want to take up the time of the House with reading 

the motion. Here is an interesting . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Just like the Premier was yesterday . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Here is an interesting sidelight. Back about 1939, what was the minimum 

price then? Was it 60 cents a bushel or 70 cents a bushel? Was that the time they were talking about 

reducing it? But anyway, we had a Federal election in March, 1940, as hon. members will remember, 

and just with the Federal election coming up, we could not get the least bit of opposition out of the 

members at that 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
8 

time of the Government. Previously, they would vote against 80 cent wheat; they would vote against the 

Wheat Board; but everything we proposed in the Session of 1940, just before that Federal election, got 

unanimous support. You will find that in the Journals of the Legislature for 1950, I think, Mr. Speaker, 

that pretty well shows who are the people who have been really sincere in fighting for a Wheat Board 

system of marketing and who are the people who are climbing on the band-wagon because they dare not 

lag behind. 

 

Listening to and reading the speeches of the hon. members opposite, particularly those of the Leader of 

the Opposition, during the past year, we have heard a great deal about this question of stagnation in 

Saskatchewan — nothing happening, or the country's just going behind, and all that sort of thing. I 

suppose, Mr. Speaker, that that is why the hotels are full and houses are hard to get — because in the 

country, there is not much doing! Undoubtedly there is a great population growth in this province; but if 

you just look around you just cannot help but see the evidences of Saskatchewan going ahead. It is again 

a case of my hon. friends living back in the age of the Liberal Government. They got so used to 

stagnation at that time, they think it is still being carried on. Look here, in the 'Leader-Post'. They could 

not help but put in a red headline about the new Ford plant coming to Regina. That does not exactly look 

like stagnation. That looks like new business. And then we go to 'Star-Phoenix'. We go to the 

'Star-Phoenix' and this is the 'Star-Phoenix' of December 29, 1950, and the headline right across the top 

of the paper reads: "Full Speed Ahead Seen As Six Saskatchewan Towns Modernized in 1950". The 

sub-headline, Mr. Speaker, is: "Nothing like it in the last 35 years". And the Towns mentioned are 

Nipawin, and, you know, they even mention Rosthern in here, and Meadow Lake and Melville — 

Melville is mentioned: nothing like it in the last 35 years, the way these towns are going ahead. And 

then my hon. friends talk about stagnation. 

 

Here is a clipping from the Prince Albert 'Herald' of October 3, 1950: "Saskatchewan Tourist Gain 

continued in August, New Figures Show". The item reads: 

 

"The Saskatchewan tourist trade continued to spiral upward during the month of August, according to 

figures just released by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics. For the second successive month 

Saskatchewan Tourist traffic recorded a percentage increase greater than that shown by any other 

province." 

 

I think I have even another one here, I was looking up — and I want to use this paper a little later; I want 

to find out who was on the Liberal executive in Melfort Constituency; but it just happens that when I 

take this paper up, I find headlines here about the progress that is being made at this particular time. Oh, 

here it is! It is a picture right in the centre: "Kindersley Installs Sewage System". Well, that is going 

ahead. I do not know what my hon. friends read. I am sure they do not read 'L'il Abner'. If they did, they 

could talk with more sense. But I do not know how they read to manage to be so ignorant about the 

progress that is being made in Saskatchewan. As Mortimer says, "It isn't easy". And here we have the 

'Star-Phoenix' for February 17: "Twenty-three buildings Added to Sturgis"; and here: "Changing Scene 

at Wynyard". Listen to this: 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
9 

"New building at Wynyard has increased the assessment by $58,000 in the last two years, exclusive of 

the new composite high school, the Union hospital or the Memorial Arena, which are non-taxable 

although they were all built within the last two years." 

 

And how about stagnation? I have another extract from the 'Star-Phoenix' here, and this is from the issue 

of November 9, 1950. The Hon. Leader of the Opposition was at Melfort, at the Melfort Liberal Rally 

and Convention. Other speakers were: J.G. Egnatoff, M.L.A. for Melfort, and J.I. Hetland, M.P. for 

Humboldt. The hon. Leader of the Opposition is quoted as saying: "The C.C.F. Government has 

frightened oil companies away from Saskatchewan to Alberta, Walter Tucker, Saskatchewan Liberal 

alleged at a banquet here Tuesday evening." I think he had eaten too much, and I will produce some 

evidence to show that something was wrong. I am sure it was not that the food was bad in Melfort, 

because they always feed you well there. It must just have been a case of over-eating. The article goes 

on to say — well, that is about rural electrification and in another part; we will not mix that up with the 

oil. 

 

Now, let us take a look at this question in regard to oil. Has the C.C.F. frightened oil firms away from 

Saskatchewan? I wonder how many people opposite actually think that that is the case? You know, 

before we had a C.C.F. Government in 1944, Mr. Speaker, we had a Liberal Government, and my hon. 

friends always appear to be praying that people will forget that we ever had a Liberal Government back 

about that time. And so, let us go back to before the time there was a C.C.F. Government, before the 

time there was a Leduc or a Redwater oilfield in Alberta, and let us compare the oil exploration in 

Saskatchewan and Alberta with a Liberal Government here in this province. In 1940, 69 wells in 

Alberta, 19 in Saskatchewan; in 1941, 86 in Alberta, 12 in Saskatchewan; in 1942, 100 wells in Alberta, 

7 in Saskatchewan; in 1943, 119 wells in Alberta, 25 in Saskatchewan. But better still, let us compare 

them on the basis of footage drilled, and the comparison is actually a great deal worse. In Alberta the 

average footage drilled in those four years, 1940 to 1943, was over 450,000. The average footage drilled 

in the province of Saskatchewan in those grand and glorious years when we had a Liberal Government 

was less than 15,000 feet a year. Seven times as much was drilled in the province of Alberta in the same 

period. 

 

My hon. friends do not like that comparison, and I admire their good taste. I would not like it if I was in 

their shoes either. Well, we will take another comparison. We will look at it another way. Maybe it 

would not be fair to compare them with Alberta; but here is the record practically from the beginning in 

Saskatchewan, from 1900 until 1943, inclusive. The Liberal Party was in power in this province all of 

those years except before the province was formed, and for the five years when the Anderson 

Government was in. And in those years, from 1900 to 1943, there were 192 wells drilled in 

Saskatchewan, an average of less than 4 1/3 wells a year. Now, if you take out the wells that were less 

than 1,000 feet deep, you just have left 64 wells in 44 years, or 11 wells per year, for the Liberal record. 

Now, they might say that is not fair. Well, let us take their record from 1940 to 1943, and we find that in 

these four years there were 63 wells dug — in four years, when there was a Liberal Government — an 

average of 15 3/4 wells per year. But, if you take off the wells that were under 1,000 feet — and there 

were 49 of them — there were only 14 wells over 1,000 feet deep in those four years, an average of 3 

1/2 wells per year. 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
10 

Now let us come to the C.C.F. period. From 1944 to 1950 inclusive, 7 years, all wells — 488, an 

average of 70 wells per year, compared with the Liberal average of 15 3/4. My hon. friend is mumbling 

to himself. Then the wells, in this period from 1944 to 1950, that were over 1,000 feet deep. We find 

there were 451 of them, an average of 64 wells per year in those seven years. That is to be compared to 

the Liberal record for the previous four years of 3 1/2 wells per year: 3 1/2 wells per year the Liberal 

record; 64 wells over a thousand feet the C.C F. accomplishment. The average footage drilled during the 

Liberal rule, in the years 1940 to 1943, the average feet of hole drilled per year, 14,728 feet. The average 

footage drilled since the C.C.F. Government took office, 141,832 feet per year, 10 times as much 

drilling. And yet our friend says, "C.C.F. frightened oil firms away". Well, Mr. Speaker, if we frightened 

the oil firms away, what in the world did the Liberals do to them from 1940 to 1943? 

 

Now these are some of the accomplishments of the oil exploration programme in the province of 

Saskatchewan during the past few years, but there are some more, too. For example: 

 

Mr. Danielson: — May I ask the hon. Minister a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, I will do exactly what my hon. friend did with me. I will deal with that 

later. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I answered your question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, that does not give the whole picture, because we have had a 

great deal of other work besides drilling of wells, not only the gravity meter work but the seismic work 

that has been done throughout the province. One company in this Province put down 14,000 shot-holes 

for seismic work, short one — 13,999; and the total footage of those shot-holes was 1,094,000 feet of 

drilling, Another company put down shot-holes totalling over 600,000 feet of drilling. The total for the 

whole province in footage of seismic shot-holes drilled would be well over 2,000,000 feet, probably 2 

1/2 million feet of actual drilling which has taken place. So, Mr. Speaker, I do not think there should be 

any further argument on this question as to whether or not the oil companies have been driven out of 

Saskatchewan. They are here. They are working. They have put millions into it now. They are going to 

put millions into it in the future. They have full confidence in the Government of Saskatchewan, and that 

is why they are staying here. 

 

Likewise, in the exploration programme in the Precambrian area, and again, it is in spite of everything 

that the Liberals could do in trying to frighten capital away by telling horrible stories, that progress is 

being made. The Hudson's Bay Mining and Smelting Company has built a new plant in the province of 

Saskatchewan, a $9-million plant, by which they will recover from the previous waste material 

considerable quantities of metals. This same company, or rather a subsidiary of this same company, has 

taken out a mining concession for exploration, 48 square miles, in that area about 75 or 90 miles 

north-east of Lac la Ronge in what is commonly known as the Waddy Lake Area. This concession is for 

two years, and they undertake to spend $60,000 in exploration work on the concession. 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
11 

The Hudson's Bay Mining and Smelting Company, in the year 1950, did over 10,000 feet of diamond 

drilling in the province of Saskatchewan, exploring further ore bodies, A good deal of this drilling was 

done not on their own claims, but on other claims on which they got an option from the claim holder. 

 

There were over a thousand claims staked in the fiscal year, and if we change the concessions into 

claims, to meet the same acreage, it would take over 9,000 claims to equal the concessions which were 

taken out during that year. 

 

There are about 40 companies interested in exploration and development work in Northern 

Saskatchewan. One of the outstanding things was the fact that the International Nickel Company filed 

through their agents 106 claims, last fall, in an area north of Black Lake and Stony Rapids. There were 

hundreds of thousands of feet of diamond-drilling done in the exploration in the North during the past 

year. There are in existence, aside from the development at Flin Flon, thousands of feet of shaft and 

drift. Three mining companies are presently working underground. Eldorado, the Dominion Crown 

Corporation, definitely has a mine and we are working with them, and I hope we will successfully work 

with the Federal Government on the building of a road into that mine, in the same manner as we did to 

build a road from Stony Rapids to Black Lake, last summer. Nisto and Nicholson mines, one located at 

Goldfields, the other at Black Lake, are approaching the time when they can make the decision as to 

whether they have ore of sufficient quantity and of sufficient quality to be a productive mine or not. 

They are both working underground. Nesbitt-Labine mines, one of the newer ones, will be underground 

in 1951. The Pitch-Ore Uranium Mines will also be going underground in 1951. Then, coming further 

south, in the Lac la Ronge area there has been a good deal of activity of surface exploration work, and of 

diamond drilling as well. There never was in the history of the province of Saskatchewan such an 

amount of exploration work going on in our mineralized areas, and we can certainly expect to see good 

results for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The motion which is before the House, Mr. Speaker, has been amended, or an amendment has been 

offered which reads: 

 

"But this Assembly regrets that the policy of Your Honour's advisors in regard to the settlement of 

vacant Crown Lands suitable for agricultural purposes is that all such land will be allocated on a 

33-year lease basis, with no provision for the settler ever having the right to obtain title to any such 

land settled on by him." 

 

In the first place, the amendment is not strictly correct in that the veterans who settled under the 

Veterans' Land Act do have a clause in their contract allowing them to purchase; but that is a mere 

detail which would not amount to much insofar as the Liberal Party is concerned. Now, it is quite 

apparent that some of the people opposite do not like the present land policy in connection with the 

allocation of Crown Lands. The member for Redberry (Mr. Korchinski) has stated he does not like it. 

The member for Melfort (Mr. Egnatoff) does not like it, and he has warned me about the dire 

consequences in my constituency 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
12 

on account of this policy. I shall have further to say about that little matter before I sit down today, I 

hope. The member for Melville (Mr. Deshaye) does not like it, and the member for Last Mountain (Mr. 

Benson) does not like it either. It is very interesting, just in passing in this House, to refer back to 1934 

Journals, and we find that there was a motion moved by Mr. Benson and seconded by Mr. Horner: "That 

in the opinion of this Assembly a use-lease system of land tenure should be instituted in this province." 

A debate arising and the question being put, it was negatived on the following division: Yeas — 1, Mr. 

Benson. And all the rest ware against it. I want to pay tribute to the hon. member for Last Mountain for 

having the courage of his convictions at that time. He is not a man who makes decisions which are 

hasty, and I am sure before he moved that motion and voted for it he had logically thought out this 

matter. He had considered the trouble which the farmers were in at that particular time, the insecurity 

they were suffering and all the rest of it, and he moved that motion because he believed in it. I will have 

to leave it to somebody else to answer as to why he changed his mind. Incidentally, I was amused at all 

the applause that the hon. member for Last Mountain got from the Liberal benches, and it seemed that 

they had completely forgotten about their candidate, Mr. Wilfred Gardiner, in Last Mountain 

constituency. I think, Mr. Speaker, that when this Redistribution Bill comes in we should try to solve 

this problem for them and probably make that a two-member seat, so they could have them both. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is an idea. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I want to read a short passage to the House from the 'Family Herald and 

Weekly Star' editorial page, November 23, 1950, and I want to make it clear to the House that I do not 

subscribe to the opinions expressed here. But this is what this newspaper, published in Montreal, said, 

and it is certainly not a C.C.F. newspaper, I think, as a matter of fact either the Liberals or the 

Conservatives could claim that they get quite a bit of support from this farm paper. And it says: — it is 

on land and land utilization and conservation, and it is headed, "Do we really own the land?" It says: 

 

"That fundamental mistake was, of course, the subdivision of the land and the allocation of it to 

individual farmers without any restriction whatever as to its use." 

 

That is what the 'Family Herald and Weekly Star' said. And again they say: 

 

"As the rain came down (this is writing about the Peace River country) and flowed along the furrows 

and ditches into the rivers, it was possible to see in the most obvious fashion, the rich, fine soil literally 

flowing away. In spite of this, farm owners were clearing brush and trees, draining sloughs and lakes 

and plowing their fields without respect to contours, and there was no authority which had the right to 

control or direct their activities." 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
13 

Again I want to make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that I do not concur in the implications of that statement. It 

points out problems, but it certainly does not indicate any proper solution insofar as I can see. But I did 

want to read that to the House, to point out to the hon. members opposite that there are a good many 

people who hold different opinions about the methods of holding land in Canada. 

 

Now that is just one side of the picture. What about the other side — the leaseholder, the occupant of the 

land? First of all, let us consider what other methods might be used. Well, I think we will have to 

recognize that the Crown land is a part of the public domain and, of course, as part of the public domain, 

the Government of the day has a responsibility as to how they are going to handle that part of the public 

domain and as to what revenue should come out of it. And my hon. friends, when their party has been in 

power, their party has always been willing to give away large chunks of the public domain if they can 

get political support for it, Sometimes they gave it to power companies like Beauharnois, but yesterday 

we touched a new low when the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) took the revenue from this 

public domain and held it up as a political bribe to every veteran in the province to get them to vote 

against the C.C.F. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am proud of it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Then I want to ask the hon. member — my hon. friend from Arm River 

should not be so much disturbed about it if he is so proud of it, he should be beaming with contentment 

instead of that he is looking very much worried. I want the hon. member for Arm River to ponder this 

question: is he going to also return the rent to every other person in the province who has rented 

property from the Crown and apply it on a purchase price? And if he has to answer that question to 

himself in the negative, then I say that he will be admitting to himself that this was nothing else but a 

way of trying to buy these people to get them to vote for his political party. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — A method of doing justice. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Crown Land is a part of the public domain. It is owned by the people of the 

province. We have not enough Crown Land fit for agriculture to give a half-section or even a 

quarter-section to all who want and need land. We have not enough to give all veterans Crown Land. 

Therefore some will get land and some will not. To be fair, whoever gets the benefit of that land must 

pay something to the public treasury for it. Now, my hon. friend is going to make a special condition 

which he talked about the other day. They used to have a 'pork barrel' in the Liberal Party, and now they 

use the public funds instead of the pork barrel. And so, if we were going to sell those lands we would 

put them up and advertise them for sale, and who would get them? I can tell you who would get them. It 

would be doctors. It would be business men. It would be farmers who already had a half-section or a 

whole section or two sections of land. 

 

Mr. Kuziak (Canora): — Lawyers. 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
14 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, there might even be some lawyers venture into the business of 

farming; they have been known to do so. 

 

Mr. Dundas: — Shumiatcher. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Those are the people that would get that land. Maybe that is what my hon. 

friends want. The hon. member for Melfort is in favour of that kind of a programme. I know that, 

because it happened right in his constituency, where the Liberal Government were doing the job of 

allocating of land. That I shall deal with a little later. Therefore, I think, selling the land would not get 

the land into the hands of the people who are most in need of land on which to build homes. Many of the 

people who have got this land, who have had this land allocated to them, had some equipment. They are 

capable. Many of them have not even got money to make a substantial down payment on land, and they 

are tickled to get this land. 

 

Now, there is lots of land for sale in the province of Saskatchewan; there is lots of land for sale. You see 

it advertised in all the newspapers. But who is getting the customers? It is the Crown Land on the lease 

basis. One quarter section in my constituency had 43 applicants for it, and my hon. friend says it is not 

popular. It is popular. And they recognize in it a security greater than they have ever had before. 

Suppose you take, for example, the old Federal Government policy that they used with the soldier 

settlers after the first World War of twenty-four thousand soldier settlers, approximately, in Canada, 

14,000 of them lost their farms; there are 3,000 still without titles. These are round figures. About 

11,000 got titles, and my hon. friend, the Leader of the Opposition, was on the committee of the House 

of Commons when the Soldier Settlers' Association appealed to that committee, after over 20 years on 

the land, to give to the old veteran his title, and they did not do it. They said "No". 

 

Mr. Tucker: — The hon. member cannot put words in my mouth. We recommended a system whereby 

help would be given to these people to get title to their land on an individual basis. That is what we 

recommended. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I am not surprised that they recommended something that they pretty well 

knew would not be done. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, several thousand have got titles since we 

recommended that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, several have got titles since that was recommended. There is no doubt 

about that; but what they did not recommend was that after 20 years on this land they should get title — 

and those old soldier settlers went through some pretty tough times, buying cattle at $100 apiece and 

then a year and a half later they were not worth more than $15 apiece; that kind of stuff. And then again 

the big bump of the '30's. If anybody knows the story of the bumps of land settlement and farming it is 

the veteran settlers of the first World War. They came through them all. But my hon. friend, the Leader 

of the Opposition, did not do very much to help them. We have examples. For example, in the selling of 

school land which has been carried on in the province of Saskatchewan in the past, and the record there 

is not too happy and has not brought too much security to too many people. 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
15 

Now, I do not believe that members of this House want to see that Crown Land allocated or sold to 

people who already have a section of land, or people who have a hardware business or some other 

business. Or, at least, most of the members of the legislature do not want to see it. But, you know, that 

did happen. In this case I was talking about, there was a Sessional Paper tabled in the House of 

Commons — Sessional Paper No. 153 of 1950 — and it is the story about the allocation of land in the 

James Smith Indian Reserve near Fort a la Corne by the Liberal Government of Canada. James Claggett, 

a member of the Liberal executive of the constituency of Melfort, in 1936, leased 1,280 acres for grazing 

at 15 cents an acre. In 1941, he got a new arrangement made whereby he could cultivate some of the 

land, and on the cultivated land he paid 75 cents an acre. In 1947, on the expiration of this lease, another 

arrangement was made by which he was to pay a quarter share of the crop, and the lease was transferred 

to Mr. Claggett's son and son-in-law, that is C.H. Claggett, Clif. Claggett and G.A.D. Will, both of 

whom my hon. friend from Melfort knows very well. And the acreage was increased to 1,440 acres, and 

that lease is still in effect until 1953. Under this lease, they paid to the Indian Band, in rental, one quarter 

share of the crop for two years, 1948 and 1949, $15,000. They were making a pretty good thing when 

they were only paying 75 cents an acre for the cultivated land before that time. That would indicate that 

they were getting $45,000 in the two years, out of the 1,440 acres. It is not likely that they paid more 

rent than they were entitled to pay. 

 

In 1950, the Indians decided that they would lease another 6,191 acres for a term of eight years, and so 

they proceeded to do this job of leasing this land. One of the questions that was asked in the House was: 

was there any preference given to veterans in this land, and the answer was, "No." Now, the first thing 

that happened, there were a few big operators who wanted to get this land. One of them applied for 

4,000 acres, but it was thought that that would be kind of 'hot stuff', to hand it out in such big pieces as 

that, so they limited it to units of approximately 320 acres in most cases, and they advertised it for bids, 

a quarter-share of the crop plus a bonus. Now, the funny thing about it is that, though there were 19 

parcels, I believe, 19 units — only four of them offered any cash bonus in their original bid. But 

apparently somebody (I do not know whether my hon. friend from Melfort knows anything about this or 

not) — somebody told them that they would have to put in a bonus bid if they expected to have any 

hope of getting it. And so, they all bid a bonus then of 50 cents or 25 cents or 75 cents per acre. On May 

8th, the Indian Affairs Department at Ottawa received telegrams from the remaining names on the list; 

that is the other names on this list of the successful bidders. They all sent telegrams on the 8th of May 

offering a uniform bid of 50 cents per acre bonus. Who got the land? W.K. Kirkham of Fort a la Corne 

got 758 acres; I am not sure whether he is a farmer or not. E. Edworthy of Melfort — 320 acres; 

incidentally he is a hotelkeeper's son. Next one, G. Edworthy, Melfort, that is George Edworthy of 

Melfort — 320 acres; he is one of the hotelkeepers in Melfort, and a member of the Melfort Liberal 

executive. He used to live in Arborfield and I was glad when he moved away to Melfort. That is one 

fellow that won't be voting against me down there any more. Then we have G. Campbell, of Star City, I 

do not know him; E. Davidson, of Melfort; R. Townsend, of Tisdale; Bob Townsend of Tisdale, a very 

nice chap — but he is a Massey-Harris agent and has a whale of a big Massey-Harris business. These are 

the 'local farmers' that got the land! Chytyk Brothers — I do not 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
16 

know them; G.W. O'Byrne — my hon. friend could help me out on some of these — I think he is a 

drover, I am not sure; W.H. Ford of Kinistino is a general merchant and he got 320 acres; G.A.D. Will. 

Now remember, G.A.D. Will and Clif. Claggett had 1,440 acres already. G.A.D. Will, James Claggett's 

son-in-law, gets another 240 acres. T.A. Gregg, Massey-Harris dealer in Melfort, gets 240 acres, G.A. 

Wood, hardware merchant in Melfort, gets 240 acres. J. Davis, Melfort — I do not know him. One of 

these chaps works in the butcher shop of James Claggett. I do not know which one it is, but he got some, 

anyway; this might be him, 240 acres. Anton Dorel, 240 acres. And then we come down to James 

Claggett himself. He is a stock drover and also has a butcher shop, and he got 320 acres. He owns lots of 

other land around the community, too. C.H. Claggett, who, remember, had a share of 1,440 acres 

already, gets another 320 acres. Keith Claggett, who, I believe, is the son of Clif. Claggett, C.H. Claggett 

got 320 acres. And so, when you add up all the Claggetts, the sons and sons-in-law, you find that that 

family got 2,640 acres. Liberal allocation of Crown lands! Foster Brothers, of Kinistino, each got 320 

acres. Now, there you are. No preference for veterans; no regard whatsoever to the need of the applicant 

for the land, but just handing it out of the pork barrel. That is all it was, pure and simple. The majority of 

those people who got that land had no more need for additional land to make a living than the man in the 

moon. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Is there any suggestion there that anyone else bid on the land and should have got it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Most of these people did not put in a bonus bid for the land. Somebody told 

them, "If you are going to get this land you will have to put in a bonus bid." And on May 8th, all their 

bonus bids came in by wire at 50 cents an acre. If there is not something funny about this, I would like to 

know. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — The hon. Minister has not answered my question, Mr. Speaker, is there any suggestion 

that anyone else bid on this land and should have got it, or was it allotted to those that did bid on it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, my hon. friend agrees with this allocation of land. I shall tell the 

people in my constituency that this is the kind of allocation of land that the Liberals believe in. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a suggestion to the hon. member. The hon. member 

has made a statement that this is an allocation of Crown Land. Now, as I understand this, this is just a 

lease to these people to clear that land up and bring it under cultivation, and thereafter . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! The hon. member has not the right to make a speech, or give his 

interpretation of what it is. The hon. Leader of the Opposition knows that he can only rise on a point of 

privilege or a point of order. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — The hon. member has misrepresented our position. Now he has said . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — A point of privilege must be personal. 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
17 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, may I state my question of privilege? The hon. member said that this 

constitutes Liberal Land settlement policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is not a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — It is a misrepresentation of our position. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If you want to rise on a point of privilege and say that the hon. member has made a 

specific misstatement, personally . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — That is exactly what I am saying, Mr. Speaker. I am saying that the hon. member has 

said "this represents Liberal land settlement policy", and I say, Mr. Speaker, it represents nothing of the 

sort. It is just a way of bringing some of this land under cultivation, after which it reverts to the Indians. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is your point of privilege. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that this Indian land was being leased for eight 

years — and this is good rich land on the north side of that Melfort area, and that is a little bit more than 

just bringing it under cultivation — seven years in which to get crops off. 

 

There is a list of 17 people, many of whom are genuine farmers, all the way from Meath Park, 

Strongpine, and so forth, people who had their money refunded, and who did not get the land. There 

were lots of bidders for the land, but they did not get any of it at all, and some of them might have been 

Liberals, but not well enough in on the 'inside track.' 

 

You see, the hon. Leader of the Opposition is in a desperate position on this question, because if he says 

he is not in favour of that kind of a policy of allocating land, then he is going against his own party; and 

if he said he is in favour of it, he knows he is wrong and I don't blame him for wanting to keep quiet on 

the question. But it is a question that the hon. member for Melfort is going to have to answer as to 

whether or not he is in favour of that kind of thing. That is a question which he will have to answer in 

that part of the country, and probably the Leader of the Opposition will, too. 

 

I think it was the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson), in regard to the settlement, said that one of the 

things was that the veteran did not know what he would have to pay for this land. You see, they put it in 

the amendment that they cannot buy it, and yet they go on talking about it, knowing that they can. Well, 

there are a lot of people that started out to buy land in the province of Saskatchewan that did not know 

what they were going to pay; but I think that to have that land valued now at the present highly inflated 

prices; might turn out to be extremely unfair to any veteran who wishes to exercise his right to buy it. 

 

Mr. Dundas: — He will take a chance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Of course, the policy which my hon. friend from Qu'Appelle-Wolseley 

supports is to sell to the poor 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
18 

fellow who has to have the land at the highest price he can get, and if he cannot pay it, get it back and 

sell it again. 

 

The statement was also made by the member for Arm River that the veterans may have to get off at the 

end of 10 years, if somebody offers more. That statement is just not correct, and I would like to correct 

the member for Arm River on that. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Is it my permission to correct a statement? What I said was this — what the veteran 

had today was an agreement that he could exercise an option on that land, at the end of 10 years. He had 

no guarantee that there would not be someone bidding against him. That is what I said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry I misunderstood him. I understood him to say that 

we would take this attitude at the end of 10 years, and I am glad he recognizes that we will be here at the 

end of 10 years. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I didn't recognize that at all. You won't be here at the end of 10 years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I understood the hon. member to say that, at the end of 10 years, someone 

else may come along and offer more for the land, and buy it away from under the veteran's very feet. 

There will be no danger of that happening whatsoever. I am not saying that that is what the hon. member 

said. I said that is what I understood him to say. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Do the same rules apply in this House, as yesterday? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Exactly the same. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If that is the case I have the right to correct the hon. gentleman that is speaking now. 

He is again misrepresenting my statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You have already corrected him. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He said that I said that at the end of 10 years someone else was going to take over 

the veteran's land. I said there was nothing in the agreement — and if he has it in the agreement, then let 

him read it. Then he can prove that I was wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member has had the opportunity to make the statement; he has made the 

statement. The Minister who is speaking, if he wishes to reply to that statement, that is his privilege. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I might have to rise again to tell what I said, and I shall do so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — It is this spring weather, I guess, Mr. Speaker, that makes people act like 

that. But anyway, I want 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
19 

to tell my hon. friends opposite that the present practice of the leasing and allocating of Crown Land is 

the most popular plan that has ever been in use in this province. There is no question about that at all. 

But I can say that the hon. member — he mentioned the votes I was going to lose over this programme; 

but I would like to say to him that a lot more than the 30-votes' margin that he had is gone over that 

allocation of land at Fort a la Corne. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I never said anything about the voting. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Minister was not talking about you. Order! Will the hon. member keep his 

seat when he is not referred to. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It is pretty hard to tell what you fellows are talking about. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — As I stated before, one quarter-section had 43 applicants for it. Many have 

had 10 or 12 or more. The people who get this land are people who will enjoy it . . . 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — The C.C.F.'ers! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I want to tell the hon. Leader of the Opposition that the remark he just made 

from his seat is absolutely false, and he knows it. There is no political discrimination in this whatsoever. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — The hon. member must be imagining things. I never said a word. He is having 

hallucinations or something. I guess it is the spring, Mr. Speaker, I never said a thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I humbly apologize to the Leader of the Opposition. I did not know it was 

the member from Melfort that made that remark; but my reply applies to the member from Melfort . . . 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — You won't even win by 30 votes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . If you will just take it as read, that will be all right. 

 

This system does give greater security than any other system that has been used. There is no question 

about that. The lease-holder can sell or assign his rights, and I want to say this. If we had 3 times as 

much Crown Land as we have, we would still have lots of customers for it on these terms. And if we put 

it up for sale at what would be the going market value, it would be a different kind of people altogether 

that would get it — the Claggetts and the Edworthys — the people who don't need it. They are the 

people that would be buying that land. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — Maybe the Liberals would get their share and that would be terrible! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — It would be terrible. My hon. friend from Melfort mentioned the large 

territorial Crown Land that should 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
20 

be opened up in the Carrot River triangle. I don't think he knows very much about it. I don't think he 

knows that the late and unlamented Liberal Government of the province of Saskatchewan leased a large 

tract of that land for a long term in 1942, to the Federal Government. He probably just did not know 

that. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — I know that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That is one of the things, and it has been, in the meantime, under our 

conservation programme, developed to a great extent in muskrat marshes. But there is not nearly the 

amount — let no one get any funny ideas like that; there is not nearly the amount of Crown Land that 

will be available on which there can be settlement, in the near future, that some people talk about. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with some of the other things in my own Department. I have already 

mentioned the mineral resources at work in both oil and the Pre-Cambrian, but some other things, too. 

At this point I would like to take time off to say that the Department of Natural Resources is a very large 

and varied department. It carries on a great many activities. In most of the provinces of Canada, they 

have mines separated from the rest of the resources, or they have other divisions. Saskatchewan is one of 

the provinces where it is all together, and I feel that it would be absolutely impossible to carry on the 

administration of this, in one department, except for the fact that I have a very excellent staff. I want to 

pay tribute to my Deputy and Assistant Deputy Ministers, my Branch heads, and right down through the 

staff, because it is their ability and industry and integrity — that is the only thing that makes it possible 

for me to carry on. 

 

To come now to our Forestry Branch. The inventory work is being pushed forward. In a couple of years, 

I think we will be pretty close to having a complete inventory of our forests, and in some ways the 

inventory is turning out to be pleasantly surprising. Undoubtedly, we have greater reserves of pulpwood 

and potential pulpwood than we knew before. Forest management work is going ahead — management 

of the forests — so that there will be a continual forest industry, and one of the big questions is 

utilization of forest products. In the years gone by it was a case of just skimming off the cream, chiefly 

the white spruce saw timber. Now we are getting some variation into the picture, and using some of the 

other products. 

 

The Box Factory at Prince Albert is one of the things that makes possible the using of a good many other 

products. The plywood plant, at Hudson Bay does help, also, in utilization, but the establishment of a 

pulp mill would be of greatest assistance in getting better utilization of forest products. We have had a 

number of people interested in our pulp resources, and I feel I am not exaggerating when I say that it is 

quite probable that, within a few years, we will have a pulp mill of some type established in this 

province. I would point out that before we took office, under Liberal Government chiefly, 90 per cent of 

our merchantable white spruce was gone — of our original merchantable white spruce. We were left 

with a comparatively little bit of merchantable timber at this time. 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
21 

Most important of all, is fire prevention and suppression. Our programme of building more observation 

towers has been carried forward during the year. The air patrol, carried out by our planes, the work of 

smoke-jumpers, the work of our stand-by crews and equipment for exterminating fires immediately they 

are discovered — all of these things have been carried on, and they are having a good effect. The great 

majority of our fires are put out while they are small, before they do much damage. Occasionally one 

gets away and does do very serious damage. I want, also, to say a word of appreciation to the settlers in 

the forest areas for the additional care they are taking in regard to fires. 

 

The Saskatchewan Timber Board has carried on with its work during the year, and has fitted in well with 

the policies of the department of Forest Management in getting the best utilization. 

 

In about two years time, The Pas Lumber Company will have finished its cut in the province of 

Saskatchewan. The Pas Lumber Company has been one of the best companies, I think, that has ever 

operated in the province. The working conditions of their men, the wages they pay to their men, have 

been leading in that field. Their work in the forest has been very good, and they have been most 

co-operative in doing anything they can to gat better production and better utilization. The total value of 

our forest production, during the past year, was very close to $5,000,000. 

 

Our Game Branch, Mr. Speaker, is doing a good job. The work of the Game Branch has resulted in 

guaranteeing the future security of game animals and birds in this province. In fact, the job in a few 

phases was done 'too well', and we did have some elk trouble, and I notice one of the hon. members 

asked a question about the elk season. That, I think, is pretty well taken care of. There was an open 

season last fall, for elk, and according to the reports turned in — I haven't got the definite figures yet — 

well over 200 elk were taken, probably nearer 300 if all returns were in. The trouble is that this crop is 

out. Had the crop been harvested no trouble would have been experienced whatsoever; but permits are 

being issued to the farmers who have crop out close to the areas where the elk are bothering them, and 

they are permitted to shoot elk, to keep the first carcass for themselves, and that, in itself, is quite a 

compensation. A good elk carcass is worth $200 of anybody's money at somewhat less than the butcher's 

prices. 

 

The Coyote control programme is going ahead and is meeting with success throughout the province, and 

the programme is being extended to the north. 

 

One of the problems which the Game Branch has to deal with is the question of caribou hunting — sport 

hunting of caribou. As you know, the caribou, in the far north are of great economic importance to the 

native people. In the Northwest Territories the Federal Government allows the hunting of caribou for 

sale, by hunters and trappers in that area. That means that caribou are shot and killed and the carcasses 

stockpiled and they are sold to campers or to mining companies, or anything like that. We have been 

urging the Federal Government to change their laws, to prevent that kind of use of the caribou, to let 

these companies take in meat from the outside. We are of the opinion that we may probably have to stop 

sport-hunting of caribou, even though the numbers killed by the hunters are not 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
22 

very great on account of the psychological effect on the natives whom we are asking to be careful with 

the caribou. 

 

In our northland, some of the principal things that affect our northland is the Fur Conservation 

Programme, and the progress there is good. The fur catch was down somewhat from a year ago, but the 

prices were good and the returns may be as good or better than the year before. We had another 

convention of trappers at Prince Albert, in January — it was attended by white people, by Metis people, 

by Cree Indians, by Chipewyan Indians; as a matter of fact we had two interpreters, one for the Cree and 

one for the Chipewyans. It is inspiring to see those people at their convention discussing their problems 

without regard to colour, creed or race. It is a real little United Nations — and the United Nations might 

be able to learn something right there at the trappers' convention about how to get along — some of the 

members of the United Nations, anyway. The fur has continued to be marketed as before, and the 

popularity of the Fur Marketing Service is growing. It is bringing greater returns to the trapper — not 

only to the one who ships direct to us, but to those who sell to the dealer also. When we have our 

December sale, for example, immediately after the sale the prices of the furs is broadcast two or three 

times over radio CKBI at Prince Albert, and I think they go over Saskatoon as well, so that the trappers 

in the province, right in the midst of the trapping season in December, know the value of fur, and if a 

dealer comes to buy them they have a pretty good idea as to whether they are getting value or not. The 

value of fur production in the province, last year, was $2 1/2 million — $400,000 of that fur was ranch 

fur; and the balance, wild fur. 

 

In Fisheries, we had another very successful year, and the marketing was carried on in the usual way and 

with very good success. Biological studies have been carried on in Lac la Ronge, Last Mountain Lake 

and in the small reservoirs throughout the province, with a view to increasing the angling resources of 

the province. Some re-stocking of trout and pickerel has been done. The value of production at railhead 

was $1 1/4 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is becoming a famous place for angling. Last summer, we had two 

American sportswriters take a trip into our northland and go fishing, and one of them was Bill Wolfe 

who wrote this article in "Sports Afield". He said in this article: 

 

"Craik and Brockelbank, (that is Mr. Craik of the Bureau of Publications and myself) had asked, back 

in Regina, for honest opinions about their Saskatchewan fishing. Here they are: 

 

"If there is any better fishing for the species available anywhere on the continent, I have not yet found 

it". 

 

Then he goes on into greater detail. That is one of the reasons we are getting more tourists: we do have 

fishing resources here which are beyond compare. 

 

In our northland, our Radio Service is being more and more appreciated and is growing. Sets are being 

rented to mining companies. We supply a pretty well complete system of communication over the north. 

Our Prince Albert station handled, last year, an average of over 120 messages per 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
23 

day for 365 days in the year. That is a lot of messages, if you figure them out. 

 

The educational programme in the north is going ahead. The schools, operated by the Minister of 

Education, are of great value. I want to remind the House that, this year, at Creighton, near Flin Flon, by 

agreement, the Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Co. built a brand new modern four-room school. You 

see, the mining property is not subject to local taxation. It can be taxed, but there is a provision in the 

Act that it need not be taxed if they supply the necessary facilities, and we made an agreement by which 

they would supply these facilities and make a contribution towards the cost of operating the school, and 

the cost of other local services, not exceeding $120 per year per employee. I understand that the member 

for Cumberland (Mr. Blanchard) is not very well satisfied with that. He says that the Government did 

not do anything about it. Well, we do pay the regular grants and we made the agreement with the 

Company, and the result is Creighton, his own home town, has a very excellent, fully modern four-room 

school. I hope the Minister of Education will have a look at that school the first time he is in Flin Flon. 

Health services in the north are very much appreciated and are giving great service to the people. There 

is the hospital at Isle a la Crosse operated by a Catholic order of Sisters; a Government hospital at 

Buffalo Narrows; a small hospital at La Loche operated by Sisters. They have good hospitals at Stony 

Rapids, Sandy Beach near Island Falls, and one at Cumberland House, and it is a wonderful thing to see 

the services that are provided to the people of the north through the medium of these hospitals and the 

nurses that are in charge. 

 

The Air Ambulance goes all over the north to pick up patients, which are emergent cases, and get them 

into hospital or in to Prince Albert, when necessary. 

 

Co-operation is going ahead in the northern part of the province. The fishermen, the trappers, the guides 

and so forth in the north, are taking an interest in co-operation. There is one Guides' Co-operative at La 

Ronge; there is a Forest Products Co-operative at Cumberland House — that co-operative has a contract 

from the Saskatchewan Timber Board to produce timber, And there is a great deal of informal 

co-operation; that is, without formal organization, but just by appointment of a committee and people 

working together, and that is all to the good. 

 

The Saskatchewan Government Airways is the counterpart in transportation that the radio is in 

communication, in the north of the province, and pilots and planes are welcomed wherever they go. 

 

Our Resources' Utilization Branch of the Department carried on its work with clays, including 

experimental and test work in regard to bentonite for drilling mud. We have, in Saskatchewan, a very 

large well-drilling programme as my hon. friends know, and they will need a lot of mud. There are a lot 

of kinds of mud that are not suitable for that use, but you have to have it made from the right kind of 

bentonite. The Utilization Branch, formerly known as the Industrial Development Branch, did work, 

also, in sodium sulphate derivatives, in utilization of forest products, and a survey of industrial 

opportunities, in co-operation with the Industrial Development Branch. 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
24 

The Surveys Branch of the Department made a number of new surveys of lots in different parts of the 

province. Due to the rapid growth and expansion that has taken place in the province of Saskatchewan, 

new lots were needed, and there was some farm land which was surveyed. Engineering surveys were 

carried on of certain landing fields and roads, and some aerial photography of roads; and revision of 

Saskatchewan maps, with 350 new names adopted for use on our Saskatchewan maps — most of them 

servicemen's names. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I sit down I want to say one word. We have, in our country, a lot of great and 

valuable democratic institutions. One of the greatest institutions which we have, and one which has a 

great responsibility, is the press. In the province of Saskatchewan practically all of our press follow the 

Liberal editorial policy, and with that I have no quarrel whatsoever. Of course, I would like to see two or 

three good publications in the province of Saskatchewan following an editorial policy which was C.C.F. 

I do not mind how biased they may be in their editorial policy, but it makes it a little difficult for 

progressive ideas to get across when the reactionaries control all of the press, as they do, in their 

editorial columns. There is one paper, however, which carries that bias far beyond its editorial columns, 

and that is the Regina 'Leader-Post', and I cannot help, much as I do not like doing this, bringing these 

examples to the House. 

 

Take, for example, in the news items. This was a news item issued in regard to Saskatchewan Box 

Factory, Prince Albert. In the Prince Albert 'Herald', of course, it did the best; it got 19 column inches in 

the Prince Albert 'Herald'. In the 'Star-Phoenix' it did very well — got 10 inches; but in the 'Leader-Post' 

it got 3 inches of a news item, and half of that was grumbling because there was no profit and loss 

figures with it. Now, maybe that is what the editor of the 'Leader-Post' thinks is a fair news policy. 

 

That is not the only example I have — I have one or two more. Here, for example, is the story of the first 

potash lease to be issued, and that should have been interesting to the paper of the capital. But here we 

have the 'Star-Phoenix' publishing it at the top of the third page, with a headline right across the page, 

and a total of 27 inches, including the headlines — 27 column inches. The 'Leader-Post' put it away back 

on a back page — I am not sure just what page it is from; it might have been on the third page, down 

low — and it is eight inches, as compared to 27 inches in the 'Star-Phoenix'. 

 

Now, that is all right, and actually it is their paper — I do not own it. Mr. Sifton, or somebody else, 

owns it and I guess he can do what he likes with it. But I do think the ownership of a newspaper does 

carry some responsibility, according to what they tell us, for giving a fair report of the news. Now, it is 

quite a different thing when the 'Leader-Post' got hold of some confidential documents. When the draft 

of the new petroleum regulations was sent out to the Oil Companies, and was sent out confidentially, the 

'Leader-Post' got hold of a copy and how much space did they give it? -36 inches. It seems to me that the 

'Leader-Post' would do well to check over its ethics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to be here today and to be speaking in this Throne Speech debate. I have 

not been here as long as my hon. friend from Arm River or one or two others, but I have been here quite 

a few years, 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
25 

and since I have been in this House, I have never been prouder of the province of Saskatchewan than I 

am today, have never been prouder of the progress that is being made in this province. 

 

I shall vote against the amendment, and I shall support the motion. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I did not want to interrupt the hon. member when he was on the air because — but I do 

want to point out to him now. He said that the Liberals had done nothing in regard to student aid. I, 

perhaps, should have interrupted him when he was on the air to read this statement of the facts, but I do 

want to draw it to his attention now. I have here the Public Accounts of 1944, and under 'Student Aid', 

even in a year like that in the middle of a war, when we were not spending money and training normal 

students as a matter of public policy because they were in the army, air force and navy — so many of 

them; we have here the expenditure on University Student Scholarships and loans, normal school 

student loans, a total of $41,000 some hundred. There was $41,000 for university student scholarships 

and loans, and $10,000 for normal school student loans. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The Federal Government had part of that. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, the Federal Government has part of what is being done today, and the hon. 

member said that the Liberal Party had done nothing, and he put that over the air to all Saskatchewan. 

Now I protest against Ministers of the Crown getting up and making statements like that as absolute 

statements of fact. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I will amend my words and say they did very little. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, it is too late now. 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I did not expect to participate in the 

Throne Speech debate at all. As a matter of fact, I fully intended to deal with the whole matter of 

rehabilitation, conservation and re-settlement during the course of the Budget Debate. I still intend to do 

that, Mr. Speaker, but I thought it might be just as well to say a few words in this debate, since the hon. 

member for Melfort (Mr. Egnatoff) has seen fit to issue his challenge, and at the same time I can assure 

the hon. member he should have seen to it that he was well provided with armour before issuing a 

challenge. 

 

The amendments, Mr. Speaker, to the Throne Speech, were, in my own opinion, very weak. The first 

one was so weak that they had to bring in another amendment; and in my opinion, the second 

amendment was far weaker than the first. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, from listening to the debate in 

this House, particularly from hon. members opposite, their speeches and the amendments are calculated 

to entice popularity. I believe though, Mr. Speaker, that the popularity of the amendment proffered by 

the hon. member for Redberry (Mr. Korchinski) will not have the popular appeal which was anticipated. 

 

The matter has been pretty well dealt with by the hon. Minister of Natural Resources, and I do not intend 

to go into any detail, only to point 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
26 

out that the hon. member for Redberry, who introduced this amendment, spent the greater part of an 

hour and a half to two hours on a dissertation on international affairs that took us to the four corners of 

the earth, and then an analysis of human history peculiar to his own particular type of mind; but he made 

no mention at all of the need of the type of amendment which he introduced. There was no concrete 

evidence to substantiate the introduction of such an amendment, and then, of course, the seconder, the 

hon. member for Melfort, similarly brought out no substantial reason why the 33-year leasehold policies 

should be discontinued, other than that it was not popular. I am inclined to believe that the hon. member 

for Melfort has a flair for popularity, particularly political popularity. In the course of trying to 

substantiate his arguments, he began to dramatize a land policy that was never the policy of the C.C.F., 

and, Mr. Speaker, I have never heard a motion in this House that needed dramatization as badly as the 

amendment; but dramatization, Mr. Speaker, without substantial factual support, is not going to get the 

popular appeal, nor is it going to get the support of the intelligent people of Saskatchewan, I am 

convinced of that. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It seems to worry you a lot. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The hon. member for Arm River says that it seems to worry me a lot. He seems to 

be the most worried member in this Legislature. Mr. Speaker, and I would suggest to the hon. member 

for Arm River . . . 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I rise on a point of privilege. The hon. Minister now speaking said that I had 

introduced an amendment and that I did not advance any reasons for introducing that amendment. May I 

be permitted to read the points that I advanced . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is not a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I would like to read the excerpt . . . 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I have the floor and there is no hon. member going to get up while I am on 

my feet, unless they raise their point of privilege, and the hon. member has not a point of privilege. And 

furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member did not advance any substantial argument in support of the 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — State your point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I want to show that I did advance arguments for the amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is no point of privilege whatever. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — What is it then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I want to offer some good advice to the hon. member for Arm River. 

If he spent less time accumulating newspaper clippings that he cannot find when he gets them all on his 

desk, when he begins three-hour orations in this House; and if he read some good books on conservation 

and the actual problems of Saskatchewan agriculture, he could probably give a more intelligent 

contribution to the affairs of this Legislature. 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
27 

I want to inform the hon. member for Arm River, since he has made some reference to the Land 

Utilization Board, that they are the ones who are desperately afraid that they may never get, back on this 

side of the House again. In their desperation, Mr. Speaker, they cling to any bit of driftwood that will 

prevent their political submersion; but I can assure them that since they do not come forward with any 

constrictive solution to the problems of the people of this province, there is very little likelihood of them 

getting the support that they anticipate. 

 

Now the hon. member for Arm River made some references to the land utilization system. He mentioned 

that the veterans would be unable to obtain their opportunity on their purchase option after 10 years. I 

want to mention to the hon. member for Arm River that the V.L.A. has a similar qualification, V.L.A. 

will not give a grant until 10 years, even though the veteran has paid his contract out in full in two or 

three years. They do that for a very necessary reason, and I am in agreement with it — otherwise the 

intended purpose of the lease would be lost. . . 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — May I ask a question? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You must get on your feet to ask a question. But evidently the hon. Minister does not 

wish to answer questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — If I remain on my feet for the benefit of the hon. members they can take their seats, 

just like the Premier took his seat yesterday, when he stood up and the hon. member for Arm River 

would not recognize him. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He was on his feet half the time. Here's a returned man wishing to ask a question . . . 

I 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I want to say further to the hon. member for Arm River that you can have another 

marathon. Sir, on the budget debate, if you wish, but I am just going to deal with you people now in a 

few well-chosen words. I think you have heard enough about land this afternoon, but I could tell you a 

whole lot more about land if you so desire, but the time will not permit. I have some nice stories on land 

administration under the former Liberal Government, and I will present them to you in due course, along 

with well-substantiated facts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to say to the hon. member for Arm River . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am not going to leave the House just for the pleasure I am getting out of this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I want to say to the hon. member for Arm River, too, that he should be aware of the 

fact that P.F.R.A. has certain reservations, too, in connection with land tenure. On irrigation projects 

they withhold the last dollar — the owner, or supposed to be owner, of that land never gets title to that 

land, and again for a very substantial reason: in order to prevent speculation in lands as a result of the 

expenditure of public money in irrigation development. But, the Liberals, in my opinion, are not exactly 

honest. They want to be complete free-enterprisers; they 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
28 

want to make the farmer believe that he has got a title to their land. After he pays for it they withhold 

one dollar — he never gets the title. It is far better to be honest about things and give a person a 33-year 

lease that is a complete guarantee of security, that does not involve any initial capital outlay for land, 

and I am going to go into that whole question in very much detail, Mr. Speaker, on the budget debate. 

But those are recognized principles . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, I know the hon. Minister wouldn't want to mislead the House, or the 

country in regard . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Are you rising to a point of privilege? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Yes, a misstatement made by the hon. Minister. His statement was that under the 

V.L.A. the veterans could not get title for 10 years. Now that is a complete misstatement. If a veteran 

wants to pay the full purchase price he can get title at once; but if he wants to get the benefit of the 

V.L.A. grant, then he cannot get title at once . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — That's exactly what he said. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — No, it is not what he said at all. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, with . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, with reference to the statement made by the hon. member for Arm 

River on the Land Utilization Board. Well, he knows that that Board was set up precisely for the purpose 

of defining the utilization of land in Saskatchewan. There are innumerable parcels of L.U.B. land spread 

throughout this province, that have not, as yet, been incorporated into any particular project, and those 

lands are being used right along, in exchange for land in the projects, in order that we can get the 

necessary land control. However, there is much of that land that will never find its way into a project, 

and it remains undeveloped, unreclaimed. All the Land Utilization Board was saying when they issued 

this statement to the municipalities, and as I said, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Arm River, like a 

political drowning man, grasped this and tried to make some capital out of it — he tried to infer that the 

Land Utilization Board, this colossal octopus, was going to take control of all this land. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That's what it's doing. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, this land is, and always has been, under the control of 

the Land Utilization Board. Now, the sole purpose of making this particular statement of policy was to 

inform rural municipal councils that the Department of Agriculture would assume responsibility for the 

reclamation of that vacant Crown land until it has been disposed of for the purpose intended — either to 

round out an existing farm unit, or to create now sizeable farm units, or to place that land in a 

community pasture or other development project. 

 

The hon. member from Arm River should be the last one to talk about the administrative work of the 

Land Utilization Board. All he needs to do is 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
29 

to go to the R.M.s of 252, 253 or 282 to discover the excellent co-operation that has taken place between 

the Land Utilization Board and the municipal councils and local agriculture committees. If there ever 

was a constituency in this province that needs conservation, and that needs the administration of the 

Land Utilization Board, it is Arm River constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — They have been doing pretty well — the municipalities. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Now the hon. member — and this is one of the reasons why I told him he would be 

well-advised to read some good agricultural books rather than collecting a whole lot of clippings from 

newspapers -suggests that a whole lot of this land could be turned back to cultivation again. I am sure 

that agriculturists in this country would be alarmed at that statement . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Another misstatement of facts. I never said that at any time. I said some of that early 

land had been going back to cultivation, and it should never have been taken out of cultivation. Now he 

says that I suggested it should be going back. What is the argument about? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If the same rules apply in this House today, as yesterday then I have a right to correct 

him, correct a misstatement. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member for Arm River has a perfect right, if he thinks he is being misquoted, 

to correct the statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — We will let the records speak, Mr. Speaker, but I distinctly heard the hon. member 

say that, with better farm machinery, a whole lot of that land could be brought under cultivation again, 

because . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, no! I said that with better farm machinery some of this land has been brought 

under cultivation again. That is what I said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, he is a terribly hard man to debate with — he never stays sitting, he 

always wants to be on his feet . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — All right, I'll debate with you any time you like. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I don't think I misinterpreted the hon. gentleman at all. That is exactly 

as I heard him make the statement, and I believe it to be correct. I want to say to the hon. member . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, he is insisting that I made a statement that I did not make, and 

according to the rules of this House, as they were interpreted yesterday, he should withdraw that 

statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Minister must accept the member's statement, until he has some concrete 

evidence to the contrary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I still don't understand what he was supposed to have said that I 

misunderstood, that I am misinterpreting 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
30 

at the present time. If he is under the impression that I did misinterpret him, I will have to take back 

anything that I have said that might have been in error. And as I have stated, Mr. Speaker, . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Let me explain what he says now . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! The hon. member said that if he has misquoted the hon. member from 

Arm River, he retracts. He takes it back. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — But now he is making the statement that he didn't make the statement. He says he 

doesn't know what I am talking about. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I had to retract my statement three times, yesterday . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member for Arm River will realize that I am running this Chamber, 

not him. And when I rule that a member has properly withdrawn, it is withdrawn, and that is not going 

to make a case for a speech. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I say, then that the rules should apply the same everyday. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Another thing, I am getting tired of having innuendos made by members of the 

Opposition that I am not conducting the business of this Chamber in a fair manner. If you don't think I 

am conducting the business properly, just move a substantive motion. The hon. member has withdrawn. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, just in . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I wonder what you mean by a substantive motion? You have made the threat before, 

and I just wonder what you mean, Are you suggesting, Mr. Speaker, and I am asking you a question, that 

you feel that you have the backing of a sufficient majority that you have nothing to fear? Is that what 

you are holding out on the Opposition? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, and you are taking an unfair advantage in this Assembly. What you have implied 

several times — you, the Leader of the Opposition, have implied that I have shown preference to the 

Government side of the House. You have said that. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, I have to say what I feel, and I remember the hon. member for Canora 

(Mr. Kuziak) muttered something to himself, and I said to Your Honour, and I brought it to your 

attention, and I asked Your Honour to let me say what I wished to say on this matter. You sometimes 

interrupt, but I asked you to recall, Mr. Speaker, that I said, "have the hon. member withdraw". I couldn't 

hear that he did, and you said, "I heard and that is all that is necessary". Now I point out to Your Honour 

that that isn't all that is necessary. This is a deliberative Assembly and if somebody says something 

aloud, and then says something so low that the Assembly can't hear it, that's not all that is necessary, Mr. 

Speaker, and when I pointed out to you, yesterday, when you insisted that my hon. friend here withdraw 

a thing three times, that all we wanted was fair play, 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
31 

that was nothing out of order, Mr. Speaker. Again, when you come around to us, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. You have repeatedly refused to accept the ruling of the House, you have 

remained on your feet, and then said that you weren't getting a square deal, that you wanted the same 

treatment as the Government side were getting. If that isn't an implication that you are not getting it, I 

don't understand English, and if we are going to have any discipline in this House, if you are going to 

have any semblance of order in the House, the Speaker must be allowed to say whether he accepts the 

statement of a member or not. When I said I had heard the member make the retraction — if I can hear 

it, and I have fairly poor hearing, very poor hearing, as a matter of fact; but if I hear the member make 

the retraction, and I acknowledge that he has made the retraction, then it has got to be sufficient for this 

House. It is not going to be made the purpose for a speech. The hon. member will continue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I, probably, Mr. Speaker, could be more of a shining example for the hon. member 

for Arm River. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If he tells the truth it is all right with me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I know he doesn't like to withdraw any statement that he has made, so if I have 

made any statement that is contradictory to what he said, in his mind, I gladly withdraw. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If you had said that in the first place it would have been all over. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Well, as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I made the withdrawal in the first place, but 

the hon. member from Arm River seems to be so obstinate in his own wind that he can't hear another 

person making a withdrawal. He just judges everyone else by his own inane stubbornness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after just a few more words, I intend to take my seat, much to the relief, perhaps, of the 

hon. members opposite; but I can assure you that when the budget debate comes, you will hear more 

from me. I intend to deal with this whole matter of land in an objective manner, Mr. Speaker, not 

because of any philosophies or any beliefs that I hold, that the group on this side of the House hold, but 

to deal with a situation that we have in the province of Saskatchewan, and a similar situation prevails in 

other similar areas of the North American continent. 

 

I was looking, Mr. Speaker, over the record of land tenure the other day, and I discovered this: that, over 

the years, less and less farmers, in this province, are owning their own land. And I want to say further, 

Mr. Speaker, that it is because the problems developed under what is known as 'private ownership' — 

the problem of large farms, the problem of farm tenancy; for that reason and because of the immediate 

need for the re-establishment of people who have been liquidated off the farms, and others who live on 

subsistence farms, it is vital and necessary that we deal with the problem realistically, and the most 

satisfactory way you can deal with it in on a 33-year lease basis, under which there is no capital outlay 

involved, under which scheme the Provincial Government breaks up 50 



February 20, 1951 

 

 
32 

acres of land for each settler. I think it is all to the good. Just take a look at the trend towards farm 

tenancy in Saskatchewan. In 1911, there were some 86,000 owner-operated farms in this province, and 

that represented 90.6 per cent of the whole. In 1946, only 56.6 per cent of the farmers wholly owned 

their own land, and proportionately, the percentage of farm tenants went up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is not necessary for me to say any more in that regards and I want to demonstrate to the 

hon. members opposite, in the course of my budget address, that the whole problem has arisen, in recent 

years, not because of the fault of any particular person, not because of any particular philosophy. It 

developed as a result of mechanization of agriculture. The tendency towards larger farm units has also 

been pronounced, as you look over the figures. For instance, in 1911, the average acreage per farm was 

295, in 1946 it was 473, and those are the problems that we are facing, Mr. Speaker. Everyone is 

interested in what is termed the 'family-sized' farm, and everyone is interested in keeping the boys down 

on the farms particularly the hon. members opposite — many of whom have expressed keen regard for 

the movement from the farms to urban centres. I do notice, though, Mr. Speaker, that very few of the 

hon. members opposite are farmers and usually the people who are most solicitous about keeping the 

boys on the farms are people that don't live on the farm themselves. They are usually people that have all 

the advantages of modern amenities in urban centres, and at the same time, they are greatly disturbed 

and concerned about the movement to urban centres. And similarly, Mr. Speaker, those are the peoples 

generally, that are so concerned about this 33-year lease. They are not the farmers themselves at all — 

our records indicate that completely; but the ones that are chiefly concerned are the ones, again, that are 

not engaged in agriculture at all. I am inclined to think, Mr. Speakers that their concern, after all, isn't so 

much for the farmer as it is for the well-being of their own particular business. It could be a loaning 

business. Perhaps they would like to have farmers in a position where they could loan money to them — 

yes, and sometimes at very exorbitant interest rates, and on very poor terms too, Mr. Speaker, at times. 

Those factors and this advice we have been getting from business organizations are the very things that 

have contributed so greatly to the present serious situation in regard to farm tenure in this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with just those few observations at this time, I want to say to you, very firmly, that I 

shall decidedly vote against the amendments and for the motion. 

 

The question being put on the amendment was negatived by 27 votes to 19. 

 

The question being put on the main motion it was agreed to by 27 votes to 19. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5.45 o'clock p.m. 


