



















































Hansard: March 06, 1951


1 

 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eleventh Legislature 

24th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 6, 1951 

 

The House met at three o‘clock p.m. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed from Monday, March 5, 1951, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of hon. 

C.M. Fines: That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair. (The Assembly to go into a Committee of 

Supply.) 

 

Mr. D. H. R. Heming (Continuing): — Continuing on from last evening when I adjourned the debate 

before the House, I would like today to possibly specialize upon the point of duty I hold myself as an 

organized labourer of 43 years‘ standing within the province of Saskatchewan. As possibly you know, 

Sir, most English-speaking nations have what are known as organizations of unions. In the United 

Kingdom, with fifty million people there are nine million organized labourers, or twenty per cent of the 

population. In the United States of America with 146 million people, 15,600,000 or eleven per cent of 

the population are organized labourers. In Australia the population is seven million - seven, with 

1,400,000 organized labourers or fourteen percent. In New Zealand with a population of 1.7 million, 

247,000 are organized labourers, or a percentage of sixteen per cent. In Canada with a population of 

close to fourteen million, we have a little over one million of organized labourers, or a percentage of 

eight per cent. 

 

I cannot say at this time, Mr. Speaker, except that we possibly may be a newer country than these other 

countries which I have mentioned, but it has seemed to me that all through the years there has been some 

force which has prevented or deterred the organization of working men. Thirty years ago in this 

province I earned the same money for the work which I performed as a railwayman as they earned in 

Chicago or Minneapolis. In the last twenty-five years or so through straight bargaining with the 

company I serve, and under the influence of Government, I have lost to the extent of thirty per cent of 

the proportionate wage they earn in the States and here. I may say too, similarly, Mr. Speaker, that the 

farms have lost proportionately from years ago to the present day in their spending power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see in a local issue of ―Time Magazine‖ where Mr. Abbott, quoting to the press at 

Whitefield, New Haven, said that the national production of Canada had climbed from $5½ billion in 

1939 to $17 million in 1950. Two billion dollars of that, Sir, was agricultural products. But here‘s where 

the wonderful part of it comes in. Ten billion dollars of manufacturing was done by Canada in the last 

year and this work was done by those million union labourers, plus 2,600,000 other workers who are 

paid by the hour in this Dominion, and during this last ten years, Mr. Abbott said Canada has invested 

$4.7 billion from outside the Dominion and also has received in the Dominion an additional $1.5 billion 

of investments, and a total of $8.5 billion is now invested by foreign interests within our Dominion. 

 

Nor, Mr. Speaker, there can be no question but that men who live in this country, who slave arduously 

and raise families, hope that success will 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

2 

 

pursue their efforts. There is no question that they are proud of the production Canada is achieving in 

these days, but at the same time, Mr. Speaker, they sometimes question whether they are getting their 

rightful share of the production, because in 1900, for a man, wife and three children it cost $9.37 per 

week for food, fuel and rent; in 1938-39 the same amount of food, thirty-six or thirty-seven articles, cost 

$17.41 per week, and since that time, Mr. Minister, the cost of living has gone up to 175 today, making 

$36.40 per week for a Canadian man to live on a Canadian standard of living with a wife and between 

two and three children. That only allows for food, fuel and rent. The average weekly wage today 

throughout the whole of Canada is $41.50, and in those areas which are strictly manufacturing it is $46. 

When you buy clothes, when you pay insurance, when you pay the hospital, when you pay all these 

things incidental to living which are coincident to living, the chances of a man living as he should in this 

Dominion of ours is very small, very remote. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we did have a hope, last summer. In June a strange thing happened. One of our 

Senators at Ottawa, Senator Roebuck, introduced a motion advocating that the Dominion of Canada 

should establish a ‗Declaration of Human Rights.‘ It asserted that it was within the framework of our 

Federal Government to enact this declaration, stating at the same time it was not yet opportune by reason 

of constitutional difficulties to establish it as a National Bill of Rights within Canadian constitution at 

this time. So we who search for programs watched it pretty closely and we found, Mr. Speaker, that this 

declaration stated the right of everyone in Canada to life, liberty and personal security; the right of equal 

treatment before the law to fair trial, to free him from arbitrary interference in one‘s privacy, to home, 

family and correspondence; to freedom of movement, to nationality, to own and enjoy property, to 

freedom of thought, conscience and religion; to freedom of opinion and expression; to peaceful 

assembly and association; to take part in the government of the country either directly or through 

representation chosen periodically under equal franchise, equal suffrage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the report ends up: ―What is required in Canada is one grand comprehensive affirmation or 

re-affirmation of human rights; equality before the law and security as a pillar and foundation of our 

nationhood.‖ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if you recollect, Mrs. Roosevelt spoke in this Chamber here, a session or so back, 

telling us what difficulties she had in persuading the other nations of the world to agree to a universal 

declaration of human rights. So I searched through the records, Mr. Speaker, and this declaration which 

Senator Roebuck had laid on the table of the Senate had missed very essential parts of the original 

declaration that organized labour wanted. And here they are, Sir. Article 22: 

 

―Everyone as a member of society has a right to social security and entitled to a realization 

through national effort and international co-operation and in accordance with the organization 

and resources of each state of the economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for his 

dignity and the free development of his personality.‖ 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

3 

 

Article 23: 

 

―Everyone has a right to work and to free choice of employment, to just and favourable 

conditions of work and to protection against unemployment. Everyone without any 

discrimination has a right to equal pay for equal work. Everyone who works has the right to just 

and favourable remuneration which will give him and his family an existence worthy of human 

dignity and supplemented if necessary by other means of social protection. Everyone has a right 

to form and join trade unions for the protection of his interests.‖ 

 

Article 24: 

 

―Everyone has the right to rest and leisure, including a reasonably limitation of working hours 

and periodic holidays with pay.‖ 

 

Article 25: 

 

―Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself 

and his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care, and necessary social services, 

and the right to secure, in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age 

or other lack of livelihood due to circumstances beyond his control‖ 

 

Article 26: 

 

―Everyone has the right to education . . .‖ 

 

and so forth, indicating, Mr. Speaker, that the very essentials that organized labour wanted – to be 

assured that the promise of their Magna Charta, and the Four Freedoms which were granted us after the 

last War and promised to all the peoples of the world; the very things which we demanded, Mr. Speaker, 

were not present in this resolution as laid down in the Senate. I presume the Senate will lift it off the 

table and it will be passed over to the House of Commons where, I presume, it will be placed on the 

archives with possibly the Haggerty Report, the Sirois Report and possibly the plans for the 

Saskatchewan dam and various other projects which we have heard of in the past. 

 

When we look to find the reason why there has not been a more equal distribution of this country‘s 

wealth – and mind you we are making a great deal of money for some people who by rights of labour 

are not earning that portion they receive, and it applies Mr. Speaker, on both sides of the line; but it 

seems to affect us more here than it does on the American side, for some reason or other, I presume, in 

connection with Federal policies of both countries. A press report here emanating 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

4 

 

from my Union‘s magazine a month or so ago says the average profits run 51 per cent higher in 1950 

over 1949. Again the profits of eighteen metal corporations were 280 per cent, twenty-four textile firms 

made 238 increase in profits, twelve coal companies made 117 per cent, steel companies 72 per cent, 

twenty-three oil companies 63 per cent, railroads 62 per cent, and so forth. 

 

That was on the American side, Mr. Speaker, but on the Canadian side here is the comparison I have 

between 1946 and 1950. The Aluminum Company of Canada in 1946 enjoyed profits of $11,500,000; in 

1950, $24,485,000. The Imperial Oil had profits of $17,300,000 in 1946, and $23,900,000 in 1950; 

Dominion Steel and Coal, $847,500 in 1946, and $5,000,000 in 1950; the Mercury Paper Company, 

$853,000 in 1946, and $2,400,000 in 1950. And so the picture goes on Mr. Speaker. Twenty-five or 

thirty of the big production firms of Canada are enjoying profits today which are extraordinarily high, 

and there is no reason why at least the primary demands of Canadian labour in the way of social security 

and various other medical and health reforms should not be agreed to, because, Sir – and this is where 

the difference shows again between Canada and the United States. As unionists we always compare 

ourselves with the United States of America insofar as wages are concerned. At the present time, in the 

United States of America, in the manufacturing branch, they are earning $59.02 a week; in Canada at the 

present time, $44.26 a week, with a cost of living of exactly the same amount in both countries. It seems 

to indicate that there is some need somewhere along the line for reformation so far as organized labour is 

concerned; and I am glad to say, sir, that I belong to a party that, were we in power at Ottawa, would see 

to it shortly that both the farmer and the labourer of this great country of ours would receive greater 

recognition than they have received in the past. 

 

I have in my hand here, too, a report issued by the Canadian Bank of Commerce stating the general 

agricultural production, and I am somewhat concerned not at the production of wheat this year, 461 

million bushels, or of oats, 420 million bushels, and other grain products proportionately; but I am 

concerned, Sir, with the milk production, the creamery butter, cheddar cheese, and so forth, the sidelines 

of farming as it were. Our total milk production, the average for 1944-48, was 1,436 million pounds, in 

1950, 1,396 million pounds; creamery butter, 24 million pounds the average in 1944-48, in 1950, 22.5 

million pounds; cheddar cheese, the average in 1944-48, 12 million pounds, in 1950, 8 million pounds; 

egg production, average in 1944-48, 29.8 million dozen, in 1950, 26.4 million dozen. And our livestock 

holdings, Mr. Speaker, the average in 1944-48 were 9,900,000, in 1950, 8,900,000. It seems, Sir, that 

that type of farming industry is gradually creeping out of the picture, and it seems, too, that the inability 

of the young man to take his place on the farm, the heavy expense involved in buying not so much the 

land as the machinery necessary to go along with the large unit which is required these days in order to 

make a living; it seems that no young man of his own initiative could ever hope to own a fully-equipped 

farm these days with the money which he can earn ordinarily under average wages. 

 

Similarly too, Mr. Speaker, there is no young urban man can ever hope, under average wages, to build 

himself a home, which should be 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

5 

 

one of the first essentials he should have under the economy of every country – the right to build his 

own home, to have his own furniture, to raise his own family and be a little king in his own castle. It is 

getting, under our National administration for some reason or other, that the young farmer and the young 

working man are in a position where they have no power or no authority; and this will lead, if 

governments continue their way, in a few short years, to where we shall have in this province and in 

other provinces, a series of huge farms rented possibly to selected tenants here and there, in order to 

work for a big rich man here and there dotted throughout the prairies, and the individual farm would be a 

thing of the past. There may be a few ranches here and there, but there will not be the raising of cows 

and of chickens and of turkeys and things like that which have been associated with farming in the past. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the whole idea of living in this Saskatchewan should be that we should give 

incentive to our young folks so that they can hope to live here and not wish to leave. Averagely, there 

emigrate from Canada 35,000 or 40,000 people a year, but we find in Saskatchewan that the 

attractiveness of higher wages ad greater security of employment elsewhere makes our young people 

leave here and go to other provinces as well as to the United States of America. We have a 

responsibility, and that responsibility cannot, as I see it be fulfilled unless we instil into the hearts of 

those people who are our governors certain facts and certain truths that they should understand. It seems 

that we are, at all times, in a state of movement. The whole world is moving at all times and there is a 

state of flux going on forever and ever. Nothing is stationary except those rich men who are sitting down 

in plush seats in the eastern part of this Dominion of ours who want the status quo to be maintained no 

matter what the odds or what the costs. 

 

I seem to lack the power of expression as to what I would like to say, and I wonder, Mr. Speaker, in 

conclusion, if I could read what Charles Dickens wrote many years ago: 

 

―‗Let well enough alone‘, the high priest said, ‗Let well enough alone‘, the rich man cried. ‗Are 

not our temples blended in their pride, our houses great, our fields widespread? What if some 

unkempt thousands cry for bread, shall we the wisdom of our gods deride, tamper with 

institutions old and tried and bring about us anarchy instead?‘ And so they babbled on, their 

logic spent, vowing that all was well with every breath, all speaking ‗agitator‘, ‗malcontent‘, to 

Him who came to them from Nazareth. ‗Leave us alone‘, they cried, but Jesus went on His way 

to Calvary and death.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 

 

Hon. J. A. Darling (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the best contribution a 

Minister can make to the budget debate is to give an adequate report of the operations of his own 

department. By doing so, he justifies or otherwise, the appropriation which is allotted to him. I believe 

this budget 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

6 

 

of $58 million is accorded pretty general acceptance insofar as its size is concerned, and I think the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs (Hon. L. F. McIntosh), was right, yesterday, when he said that the main 

concern of the Opposition was that it should be distributed according to their wishes rather than 

according to the best judgment of the Government. 

 

Now, I was present at a good many sessions when this budget was under preparation. Most of us on this 

side of the House, perhaps all of us, have had some part to play in the discussions which accompanies 

the preparation of this budget, and we know the care that was exercised to make sure that every possible 

economy was practiced, that every improvement of administration was suggested or proposed, in order 

that the greatest value could be achieved for the expenditure of this $58 million; and that established 

services might continue to the people of Saskatchewan. I know those things, and knowing them, I want 

to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. C. M. Fines) on his work in preparing this budget, in 

piloting it through the mill which it had to pass before it gained acceptance on this side of the House; 

and I also want to congratulate him upon the presentation of it to the Legislature. I think he has done, as 

he has always done, a very fine job. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Public Works: it is a service department. It is like the engines in a 

steamship. It is what makes things go; but it does not show very much on the surface. Its function is to 

provide the physical facilities which enable other departments of government to function. It builds the 

buildings – office buildings, institutions – makes repairs, maintenance and so forth of those buildings, 

and it provides almost everything, even down to the smallest article of furniture which those buildings 

contain. Sometimes we feel that we would like to get a little more recognition that we do. We built a 

Boys‘ School back of the buildings here that is quite a creditable building and it is a fine achievement of 

the Department of Social Welfare. We have under construction at Moose Jaw a training school for 

mental defectives. I am sure it is going to be a very fine institution and that the Department of Public 

Health will receive a great many congratulations. On the University campus there is under construction a 

building, the University Hospital, connected as it is to the Medical College there, in which I take a great 

deal of pleasure every time I visit Saskatoon. It is taking form; and I predict – I think we will all agree – 

that when it is completed it will be one of the most outstanding buildings both as to structure and 

architectural beauty, in Western Canada. The Department of Public Works is quite content that the 

University shall be proud of it, that the Province shall be proud of it, and that the Department of Public 

Health will be able to claim a very fine achievement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do some things, however. We redecorated this Chamber. There have been a number of 

quite complimentary comments with respect to that work. I might say that our own painters on the staff 

of Public Works did the painting, and anyone who was in this building in the late fall or early winter 

would have found that it was completely filled with scaffolding right from the floor to the skylights and 

all over the entire Chamber, and our painter crew (and some of them are not boys any 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

7 

 

longer) were lost to view among all that scaffolding, doing that work for a long time. I used to wonder 

whether they were working or not; but when they took down the scaffolding there was what we found. I 

think that credit is due to those men who did that work and also to Miss Margaret Messer, Director of 

Art at Balfour Technical School, for the colour scheme. She made several drawings and submitted them 

to us for approval. I think that last year I promised the Leader of the Opposition that I would have an 

elevator for him so that he would not have to climb the stairs during this Session. The elevator is there, 

and I hope that he is enjoying it. It runs very smoothly, and I can assure him that the Department of 

Public Works is proud to be the author of any elevating influence to which he will submit himself, even 

though it should be a purely physical one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have, during the past two sessions, endeavoured to give a fairly comprehensive report on 

the operations of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Unless I have failed very materially, those 

records have been of interest to the members of the Assembly. I am encouraged, through the comments 

that have come to me, to believe that they are also of interest to the public generally. I therefore, propose 

to take up a great deal of the time, this afternoon, in following my previous custom. 

 

Now, it is not surprising, Mr. Speaker, that there is widespread interest in power development in 

Saskatchewan; there is widespread interest in power development everywhere. I was a little surprised to 

read the other day – we are accustomed to think we are a little behind in Canada; but I was surprised to 

read, the other day, that there are still two million farms in the United States not served with electrical 

power. Two million farms seems to me a great many. I cannot vouch for the accuracy of that statement, 

but I did read it in a more or less dependable journal. In Saskatchewan, we are making some progress. 

 

You know, we do not have to be very old to remember when our city streets were pretty dim and dismal 

places. The hon. member for Moose Jaw (Mr. Heming) was quoting Dickens. I can remember very 

clearly when the streetlights in Edinburgh were gaslights and were lit by a lamplighter just as they were 

in Dickens‘ day. Nowadays, when we look down a city street and we see the almost Christmassy 

appearance which results from the neon signs that are on display there, we can appreciate, or I hope we 

take time to appreciate, the beauty which our city streets exhibit at this day as compared to those to 

which our fathers were accustomed. Now, the electrification of the larger urban centres is virtually 

completed insofar as Saskatchewan is concerned, insofar as most of this Continent is concerned; and we 

are turning our attention to the electrification of farms and hamlets. I am sure we all appreciate and 

sympathize with the urgent desire of rural residents to bring their homes and their businesses up to city 

standards. 

 

The provision of electric light and power to urban centres was a simple matter from an economic point 

of view. The concentrated 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

8 

 

load there enable generation and distribution to be done at a price to the consumer which was well 

within his reach to pay. The electrification of a sparsely populated rural area, however, presents a very 

different problem, and that problem varies with the extent of the area, the density of the farms and the 

type of agriculture that is followed. Nevertheless it can be done, and we are doing it. The advance in 

cultural standards which has taken place during the past half-century, has brought with it the need on the 

part of enlightened people for the refinements of living to which our forefathers were strangers. Social 

and economic conditions require that the work which was formerly done by many hands must now be 

done by a few. That is true on the farm. It is true in industry. It is true in the home, and the housewife by 

means of the assistance of electrical equipment is able to do, with much less effort that was formerly the 

case those duties which are here in the home. If Saskatchewan farmers are going to compete efficiently, 

produce as efficiently as farmers in other provinces, then they must have the benefit of electrical power. 

And the harnessing of electrical power to farm chores can make far more difference than most farmers 

realize. For anyone who has not been accustomed to working on an electrically-equipped farm, it would 

be well worth his time to go to one and see just how much work can be done without much effort and by 

very few hands. 

 

Now, I want to say something about what we have accomplished during the past year. We have 

extended power service to 2,000 farms, I think that has already been said in the Chamber this Session; 

and we had as our objective 2,400 farms. We did not quite reach it; but I think we made fairly 

substantial progress. In addition to the 2,000 farms that we have completed, 400 others are in various 

stages of completion. We had 15 gangs working on construction work at the peak of the construction 

season, and we still have 12 gangs out doing farm electrification. The gangs that are working now do not 

have so many men in each gang as there were in the summer season, but there are 12 gangs out. 

 

We were fortunate, last fall, in making good progress in pole setting and, of course, the digging of those 

holes in the frosty ground is one of the factors which makes power construction in the wintertime 

difficult, even in nice winter weather. But we were fortunate, last fall, in making good progress in pole 

setting, and the gangs are out now completing the job. I would not be surprised if nearly all of those 400 

farms were completed by the time we complete this Session. We had, of course, a couple of factors that 

retarded progress, last season. It was an extremely wet season in some places where those lines were 

being constructed and that, of course, slowed down the work. Then again, the railway strike in August 

held up the delivery of poles, and again we experienced inconvenience and a slowing down of work. 

Nevertheless, I think we had a pretty good construction season. 

 

Before I leave farm electrification, I would like to say something about our plans for the future. We are 

not entirely satisfied 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

9 

 

with the manner in which we have developed rural electrification projects. That requires some 

clarification. We have had some difficulty, or we anticipate difficulty, in a fair allocation to farmers of 

their share in the cost of construction. Usually, in the initial project there is not much trouble. A project 

is planned and the farmers are signed up, the course that the lines will follow is laid out, and that project 

can be completed and the farmers connected. Under the terms of The Rural Electrification Act, the 

farmer knows what he is going to pay. He is told, before it starts, what it is going to cost him for his 

share in construction costs. So far, so good. The original project is completed to everyone‘s satisfaction, 

let us say, but it is not very long until some newcomers wish to become connected to that project. They 

may live anywhere in the proximity, perhaps right along the transmission line. All they need is a tap-off 

from the farm to that transmission line; but there are usually a number who, after they see their 

neighbours supplied with power, wish to be connected to the line. 

 

Now, it would be obviously unfair to connect them to lines to which their neighbours had contributed, 

which had been built on a shard basis between their neighbours and the Power Corporation, without 

making them pay a similar charge toward the construction of those main lines, so that the Power 

Corporation has been assessing them on the same basis as the original signers, the original members of 

the group. Sometimes it has not cost that much to connect them, so that there accumulates a surplus 

which, in equity, ought to be distributed among all the members of that group. That equity may be very 

small. It usually has been very small, because we have not been very long doing this work; but in course 

of time it might amount to a great deal, so that we are planning a change. We are planning what we call 

―area development‖, and that would be done something like this: an area of appropriate dimensions 

would be surveyed, the farms mapped out and an estimate would then be made of the cost of serving that 

entire area, on the basis of a certain saturation, that is, a certain number of farms being connected in that 

area. We would not commence a project to serve an area until we had at least a 65 per cent sign-up of 

the farms in that area. Having secured the 65 per cent, or more, we would assess each of those farmers 

an equal share of the cost of electrifying the area. Originally it might be that the farmer would pay a 

little less than his actual share on the old basis, but as newcomers entered the project they would be 

assessed similarly, so that every member on every ultimate connection to that project would have paid 

the same price for his connection. 

 

I cannot give you any more details than that at this time. We are trying out one area, a trial area, to see 

how that will work; but it should avoid the necessity of perpetual revision and rebates which would, in 

the course of time, become a very cumbersome operation for our head office. 

 

Mention was made in the Speech from the Throne of the intention to assist certain farmers by means of 

loans for power extension purposes. It seems appropriate that I should indicate in very general terms 

what is intended. It will be remembered that The Rural Electrification Act provides that under certain 

conditions a power line levy may be placed 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

10 

 

against the land adjacent to the power line, and in this way provision was made for credit to farmers. 

You will remember that before the project was started, under the terms of The Rural Electrification Act 

75 per cent of the farmers‘ share of costs had to be collected. Then the other 25 per cent could be 

secured by means of a power line levy. Now, this portion of the Act proved very difficult to administer. 

We have not had to use it very much, fortunately, only in one project during 1950, and we are glad that 

we did not have to use it too much. There were substantial administrative difficulties in the way of 

making use of that in the Act. Fortunately, too, we were able to find projects in which all the farmers 

were able to pay, in cash, their full share of construction costs of the project. So we were able to go 

ahead without interruption and without making use to any material extend of the power line levy. 

 

We are running into conditions now, however, where we feel a more simplified form of credit to farmers 

will be beneficial. In some cases, at least, the power project will be organized – the organization will 

proceed to the point that the farmers‘ share of costs are being collected, and then we may find that there 

are a few farmers in that area willing and anxious to take the power services and yet who find it 

impossible to pay their share of the costs. The result of this, sometimes, is that the project falls down 

because it does not qualify on the basis of farms-per-mile of line. And a few farmers, temporarily 

embarrassed for funds, are the cause of their neighbours and all the other members of that project failing 

to secure power service. That must be a very uncomfortable position for the farmer himself, and also 

very disturbing to those who are able to pay yet who cannot receive power because of the temporary 

embarrassment of some of their neighbours. 

 

Now, it is planned to overcome this situation. It is planned to give credit to a limited number of farmers. 

We don‘t propose to go out and give credit to all farmers in a project. I feel it would be a mistake to do 

that. I feel that if all farmers in an area require assistance in order to make their contribution towards 

construction costs, that project had better wait for a year until the farmers are in a little better financial 

position. Our plan is to provide credit to those few who, because of their temporary embarrassment, 

would cause a project to fall down. Now, the extent of the credit which would be provided them would 

be limited to two-thirds of an individual farmer‘s contribution, and we intend that it shall be secured 

against the farmer‘s land, and that it shall be repayable within a period of three years. That, very 

roughly, is the plan that we propose to put into effect. 

 

I am very pleased indeed with the work of the Farm Electrification Branch of the Power Corporation. I 

think they have done a splendid job of going out and meeting the farmers and explaining to the farmers 

what is expected of them, the responsibilities which are theirs, and the responsibilities of the Power 

Corporation. I, unfortunately, did not hear one of the hon. members opposite, the other day. I am 

speaking of the hon. member for Humboldt (Mr. A. W. Loehr), but I am told that he said the farmers in 

his area had no reason to feel grateful or to express thanks to the Power Corporation for having 

connected their farms to the power lines. Now, Mr. Speaker, I haven‘t yet heard any member of the 

Power Corporation ask for thanks for doing the job of connecting power lines; but I would like to say 

that not all persons in the hon. member‘s constituency feel as he does, and when thanks do come, I can 

assure you – and you know, too, from your own experience – that hard-working men like to have a little 

word of thanks. I would like to read part of a letter which came to me. It is dated in Humboldt on 

January 15, 1951. I won‘t read it all, and since I have not got the authority of the gentleman who wrote it 

to me to give his name, I won‘t give his name, but I‘ll give it on my own responsibility: 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

11 

 

―A year ago I wrote you to report my interest and my organizational work in the field of rural 

electrification. The high hopes I expressed at that time have practically all materialized. During 

the past year, as you well know, rural electrification has made great strides forward in the 

divisional superintendency under Mr. S.G. Shepherd, Humboldt. This area has been among the 

fortunate ones and in 1950 over 500 rurals have been connected to the network of the Power 

Corporation. In the name of these farmers I wish to extend to you our sincerest thanks. Up here, 

Mr. Shepherd and I will always continue to be interested‖. 

 

And then the final paragraph in the letter (— the body of the letter refers to a specific project); 

 

―From all sides come expressions of appreciation and I want to pass them on to you. I once wrote 

Mr. Smith, Superintendent of Rural Electrification, that in my opinion one of the biggest points 

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has scored lies in the entire avoidance of politics in the 

programme of expansion. 

 

―In conclusion I wish to thank you again for all the good things the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation has brought us and may it bring further blessings to many rurals in 1951.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, that letter was, of course, unsolicited. But I want at this time to express appreciation to the 

people at Head Office who go down to the office in the evenings, on Saturdays, on Sundays and on 

holidays, any time when their presence there can help to expedite this matter of rural electrification. 

 

Expansion of our town and village programme brought service to 33 additional towns, villages and 

hamlets during the past year. Some 435 cities, towns, villages and hamlets are now served, and the 

number of our customers has increased from 57,855 to over 63,600. I think that that is a fairly 

satisfactory contribution to the town and village programme. 

 

It is a simple matter, Mr. Speaker, to reel off a pile of figures that is difficult to assimilate. It is difficult 

to appreciate just what has been done. Sometimes an illustration will do more than all the figures that 

can be quoted. I would like the members of the Assembly to imagine that, instead of distributing those 

power lines all over Saskatchewan, we had built them in one straight line and that we started from the 

City of Regina and built them eastward, end to end. In that case the last pole might be set in the streets 

of Montreal. That is not just stringing wire, Mr. Speaker! That is digging holes and putting up poles. We 

have used 37,000 poles and, in addition to many small shipments of material, we have used over 350 

carload lots of material in our construction programme. 

 

We have done something, too, to brighten up our towns and villages. Some 107 towns and villages have 

added street lights during the past year, and modernization of street lighting systems have been begun, 

and some of them finished, in Yorkton, Watrous, Nipawin, Moosomin, Humboldt, Kindersley, Unity 

and Wilkie. I think perhaps too little attention has been paid in the 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

12 

 

past to good street lighting. I have in my office two pictures of the main street in the town of Watrous. In 

one picture, taken before the modernization was put into effect, it is barely possible to see the buildings 

on either side of the street under the old system of lights going down the centre of the street. In the other, 

taken after the street lighting had been modernized, it is possible to see the licence plates on the cars 

parked along the side of the street; that is, on those that are closest to the camera. You can‘t read the 

numbers – I won‘t go so far as to say that; but you can see the licences. 

 

It would be interesting to the Assembly, I am sure, to know that we are trying to run the Power 

Corporation as a fully modern operation, and we have instituted aerial patrol of our power lines. We 

plan that this will be done twice annually. An aeroplane flying low over power lines, I am told, can 

discover faults and potential trouble spots that are not discernible from an observer on the ground. And 

that is being done. When a trouble spot is discovered, its location is reported to the district operator, and 

he goes out and fixes it up. That is probably one reason why we have been able to give a pretty good 

standard of service over our network. 

 

The Power Corporation came under a certain amount of criticism, last year, particularly in the City of 

Saskatoon during the railway strike, because there was what might have been considered an inadequate 

fuel supply to make certain that the plant would not run into difficulties. It was a rather difficult position 

for the Power Corporation to be in. If we had known how long the railway strike was going to last, we 

would have been able to say whether or not there was a shortage of fuel. We felt that the situation was 

not too critical. The difficulty there was that part of our fuel yard was occupied by construction material 

and consequently our stockpile was lower than usual. Now, with the type of coal which we use in our 

boilers, spontaneous combustion is almost certain to occur if coal is piled in too great bulk. 

Consequently, you cannot just pile it high and expect that to be satisfactory. It has to be spread out, and 

it is true that our coal yard was not as fully stocked as it would have been under normal circumstances. 

Nevertheless, we did have 250,000 gallons of oil in a tank there that was never touched. Our present 

policy is to have a stockpile of a different type of coal – a different type that is not subject to 

spontaneous combustion – and also to keep well stocked with oil. 

 

Increases to our generating capacity were made to keep pace with increased demands for power during 

the past year. The principal improvement made to the largest generating stations was in the increased 

generating capacity of Estevan, Prince Albert and Saskatoon. New boiler capacity totalling 420,000 

pounds per hour was installed at those plants. The new boilers at Prince Albert and Saskatoon are 

equipped to burn either coal or oil. We have been using oil from the skimming plant located near our 

plant there, but the recent increases in the cost of crude oil may make it desirable to increase the 

percentage of coal that is used. The 15,000 K.W. turbo-generator ordered in 1948 for the plant at 

Estevan is installed now, and will be in operation very soon. The 25,000 K.W. turbo-generator that was 

ordered for Saskatoon is in process of construction and it is coming forward as scheduled. We are 

installing a 10,000 K.W. unit at Prince Albert this year which, together with an interconnecting 

transmission line, will ensure adequate supply of power for both Saskatoon and Prince Albert. At Unity, 

the only point 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

13 

 

where we generate from natural gas, we have added a 1,200 h.p. gas diesel to the plant which increases 

the capacity of that plant by 50 per cent. There is some possibility that in the Lone Rock area there may 

be quantities of gas available, which will make it possible for us to establish a gas generating station 

there. We are carrying on investigations, but my last word was that the matter had not been finally 

decided. 

 

In addition to 300 miles of transmission lines built to serve our town and village programme and 1,500-

odd miles of arm lines, there were many miles of heavy transmission lines built to relieve overloaded 

facilities. Construction of these heavy transmission lines has served to render unnecessary the operation 

of some costly diesel plants. It is significant that as a result of construction of these high voltage 

transmission lines, we have been able, this year, to transfer the generation of 6,000,000 K.W.H.s from 

diesel plants to steam plants. The Prince Albert-Melfort-Tisdale line will transmit power at 69,000 volts, 

and it was built suitable for 115,000 volts operation when the loads increase. A heavy 33,000-volt line 

was built from Saskatoon to Rosetown, and also to serve Biggar and Perdue. Biggar, Perdue and 

Rosetown were formerly served by diesel plants. In all we have closed five diesel plants and reduced the 

operating hours of a good many others. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about rates. Rates have been already mentioned in the 

Assembly this Session and, after all, what the customer has to pay for his power is of very great 

importance to him. One achievement of the Power Commission – I say Power Commission before the 

Power Corporation was set up – was to effect very substantial rate reductions in Saskatchewan. There 

were four successive rate reductions and while our present rates are not the lowest in the west by any 

means, nevertheless they are substantially lower than can be provided by small plants, municipally or 

privately owned. That, of course, is the reason for our transmission line service. 

 

A factor in the high cost of power in Saskatchewan is the low average consumption in this province. Of 

course, we have to expect low average consumption because so many of our customers are new 

customers. It is nevertheless true that the average consumption of the Saskatchewan farmer, in 1950, 

was only 95 K.W.H. per month. This compares with 208 K.W.H. per month by the Manitoba farmer and 

180 K.W.H. per month by the Alberta farmer. The Saskatchewan farmer, being a new user of electrical 

energy, has not yet developed to the point where he is making full use of the utility. 

 

I suppose that most hon. members are aware of what the rates are to the farmers of Saskatchewan. First 

of all, there is a demand charge of $2.00. The $2.00 demand charge is expected to cover the carrying 

charges on the extra capital required to serve farms. Then there is a block of 30 K.W.H. at 8 cents and 

another block of 20 K.W.H. at 6 cents, with a run-off rate of 3 cents per K.W.H. It is obvious, then, that 

the cost per K.W.H. is very much lower to the farmer when he can find uses for a substantially increased 

consumption of electrical energy. I will try to illustrate that. The average cost per K.W.H. to a 

Saskatchewan farmer who uses 100 K.W.H. per month 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

14 

 

is 7.1 cents, but if he will supply himself with some more equipment so that he uses more power, 

profitably of course – he should only supply himself with equipment and appliances which he can use 

probably, but if he can use 150 K.W.H., he gets it for an average cost of 5.7 cents, and if he gets up to 

250 K.W.H. the cost to him is 4.6 cents per K.W.H. That is a reduction for the man who uses 100 

K.W.H. from 7.1 cents to 4.6 cents once he gets into using power in a large way. On the basis of the 

present coverage consumption of 95 K.W.H. per month the Saskatchewan farmer pays 7.3 cents per 

K.W.H. 

 

The rate structure is a highly scientific study, one Power Corporation Officials are employed in this 

study at the present time. Members of the Assembly will remember that the last Session there was an 

amendment of agreements with towns and villages, subject of the approval of the Local Government 

Board. That no revision of rates has been affected up to this time is because an economic survey of the 

entire Power Corporation system, in all its aspects, has been carried on this summer, and it was 

necessary to give that economic survey precedence. The rate study is going on now, as I say. Our 

objective must be to encourage and promote greater consumption, and to provide power at the lowest 

possible run-off rates. 

 

It is obvious from our experience – in fact we can tell it without experience – that transmission of power 

to farms for light and convenience in the home alone is not practical. Farm electrification spans a 

tremendous field for the sale of appliance and farm electrical equipment. In Manitoba, the farmer is 

required to buy five appliances as a condition of getting service. He has to buy the five appliances before 

the Manitoba Power Commission will give him service, and the Manitoba Power Corporation sells the 

appliances direct to the farmer at a reduced price. In Alberta there are two utilities there – the Canadian 

Utilities and the Calgary Power. Now, they do something there to promote sales. I believe one of them 

engages in merchandising electrical appliances, but I don‘t know which of them it is. In Saskatchewan at 

the present time, the Power Corporation is seeking the co-operation of dealers without active 

participation by the Corporation itself. We are trying to persuade dealers to put on a drive, where 

electrification has been installed, to sell appliances. If this isn‘t effective, then, perhaps, it will be 

necessary to consider further steps. 

 

Now, I have heard several people say that we are not going fast enough in our development of our 

electrical system in Saskatchewan. I am not much impressed by those arguments, and I would like the 

House to recall that, in 1948, the budget for power was $2,400,000. In 1949, that was stepped up to 

$3,600,000, and then a supplementary increased that figure to $4,100,000. The total expended in 1950 

on power development in the province approached $6,000,000 and, in addition to this, $1,000,000 was 

spent on the purchase of material required in the 1951 programme. Now, Mr. Speaker, the reason that 

exceeds the appropriation was that farmers made a contribution towards the construction line, and that 

was included in addition to the appropriation. But it takes a lot of organization. It takes a lot of building-

up of organization, both in the field and 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

15 

 

in Head Office to come from $2,400,000 expenditure up to $6,000,000, and this year, if we are fortunate 

enough to secure the materials we need – and we have been a little uneasy in some respects with regard 

to material supplies – there will be spent in this province, this year, on farm extensions pretty close to 

$8,000,000. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that it would be very difficult, if not impossible, to step up, let us 

say, from $4,000,000 to $8,000,000 in a single year. We would not have the organization to handle such 

an expanded programme, and I think we have gone forward in quite substantial steps from $2,400,000 in 

1948 to $8,000,000 in 1951. 

 

Now, I want to say a little about load growth. The demand for further extensions to our power system 

goes on unabated. I think I mentioned earlier that there was an economic survey by the Power 

Corporation into the entire system, and this included estimates of the load growth which can be expected 

to Saskatchewan for some years to come. The load growth is attributable to three factors: (1) The 

extension into new towns and villages, and farm connections; (2) New installations in communities 

already served; (3) The increased use through the acquisition of appliances by our customers. 

 

The House will be interested to know that in 1948, the consumption increased 15 per cent over 1947; in 

1949, consumption increased 17 per cent over 1948; and in 1950, consumption increased 21 per cent 

over 1949. Now there, you will notice, are compounded increases; and in total we can see that the use of 

electricity 21 per cent over 1949. Now these, you will notice, are compounded increases; and in total we 

can see that the use of electricity in Saskatchewan has more than doubled in the past five years. We can 

expect continued increases in consumption. For one thing, as I pointed out a little while ago, a great 

many farmers are going to have received electrical power on their farms, they are going to be buying 

equipment, and they are going to be using more than the average of 95 K.W.H. per month that they are 

using now. The same is true in towns and villages. Because of the low saturation of appliances in 

Saskatchewan, we can expect that the kilowatt hours of consumption per customer will very materially 

rise. Now, consumption in 1950 by Power Corporation customers total 236 million K.W.H. That is 

exclusive of Regina and Saskatoon, or Regina and Moose Jaw, which are the two major centres that 

would materially alter it if we were dealing with the provincial figure. The Power Corporation study to 

which I have referred indicates that, if there is no interruption in our anticipated expansion, consumption 

in Saskatchewan will have reached 900 million K.W.H. by 1940, or four times the present consumption. 

And if we include the cities of Regina and Moose Jaw, then Saskatchewan will be consuming 1100 

million K.W.H. 10 years from now. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that immediately gives us some idea of the time of the programme that lies ahead in 

keeping pace with that demand. At this time I think it is very timely that the Government and the Power 

Corporation have made this study so that we can look ahead. Too often it has been true in power 

development that very suddenly a crisis has had to be faced. We are not facing a crisis at this moment in 

Saskatchewan, but we can see that there must be very heavy capital expenditures over the next 10 years 

if we are going to keep pace with the anticipated demand. Now, of 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

16 

 

course, the promise might be all wrong upon which those demands, or perspective demands, are 

estimated. You might have war; we might have depression. Either would make a very great difference in 

the realization of my estimates; but I think that, in such a matter as power development, it is safe to 

assume and be prepared for which is likely to transpire. 

 

Now where, and by what means, are we going to effect this great increase in generating capacity: Our 

policy during the years immediately past has been to concentrate generation in the larger generating 

plants and to eliminate the small ones. Therefore, it is logical that we should proceed to expand our 

larger plants such as Estevan and Saskatoon, and at the same time give very serious thought to the 

development of such hydropower as is available to us in this province. 

 

Our customers in the north-central part of Saskatchewan, which includes Saskatoon, North Battleford 

and Prince Albert, used 185,000,000 K.W.H. in 1950. Normal increases in this area, plus farm 

electrification, will result in the use of power in the order of $400,000,000 K.W.H. by 1955. Now, it 

appears obvious that the potential capacity of the power plant at Fort a la Corne could be utilized by that 

time, or the year after, 1956. 

 

The H. G. Acres 1947 report Fort a la Corne indicated that the site was feasible when the power 

consumption within a reasonable distance of the site reached 370,000,000 K.W.H. I have said that the 

estimates of the Power Corporation people indicated that by 1955 there will be a demand for 

400,000,000 K.W.H. The load growth which can be anticipated in the central and southern parts of the 

province indicate that a power plan located at the proposed dam at Coteau Creek on the South 

Saskatchewan River could be utilized at full capacity at the earliest possible moment that it could be 

built if it were started today. I am very much discouraged and disappointed to note that the Federal 

Government had decreased their appropriation for that project by a million dollars. There is a great need, 

from the standpoint of power development in this province, that we should make progress with the 

construction of the Coteau Creek dam on the South Saskatchewan River. 

 

In order to distribute the power generated at these plants and greatly expanded steam plants at Saskatoon 

and Estevan, many hundreds of miles of high voltage transmission lines must be built to feed our 

primary grid. It has been estimated that the Fort a la Corne development at the site will cost between $17 

million and $18 million. At Coteau Creek – of course, the Federal Government is going to build the 

dam, all we will have is the power plant; at Coteau Creek the plant will cost the Government and the 

Power Corporation in the neighbor of $8 million or 8½ million. The type of high voltage transmission 

lines which connects those plants and which will distribute their energy throughout our system, would 

cost $6,000 to $8,000 a mile. I will not attempt to say how great the present capacity will have to be 

increased several times over; and I am speaking, Mr. Speaker, not of the distant future but of the 

comparatively near future of power development in this province. 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

17 

 

Now, I think if we could see a picture – I am only dreaming dreams, Mr. Speaker, at the moment – but 

suppose we would take a look at Saskatchewan in the future as it may be ten years from now. I would 

hope to see a power plant at Fort a la Corne connected by high voltage transmission line to a power plant 

at Coteau Creek and, from there, to Weyburn and down to Estevan; and I would expect to find that that 

system of high voltage transmission lines interconnecting all those plants would be, as it were, the 

backbone of the distribution system in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We have to think in those terms, in terms of a power pool. A power pool for this province is as essential 

as a power pool has been in other parts of the world. Everyone knows that in Manitoba at the present 

time, the Manitoba Government is in process of bringing into being a power pool. In Britain the same 

thing was done. It is the most economical way in which power service can be utilized. It is the most 

economical way in which it can be developed. There are a number of benefits which come from the 

establishment of a power pool. One of them is, of course, continuity of service; if one plant breaks down 

it can draw from another, and we can have continuity of service. Another advantage is, of course, that 

each plant is relieved of the necessity of maintaining expensive stand-by units that are idle most of the 

time. 

 

I want to read just a little bit from an article which appeared in the ‗Free Press‘: 

 

―The achievement of the central electricity board in Britain in creating a grid system and power 

pool is generally acknowledged as one of the most outstanding in electrical power development. 

In less than ten years the country was covered by a network of inter-connected transmission lines 

and a power pool had been set up that supplied Britain‘s main electricity needs for many years at 

a saving to the country of millions of dollars.‖ 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, at least it is my hope, that we will revise our thinking a little bit in this province 

with respect to power development. It seems to me that we have been thinking too locally. One 

community has been thinking of power as it affects itself and the next as it affects its own particular 

environment. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that before we can have a satisfactory power system in this 

province, we must think in terms of the province as a whole. Now, I am not too critical of people who 

are not yet caught up with that idea, and when I quote an editorial from the Saskatoon ‗Star-Phoenix‘ I 

am not necessarily condemning the writer of that editorial, because I think that he simply reflects a type 

of thinking that is very common in the province and is certainly not peculiar to the Saskatoon ‗Star-

Phoenix.‘ The Power Corporation officials had some contact with the officials in Saskatoon and gave 

them some of the figures on prospective load growth and, immediately, the City of Saskatoon becomes 

conscious of the urgency in knowing where future supplies of electricity were coming to their city. Very 

natural; I have no fault to find with 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

18 

 

that at all. But what our Power Corporation proposes is that they will build, as I said earlier in my talk, 

in the Prince Albert plant a 10,000 K.W. generator this year. Fortunately, we were able to get that 

generator from Edmonton; and we got it secondhand and very reasonably, and it is going into Prince 

Albert plant. It could be put in the Saskatoon plant, but if it were put there it would occupy space that 

would later on be better utilized for a larger unit such as a 25,000 K.W. unit. But we are putting it in 

Prince Albert and in this connection the Saskatoon ‗Star-Phoenix‘ says this: 

 

―The Corporation suggests that Saskatoon can be carried over this year‘s peak consumption by 

equipment it proposes to install in Prince Albert this summer. By building additional high-

tension lines some of Prince Albert‘s surplus can be put into Saskatoon district to relieve the 

local plant and bring the load down to manageable proportions. If this is the only solution that 

can be worked out, then we must have it, and presumably the City will have to bear its share of 

the cost by paying a rate to the Power Commission that will include the City‘s portion of the 

expenses it has been put to. But at best it is only an emergency solution and not entirely 

satisfactory to any of the parties involved.‖ 

 

Now, that is the point of view of the writer of that editorial, and what is really happening is this, Mr. 

Speaker. There was a 69,000 voltage transmission line built, last summer, from Prince Albert to Melfort 

to Tisdale. The transmission line, which will connect with Saskatoon, will leave that transmission line at 

a point nearest to the Port a la Corne site. It will come due south through Humboldt, and it will meet 

another high voltage transmission line which will be built from Saskatoon eastward to Wynyard. And 

there we see the integrated power system that will have taken form, this summer, in the north-central 

part of the province. The cities of Prince Albert, Humboldt, Saskatoon will all be interconnected by high 

voltage transmission lines. And Saskatoon is concerned because it doesn‘t view this as satisfactory, 

according to the writer of this editorial who feels that the plant should be in Saskatoon, that it should not 

be in Prince Albert, when in point of fact, Mr. Speaker, the City of Saskatoon is going to be the first 

beneficiary of an integrated power system in the province. 

 

It seems to me I am taking a very long time, Mr. Minister, I hope I am not boring the House with this; 

but I did feel that I wanted to give, if possible, a clear picture of what lies ahead of us in this province. It 

appears to me that if we fail to profit from a study of what has happened and is happening in Manitoba, 

we will be making a serious mistake. As you know, the Manitoba Government is facing up to a crisis in 

power supply, and they are proposing to put into effect a modification of the Hogg report of three years 

ago in an effort to escape very serious difficulties in the very near future. Two years ago, the Manitoba 

Government began engineering work on the power development at Pine Falls. That is a plant which will 

cost the Manitoba Government something over $20,000,000. 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

19 

 

Now, one of the troubles with power is that you have got to be far-sighted. You have got to see a long 

way ahead. It takes three to four years from the time that plans are first conceived until a power project 

such as Pine Falls can be put into operation. It is two years since they began to plan for Pine Falls, and 

this won‘t be ready for some time; but Premier Campbell said, according to a press report: 

 

―Unless further developments are underway meanwhile, our supply position will be worse on the 

day we finish Pine Falls than it was the day this project was started. 

 

The Manitoba Government has accepted the principle of a power pool, a principle which I feel we are 

going to accept in this province of Saskatchewan. In order to bring this pool into being, it proposes to 

purchase the plant of the Winnipeg Electric Company and to require the City of Winnipeg plant to 

become incorporated in the pool. There is some disagreement, naturally enough, as to whether it is 

necessary to purchase the Winnipeg Electric Plant. The power pool can operate, in spite of the fact – the 

power pools are operating in some places irrespective of ownership of the plants; but apparently it is the 

intention of the Manitoba Government to purchase the Winnipeg Electric Company‘s plant. The 

Winnipeg ‗Free Press‘ says this on the matter of the power pool in Manitoba and I will only quote it 

part: 

 

―On the main point – that costs of producing power in this province must be pooled – there is no 

disagreement. As matters now stand there are four low cost sites on the Winnipeg River. Two of 

these plants – the Points du Bois and Slave Falls plants – are owned by the City Hydro, and the 

other two – Great Falls and Seven Sisters plants – by the Winnipeg Electric. The average cost of 

installing these plants was below $100 per h.p. The Manitoba Government‘s new plant at Pine 

Falls will cost $220 per h.p., and the cost of future installations, whether of steam or waterpower, 

will be much higher again. Clearly the averaging of all these costs, present and future, in a pool 

to be operated under provincial authority, is essential for the benefit of all the power users.‖ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I could go on giving you further data in connection with the reaction of the different 

people in Manitoba with respect to the proposed power pool. The reaction of the Winnipeg City Council 

to government proposals is interesting. Mayor Garnet Coulter indicated that the Council was in 

substantial agreement with the proposals as made by the Premier, and stated that – and I quote: ―Council 

intended to co-operate with the Government to maintain a general level of rates for public service at 

least equal to that now enjoyed by the people of Greater Winnipeg.‖ 

 

The Manitoba ‗Free Press‘ in an editorial headed ―The Right Solution‖ says this: 

 

―Obviously no single community or group of communities, regardless of existing ownership and 

use, have the right 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

20 

 

to take the cheap power and saddle the rest of the people of the province with the high cost 

power. Therefore it is essential that a power pool covering all of the province be created. Into 

this power pool all power – cheap and costly – must go. In the pool, the costs will be averaged 

and the average price will be charged to all distributors." 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I want to refer to the editorial in the Saskatoon ‗Star-Phoenix‘, and again I might say 

that I am not surprised at the writer‘s point of view. It all too common in this province. We are not up-

to-date in our thinking on power matters. But the last few sentences, the last few words, of the editorial 

are these: 

 

―City consumers are not be expected to bear part of the cost of power in other cities or in rural 

districts.‖ 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — That‘s an old fashioned one, Jim. 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‘t know if I should inflect any more of this on the 

House. I would like, however, to draw attention to one more fact. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Haven‘t you been talking to the Minister of Social Welfare about that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — I am stating facts, they can fall where they please. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I think he and facts are foreign to one another. 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier of Manitoba has announced a policy which he calls a 

‗no-diversion‘ policy. I am not qualified, it would be quite unfair for me to attempt on the very sketchy 

data I have on the Premier‘s policy, to discuss it; but I believe that he means that revenues from power 

should be directed into power expansion and should not be diverted anywhere else. I think when he has 

an opportunity to enlarge on statements that I have seen that that will be found to be his intentions. In 

the Province of Ontario that is true, and I would like to read you a section or two from the Ontario 

Power Commission Act. Section 95A provides for the manner in which a municipal corporation which 

received power from the Commission for distribution may utilize funds in its hands derived from the 

electrical utility. Any such funds, not required for current operating expenses or current working capital 

of the utility must be used for the following purposes and no others: 

 

(a) Reduction of the indebtedness incurred with respect to the installation of works for the 

production or distribution of power; (b) the acquisition of a site and the erection of buildings for 

use by the municipal commission as offices for the other business purposes 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

21 

 

subject to the approval of the Power Commission; (c) the renewal of such buildings; (d) the 

extension of works for production or distribution of power and so on; (e) the purchase of 

securities approved by the Power Corporation.‖ 

 

Those are under Section 95A of the Ontario Power Commission Act, the purposes for which revenue 

surpluses derived from power distribution may be used. Under Section 96, if the municipal corporation 

or commission shows a surplus from its electric utility, after paying running expenses and any sums 

required to be paid on account of principal and interest of any debentures issued in respect of the utility, 

and providing for depreciation and other reserves approved by the Power Commission, the surplus is to 

be applied and disposed on in such a manner as the Power Commission pay direct: 

 

(a) In reconstruction or rebuilding its works for the production or distribution of power and so 
on. 

 

(b) In repaying to persons to whom power is being supplied by the municipal corporation or 
municipal commission, money paid by them for power supplied, such repayment to be made 

either directly or by a credit on bills for power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I won‘t read any further, but the whole practice in Ontario is to prevent the diversion of 

surpluses derived from the generation and distribution of power to any other purpose except the 

expansion of power. I present that simply to indicate that a very different pattern has developed in the 

province of Saskatchewan. I don‘t know whether that is good or bad. I don‘t intend to comment on it 

one way or the other; but as the Minister responsible to the Power Corporation I would like to point out 

that it is one more handicap added to the natural handicaps which we face in this province, which has 

been avoided in provinces where there are fewer natural handicaps to contend with. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that most people are tired listening to me, but I would like to say a word or 

two about Telephones. I am sure that Telephones won‘t object if I don‘t. It may be that in the Crown 

Corporations Committee I will have an opportunity to say those things in connection with Telephones 

that I would like to say here. I would like to say just a little at least in connection with the problem that 

we have been facing because of the tremendous increase in demand for telephones. We converted to 

automatic the telephone service at Biggar just before the opening of the Session. When we planned that 

conversion, there were 277 local lines and 25 rural lines in operation into the Biggar exchange. Well, 

277 and 25, that is 302. We ordered 400 lines, expecting that that would be adequate; but when we went 

down there to open the exchange on the 23rd of January (I think it was) we found that there were 27 

people waiting for service and our full 400 lines were taken up. That is our experience. It was true in 

Melville. It was true in Biggar. It is true almost everywhere where we open an exchange. There are a 

number of reasons for that. One thing, I think, is that people like to have a modern instrument in their 

home. They like to use the dial telephone, and they like the cradle 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

22 

 

type telephone and, more than that, they like the monthly billing which we are putting into effect 

wherever dial telephones are installed. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Not if it is too big. 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I think I will take an opportunity to go further into 

Telephones possibly under the questions which are asked in the Power Corporations Committee, but I 

want to say that the effort which has gone into meeting the demand by the public for telephone 

installation reflects the highest credit upon the staff of Saskatchewan Government Telephones. I want to 

say that never before have telephones been installed at so rapid a rate in this province, and we have had 

a great struggle in breaking the back of the waiting list which has been staring us in the face for the last 

two years. We have now reduced it to the point that there are 4,809 on the waiting list, whereas at this 

time last year, the figure was more than 8,000. In 1948, we installed 5,420 telephones; in 1949, 6138; in 

1950, 7,587. Now, we have since 1948 added 21,000 circuit miles to our long distance lines, and 7,300 

of those were installed, this year. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, before the Hon. Minister resumes his seat I wonder – he mentioned the 

fact that some electricity was being generated by diesel, run by natural gas in the western part of the 

province. I wonder if he will tell the House just before he finishes, to round the picture out, as to what 

their experience was in that regard. 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — You are referring, of course to the installation at Unity. Well, the experience was 

very satisfactory. Gas generation is a cheap form of generation. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — How does it compare with coal? What I had in mind was the comparative cost. I read in 

an article the other day, that it has been found that it was cheaper to generate it that way than by some of 

the more recent installations in hydroelectric power. And when there is a possibility of so much natural 

gas available, I wondered that in his comprehensive survey the Minister had not included the western 

part of the province based upon natural gas. 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — Discovery of natural gas, of course, or any other cheap source of energy, would 

naturally affect our plans. The generation in Unity is the cheapest that we have in our system. I think I 

am correct in saying that now. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have been reminded that there has been a lot of talk across the floor about 

telephone rates. If anyone had asked me whether or not we had increased rural connecting fees I would 

have said ―yes‖ and I would have been right. But when they ask me whether or not I have increased 

telephone rates I say ―no‖. There is a very great difference. So we come to talk about telephone rates and 

I have . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — There should have been a lawyer here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — Mr. Speaker, a lawyer isn‘t in it with me when I know the facts. 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

23 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I‘m going to go after a lawyer. You can split a hair finer than he can. 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — Mr. Speaker, there is a strong feeling of fraternalism among telephone companies 

in Canada. They don‘t like to say unpleasant things about one another. They don‘t like to draw 

comparisons that are damaging one to the other. That is an unusual situation, perhaps. Some of those 

telephone companies are private companies; some of them are publicly-owned, and yet together they 

form the Trans-Canada Telephone Association, a loosely-bound group that never has any difficulty, 

apparently, in coming to agreement with respect to matters which concern them all. The Bell Telephone 

company, as everyone I think will know, made application, last July, to the Board of Transport 

Commission (I believe that is where they apply) for a 10 per cent increase in telephone rates. And they 

were granted that. Then they made a further application which will give them a 20 per cent increase in 

revenue. The British Columbia Telephone Company has done the same thing. They have got an increase 

of 18 per cent on telephone rates. Now, those are the rates, Mr. Speaker, that one pays for the telephone 

in the house. That is the rate we are talking about. If you have a telephone in your office, or a telephone 

in your house, you pay a rate for that telephone. Those have not been changed in Saskatchewan. With 

respect to the rural connecting fees, I should say this: They were formerly at their present level in 1935, 

but because of conditions of depression they were reduced to $3. I remember rural companies did that 

too; It was less than a cost basis. The rural company of which I was a subscriber had a rental of $7 a 

year; later, it was increased to $10, but that was true all over the province. The lines were permitted to 

deteriorate and they just carried along at an extremely low rental. So the rural connecting fees were 

reduced to $3. Now, they should have been increased long before they were. They should have been 

increased, because the $3, Mr. Speaker, was below the cost of operation, and it became necessary to pay 

increased commissions to our agents throughout the province. And I might say that half our agents are 

rural telephone companies and those agents received 70 per cent of the increase so that when we 

collected $2 extra on each telephone from a rural company in rural connection fees, where the company 

was our agent they got 70 per cent or $1.40 of that back in addition to commissions to their office. The 

increase in rural connecting fees is a payment made by rural telephone companies to the Saskatchewan 

Government Telephones for the use of our switchboard, and our office equipment. It is not a rate for a 

telephone that you have on your desk. The increases in Swift Current and North Battleford that were 

mentioned, I believe, by the Minister of Labour were the result of a step up to a higher bracket based on 

number of lines in the Exchange. Now, that is not an increase. I might just as well say that if a fellow 

goes out and buys an old jalopy and gets a licence for $10, and then trades it in and gets a better car and 

has to pay $17, and trades that one in and gets a bigger one and pays $25, it does not involve an increase 

in automobile licence fees. The same is true of telephone rates. As a community grows the subscriber 

has contact with more people without the payment of toll service. He gets the use of more exchange 

equipment. 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

24 

 

I have some of the rates here – Nova Scotia Telephone Company, New Brunswick Telephone Company 

and the Bell Telephone Company, the B. C. Telephone Company, the Alberta Telephone Company – the 

practice is universal in Canada and I believe, in the United States, to graduate Telephone rates according 

to the number of lines connected to the exchange. There isn‘t any difference. Now those rates are there. 

When you qualify for a higher rate you get it; but the rates are not changed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Better service and more of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — Yes. Now, in the case of Swift Current and North Battleford, they stepped up to a 

different rating. They were given monthly billing and modern telephone equipment, and their higher 

rates came into effect on the first of this month, the first of March, and they are very pleased about it all. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with that explanation . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — What about Regina? 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — Regina and Saskatoon qualified in the same way. They simply stepped up and are 

different rates. It was not the population; it was the number of telephones. Now, those rates have been 

there since . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Will the hon. member permit another question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — Certainly. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Have you any knowledge if any of the companies supplying telephone facilities have 

had to raise their rates to their subscribers as a result of having to pay the extra $2 switching fee. How 

many have had to raise their rates? 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — I have no knowledge of that. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Don‘t they have to make their records? 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — I have no knowledge of that. Mr. Speaker. I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. J.R. Denike (Torch River): — Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that the Minister of Public Works 

expects us to spend a considerable amount of his appropriation in the Torch River constituency, during 

the coming season, I thought it was quite appropriate that he should spend some considerable time in 

discussing the work of his Department. As a matter of fact, the Minister has neglected us considerably 

during the past six years. I am glad that he mentioned the fact that the Power corporation had installed 

streetlights in the town of Nipawin. Otherwise the Department of Public Works has done very little in 

the Torch River constituency. 

 

Plans, at the present time, are for the Power corporation to extend a line from Nipawin, or from White 

Fox to Smeaton; surveys have been made and this should progress during the coming season. Plans also 

have been made to install a new telephone exchange in the town of Nipawin, 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

25 

 

but knowing the difficulties that accompany such an extensive project we are well prepared to wait until 

equipment is available. 

 

The Minister of Public Works is perhaps the only one of the Ministers whose mark has not been made in 

my own particular constituency. The Minister of Public Health certainly has done an excellent job. The 

hospital plan introduced by the Saskatchewan Government has been of particular benefit in my own 

territory. The reason for that is because many of the people are homesteaders with small holdings and 

with not a great deal of cash behind them. Some of them, it is true, are quite wealthy and are located 

upon some of the best land in the province of Saskatchewan; but there are a large number of them who 

are just now getting on their feet, and for that reason they have appreciated very much during the past 

six years the efforts made by the Department of Public Health to alleviate their sufferings and to care for 

the great backlog of medical care which has piled up over the years. 

 

I have been looking in vain for some member of the Opposition to answer the question of my seatmate 

for information as to what the Opposition means by ‗decentralization‘. The only answer that I have had 

has come through the medium of the ―Leader-Post.‖ Now the ―Leader-Post‖ in making reference to the 

Alberta plan, said that Alberta had looked at the Saskatchewan Hospital Plan and the British Columbia 

Hospital Plan and had decided to inaugurate a system of municipal assistance. Now this plan has been 

tried out in the past and has been found wanting. Ontario has a similar plan, and in connection with the 

municipal plan as applied to the city of Toronto, it gives an indication as to what might happen, in 

Saskatchewan, if a decentralization plan should be followed. 

 

Toronto hospitals lost more than $500,000, last year, in deficits, through care for indigent patients. They 

still have $700,000 outstanding after receiving provincial and municipal grants for 1948-49. The 

proposed new plan for grants has to come before the Cabinet and Legislature. Alberta has adopted the 

deterrent plan of $1 a day per patient, and the remaining costs are divided between the municipality and 

the government. 

 

I can‘t understand why the Opposition should leave it to the ―Leader-Post‖ to answer a direct question, 

or perhaps we can understand – they are not prepared to take a definite stand, but they use the editor of 

the ―Leader-Post‖ to ‗fly a kite‘ for them. 

 

The Torch River constituency tried out the Automobile Insurance Act very early after its inception. Files 

3 and 4 in the Saskatchewan Government Insurance files indicate that two standing on a street in 

Nipawin were severely injured, necessitating a lengthy stay in hospital. Each one had a leg broken, and 

indemnity and medical expenses were paid. The total cost of caring for these men was something like 

$800. The owner of the car- a 1931 coupe – certainly was not able to bear the cost of any expenses 

involved, nor to pay compensation. Now this accident, occurring so early in the course of the experiment 

with automobile accident insurance, put an end to any criticism that might have followed later, in 

connection with the plan. Since that time, nobody, in my hearing, has said anything in protest against the 

automobile insurance plan, and I notice that our hon. friends on the opposite side say very little about it. 

It is just another example of ‗eating crow.‘ I think that this Legislature will go down in history as a crow 

feast for the Opposition, with Crown Corporations 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

26 

 

as their principal dish – ―in and out the window!‖ It was rather interesting to see one member of the 

Opposition sitting eating a special crow all by himself – the brick plant at Estevan . . . 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Better than a dead duck anyway. 

 

Mr. Denike: — Natural Resources, perhaps has been one of the most controversial of all the projects 

established by the Saskatchewan Government, and it seems that the Opposition haven‘t quite caught the 

idea yet. They still don‘t recognize the fact that the forests belong to the people of Saskatchewan. Now if 

the policies followed by former Liberal Governments had continued, forests, like the Torch River 

Provincial Forest, would by this time have been almost completely denuded, and consequently that 

would have been an end to the lumbering industry in that particular area. As it is, the forest at the present 

time is established so that a sustained yield will be carried on, and we can expect that in that area 

lumbering will be an industry for years and years to come. 

 

Last year, for the first time, I heard criticism of Timber Board activities from some of my friends. Now, 

I shouldn‘t tell you this, but it is quite in keeping with recommendations that have been made by 

Opposition members. Some of them think that, just because a timber producer is given $34 or 

thereabouts for producing a thousand feet of lumber, and the thousand feet of lumber finally reaches the 

consumer at a price of $100, the intervening price – the amount between $34 and $100 – remains within 

the Timber Board. 

 

Our hon. friends across the way, Mr. Speaker, evidently don‘t study their Crown corporation reports 

very well, and evidently they don‘t understand business practice very well, or they would know that 

there are many costs involved between the raw product and the consumer. The Timber Board had such a 

demand for their timber for the past season that piling yards ran short of supplies. The reason for that 

was because of such a crop in the northern part of Saskatchewan – of course all parts of Saskatchewan 

had a fairly good crop; but the people of north-eastern Saskatchewan had the advantage in that they can 

go to a local piling yard and obtain their supplies of lumber. The piling yards had maintained or had 

retained the usual supply of lumber necessary to supply the requirements of people in the area. However, 

the requirements were so great, during last fall, that the supply ran short. The people, then, were forced 

to go to the local lumber yards and purchase lumber at a very high rate – in the neighbourhood of $100 

per thousand feet. It was significant that, until the supply of lumber ran short in the piling yards, the 

price in the lumber yards remained somewhat near the piling-yard price. It goes to show, Mr. Speaker, 

just what socialized industry will do in maintaining and holding a price line. 

 

People who came to me in criticism of the action of the Timber Board in not holding enough lumber for 

them, were told, that if they wished to ensure further supplies of lumber, a co-operative would be quite 

in order and the best plan for them. I propose to use that suggestion at any time that any one of these 

people comes to me suggesting that the piling yard should guarantee in perpetuity that there will be 

supplies of lumber for them. People have to do a certain amount of work for themselves, but I think that 

the whole situation was demonstrated very well to those people 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

27 

 

that a co-operative would be the best method of handling lumber in that area. 

 

I think that the Department of Education perhaps has made a greater contribution to that area than any 

other department. I have a statement here indicating the amount of building that was carried on in the 

Nipawin Larger School Unit during the past year. This list of building indicates clearly just what 

building was not done before this Saskatchewan Government came into power. This building was 

urgently required. First of all, completion of a six-room extension to the Carrot River School; 

completion of a four-room school at Garrick; a new six-room school at the village of Smeaton; a four-

room extension to the two-room school at White Fox; and a new one-room modern rural school at 

Trail‘s End, and various other one-room schools. 

 

There is also a summary of the work that has been accomplished by the Nipawin Larger School Unit 

since it was started: Fifty class rooms constructed, 15 to replace old buildings and the balance as 

additional class rooms; 15 new teacherages; 16 new barns; 1,150 new desks purchased and distributed; 

class room libraries have been methodically improved every year since the unit was established. This is 

just an indication as to the work that has been carried on by the Nipawin Larger Unit since it was started 

about 5 1/2 years ago. 

 

It is significant, in connection with the Nipawin Larger Unit, that the town of Nipawin School Unit, has 

become part of the Nipawin Larger Unit. There is a definite reason why this should be so, and why the 

arrangement should be mutually satisfactory to both sides. The Federal Government has offered a 

$50,000 grant to assist in the construction of a composite high school in Nipawin, but the town of 

Nipawin felt that that was beyond their means to handle, so that at the expiry of the probationary period 

of the Nipawin School Unit the Nipawin School Board and the Nipawin Large Unit combined forces 

and, as a result a composite school is in the progress of construction in the town of Nipawin. That is 

something that could not have been handled without co-operation between such an organization as the 

school unit and the school district of the town of Nipawin. 

 

It is also significant that the Village of Aylsham hastened to make application to join the Nipawin 

Larger School Unit before a vote was taken in the Tisdale area. Aylsham is a village situated in one of 

the richest farming areas in the province of Saskatchewan and opponents of the larger school unit – I 

think these opponents have pretty well disappeared, we have not heard very much about the larger unit 

during this session; but opponents of the larger unit might wonder why people situated in such lucky 

circumstances would wish to join the unit. But it is in keeping with the spirit of co-operation that you 

will find in our particular part of Saskatchewan. 

 

I was somewhat interested in the remarks made by the hon. member for Souris-Estevan in connection 

with the use of fuel oil as a method of heating in the Legislative Building. Now I can understand 

perfectly well why such a suggestion should have been made in the first case. I have a list here of the 

heavy oil burners installed in different buildings in 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

28 

 

Regina and if the owners of these buildings and schools do not feel that oil is a cheaper method of 

heating than coal, they certainly would not have installed these oil burners. I am more or less in 

sympathy with the member for Souris-Estevan, and with the coalminers in the vicinity of Estevan, but it 

is significant that Alberta is faced with the same problem. The coal mines in Alberta are wondering just 

which way they are going at the present time. I have two or three editorial comments here, which I will 

not read; but it is a problem that is facing Alberta as well as Saskatchewan – Alberta more than in 

Saskatchewan. However, if the Minister of Public Works decides that it is not expedient to install heavy 

oil burners in the Legislature Building, we might then take that as a subsidization of the coalmines in the 

vicinity of Estevan. 

 

The hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) spent some considerable time in the Legislature 

commenting on the situation that had occurred in connection with the American – Canadian Uranium 

Company in the State of New York, and he, apparently, was inclined to leave the impression that this 

company was the only one that had been in difficulty in the State of New York. I have an extract from 

the ―Financial Post‖ which indicates what has been going on in the State of New York; how it all started. 

It all started about a month ago when the New York office of the Securities and Exchange Commission 

began warning individuals and New York brokers because there were financing agreements outstanding, 

and Anthony Lund, supervisor for this Commission, said that the United States was being flooded with 

dubious Canadian offerings of securities which have not been qualified for sale in the United States. The 

―Financial Post‖ did not make reference to American–Canadian Uranium, but selected Leduc-Calmar as 

a striking example of what can happen as a result of the action of these wildcat stock operators in the 

United States and on the New York Stock Exchange. On February 23rd and 24th, New York traders 

were buyers of perhaps 300,000 shares of Leduc-Calmar, a Calgary oil stock. The price rose from about 

71 cents to $1.02 a share over a few days. Then it was on or about February 23rd, so, no February 26th 

the New York brokers went to work to sell the 300,000 shares they had purchased. By February 27th the 

price was down to 62 cents a share. I am sorry that the member for Maple Creek is not here to hear what 

I have to say but perhaps he will, at some future date, comment upon this and assure the Legislature that 

he did not want to lead anybody astray. 

 

Yesterday, the hon. member for Cumberland (Mr. Blanchard), made reference to the Flin Flon highway. 

I, also, am interested in the Flin Flon highway, but I do not think that the Flin Flon highway is going to 

satisfy the requirements of my own particular area at the present time. The Flin Flon highway is 

something that has to be looked at from a provincial standpoint and, therefore, it is advisable to leave it 

to be examined from a wider viewpoint. In our own particular area we have other projects which we 

think are much more important at the present time. We think that a highway directly east of Nipawin and 

leading to the co-op farms and on into the area which is to be developed by the Department of 

Agriculture would be much more feasible. I am not in favour of pushing highways through territory that 

is not going to be productive. I am not too enthusiastic about the Carrot River-The Pas highway just at 

the present time either, 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

29 

 

for that reason. I would much prefer to see highways following development of agricultural land. 

 

We have another problem facing us and that is the eventual rebuilding of No. 55 Highway, and that will 

have to be done in the not-too-distant future. So you can see, Mr. Speaker, what we are faced with in the 

Torch River constituency. We have four highways in project and we have to decide just which one we 

would prefer. My interests lie towards the east and I think that any highway that is built should be one 

that will serve an area that is settled and an area that deserves recognition. This area which deserves 

recognition – I am not quite sure why the hon. members are laughing, they apparently do not know what 

has taken place in the past; they do not know that that is a homestead area and that the people who 

moved into that area 20 years ago were just dropped in the bush by former Liberal Governments and left 

to work out their own salvation, have done so in the past, and now they have a Government that is going 

to see to it that some recognition is given to their claims. 

 

The Department of Labour has been recognized in the towns of the Torch River Constituency as well as 

in other towns in Saskatchewan. I would like to take issue with the Minister of Labour on his statement 

that the business men, in general, are in opposition to the suggestions and the Acts passed by the 

Saskatchewan Legislature. Merchants in general recognize that workers have to have a decent standard 

of living, and merchants in general are becoming much more considerate of people around them than 

they were before. They know, as well as anybody else, that a wealthy farm community is all to the good, 

and they know that their workers will do a better job and be much more reliable if they are also given a 

decent wage. So The Hours of Work, The Holidays with Pay and The One Day‘s Rest in Seven are Acts 

that are well appreciated by the workers in my constituency. 

 

One day‘s rest in seven brings something to my mind that had escaped it. For two years in succession I 

notice that the hon. member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. McCormack) has made reference to the very high 

wages paid in the mines in his constituency. He used that as a lever or as a club over the Government, 

perhaps, to pay greater wages in Crown Corporations, And last year, shortly after he made that 

reference, the Minister of Labour got up to speak, and he made reference to a case that had taken place 

in connection with the Assiniboia Club. One of the employees at the Assiniboia Club had been denied 

his one day‘s rest in seven. It just happened that the hon. member for Souris-Estevan has been a guest at 

this Club quite frequently. I was just wondering, Mr. Speaker, whether he would be willing to go to bat 

for that employee at the Assiniboia Club if he had a chance. Certainly, with his knowledge of labour 

relations and labour laws and labour disputes, he should have known what was going on there. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — He was getting six-days‘ rest in seven. 

 

Mr. Denike: — Nipawin is well known for its ―firsts‖. I do not have to mention the famous auto 

bonspiel, and the Torch River constituency has also another first in that it has a large municipal unit 

composed of perhaps 20 townships. Now, the prologue to the organization of this municipal unit is, I 

think, quite interesting, Mr. Speaker. When 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

30 

 

I became a member of the Legislature in 1948, I found that on the Statute Books there was an L. I. D. 

Act passed in 1946, and the purpose of this L. I. D. was to develop some sort of self-government in L. I. 

D.‘s. I found that this had not been done, that the organization that was to be done had not taken place, 

and I think, Mr. Speaker, that the responsibility for inaction in that case must rest with the L. I. D. 

administrator of that time. Upon one occasion, in the Public Accounts Committee, I think it was in the 

first session of the present Legislature, the dismissal of that particular administrator was called in 

question. I did not happen to be in the House at the time, but if I had been there I would have been glad 

to substantiate the action of the Minister of Municipal Affairs in removing that gentleman from his post, 

because I found, when I came to check over the administration for the Act of 1946, that practically 

nothing had been done to implement the requirements. So I set out to organize these L. I. D.‘s along the 

principles as outlined in the L. I. D. Act of 1946, and the councils so organized responded so well and 

took such an active part in administering their own affairs as far as they could go, that it was very easy 

to interest them in going further into a rural organization. As a result, the larger rural municipality of 

Torch River has been formed. 

 

At the present time, Mr. Speaker, I am not prepared to give a report of the operation of the R. M. of 

Torch River, whether it is working out to the best advantage or not; but my impression is that that is the 

solution for rural municipalities. Each rural municipality which is out to do a job of administration and 

construction is going to be faced with a terrific capital investment in machinery, a capital investment 

that is beyond their power to carry. While revenues are buoyant, it can be done, perhaps; but the time is 

liable to come when it will be beyond their power. 

 

In keeping with what I have just mentioned in connection with machinery costs in rural municipalities, I 

would like to make a comment on work that is being done by the Department of Co-operatives in 

investigating costs. I have here a table showing the results of statistics supplied by five large machine 

companies, and they suggest that on a 160-acre farm that the per-acre investment cost of a suitable line 

of machinery would be $37.26, and the per-acre yearly investment cost would be $3.91, whereas, on a 

2,000 acres farm the per-acre investment would be $8.29 and the per-acre yearly investment would be 

$1.41. This points out very clearly, Mr. Speaker, the advantage of operating machinery co-operatives in 

the province of Saskatchewan. That is an ideal machinery arrangement. It might not apply to all parts of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I am particularly interested in the park belt and here is what it would cost per cultivated acre to provide a 

satisfactory line of machinery on a farm of 100 to 240 acres under cultivation. The investment per 

cultivated acre would be $27.66 and the yearly investment cost per cultivated acre would be $2.76. On 

240 to 400 acres under cultivation the investment would be about $2.00 less per cultivated acre and the 

yearly investment cost per cultivated acre would be slightly higher, $2.95. On a farm of 1,000 acres 

under cultivation, that is, in the Prince Albert area, the investment per cultivated acre would be $14.75 

and the yearly investment cost would be $2.06, and on one co-operative farm involving 2,300 acres the 

investment per cultivated acre would be $11.57 and the yearly investment cost 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

31 

 

per cultivated acre $1.96. Now these figures, I think show the advantage of operating on a co-operative 

basis, or at least on a machinery co-operative basis. This is something that is facing all farmers, 

particularly farmers in my own area. Many of them are on quarter-section units and for that reason they 

are faced with an intolerable machinery cost. 

 

I have not made reference to the Department of Agriculture, but I think that I am equally interested in 

what is going to take place in connection with that Department as I am in the Department of Public 

Works and the Power Corporation. An appropriation to spend $500,000 dollars in clearing, breaking and 

draining land in the area north-east of Nipawin and Carrot River is of great interest to the people of that 

area. It is also of great interest to the editor of the ―Hudson Bay Post‖. The ―Hudson Bay Post‖ says: 

 

―It may come as a surprise to many of my listeners to learn that in north-eastern Saskatchewan 

there are about 2,000,000 virgin acres of the best type of farm land known. It is awaiting 

settlement and development. Now this fact has been virtually kept hidden from the people of 

Saskatchewan by the Douglas Government and the Socialist Minister who represents Tisdale 

Constituency in the Legislature.‖ 

 

We have not able to figure out, Mr. Speaker, just how in the world the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank could keep 

it hidden, but in any case, the news is out, and the editor of the ―Hudson Bay Post‖ – by the way, you 

should know that the editor of the ―Hudson Bay Post‖ has also been nominated as the Liberal candidate 

in the Tisdale constituency, and has always declared himself elected. He goes on to say: 

 

―The undeveloped suitable agricultural area has a potential invested wealth of upwards of 100 

million dollars. Now this could have been added to the economy of this province during the past 

six years, but it has been kept hidden by the C. C. F. and their member for Tisdale.‖ 

 

He also says, 

 

―This development would have been an accomplished fact had Liberal settlement policies been 

in effect in Saskatchewan in the past six years.‖ 

 

I have some interesting information here in connection with Liberal land settlement policies, not within 

the last six years, certainly, Mr. Speaker, but dating back to 1926. The Minister of Agriculture has made 

reference to this particular land allocation project organized by the Liberal Party, but he did not know 

the half of it, Mr. Speaker. All that he could do was to count the number of quarter-sections allotted to 

one particular individual and say, ―That is terrible.‖ Well, it was terrible all right. He did not recognize 

the names of the people who had purchased land at sales held in the Moose Range area in 1926, 1927, 

1928 and finally in 1937. Now 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

32 

 

I am not going to mention any names here, with the exception of the John Deere Plow Company, which 

purchased a quarter of land and acquired title in 1932. I do not know how much they paid for it, but I 

doubt very much that the Minister of Agriculture would condescend to grant a quarter-section to the 

John Deer Plow Company under the present arrangement. 

 

Mr. P. A. Howe (Kelvington): — Perhaps they needed rehabilitation. 

 

Mr. Denike: — I would not be a bit surprised. 

 

The list here is quite interesting, I find a bank manager acquired a couple of quarters and a druggist (a 

bachelor, by the way) acquired a couple of quarters, and a hardware store operator and automobile 

operator for a garage acquired another quarter. I do not think he bought it at the sale, I think he must 

have acquired it later on. That is something that would not occur under the arrangements suggested by 

the Minister of Agriculture. Another two quarters went to a clothing merchant, also we have twenty-odd 

quarters going to one gentleman who acquired some of them at the sale and others were acquired over a 

period of years. A hardware merchant and his partner in Prince Albert acquired about three quarters. But 

I also find that two lawyers acquired a couple of quarters. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Schumiachter? 

 

Mr. Denike: — But the interesting part of this is that these two lawyers, by dint of working after hours 

and on Sundays and on holidays, I suppose, and by blisters on their hands, managed to arrive at the stage 

where they just owed a thousand dollars upon these two quarter-sections, so they applied to the Board of 

Revenue Commissioners for clemency – I suppose you would call it – and were granted titles to their 

quarters on the payment of a thousand dollars. Now that thousand-dollar payment cut off actually about 

$1,300. When they applied for clemency they owed $2,242, and they offered to put up a thousand 

dollars and call it square. So the Board of Revenue Commissioners decided to call it square, and the two 

lawyers acquired their titles. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that I have said enough to show you that I am perfectly well satisfied with the 

record of the Saskatchewan Government during the past six years, that I am looking forward to 

continuation of their efforts and that, during the coming season, I expect a very definite manifestation of 

the work that is being done or will be done by the Department of Highways and the Department of 

Public Works. I support the Motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, if I may, for just a moment. I would like to 

correct an impression I think my friend has over something I said the other day – I did not like to 

interrupt him when he was speaking. It was the remark I made to the effect that some storekeepers are 

the enemies of this Government. I am afraid the member who has just spoken has taken it too all-

inclusive and has thought I have referred to perhaps some in his home town, which was far from the 

case. I only referred to those who criticized our labour 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

33 

 

legislation to their customers. Perhaps there are not very many, but certainly I had not the slightest 

intention of making any blanket accusation or anything of that kind. The type of merchant to which my 

friend has just referred are the very people we like, friends of our Department at least, and they are 

going to give their employees a break and we are very glad to see them have a successful business. 

Thank you for this opportunity. 

 

Mr. J. W. Erb (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I feel rather like an after-dinner speaker at this time of the 

evening after having just finished a big meal downstairs. I trust that the big dinner the members had is 

not going to make them feel too sleepy. Probably some of the things that I am going to say tonight are 

going to have a tendency to wake them up. My speech is not going to be too long this evening, 

considering the other speakers that are still coming on. In any case, I do not think I could make a very 

long speech, I believe I would have to get on to the years that the member from Arm River (Mr. 

Danielson) has attained, probably the size of the member from Rosthern (Mr. Tucker) and the wisdom of 

the member for Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. Wellbelove), I probably then could make a long speech. 

 

I should first, of course, like to congratulate all members who have so far taken part in this debate 

which, to my mind, has been much like a good Broadway play that has been extended over its normal 

run. Well, Mr. Speaker, like a good drama, this debate has provided ample scope for the heroes and the 

villains. I can assure everyone that when this debate is over the villains will have gone down to sure 

defeat. Of course, it could not be otherwise; with all the shellacking and the double-and triple-

whammies and the gazoopie-gazuppies they have taken, the outcome is almost predestined to be that 

way. I should like, specially, to congratulate the hon. Provincial Treasurer on what I believe was one of 

the most outstanding addresses he has made so far in his career in this Legislature. 

 

The budget of 1951, Mr. Speaker, has caused no small amount of consternation among our hon. friends 

in the Opposition and it is obvious, listening to their speeches, that a sort of frustration has set in. It 

seems to me that the hon. member from Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Dundas) is so frustrated that he even 

complained about the alcohol content of his whisky. It would appear that the present alcohol percentage 

is not sufficient to lull him into that state of mental inertia that he would like to have produced in order 

to make him forget about the awful budget. It would hardly be in good taste for the Provincial Treasurer 

to instruct the Liquor Board to adjust the specific gravity of alcohol according to the degrees of 

frustration of our hon. friend from Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley. 

 

Like preceding budgets of the C. C. F. administration, Mr. Speaker, the 1951 budget is again a 

humanitarian budget, and I can say that, as long as budgets are brought down by a C. C. F. Government 

those budgets will be humanitarian budgets. Of course, my hon. friends have a tendency to snicker; they 

are unable to conceive apparently, what a humanitarian budget is. They were born and raised in the dog-

eat-dog and devil-take-the hindmost atmosphere of the economic jungle. By their criticism of the 

budget, Mr. Speaker, I can only come to one conclusion which is that they have only one 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

34 

 

objective; their own concern is to perpetuate a degenerate and debasing system of inequality and 

privilege. By opposing the budget, Mr. Speaker, they are opposing Socialism. By being opposed to 

Socialism they oppose the banding together of the common people in the pursuit of a common goal of 

social and economic and political justice. 

 

This Government, Mr. Speaker, because it is a socialist government has widened the social and 

economic horizons of the people of Saskatchewan. By its legislation, this Government has made it 

possible for the people of Saskatchewan to do co-operatively what they in the past have not been able to 

do individually. By its legislation the C. C. F. Government has enabled the people to collectively give 

expression to man‘s noblest persuasion – that of bearing each other‘s burdens. And if my hon. friends 

across the floor think that is idealistic nonsense I want to tell them that that is why the people of 

Saskatchewan have put them on to the left of Mr. Speaker on two occasions. I can tell them too, Mr. 

Speaker, that if their performance in this House and on the hustings does not improve they are just going 

to be left. 

 

I am confident that the people of Saskatchewan are as pleased with the budget that was just brought 

down as we are on this side of the House, because, Mr. Speaker, in spite of rising costs of living, no new 

taxes were necessary to provide the same amount of services that were provided last year, and at that, 

the budget is $3 million higher. The outstanding contribution to the budget debate of our hon. friends of 

the Opposition has been the strange paradox that the budget is too large and too small at the same time. I 

should like to suggest to them, Mr. Speaker, that instead of using their heads as battering rams, they get 

down to some clear thinking, and I would suggest that they seriously consider why the 1951 budget is 

larger by $3 million than last year‘s and still provides the same amount of services. And, having done 

so, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that they tell the people of Saskatchewan so. They would then be 

speaking in terms that the people not only of this province but all of Canada would understand. 

 

What they would say would probably sound like this: ‗We, of his Majesty‘s Loyal Opposition, after 

having carefully and conscientiously considered the 1950 budget, have come to the following 

conclusions: (a) that the 1950 budget meets, insofar as is possible, the social and economic demands of 

the people of Saskatchewan; (b) that we regret, due to the inflationary policies followed by the Federal 

Government at Ottawa, the costs of the provincial services have increased by $3 million, and (c) that, 

having taken full cognizance of the hardships created by the above Federal policies on the people 

generally, we shall exercise full use of our party connections with the Federal Government at Ottawa in 

an effort to bring about a satisfactory solution to our regret of clause (b).‘ 

 

Now, before going further, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the hon. member for Athabasca (Mr. 

Marion) on his speech last week. In that speech he gave credit to the extent that he believed this 

Government should have credit for the accomplishments it has made in these past years as the 

administration of Saskatchewan. I want to assure the hon. member that it was appreciated on this side of 

the House not alone for what he said, but because of the courage that he had to say it. And I should also 

like to make a remark about a comment that our good friend Peter McLintock 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

35 

 

made, that, ―if you give credit where credit is due, your criticism is going to sound a lot more valid.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone I have been complimenting this evening is not here. 

 

Now, is it, perhaps, because of the utterance of our hon. member for Athabasca or possibly what our 

good friend in the press had said that four members who spoke yesterday changed the somewhat usual 

tenor of their criticism of the budget? I was glad to hear them say, Mr. Speaker, that they are not 

opposed to the amount of money that this Government is spending. Well, I would say in that regard they 

are making progress. Might it not also be possible that insofar as my hon. friend from Souris-Estevan 

(Mr. McCormack) is concerned, a black top highway, the Estevan School Unit, the power generating 

plant, and, lastly, a modern brick plant, all in his constituency, have not also contributed to the progress 

he made yesterday? His chief criticism of the budget, Mr. Speaker, was then that he is not opposed to the 

amount of money that is being spent, but rather the wasteful manner in which it is being spent. And I 

remember he pointed out two things: first, that the number of staff is out of proportion in relation to the 

money being spent by the different departments; and, second, that the continuance of those Crown 

Corporations which have been losing money is unjustified. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with regard to his criticism of the number of staff, I am reminded of an analogy of 

the ship of state and the battleship. Let us first look at the battleship anchored in the harbour. It has no 

duty to perform and lies idle in the harbour; only a few sailors may be observed on its deck for the 

purpose of simply keeping up the shop. But suddenly an emergency arises and what happens? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, there is activity wherever you look, right from the captain down to the lowliest seaman. The 

ship puts out to sea; it is going somewhere, Mr. Speaker, manned for action and every man trained for 

his specific duty. The ship of state of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, prior to 1944, can be compared to the 

battleship laying at anchor in the harbour, idle and doing nothing. But in 1944 the people of 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Got into deep water! 

 

Mr. Erb: — But in 1944 the people of Saskatchewan put a new captain in and a new crew on this ship 

of state, and since then, Mr. Minister, it has drawn anchor, is fully manned has pt to sea and there is 

action all around it. It is going places and doing things. Oh yes, Mr. Speaker, it costs money, of course, 

and it required more man-power, but I can assure my hon. friends across the floor that the people of 

Saskatchewan have full confidence in their captain and their crew. 

 

Late last fall, the Hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs and I made a courtesy call on my good friend from 

Souris-Estevan in his law Office. We could not see him immediately because he was busy, so we sat 

down. And, while sitting, I let my gaze go around the office and I noticed that behind the counter there 

was bustling activity. There were four pretty girls as busy as bees, answering the telephone, typing, 

sorting files and so on. Now, Mr. Speaker, I believe a poor lawyer could do without a secretary, and I 

believe a fair lawyer probably would need one secretary, but when a 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

36 

 

lawyer has three or four secretaries or stenographers he does not employ them just for their good looks; 

no, they are engaged to do a job. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Of course he is a handsome young lawyer. 

 

Mr. Erb: — So I finally came to the conclusion that my good friend from Souris-Estevan must be going 

places and doing things – not with the girls but with his law office. 

 

Now it is true that this Government has increased its staff, and it is also true that it has greatly expanded 

its services. Never in the history of this province, Mr. Speaker, have the people had such services on 

such a scale, and it requires a staff commensurate with those services which are being rendered. My hon. 

friend, of course, is entitled to his opinion about the number of staff in relation to the services rendered; 

but what I want to say is that, when we compare the number of Government staff today and what they 

are doing, to the number of staff under the Liberal administration and what they were doing, I am quite 

sure that our observations would be quite striking. Now, I do not like to make comparisons. It has been 

said in the House that comparisons are odious. There was a time when I did not know what the word 

―odious‖ meant. After I found out I know that it was a polite way of saying that something stinks. But, 

certainly, going over some of these things and making the comparison, while it might seem odious, the 

fact is that the thing also might reveal that something was rotten in Denmark. 

 

In respect to that argument, I would like to point out to my hon. friend about the increase in staff that, 

for instance, in Highways, when I say that a staff has to be commensurate with the amount of money 

being spent we have the figures to prove it. In 1950 we spent 89,392,000 on highways whereas the 

administration in 1943-44 spent $2,918,000. It is quite inconceivable that the same number of men could 

do this $9 million job as did do a $2 million job. The same thing is true in Power. Last year, this 

administration spent $5 million on power, compared to $297,000 by the administration in 1943-44; and 

certainly they are not going to tell us for one moment that the same number of employees they had in 

1943-44 are going to do the same type of job that we are doing in the Power Corporation, in 1950, with 

all the expansion going on over the Province, as was so ably detailed by the Minister of the Department 

concerned this afternoon. On Telephones, he spent $4,160,000 compared to $215,000. Now, certainly, 

with all the new installations that we heard about this afternoon and the phenomenal growth of the 

Telephone Corporation, we have to have an increase in staff. In Agriculture, for instance, in 1943-44 the 

administration then had 21 agricultural representatives; in 1949-50 this Government had 36. When we 

speak about developing land and self-help projects, cattle testing for Bang‘s disease, acres classified for 

re-settlement, all through, there was absolutely no activity. 

 

That gives credence to the picture that I have tried to paint, Mr. Speaker, of that battleship anchored at 

sea, full of barnacles and doing nothing. Certainly you did not have to have a staff to do nothing – at 

least you should not have had. The fact is the previous administration did not do any of these things and, 

therefore, a large staff was not justified. But, in 1949-50, for instance, testing cattle for Bang‘s 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

37 

 

disease, we tested 34,074 cattle compared to none tested before. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, no ordinary 

man can go out and test cattle for Bang‘s disease; you have to have laboratory technicians and 

veterinarians to do that kind of work. So, in the ever-expanding programme of social services that we 

have had, the economic aid given to agriculture and the like, we have had to expand our staff. 

 

His other criticism, Mr. Speaker, was that the Crown Corporations which are losing money should be 

closed. And again he is entitled to his opinion. But, Mr. Minister, I am quite sure that the hon. member 

from Souris-Estevan was not very anxious at any time to see the brick plant closed, even before the time 

this Government had decided to renovate or modernize the brick plant at Estevan. I am inclined to 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that if any of those constituencies in which we have one of the very few losing 

Crown Corporations we had a Liberal member, they would not be nearly so voluble about closing the 

corporations and saying that they are losing so much money. 

 

The erstwhile criticism of the Opposition, of Government in business is markedly different now from 

what it was. Now they say that the Saskatchewan Transportation Company, the Government Airways, 

the medium sulphate plant, Power and Telephones and so on, are performing a service, and I quite agree 

with them. And I want to say that I believe that even those Crown Corporations which they would like to 

―toss out the window‖ with such dispatch now, will in the not-too-distant future be as acceptable to them 

as the corporations which they feel are acceptable to them now. These Crown Corporations, Mr. 

Speaker, are also rendering a service, and they are employing Saskatchewan people who would 

otherwise have to seek for work outside the confines of this province. And we need only look at the 

report of the various Crown Corporations, of the number of people employed. I am not going to weary 

the hon. members this evening by going through the whole list. As a matter of fact, they can find this out 

for themselves. I know when I went to school and I asked the teacher something, he could have told me 

the answer, of course; but he said, ―You look it up, and, having looked it up you will remember it much 

better‖. They just need to look up these figures, Mr. Speaker; they have access to them. 

 

What I do want to point out is that the Saskatchewan Government Airways employ 53 people; and the 

Saskatchewan Clay Products of Estevan employ 92 people; sodium sulphate, 63 people; Government 

Finance Office, 10; Saskatchewan Government Telephone, 1,598; Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company, 276; the Wool Products, 68. We total all those up, Mr. Speaker, there are 3,532 people 

employed just about the size of the town of Estevan. These employed people, Mr. Speaker, are making a 

fair wage, and almost all the money that is being earned by these people stays within the province. It is 

providing homes, health, education for these people who would otherwise have to seek beyond the 

confines of this province for work. 

 

I cannot give the total figure of the annual payroll of all these people; but I would like to point out that 

we have some specific instances of what a certain industry has paid. For instance, the Box Factory in 

1950 employed 124 people and had a payroll of $243,000. That is a lot of money in Prince Albert. It 

would be a lot of people for the city of Prince Albert to look after to find jobs. It would cause 

considerable disruption, 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

38 

 

Mr. Speaker, to have 124 people move out of town to seek work elsewhere. Certainly these corporations 

are justified. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I think the total payroll is something over $6 million. 

 

Mr. Erb: — For all the corporations, over $6 million, that is a mighty lot of money, and it is helping to 

provide, as I said,, for those people, a living, everything that is associated with a living. 

 

I would like to consider specifically the Saskatchewan Transportation Company. That is a thing that the 

Government thought should be in the hands of the people, and we must commend the C.C.F. 

Government for having the courage and the foresight to take over the transportation of the province of 

Saskatchewan. On January 29, 1946, the Saskatchewan Transportation Company was formed for the 

purpose of operating, on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, a motor vehicle and communication 

system. Even prior to that the Government felt that it had a responsibility to people who needed bus 

service. You will remember that, in 1945, when veterans who had come home from overseas were 

unable to find adequate housing in Regina, they were able to find adequate housing at Regina Beach. 

They were employed in the city of Regina; they had to commute between Regina Beach and Regina. 

What happened? The Government put in a bus service in order that these veterans might be transported 

back and forth to their work. We might look upon this as being an emergency, and this Government, Mr. 

Speaker, has never shirked its responsibility wherever an emergency has existed. We remember the great 

fire we had here in 1947, when a great portion of the transportation system of this city was burned. 

Without the help of the Saskatchewan Transportation Company, I am quite convinced, Mr. Speaker, that 

the transportation problems in this city would have been very grave indeed. 

 

The Saskatchewan Transportation Corporation was formed, as I said, in 1946. Mr. W. T. Bunn, the 

Director of Transportation, was given the responsibility of organizing it, and I think we should 

commend him for the excellent work he has done. Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, I think the Government is 

to be commended for its ability in choosing people with ability to organize and direct its Crown 

Corporations. The success that we have had in these Crown Corporations has been largely due to the 

excellent personnel this Government has been able to choose. There was a lot of argument, of course, 

when the Transportation Company came into being. Oh, it was another ―thin edge of the wedge of 

Socialism‖ taking over everything, Mr. Speaker! Our friends forget how closely government touches 

their lives every day – Federal government or any government; how closely Socialism touches their 

lives every day. They need only to get on the Regina bus, the City bus, and they are riding on a 

socialized transportation service. They need only to switch on their light and they have socialized power. 

They get on a C.N.R. train and they are riding on a socialist train. And they go to sleep and eat in a 

socialized hotel. They mail a letter in a socialized postal service. And they are so opposed to Socialism, 

Mr. Speaker, when expediency demands! The telephone and the radio – I could be here half an hour 

telling them how they are members of a socialist society. 

 

The reason we took over the bus service of this province, Mr. Speaker, was not because we had an axe 

to grind with private enterprise, but because private enterprise had failed to deliver the type of service 

that the people of Saskatchewan required. The private companies could never 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

39 

 

give the type of service that this Government is giving. The Greyhound and other associated lines run 

only on the lucrative lines, where they could make a profit, and I do not blame them. If I were in the bus 

business I could not afford it either, because I could not function on just breaking even, because I have 

to make a living. But government is the only body that is able to bring the type of service to everybody, 

because government is the people. 

 

The mileage that was being served by the independent bus companies when we took over was 3,199 

miles, and year after year, Mr. Speaker, we have increased that mileage until today we are transporting 

passengers and mail and freight over 4,367 miles, or an increase of 1,148 miles over what the service 

was before. The actual mileage, in 1950, was 3,156,645 miles. I do not know how many trips to the 

moon and back that would make. Sixty-five buses travelled an average of 10,000 miles daily. That is 

indeed a great record I remember, Mr. Speaker, when the bus first came into being, they would call it the 

―sunshine bus‖ because it only ran when the sun shone. But, with the excellent policies of the 

Government in regard to highways, we have now excellent roads over which these excellent buses 

travel, bringing this excellent service to the excellent people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to say, that, before this increase of 1,148 in the bus lines, Mr. Speaker, many of the outlying areas 

had not any bus service at all. They had varying railroad service. They may have had a train twice a 

week, once a week, once a week or once in ten days. Today, by bus services many of these points are 

connected up to the metropolitan centres of this province; people are able to get in and out, and they 

appreciate it greatly. The fact that we are able to do this, Mr. Speaker – and only a socialized 

transportation company could do this – it is for the reason that we have the same lucrative runs that the 

Greyhound enjoyed, and the other associated lines. We are making a profit on those runs, but, like this 

Government gives the profits from the corporation back to the people of this province, we are taking the 

profit from the lucrative lines and putting it over into those areas to bring service to communities where 

actually we are losing money. That is socialism. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What a story! 

 

Mr. Erb: — Don‘t you like it? Well, after four years they should really be able to graduate. 

 

The Saskatchewan Transportation Company, as I pointed out a moment ago, employ 273 people. The 

average monthly payroll was $48,000; plus 300 agents receiving commissions. Now that is really 

spreading not only the service over the province; it is also spreading the money over the province, and I 

am sure my friends over there are interested in that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, because this Government is interested in human welfare, we are going to continue to 

have Crown Corporations, and we are going to continue to have this as long as the Government places 

human welfare above the almighty dollar, as long as the Government makes the almighty dollar the 

servant of the people rather than their master. So long as this Government does that, Mr. Speaker, so 

long will it enjoy the trust and the confidence of the people of Saskatchewan. Crown Corporations, Mr. 

Speaker, like humanitarian budgets, are here to stay. 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

40 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is Education Week, I have been doing my best to educate, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You are optimistic. 

 

Mr. Erb: — . . . ―Problem children.‖ Now, a week such as this is, of course, to help renew the interest 

of the public generally in education and its responsibility toward it. We have, of course, different types 

of weeks – the Week for British Trade and the Community Chest and so on. All these weeks that are set 

aside are weeks in which we can rededicate ourselves to the principles that we believe in – like going to 

church every Sunday, where you rededicate yourself on Sunday to being a better boy during the week, 

and actually are. I trust that Education Week is going to serve the purpose for which it was intended. I 

think that even our friends across the floor admit, Mr. Speaker, that great strides have been made in 

education in this province, and I must commend the Minister of Education and his excellent staff for the 

fine achievements that they have made in the course of these past six years. 

 

Undoubtedly one of the greatest achievements in education, Mr. Speaker, has been the school unit. 

There is probably no better example of the application of socialist principles than that of the school unit. 

And that is probably why my good friends over there do not have very much good to say about the unit. 

Last year, I remember one gentleman was making a speech about the school unit. ―Now,‖ he said, ―I am 

going to say some good things about it and I am going to say some bad things about it.‖ And when he 

got through he had said all the bad things about it but had forgotten to say the good things about it. 

 

By the principle of equalization, Mr. Speaker, children today are receiving equal education 

opportunities. I am sure that my friends here even heard that expression so many times that they should 

be able to know it by heart now; they should have learned it by this time and learned to believe it. In 

some quarters, as we know, resistance to the school unit was fierce and tenacious, but today even some 

of our severest critics have become the unit‘s greatest admirers and supporters. Wherever the unit has 

been set up; Mr. Speaker, it is there to stay. 

 

Milestone Unit No. 12 covers the large area of Milestone Constituency. This unit was formed five years 

ago. In June it will have finished its trial period. During that time its progress, Mr. Speaker, has been 

remarkable, and I should like to review very briefly some of the achievements of this fine school unit. I 

would like to read here a little comment by one of the first trustees, who is the only original member of 

the board – Mr. Charles White. He writes this: 

 

―After serving on a local school board for years and five years on a larger school unit board, I am 

convinced that the unit system is a decided improvement over the old set-up, although the other 

did serve its purpose. Our taxes have not increased in comparison to the increase of living 

expenses and material expenses. Our school facilities are very much improved, including 

libraries, other equipment and sporting goods. Teacher and janitor salaries are much higher, all 

of our operating schools are clean and well heated, most 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

41 

 

of them have been painted outside and decorated inside. Our unit is pretty well off, pretty well 

out of debt and we have a very satisfactory surplus, after paying off many local school district 

debts and debentures. The majority of rate payers are well satisfied.‖ 

 

Then, here is what the report shows has been done in Milestone Unit over these five years; 10 new 

classrooms built and a new five-room school at Pangman; 12 teacherages built or purchased; 13 schools 

have new caustic or septic toilets installed, also 22 new outdoor deep-pit toilets built; 33 schools 

reconditioned and repairs done to others; 8 basements placed under schools; 75 schools painted inside or 

out, or both; 30 schools insulated; debts nearly wiped out; 11 new stables and 15 new furnaces and 8 

new stoves. That is quite a repair and building programme, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am not going to worry the House much about this, but I want to point out the excellent progress that 

has been made in education (this particularly being Education Week), and any of us who have ears to 

hear and eyes to see and who feel that the larger unit is doing a job, should get behind it and help in its 

administration, or if not in its administration, be a good supporter of the unit, because we are doing it for 

ourselves and for the generations of Canadians to come. Now, the president of the Milestone 

Superintendency Association (Mrs. Sylvia Burnsy) says this: 

 

―We, in the Ogema School District had the advantage of seeing the Milestone School Unit being 

tested and tried, and as we became aware of the marks of continual progress the ratepayers 

realized that if our school were to serve Ogema and district efficiently we could not afford to 

stay out. We have been in the unit for a year now, we have a fully equipped home economics 

room and a room for shop mechanics, a projector, and access to the unit library. Therefore, I 

would strongly urge all trustees to help build a finer and stronger unit. Criticize if you must, but 

criticize constructively. Education is on the march, let us help our unit promote education.‖ 

 

I think that is a fine tribute to education. And this is what the Chairman of the Larger Unit of Milestone 

writes: 

 

―I think the Milestone Unit has helped education in many ways. We have helped get more pupils 

into the high schools and continued the high school work longer than in the past. We have looked 

after the children in closed rural school districts. We saw that they got to school where we could 

and, in a few cases where they were too far from another school we did the best we could by 

having them taught in their own homes. Under this system, the children all had the same chance 

to receive equal education. The superintendent has a better contact with his school through his 

sub-unit trustees, as well as the local board.‖ (Signed) ―Chester Schwindt.‖ 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

42 

 

That is the comment of the people who are responsible for making the unit the success that it is. And 

here is a note: 

 

―There will be no increase in mill rate for 1951, regardless of the increase in teacher‘s salaries 

and higher cost of materials. The unit has had a surplus every year and, with the lessening need 

for repairs, the unit board expects to balance its budget in 1951 without any raise in taxes. In 

1950, Milestone Unit had the second lowest mill rate in the Province.‖ 

 

And then this, Mr. Speaker, I thought was the pay-off. We have heard so much criticism about the unit 

being responsible for the rise in taxes. Indeed, our friends across the floor have tried on many occasions 

– I have heard them Mr. Speaker – leave the impression that this Government has been responsible for 

the increase in the mill rate in the municipalities and in the school districts where we have a large unit. 

They did succeed in making a lot of people believe that. I was at a meeting one night in my constituency 

and a man got up griping about the high taxes that he has to pay in the school unit. We asked him for his 

land number and it transpired that he farmed just outside the unit. He did not even belong in the unit. He 

thought he did, because he was paying higher taxes. He thought he lived in our unit, but he lived in the 

Regina Unit, Mr. Speaker, and I am going to tell you something about the Regina Unit. 

 

The Regina Rural Superintendency has an assessment of about $27 million and 102 school districts. The 

average assessment per district is $264,706. Now, Milestone Unit, up to 1950, had an assessment of 

nearly $18 million – mark you, $18 million, that is exactly $9 million less than the Regina 

superintendency; and it had 87 districts, 15 districts less. The average assessment of the Milestone 

district was $206,896 compared to $264,706 in Regina. Now, during the four years compared, Milestone 

Unit spent 2.4 times as much as Regina Rural on buildings, repairs and equipment, more than twice as 

much on libraries, and teachers‘ salaries increased 45.6 per cent in Milestone Unit compared with 17.6 

in Regina Rural. At the same time the Regina Rural mill rate went up 31 per cent and Milestone 25 per 

cent. Then, in 1950, the Milestone mill rate dropped down to 20 per cent, and Milestone has built up a 

substantial surplus. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Regina is not an organized unit. 

 

Mr. Erb: — No, it is not an organized unit. 2.4 times as much in buildings and repairs, Mr. Speaker, 

and equipment, more than twice as much on libraries, teachers‘ salaries increased almost three times as 

much, or I should say about three times the percentage, 45 per cent compared to their 17 per cent, and at 

the same time the Regina unorganized district went up to a 31 mill rate and ours only to 25, and ours 

dropped back, in 1950, to 20. 

 

That should squelch for all time, Mr. Speaker, the argument that the larger unit increases taxes. As a 

matter of fact, it does the opposite. It is demonstrated that here we have a unit and a non-unit on the 

Regina Plains, the same type of land and about the same type of assessment, and this is the record. Now, 

either the Regina Rural District is building up 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

43 

 

a huge surplus (we are building up one, too), or else their system is very inefficient. That is the only 

conclusion I can come to. And, that is the story, Mr. Speaker, of the Milestone Unit. In June of this year, 

1951, its trial period will be up, and I am quite confident that the Milestone Unit is going to be sustained 

by an overwhelming majority approval by the ratepayers of Milestone Unit. 

 

I want to congratulate all those who had a part in the great progress of this fine school unit. I am sure 

that they feel proud and happy in the knowledge that by their efforts Gray‘s ―Elegy in a Country 

Churchyard‖ does not apply, when Gray says: 

 

―Full many a gem of purest ray serene 

The dark, unfathomed caves of ocean bear, 

Full many a flower is born to blush unseen 

And waste its sweetness on the desert air.‖ 

 

That used to happen, Mr. Speaker. It used to happen in Saskatchewan, not so very long ago; and it 

would happen right now, Mr. Speaker, if it were not for the large unit in those areas which have suffered 

failure after failure. With the shortage of teachers, the law of supply and demand would rule out the 

equal education opportunities that the children of Saskatchewan are receiving today. I am sure, Mr. 

Speaker, that there are other units in Saskatchewan which have had an equally good record as Milestone, 

and I reiterate what I said in a preceding speech, that the day is not far distant when all education is 

going to be brought under the administration of the larger unit. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we members of the Legislature are here, gathered together in this Assembly, of 

different race and creed and so on, but we are all good Canadians, I am sure we are all good Canadians. 

But that does not matter so much. What does matter is that we, as a legislative body become of a kindred 

spirit – of a kindred spirit in the approach toward solving the hunger and the poverty and the inequalities 

that are rampant today. We may not have the grimmest manifestations of hunger and need in this 

province that we find elsewhere in the world, but we have many problems that are akin to these, and 

what we do conscientiously toward relieving those problems here will be a beaconlight to others that 

democracy can and will achieve the hopes and aspirations of all people. 

 

The 1951 budget, I believe, goes a long way to meeting the social and economic problems of our 

Province. As our resources increase the people of Saskatchewan under a C.C.F. administration can look 

forward with confidence and hope that the services they receive now will be further enhanced and 

enlarged. No government or individual can remain static, Mr. Speaker, they either go forward or back. I 

am often reminded, thinking on these things, of the great inspirational thought I learned at school and 

later taught; and I think this is something that the great poet had in mind about moving on, building 

bigger and better, when he said: 

 

―Build thee more stately mansions, oh my soul, as the swift seasons roll ‘neath thy low-vaulted 

pass. Let each new dome more noble than the last shut thee from heaven till thou at length art 

free, leaving thine out-grown shell by life‘s unresting sea.‖ 

 

I shall, Mr. Speaker, as has been probably already gathered, support the motion. 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

44 

 

Mr. B. L. Korchinski (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, I am very thankful that I was given an opportunity 

to say a few words in regard to the budget that was presented to us by the Provincial Treasurer. I am 

sorry to see that the Government members have taken so much of our time this afternoon and tonight 

that it will be almost impossible to cover all the ground that they covered; but I will try to be as brief as 

possible and cover whatever I intended to say. 

 

It is customary, as I notice, to congratulate all the speakers who have taken part in this debate, and I 

think that I shall do likewise. I would like to extend my congratulations to all those who have taken part 

in this debate. I think they have all said what they considered was best, and I think that we have heard 

from both sides some very good ideas. Since this budget debate is nearing its end, I think that pretty well 

everything has been said that could be said – quite often it is just a matter of repeating something that 

someone else has said. I thought, however, it would not be fair to the people whom I represent if I did 

not arise in this House and present their requirements in that constituency. 

 

Before I deal with the constituency of Redberry, I would like to deal with some of the things that were 

said, this afternoon, especially by the hon. member from Torch River. The others will come under my 

general talk, so I will not deal separately with them. This particular speaker was mentioning something 

about the larger rural municipalities, and I was curious to hear about that. I thought the idea of larger 

rural municipalities was not to be introduced and I hear, now, that they are starting to introduce it in his 

constituency. I don‘t agree with that idea at all. I think it was debated by the rural municipalities in quite 

a few places, and I think that they were against it. 

 

Then, the hon. member tried to reply to some of the things that were said by the hon. member from 

Maple Creek in connection with natural resources, and I think that confused the issue more than ever. 

We so far have failed to get any explanation or any proper reply to some of the questions asked by hon. 

member from Maple Creek and the people of Saskatchewan are still waiting for an answer. I know that 

the Minister himself got up, that evening, and he seemed to be quite excited and flustered about some of 

the things that were said. Instead of clarifying the situation, however, he engaged in a very peculiar 

tactic. The only thing I can say about that speech is that it had very little in common with his 

Department and had very little explanation. He tried to prove to us that we were voting against the 

budget and we were voting against the hospitals. He said that if I voted against the budget I voted 

against the hospitalization and it was very amusing to me. That was a kind of twisting speech. I think of 

that speech as like a piece of rope: it was twisted around and around; you don‘t know where it lands or 

where it goes, but it is going. I am not satisfied that there was an answer or an explanation in it to what 

the hon. member for Maple Creek had asked. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — On a point of privilege. The speech wasn‘t ―twisting‖, but the members of 

the Opposition were just going in circles. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — The member from Torch River also said something about the Lord‘s Day Act, and 

it sounded, from him, as if the Government, 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

45 

 

or the C.C.F. Party were the ones to take credit for it. I notice that this Act as in force in 1940. It was 

called ―An Act to provide for One Day‘s Rest in Seven, for Certain Employees‖; but as usual, they tried 

to take credit for something they had not done. To him, I think it sounded as if it was something new, 

but I think this is a very old Act, . . . 

 

Mr. Denike: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. I don‘t think the hon. member for Redberry has 

the matter straight. I was referring to The Hours of Work Act which provided for one day‘s rest in 

seven; he is referring to the Lord‘s Day Act, which is something else, entirely. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Mr. Speaker, The Hours of Work Act does not provide for one day‘s rest out of 

seven. It is a special act, and he was talking about One Day‘s Rest out of Seven. Anyway, the other 

speakers from the Government side since the time the budget debate started, will be treated as I go along 

with this talk. I have made sort of an outline and so you may have an idea of what is coming, I have it 

under six headings: (1) constituency; (2) snow plows; (3) Crown Corporations; (4) budget; (5) Socialists 

and C.C.F. tactics . . . 

 

Govt. Member: — What about Korea? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — The last one is the most interesting, and I left it purposely because there may be 

some fireworks when I get to that one. I am starting with the simple matters. I know that it is very 

important . . . I am going to get to my friend from Hanley (Mr. Walker) yet, so don‘t get so excited. 

 

I heard during this debate one of the members, I think it was the hon. member from Bengough (Mr. 

Brown) say that if we got up here in this House and said anything, or put in any requests for our 

constituents, that we were selfish men. I would like to know why we were elected, if it wasn‘t for that 

purpose. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I have often wondered that, too. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I am going to get to the Social Welfare Department in my speech, too, so hold 

yourself together, I think that it is quite natural that we should present the requests of our people. 

 

Now, the constituency of Redberry had some requests, last year, and I have to come down here and 

repeat them. We need power; we need electrification. There is a place called Krydor in that seat. Krydor 

is a very prosperous village; it is now 40 miles from power at Hafford and about 10 miles from power at 

Blaine Lake. It is very essential that these people should be given that connection. It would not only help 

them, but it would also complete the loop that would connect the Saskatoon line with the Battleford line. 

On the way from Hafford to Krydor or from Krydor to Blaine Lake, the district is quite thickly 

populated, and I am sure that the rural electrification programme would be appreciated in that area. 

 

Then we have Alticane and Keatley and Mayfair, Redfield, Whitkow and Mullingar that require 

electrification. These places are in the north of the constituency. They are in a mixed-farming area, the 

farms are quite 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

46 

 

productive, in fact, some of the soil around Keatley, north of Speers, is very productive. It is supposed to 

be some of the best soil in Saskatchewan. Now these people are anxiously waiting for power 

connections. Besides these villages and hamlets, we have many farmers who are very anxious to have 

rural electrification, so that I would be very grateful if the Minister of Public Works would see fit to 

advise the Power Corporation to go into that particular area. 

 

Besides the power, we need roads. Last year I explained to you, Mr. Speaker, how the people along 

Highway No. 40 have no way of getting to the Highway No. 5, unless they go to Prince Albert or North 

Battleford. Now the centre of the seat is about 72 miles from Saskatoon, and when I was talking about 

the roads, I don‘t think that I am talking selfishly about the people from Redberry; this also includes the 

people from Shellbrook seat and those from Meadow Lake seat, and it also, in a way, takes in 

Saskatoon. I think that I should get strong support for this project from the Saskatoon members because 

it is for the good of the city of Saskatoon that they should have these roads leading to Saskatoon. 

 

This No. 40 Highway runs from North Battleford to Prince Albert. We have a road that runs east and 

west, but we lack roads running south and north. Very many of our people go to Saskatoon to do their 

business. They like to go there – they like the city, and they like to go there because it is a larger city 

than Prince Albert or North Battleford. They do a lot business in Prince Albert and a lot in North 

Battleford, but there are certain establishments in Saskatoon that you cannot find in North Battleford, 

and so there are very many of our people who go to Saskatoon. To get to Saskatoon from, say, Krydor 

during winter months you have to go to North Battleford. In summer, it is 65 miles to Saskatoon from 

Krydor, but in winter it is 160. That means that they have to go an extra 95 miles to get to Saskatoon, or 

180 miles round trip, extra, and I don‘t think that is fair, because these people pay licence fees, they pay 

gasoline tax, they are subject to all levies of this Government, and I think they should be given this 

consideration. 

 

Hafford is 72 miles from Saskatoon in summer; but to get there in winter, you have to make 145 miles. 

Speers is 80 miles by summer roads; in winter, 135 miles. If there was a road built from No. 40 to No. 5 

– only one road is necessary, a matter of some 20 miles – then all these people would have that 

advantage of visiting Saskatoon more often and of saving a lot of their money. 

 

Then there is the problem of the highway from No. 40 to No. 12. Blaine Lake is 65 miles away from 

Saskatoon – if they can cross the river by the ferry and take a short-cut, as they do in summer. But if 

they want to go to Saskatoon in winter, they have to make 170 miles. Now that is 105 miles more, and 

they do that. I quite often see people going through Hafford down to Battleford and on to Saskatoon. 

Now I don‘t think it is just or right that these people should be required to go that far to get to 

Saskatoon. If this particular road was built to connect No. 40 with No. 12, it would serve not only people 

from Blaine Lake, but it would also include the largest part of the Shellbrook seat. It would take in 

Marcelin, Leask, Kilwinning, Parkside, and even Shellbrook itself. It would also serve all the people and 

all the villages along Highway No. 55, and I am really surprised that this road has not been built yet. I 

may say that this road was promised. It was understood before the election that there 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

47 

 

was going to be a road there. There was even a bulldozer from some road machinery working along this 

particular place, but when the election was over, everything stopped, and then . . . 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. gentleman must know that that work was completed. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — It is correct, and I know it, that there was pressure from the people in Blaine Lake, 

and especially from, I think, - at least that is the way the talk went around town there – the campaign 

manager of the Government candidate there. He was really flabbergasted with these tactics, and finally, 

they did scratch up this road a little bit. But, in fact, people in Blaine Lake told me that they ruined the 

road, and I‘ll tell you how: I am not trying to run the Department down, but I‘ll just tell you what 

happened. This road runs through about five miles of alkali flats and there was a road there covered with 

gravel on these alkali flats. Now then this road was built up and cut up and alkali salt was brought to the 

surface, and then it rained, and you couldn‘t pass over that road no matter how you tried. 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas: — There was no gravel left in 1948. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — There was gravel all the way to Petrofke ferry – I know because I travelled it quite 

often. There is no use talking to me about it, because I know; no use denying it or trying to say anything 

about it, because that is the way it was and that is the way it stands, and people are dissatisfied. There 

should be a road built up there; there should be gravel and they should have a road that they can use 

summer or winter, and it would serve many people, not only Blaine Lake people, but all these other 

people that I have mentioned. Now that is a matter of about 40 miles so far. 

 

Then there is the matter of roads leading from No. 40 north to No. 55. There was a road started from No. 

40 north, just before the election. It was supposed to be a provincial highway, as far as we understood, 

and it was to go from between Speers and Hafford north through Keatley, Alticane, Mayfair, and then, I 

believe to Mullingar and on to 55. Well, it stopped near Mayfair. It stopped there in 1948 and it is still 

there. That road is in bad shape now because it was not gravelled, and I think it should have been 

gravelled because it was a pretty good road. It was built up high, but in these wet days and years, heavy 

trucks went over that road and cut it up and it is really too bad that that road has not been covered with 

gravel. We hoped that that road was going to be continued, and finished, because the people in that part 

of the constituency need this road very badly. The people of Mullingar and Mayfair and further north are 

in great need of that road. There are very many who think that road is in the wrong place, but it can‘t be 

helped now; we hope that road will be completed. 

 

Besides these three particular projects, we need roads north of Hafford into what is known as the Oscar 

Lake district. They are very poor roads there, and I think that the Department should help with the 

municipality with extra grants. You have to go 26 miles to get to Oscar Lake. Now you should try this 

road and you would see what I mean; there is very little there in the way of roads. Then there is another 

area like that north of Krydor, in what is known as the Moon Hills. When you go into Moon Hills, 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

48 

 

you usually see the tail light of your own car, when you start going around those hills – there is very 

little in the way of roads there. Then there is quite a productive area around the Redberry Lake on the 

east side of us – it is called the Great Deer area. Now people in Great Deer area are 22 miles from town, 

either from Borden or from Krydor or from Blaine Lake, or from Hafford. It is a place that is very far 

away from everywhere and they need roads very badly. I made it a point to ask you for those things 

because those are the things that are needed. They are needed by those people there, and they hope that 

those roads and the power will be given to them. 

 

If anyone wishes to secure everlasting gratitude of northern farmers, let him look to the snow plows of 

that area, because today the problem of snow removal on the country roads is problem No. 1 in there. 

Now, I don‘t think that this Government has realized what has happened in the last six or seven years. 

They think that, perhaps, I am kidding when I say they are still in the horse-and-buggy days as far as 

their administration in our rural area is concerned, but it is just a plain fact. There is a tremendous 

change that has taken place in the country out there, but I don‘t think that the Government realizes what 

has happened. Before the war, that country was based on the horse-and-buggy economy. Fieldwork was 

done by horses; transportation was carried on by horses. During the war times became better, machinery 

was improved and money was saved, and so, as soon as equipment was available, most of the farmers 

had secured power equipment for their farms. They sold horses and they bought tractors; they bought 

trucks, and they bought cars. 

 

That is what happened in that country in these post-war years, and I think it is generally the case in most 

of our province here that farming has changed radically in the last seven years, but the Government has 

not kept pace with this change. What happens now? The farmer now expects to go to town using his car, 

and he wants to do it summer and winter; but there are the roads impassable, so what do the farmers do? 

Well they band together to help themselves. You see, my idea of the purpose of a government is to help 

people when they can‘t help themselves, not to get into making bricks or shoes – then abandon the idea 

of making shoes – I am going to talk about that some more and it is not going to be very funny either. I 

don‘t think that government should get into those businesses that people had established here before; I 

think it is nonsense. They have enough to do if they can look after the needs of the people who are 

actually within their sphere of government. I think that these other things are outside the government. 

Now then, here is an item that you may, perhaps, be interested to hear. This is a quotation from the 

―Prince Albert Herald‖ newspaper, and it says as follows: 

 

―Snow-Plow Clubs keep Roads Open‖ 

 

Not the C.C.F. Government – but the snow plow clubs keep roads open . . . 

 

―Snowplow Clubs are providing an answer to the north Saskatchewan perennial problem of 

blocked roads and meagre transportation. Clubs are formed, plows bought with money donated 

by members. The majority of the snowplows in operation in this region were made by J. R. 

Leech and Son Limited in 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

49 

 

Prince Albert. In the past three years Leech Tractor has sold over a thousand snowplows in the 

province.‖ 

 

Now that is not a local problem. That is not a Speers problem, or a Hafford problem – it is a provincial 

problem. If Leech sells a thousand snowplows in Saskatchewan, well then there are other manufacturers 

who sell perhaps hundreds or thousands of snowplows. How do these clubs form? I am a member of one 

of those clubs. You see we are a mile from the provincial highway. Speers, where I live, is a mile from 

No. 40 highway, and there is a mile there that blocks up, and in the years past, we had to get all the men 

from the town, all the school children and all the women available, take our shovels and dig our way 

through. Well, then, one of the garages got wise and the owner said he was going to make a snowplow, 

and he made a contraption out of heavy beams of iron and he used that thing to push the snow apart, but 

it didn‘t work very well. Then we got together and we bought two snowplows from Macleods, and today 

we have two snowplow clubs in Speers – one north of Speers, in the Alticane area, and there is one right 

here in town, and we contribute every year, and those of us in town have a mile. Now the boys, this year, 

got wise to the whole thing – I don‘t know how they are making out after this storm, but they were very 

successful up to before I left. They ridged up snow on both sides far out in the fields with this push 

snowplow and there was no snow on the road when I left, although there had been several blizzards up 

to then. 

 

This other snowplow, in the north, keeps miles and miles of road open. It is a rotary, and our people 

come to town – we have a curling club there and they were very anxious to come and curl. They were 

very anxious to come and do business in town, and they want to come by car because very few of them 

have horses left, and that is the problem. They don‘t want to move to town, though some of them did; 

but the majority of them have wonderful homes. One farmer has a grain elevator in his yard – a big grain 

elevator like those you see in the small villages, and how is he going to move to town? He can‘t leave 

that set-up; his whole yard looks like one of the small hamlets. He wants to stay there; he wants to raise 

stock, and his problem, today, is to keep that road from his place to Speers (which is 12 miles) open 

during 12 months of the year. Now there are six months of the year it is closed, unless he does 

something about it, so he joined this club. How much does it cost him? Well, he put in $200. Most of the 

members put in either $100 or $200 to buy the plow, which cost something like $1,100, and then they 

pay for the operation of the plow. It costs quite a bit. That is just one instance. There is a club at Hafford, 

and I think that it is quite true to say that in almost every hamlet, every village, and in areas far away, 

there are plows. I think the hon. Speaker will bear me out on this; I know there are several clubs in his 

own constituency of Touchwood. I know of one particular road from Balcarres to Ituna that is used very 

much, and there are several plows there operating. 

 

Now, since the people are helping themselves, perhaps the Government should not step in, because they 

are doing a fairly good job; but there is something in this particular set-up that is not satisfactory, and I 

would like to explain this particular thing. There are people – I don‘t know if they are socialists or if 

they are free enterprisers or who they are; but there are people who live along the road who will not join 

the club and who will not contribute, and yet they use the road. 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

50 

 

What are you going to do with them? Now I know, in fact, that there are people on one particular road 

who, as soon as the road is opened, are out on the road with their cars, and they won‘t contribute. 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas: — They are free enterprisers . . . 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Since you mention it, I have reasons to believe that they are just the opposite. They 

are the fellows who have their hands out and say, ―gimme, gimme, gimme!‖ It is the fellows who are in 

the club that are the free enterprisers. There should be help coming to these projects. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — Who‘s asking for the ‗gimme‘? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I am asking for the ‗gimme‘; I am proud of it. I am talking for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Now, I wish the people of Saskatchewan – those that go and dig the roads open with their 

shovels – had heard you fellows laugh about them. I wish they had heard it. I don‘t think there would be 

any use of showing yourselves before them, because this is a problem – when you get cold, when you 

get frozen, when you are digging snow off the road, it really hurts, and no talk in the press of the C.C.F. 

and their socialist ideas, of helping a man who is really cold and he is trying to get to town. 

 

My reasons for asking for this help are these: These people need this help. There are a thousand plows 

sold by Leech – not one, not ten, but a thousand. It concerns all the people in general, not a few people; 

that is the second reason why they should be helped – it includes all the people. It takes in, also, those 

who use the roads when the snowplows open them, those who use the roads who won‘t pay in to the 

club and won‘t contribute to keep the road open, and there is no way that the club can stop them from 

using the roads. And another reason, and perhaps the most important reason is – this will help to keep 

the farmer on the land. Keep the road open for them, and there are many farmers who will stay on the 

land. 

 

The members and the Ministers from the other side come in with this idea that the Opposition is never 

suggesting anything – ―never telling us what to do; they just get up and criticize us.‖ Well, I am giving 

you a suggestion and I am telling you that this is a suggestion and it is a complete one, and I want you to 

do something about it, or there is going to be somebody who will do something about it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Would the hon. member permit a question; I am very interested in this. Does he 

mean that he wants the Government to assist in keeping all the roads in the country open? – all the side 

roads so that everybody can get to the various towns, and if so, has he worked out any idea at all of the 

cost of it? 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas: — He couldn‘t work it out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Has he worked out any idea at all of the cost of this? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I supposed the Minister was going to . . . He looks very hurt – as you know that is 

his technique. He looks so hurt when I say something about help. Now you don‘t have to be so touchy 

about it. It sure would cost a lot of money. I haven‘t worked out how much it would cost. I haven‘t the 

slightest idea what it would cost. 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

51 

 

It would be up to the Provincial Treasurer to work that out. He has a Planning Board; he has a budget 

bureau; he has all kinds of planners. I don‘t know what it would cost, but people in Saskatchewan, 

today, are solving the problem in spite of the Government. In spite of the Government they are solving 

this with 1,000 plows sold by the Leech Company. They didn‘t get a cent from you – I don‘t think they 

did, so I don‘t know what it would cost, but I think that they can pay for it; and the suggestion is this: Do 

something about it! (Interruption) . . . I‘ll tell you. When we get over there, which is not going to be very 

long, we are going to solve the problem, but it is not up to me to tell you how to solve it. It is up to you 

to find out yourself how to solve it. I read an extract from that wonderful man Winston Churchill, and 

Socialists over there were always attacking him like you fellows are attacking us, saying that we are 

criticizing, doing this and that, but not telling you what to do. Churchill said, ―His Majesty‘s Loyal 

Opposition is not to tell the Government what to do‖. Now, he should know. We are to criticize you and 

you should find your way out of it; It is up to you to find an answer. Now that comes from an authority – 

from the man who has been a member of the British parliament from before many of us were born. I 

want to mention again – do something about these thousands and thousands of snowplows, because if 

you don‘t it is not going to be very funny – I don‘t think it is going to be very funny. 

 

Now then we will go on to the Crown Corporations. It made the members opposite very happy; they 

have seized upon the statements ―throw them out the window‖ and ―caboodle‖. They like these words so 

they are very happy that they have got them. You say you never get anything from this side – well, you 

got these words. I am going to give you some more new words to use. You have nothing else to use so 

you are happy with ―caboodle‖ and ―window‖ and stuff like that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — May I ask the hon. member a question. Since he has evidenced to the House that 

he is so very very efficient with a shovel, why doesn‘t he keep the roads of the province clear of snow? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Is that ―Just Mary‖ or ―Kindergarten of the Air‖? It is a peculiar question for the 

Minister of Social Welfare to ask. 

 

Anyway, with regard to the Crown Corporations – this is in all seriousness. I am not laying here the 

policy of the Liberal Party. I am giving a personal opinion, but personal opinions make up public 

opinion, and about these Crown Corporations, you have mixed them all up, I think they should have 

been classified. I think they should have been classified as utilities, as manufacturing establishments, 

and as merchandising businesses, and I think they should have been kept under different names instead 

of calling them all Crown Corporations. I don‘t think they all should have been called Crown 

Corporations, but that is beside the point. I don‘t believe that the Government should go into the 

business of merchandising, nor manufacturing, unless it is absolutely necessary. 

 

Now, about these corporations, you asked me what I would do about, say, the brick plant in Estevan. 

Well, it cannot be ―thrown out 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

52 

 

the window‖; that is just an expression. I think what the hon. member for the Battlefords (Mr. Maher) 

meant was that the Government should dispose of it, and I think that is what should be done – it should 

not be kept in the hands of the Government. Now should you dispose of it? Well, I would say, give it to 

the workers. If it is making money, (which you claim it is), if it is making profits, try to recover the 

money that was invested by the province. Let every employee and the managers, or whoever is there, 

pay in say $10 a month or $10 a year, or $1 a year, whatever they are making and let them keep some of 

the profits, but I think that should be wound up that way. 

 

Don‘t try to frighten the people of Estevan that they are going to lose their plant if the Liberals get into 

power. I think that is nonsense. Don‘t try to tell the people around the Sodium Sulphate plant that they 

are going to lose that, that somebody is going to jack it up and move it somewhere. Impossible! It is 

going to stay there. Our money is invested in there, and we are interested in that money. Don‘t you fool 

yourself. We want to see that that money returns to the province. We want to see that that money is back 

where it belongs, and if people who send wires are anxious that that plant operate there – and I think 

they are, I don‘t see why they shouldn‘t be – they will get behind the plant, they will make money and 

they will own the plant – right there, and they will see that that plant is not only producing what it is 

producing today, but it will improve very much because they will feel that they own it, they will feel that 

they have an interest in it and they will work that much harder in it. And wouldn‘t they be glad if they 

could feel that they had a share in that particular plant? The workers who are there now – I don‘t know 

how many work there; but I don‘t think that is beyond possibility that we should give that plant to them. 

I suppose there could be some arrangement made that we could recover the money gradually because 

you say the plant is going to be making big profits. I am not going to be jealous it they own that plant. I 

am not going to say that we should take it away from them, and I think that that is the way that this 

manufacturing plant should be disposed of. I will tell you why. I don‘t believe in the Crown 

Corporations, and I will tell you why I don‘t believe in them – because of the people of Saskatchewan, 

through their lack of representatives, cannot keep track of what is going on in those Crown Corporations 

or those manufacturing establishments. We come here and we get a card that they are going to have a 

Crown Corporations committee meeting. Now, what can you examine in these few hours? 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas: — You have a whole year ahead of you. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — All you get is what is behind the story, what is the background. If I had my way I 

would say that if we had to have the Crown Corporations (which I don‘t think we do) I think the 

Government should provide enough money for the Opposition to hire a counsel who would be 

authorized to go through the business of those Crown Corporations; to check the bills, to check 

everything that is going on there, so that we would know what is going on. And I think that the 

Committee sittings should be held where the plants are located, and we should be able to call witnesses, 

if necessary, to see what is going on. I think that there should be a full report given – this balance sheet 

that we are getting is just a waste of time. 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

53 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, may I just clarify a point here? The hon. member is not casting any 

aspersions on the auditor, I trust. The auditor does represent the members of the Opposition, just as such 

as he represents the members of the Government, and you do have a full-fledged chartered accountant 

. . . I think the hon. gentleman should correct that insinuation. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — That was, Mr. Speaker, uncalled for. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — But I don‘t mind it. I didn‘t say anything about the auditors. I didn‘t mention them. 

I say I would like to hire myself an auditor to go through the Timber Board, and to see what is at the end 

of it. I would like to do that. If you like your auditor, fine and good. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Well, he is yours as much as he is mine. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I think that, to get out of all this – we didn‘t have to do all this, because it isn‘t in 

my opinion the business of the Government to get into that kind of a situation where you have to do all 

this checking – and, by the way . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — What are you being paid for? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I think that there is a sort of a . . . 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — You are getting paid for it, too. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I think that they are trying to wear us out. You see, you got up here at 10:30; this 

morning I was here at 10 o‘clock. I went to bed at half past eleven last night. There is hardly any chance 

to do anything – you have to be here all the time. I would suggest that the Crown Corporations buy us 

some beds so we can sleep here. It is really getting to be very bad. I would like to get back home as soon 

as possible because every day that I am here it costs me a certain amount of money; but yet with all 

these Crown Corporations, we at least have to go through the motions of checking them, and it takes all 

of our time – and that is one of my personal complaints, . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Can‘t you take it? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Oh, I can take it. I can stick it out, even if it is pretty tough. I think I will keep up 

with you, you don‘t have to worry about that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — It won‘t be long now. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Anyway, the Crown Corporations are a mess the Government got into and it is 

going to be quite a job to get out of it. I can see that. 

 

Now then, the Budget. You know, Mr. Speaker, I should have congratulated the Provincial Treasurer on 

the budget. I know that everyone has been doing that. I don‘t know what to congratulate him on. If I was 

going to congratulate him on his reading of the speech, well I would say that he 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

54 

 

did it very well, very fluently. He expressed the proper words, especially those that had any propaganda 

value. He put in a few digs to hurt us, but as far as telling us what this is all about, there was nothing 

about it. There was just a political speech in here, and it ends with $58 million. You will have to excuse 

me if we can‘t offer very much constructive criticism to this budget because there is nothing in this 

speech to signify what is going to be done with this $58 million. That is coming, I think, on the 

estimates, and I think you will hear all about it then. So I think that we are expected to criticize his 

speech – well, I read it over and over and over again. That is no fooling – I did, and here is what I find: I 

find contradictions, political digs and a lot of padding with words to fill up pages, and I came across 

something that I am going to talk about in a moment. I want to prove from the budget itself what I mean 

by contradictions. I will have to quote and show that the thing is right in there. ―Strengthening Demand 

for Food‖ – now just listen to this and carefully weigh it: 

 

―In contrast to the grain situation, cash income from the marketing of livestock increased in 1950 

despite an over-all decline in volume. The strong demand for beef from the United States has 

been the dynamic factor which has reacted upon the whole price structure in the animal products 

market. It is expected that current high price levels will be more than maintained‖ (now notice 

that – ‗will be more than maintained‘) ―in the year ahead and farmers may be expected to 

increase production in these lines. But as most of the hon. members will be aware, the output of 

beef cattle or even hogs cannot be increased or decreased at will.‖ (I think that‘s wrong, you 

have to have will to raise cattle and hogs – he says ‗it can‘t be done at will‘ – I think it could. 

That is just a side issue, that is not the question I am getting at.) 

 

Now listen to this – I want you to listen, because he made a mistake in here: 

 

―The necessary expansion in production can only be achieved when a strong basic industry with 

stable markets and adequate prices has been solidly established.‖ 

 

―The same problem of an unstable . . .‖ 

 

That is a continuation – ―unstable‖ – now here it is – ―levels will be more than maintained‖, and here it 

has become unstable already; in a few lines, the same problem of unstable markets. He was talking 

about stable markets – ―the levels will be maintained‖; and here it is becoming ―unstable‖: 

 

―. . . market situation raising the continual threat of unmarketable surpluses was raised last spring 

in regard to a variety of other farm products.‖ 

 

Then there is another paragraph, just continuing that: 

 

―The detailed comparative figures on volume and value of production, with your permission, Mr. 

Speaker, are again being tabled as an appendix.‖ 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

55 

 

And there is the table here – and the value of that table, I think, is zero, absolutely zero, because he has 

got the price of crops and other products for 1949 and 1950, and then later o he says that all the crop has 

not been marketed. Well then, the figures are not complete. Then why talk about them? He says, in that 

same paragraph: 

 

―The preliminary estimate of cash income of Saskatchewan farmers for 1950 is now placed at 

$405 million, a drop of about 27 per cent below the previous year.‖ 

 

And, at the end of that paragraph it says: 

 

―However, a very rough estimate of the gross value of our total agricultural output in the 

1950-51 crop year, which takes into account the additional income yet to be received, 

approximates $690 million, possibly an all-time high.‖ 

 

Notice first, there is a drop, and then possibly an all-time high. I say that is a contradiction. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, might I just ask the hon. gentleman to read what was in between so 

that . . . I wonder whether he read it at all or not. It is so silly. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Well I think that actually it is silly. There was quite a bit of propaganda in this 

budget speech – on page 17: 

 

―This year‘s budget, then, reflects the ‗humanity first‘ policies undertaken during our past six 

years in office.‖ 

 

―Humanity first‖ – that is just one man‘s opinion, or maybe the opinion of the C.C.F. I don‘t think that 

this budget reflects any such thing as humanity first. That is just a matter of propaganda. Then he says, 

in another place, in the same paragraph: 

 

―For it is this Government‘s announced intention, having made tremendous strides . . .‖ 

 

Who told you that you have made tremendous strides? That is just talk – tremendous strides in 

propaganda, perhaps but not in what the people of Saskatchewan expect. They judge you by your 

actions, so don‘t tell them you have made tremendous strides. They have a good opportunity to observe, 

and they don‘t go by words, they go by deeds. And so that was actually another propaganda word 

inserted there just to confuse, because there was nothing else to say in this budget speech. There is 

something interesting coming now, however. He talks about three forms of enterprise. You see, last 

year, the members of the Government side got up and voted and said that they were socialists, in and 

out. They were behind the Regina Manifesto, but now we have the Provincial Treasurer getting up and 

admitting that there are three forms of enterprise in Saskatchewan: there is the public, co-operative and 

private enterprise. This, Mr. Speaker, is a socialist retreat, and I want to discuss this socialist retreat, 

because it may sound peculiar to you, but, nevertheless, it is a fact that we have a parallel to this kind of 

a tactic in the U.S.S.R. Now I know when I mention the 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

56 

 

U. S. S. R. the Government members either feel uncomfortable or they laugh about it; but I can‘t help it, 

because there are so many similarities. I can‘t help it, because you are socialists – you voted, you 

elected, you admitted, you confessed you are socialists, and those men behind the iron curtain are 

socialists also. Now then, there is right now in Saskatchewan, a socialist retreat – and why? Because, in 

1948, the socialists just about got kicked out. Saskatchewan people would not swallow this socialist 

idea, so the Government got in as you all know, by the skin of their teeth. There is no question about that 

– you can‘t contradict facts. So ―what are we going to do now?‖ they ask. ―We are going to back out. 

First, we were going to socialize the whole works; we were going to eradicate the capitalist system‖ – to 

eradicate anything means to turn everything with the roots upside down. It comes from the latin word 

―radix‖ and radix means root, and to eradicate capitalism! But the people of Saskatchewan said ‗no‘ – 

just a minute – hold your horses – we think that it is not right; and so what do we have now? We have 

the socialist retreat. Now, that is exactly what happened in the U. S. S. R. I want to read you a quotation 

here . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Did you buy another book? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Oh, I have lots of them here. This is from a book which is entitled ―The Verdict of 

Three Decades‖, and if anyone wants to know what happened and what is happening in the U. S. S. R. 

they should read that book. 

 

Quoting from this book: 

 

―In 1921 the Kremlin, in an effort to recover from the general and bitter discontent that had 

brought the regime close to downfall, turned its back for the moment – a long and extraordinarily 

revealing moment, on Communism. To give the country a chance at survival Lenin embarked on 

a strategic retreat. Later he admitted, ‗if we had not transformed our economic policy, we should 

not have lasted many months longer‘‖. 

 

And so what did they do? The new programme, Lenin explained, meant a transition to the restoration of 

capitalism in no small degree. Private trade and small productive enterprises were allowed again. The 

restrictions on individual craftsmen were lifted, and so on and so on; and this whole thing was called the 

―New Economic Policy‖ or ―N.E.P.‖ They retreated and they kept in retreat until Stalin took over. Now 

then, during the years when joining farming collectives was voluntary, less than two per cent of the 

present number became collectives, when it was voluntary. Now we have a parallel, here in 

Saskatchewan. We have collective farms promoted, and we have land socialized. I don‘t know what 

percentage of land is socialized now – that is the Crown land, but it is socialized. We have a very good 

parallel here. We have a ―NEP‖ in Saskatchewan at the present time, and the Minister in charge of the 

Treasury has admitted it. But let us not be misled by the tactics, because I believe that, if the C. C. F. 

Party had the chance, they would try to eradicate capitalism. They have retreated because the people of 

Saskatchewan turned them back. 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

57 

 

I think that should be enough about the budget. We are going to have quite a bit to say about the budget 

when we get to considering the estimates, because I think that is the only place where we can say 

anything about how this budget should be spent. I would say, Mr. Speaker, that I think the budget is too 

large for what we are getting for it. I am one of those who says it in a different way – but I am saying 

that it is too large for what we are getting; for value received, it is too large. 

 

Now then, this should take a little time. This is about Socialism. I wanted to deal with Socialism because 

I haven‘t heard any of the Government members on the other side explain Socialism, so I have to take it 

upon myself to explain it to them. It is not funny, because I don‘t think that the biggest percentage of 

you people on the other side understand what is meant by Socialism, and therefore I am going to talk 

about Socialism now. 

 

You see, it is important that we know what philosophy is underlining our Government, and on what 

basis and what foundation our Government is constituted. Now our Saskatchewan Government is built 

on Socialism, and we have to understand that, because, whatever they do – no matter how it looks or 

what they say – at the foundation of the thing there is still Socialism, and therefore, we want to discuss 

Socialism. 

 

Now there has been very little said about it. I know that the hon. member from Swift Current (Mr. 

Gibbs) – and I admire him for the wonderful nature he possesses; I know he called me names, but I 

won‘t call him names; I think that he is a Lancashire man, and he said that he was a socialist. Well, he 

can say that, but I don‘t believe he is a socialist. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — Yes, I am. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Well, that is fine. I didn‘t hear everything that he had to say, I had to go out for a 

while; but I enjoyed his speech, and we are going to be very sorry, after next election, to lose him. 

 

Now then, we have, in Saskatchewan, a socialist government. They have said that they are socialists; 

they say that they stand behind the Regina Manifesto; they voted for it last year; and therefore, we have 

socialists here – there is no question about it. If I was going to count the numbers – I don‘t want to 

embarrass them, but if I was going to start counting them, I could tell you who are socialists, in my 

opinion. It may not be the correct opinion, because it is very difficult to judge every person; but you can 

judge people from what they say, from what they think, and from what they do, and from what a lot of 

people say about them. If you studied characters in Shakespeare, you ask your students to watch what 

the characters say, what they think, what other characters say about them, and what they do. Now then, I 

have been here for three sessions and I have watched the Government side – the members individually, 

and the Ministers – and I have formed an opinion about them, and I have formed an opinion as to who 

are socialists and who are not. There is no question that there are enough non-socialists there, and if they 

were sincere, and sane, they should cross here to this side, and it would not be necessary to hold an 

election to drive them out. I know, for a certainty, that there are enough members on the other side that 

are not socialists and that if they did not follow this idea of the C.C. F. this Government would be upset 

without any trouble. Well anyway I will spare them the embarrassment of naming them, but I would say 

that with 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

58 

 

the exception of one or two Minister, I consider that most of the Ministers are socialists, and I would say 

that, with the exception of one or two private members on the Government side, all the private members 

are non-socialists. That is my judgement. They can call themselves socialists, they can call themselves 

anything; but by their actions, by what they have said, and what they are doing today, I can say that they 

are not socialists. For example, the hon. member from Lumsden (Mr. Thair), I can say that he is not a 

socialist, and I can say that without any reservation. 

 

Mr. Thair: — Why pick on me? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Well, I just thought you are very pleasant looking and a sensible man, and I said, 

well he is not a socialist. And I don‘t think the hon. member from Morse (Mr. Gibson) is a socialist. 

 

Mr. Gibson: — I certainly am; have been for years. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — But where did that Socialism originate? It is as old as the hills, and as far as I could 

trace it (and I have read and studied as much as I could on this thing) it goes back to Asia, away back in 

history. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — How far are we going back tonight? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Well now, we are not going to go very far in explaining its origin, but it was 

connected with these large states in Asia. Socialism originally was what you could call ‗Statism‘; 

everything was held in common. Remember that Socialism is based on the same ideas as a swarm of 

bees; everybody works for the common wealth of each one separately – everybody working together. 

Now, that is the basic idea, you work together for every individual – everybody working for every 

individual – I think that is the theory. Well, anyway, it is an old story, but modern Socialism is a recent 

idea, and I don‘t think you can contradict me when I say that it was the result of the industrial 

revolution. It arose as a result of the injustices that existed in the factories, that existed in slums. There 

were people who thought that they could remedy the conditions that were brought about by industrial 

revolution and so they began to introduce Socialism; but if you study carefully you find that it most was 

perpetrated and organized by intellectuals. As a rule they were university professors who were cranks 

and who had an axe to grind; they wanted to take revenge on society for the economic condition which 

they were suffering, and as they began to revive this old idea of Statism and called it ―Modern Scientific 

Socialism‖. 

 

The fathers of modern Scientific Socialism are people like the Webbs, Marx, Engels and Lenin – those 

are the people who laid the foundation and then expanded Socialism. I may say, in passing that we 

should watch where this thing originated. As I said, very many professors of the universities had a hand 

in it, very many intellectuals, very many writers, and that is why our teachers in Saskatchewan should be 

well paid and paid much more, because to a very large extent the teachers of Saskatchewan brought 

Socialism upon Saskatchewan. That is why I say teachers should be paid so that they would not have 

any cause to take revenge on society for the treatment they are getting, because I think that the teachers 

are underpaid and I think that there has no improvement since the C. C. F. got in. I don‘t think there has 

been any improvement at all. I think that the teachers should 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

59 

 

be paid so that they would have no cause for studying Socialism. 

 

Now then, as I said, if you want to know Socialism, you have to read Marx and Engels and Stalin and 

Lenin and the Webbs, and so the other side of it, read Professors Jewkes – read these others, read both 

sides. I am not telling you to read Professor Hayek and Professor Jewkes, alone, I am telling you to read 

both sides and then see if you can come to some conclusion about the thing. I was interested in 

Socialism long ago, like very many of the people on the other side, and if there is anyone in this House 

who has any reason to be a socialist, it should be me, because, as far as I can see, I have nothing to lose 

by becoming a socialist. I have no big farms, I have no big factories, I possess very little personal 

property, and I should be the first one to join the socialist party, and to eradicate and upset everything 

upside down, and to get in with those big farmers that drive big shiny cars, and to get in with those 

capitalists that drew juicy salaries. I should be an anarchist, but my name tells me and my good 

judgment tells me that it is not right that it is wrong to be a socialist because that thing has been tried. 

Socialism has been tried and in no place in the world where it has been tried has it every succeeded; so 

why try it again if it has never succeeded any place. 

 

Did you read ―Ordeal by Planning‖ by Professor Jewkes of Manchester University? It is in the Library 

here and I didn‘t order it, but I read it, and this man explained he is an Englishman; I don‘t know if he is 

Lancashire man or whether he is Cockney or what he it; but he put a lot of good sense in that book. He 

says that the British people are going through an ordeal by planning. You see there was ‗ordeal by 

water‘, ‗ordeal by fire‘ in the old days; now they have ‗ordeal by planning‘ . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — We are having a real ordeal right now! 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Oh, yes, that is right; you are right. We are subjected to the ordeal of Socialism, 

that was explained to you. What is Socialism? You can image a utopia in the minds of university cranks, 

and out of the minds of these disgruntled intelligentsia who have an axe to grind and who want to get 

even with society for the economic condition in which they find themselves, and the gist of it is this: the 

state is the omnipotent, the almighty thing; we all work for the state, we all work for the common good; 

we all work for common weal. Those are the catchwords of Socialism. The State is the main thing – the 

individual is subordinate . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — You don‘t know what you are talking about. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Now that is where we differ and where our roads part. We on this side say that the 

State is secondary to the individual, that the individual is first on this earth, and then comes the family 

and then the State. We say that the individual is the important thing. We say that the family is important. 

We say that the State is organized by the individuals to serve themselves in places where they cannot 

help themselves. They say that the State is the important thing – we say that the individual is. That is the 

difference. The ideals of Socialism are golden, shiny and bright, but when they are applied they become 

a dismal failure. It has failed wherever it has been tried. It has failed in the U. S. S. R. We have no 

Socialism in the U. S. S. R. today, we have Stalinism; we have no Communism 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

60 

 

in Russia today, we have Stalinism, we have worship of Stalin. We have worship of a dictator who by 

terror, by secret police, holds this great nation in bondage. It was tried in Australia, and failed. It was 

tried in New Zealand and it failed; it is being tried in England and it has failed, and it was tried in 

Saskatchewan, and it failed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — What about the Scandinavian countries? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — In England I saw a report of a Gallup poll, the other day, and it said there that they 

asked the people what they thought of Socialism in England, who would vote for it again – and there 

was 38 per cent that would vote for Socialism. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — That was a Tory paper that said that. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — No, it was not a Tory paper, it was a capitalist paper. It was, as our Premier says, 

not a paper that I would call a progressive paper. It is ―Time Magazine‖ which he doesn‘t consider 

progressive. I am going to get to what is meant by ―Progressive‖ later on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Oh dear! 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — . . . It was tried in Italy in another shape, and it failed. And so Socialism in practice, 

is a dismal failure . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — How stupid can you get? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Don‘t try to insult me, because by trying to insult me, you insult yourself. So, what 

is Socialism? It is the road to serfdom: it is the god that failed. Now ―Road to Serfdom‖ is written by 

Professor Hayek – read it and you will find out that he proved it; and ―The Go that Failed‖ is a book in 

which six specialists confess why they have turned against Socialism – and they are all outstanding 

people; they are not common jokers, they are outstanding people. There is Koestler; and the most of 

them are great writers and they confess that this thing doesn‘t work, and the call this book ―The God that 

Failed‖. Read that book. 

 

So, as you notice, Mr. Speaker, there are various brands of Socialism, too. Now I wouldn‘t say that our 

S. C. F. Socialism in Saskatchewan is the same as U. S. S. R. Socialism in Russia. I would say that there 

are many similarities, but it isn‘t the same. I would not say that the Socialism in Saskatchewan is the 

same as they had in Germany – there are many similarities in both instances; the State is glorified, in 

both instances the State used propaganda to perpetuate itself in power, but I will not say that it is the 

same thing – it is a different brand – a different brand of Socialism. The unfortunate thing about it is that 

the socialists have throughout these years, tried continually to change, to radically invert the vocabulary 

used by people. They have continually tried to get on the bandwagon of some certain words, and so, 

today, we have to be very careful when we begin using words; we have to think, first – what does that 

word mean? Now, for example, Russia, today, talks about peace. What does Russia mean? Russia means 

war. Russia talks 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

61 

 

about the ―peoples‘ democracy.‖ What does Russia mean? It means Stalin dictatorship. And so we have 

these words with us today. Progressive – what does the word ―progressive‖ mean? It means reactionary. 

These words are continually being twisted around. I am not accusing the C. C. F. of Saskatchewan for 

doing so, but they have their own share and they have to take part of the blame themselves. They are in 

the soup. 

 

Our brand of Socialism in Saskatchewan is the utopian brand; they call it ―scientific‖ brand. How did it 

originate here, how did it get into Saskatchewan? Why did people vote for it? Well, it was based on 

promises of such men as Woodsworth and Coldwell and our present members of the Government and 

other minor party people who went from end to end in Saskatchewan when the times were hard, when 

people were hungry, and appealed to peoples‘ stomachs and said that they were going to cure all. So the 

people of Saskatchewan put their trust in these men and, as soon as they got in – I told you that before, 

but it doesn‘t hurt to repeat it again – they subjected us to a psychological warfare. They organized their 

propaganda very efficiently, and they began to say how wonderful they were and what they had 

accomplished, and that brings me down to the last part of my talk – the C. C. F. tactics. How they got it, 

and how they keep themselves in power. 

 

By the way, Mr. Speaker, I actually forgot one thing. Do you people find Professor Hayek‘s book very 

difficult to read? I might say it is very difficult and very dry, but the arguments are irrefutable. I read 

―The Road to Reaction‖ – I had the two books on the table, side by side, and I studied and compared 

―The Road to Reaction,‖ which is the answer to Professor Hayek by a socialist. Well I didn‘t find any 

answer, like I didn‘t find any answer to the speech that was made by my hon. seat-mate here. There is no 

answer to it yet, so ―The Road to Reaction‖ is not an answer to Professor Hayek‘s book. But if you find 

it too difficult to read, then there is a simpler book and it is called ―Animal Farm‖ by Orwell. Now this 

book can be understood and you don‘t have to strain yourself to read it. Now this ―Animal Farm‖, Mr. 

Speaker, it is a very interesting set-up. It happened in England – I think it was in Lancashire. There was 

a farm that was called the Manor Farm. The owner was Mr. Jones a rather shiftless character, who liked 

his liquor and I think he was a bachelor. He had quite a bunch of animals on this farm; there were hogs 

and pigs, horses, cows, chickens, turkeys and pigeons, sheep and mules and so on. There were all kinds 

of animals there, and there was one old hog there that continually talked about Animalism‖. He said that 

there was going to be a day when the animals were going to start a revolution – the great rebellion – and 

that they were going to kick Jones out and take over the farm. Now then, that really took place – strange 

as it may seem. Jones went away on a spree and got drunk, and the animals got together and got ready 

for him, and when he came back to the farm they kicked him out. They took over the farm and they 

established ‗Animalism‘ on this farm. They took down the notice, ―Manor Farm‖ and they put up 

―Animal Farm‖. Two hogs – Napoleon and Snowball – were the leaders. Now then, there was a horse 

called Boxer and another called Mabel and – well, in a way it is funny; but, like Aesop‘s Fables, 

sometimes to simple people you have to use simple stories to put anything across to them – and I would 

recommend this book strongly, to the members opposite. Well, anyway, to make a long story short, 

Snowball and Napoleon were in charge; all the other animals were to work and their objective was to put 

up a mill, to electrify the farm, and that mill was going to bring to future generations all the benefits of 

the ―animalist‖ paradise. What happened was 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

62 

 

this. They wrote on the barn wall their seven commandments and among the commandments that I can 

remember was one, ―all animals are equal‖, and another commandment was ―Four feet, good; two feet, 

bad‖; anything that walked on four feet was good, and anything that walked on two feet was bad, and 

there were other commandments. As time went on there friction started between Snowball and 

Napoleon. You see, Snowball was drawing the plans for the mill on the floor of the blacksmith shop 

with chalk, and Napoleon didn‘t say very much, but among the other animals he used to say that that 

was not the right plan. 

 

Time went on. It was firstly, a rule that no animals could live in the house that was occupied by Jones, 

but little by little, Napoleon and the pigs went and stayed in the house, and they began to work on this 

mill, and most of the work was carried on by Boxer – a big strong horse. Boxer could not learn to read. 

Most of the animals, that is the higher animals like the pigs, they learned to read; but some of the lower 

animals like the sheep and the horses and the mules, they couldn‘t learn to read. The only thing that 

Boxer could learn was ‗A‘. He could make ‗A‘ with his hoof in the sand, and he used to worry and 

worry about this, but he said, ―well, I think I had better work harder‖. So he really put out every ounce 

of energy in him to see that that mill was successfully built. Well, as the time went on, the pigs in the 

house began to acquire more and more control over the other animals, and so the other animals began to 

be suspicious, and they began to complain. Anyway among the pigs in the house and there were quite a 

few now – there was one called the ‗Squealer‘. Now the Squealer was a great orator. He had a special 

way of standing on the stage and shifting to the side, and twisting his tail and he could explain anything. 

Well now, it was the Squealer‘s aim to explain everything that the leadership in the house wished, and 

so as time went on there were many things that the pigs in the house began to do that were not right and 

the animals saw it, but the Squealer explained everything. 

 

Now the sheep were not very smart and they couldn‘t learn to read, but they memorized a song; they 

memorized one of the commandments. They used to repeat, in unison; ―Four legs, good; two legs, bad‖. 

Now whenever the Squealer would get up to explain anything the sheep would shout: ―Four legs, good; 

two legs, bad‖. Well, as the time went on, the mill went up quite high and Boxer put more work into that 

mill than anybody else; but somehow or other something happened and the mill collapsed. In the 

meantime the friction between Snowball and Napoleon became so great that Snowball was finally 

kicked out of the farm – exiled. Anyway – this is what happened at the end – the pigs in the house, when 

they were criticized because they had started drinking alcohol said that they needed this for their brains, 

because they were doing a lot of thinking. When they were asked why there were so many of them there 

working and so few animals out in the field – well, Squealer said, ―you see, we do a lot of thinking‖ . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don‘t know whether I am lax in my duty but it seems to me that the member who is 

speaking is not adding anything to the dignity of this House at all. If he wishes to bring an allegory I 

think he could do it in a lot fewer words, and maybe not something which I think may subject this House 

to ridicule. 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

63 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Mr. Speaker, I am not changing the text of that book at all and that book is quite a 

well-known book, read by many people. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would like to draw to the attention of the member that it is more like a vaudeville 

show than a discussion in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time that there has been a show in this Chamber. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If the hon. member would like to bring his allegory to a close . . . 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Yes, I will do that. You see what happened was this – that those who were in the 

house, little by little, changed the commandments, and this is what happened at the very end. Now listen 

carefully, this is important. ―All animals are equal, but some are more equal that others‖. Do you get 

that? And when the pigs started walking on two legs – and they did that – and started drinking liquor, 

well, the sheep were taken into a corner of the pasture and they were taught to say: ―Four legs, good; 

two legs, better‖. Instead of two legs, bad; they said they were better. Well, I would recommend that 

book, since I cannot elaborate on it and I don‘t think I should. I would recommend that book to all 

people who are interested in this allegory, and I think it would do them good. 

 

Well, anyway, Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention something about the tactics of the C. C. F. then I 

will close. You see, these are some of the tactics that they use. We had a very good demonstration, 

tonight. They seize upon catch-words; they say ―peoples‘ budget‖; they say ―progressive budget‖; they 

say ―great strides‖; they say, for example, ―people own the lumbering industry‖. That is one thing that 

they say and there is a purpose in that. Another thing that they do, that I don‘t approve of – and I don‘t 

think very many people in Saskatchewan approve of it; they engage in name-calling. Now, in this 

Legislature, I was called names several times, last year, this year; and not only me but other members on 

this side. I don‘t think that is the proper thing, and I think that they should be called to order when they 

do that, because if you don‘t agree with our politics, you do not have to engage in calling names, 

because what I expect next after name-calling maybe something worse. I am afraid that maybe some of 

the members will start making faces at us and showing their tongues, because here are some of the 

names: "Missing link", ―fossils‖, ―refugee from Lower Slobovia‖, ―clown prince‖, ―cry-baby‖ . . . 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I challenge the member from Redberry. I never 

mentioned any names in regard to any of the Opposition members as the ‗missing link‘. I challenge him 

for that. If you like to take it that way, all right. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — How am I supposed to answer that challenge? 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — He said missing link in Redberry. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order ! Order! 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Well, I didn‘t say that you said it, did I? 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — You said I said that . . . 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

64 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — No, I didn‘t say that you said it. Mr. Speaker, the member from Swift Current is 

accusing me of something that I didn‘t say. I did not say that the member from Swift Current said 

anything of the sort, but he seems to be guilty of something – I don‘t know what. His conscience is 

bothering him. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — You said I was calling you names. I wasn‘t calling you names. You made that assertion 

yourself. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Well, I said in one place that I admired the member. I like his jokes and I like the 

Lancashire way of talking – the way he says, ―we was‖ and not using ―ing‖. I like that, and I hope that 

he continues in good health for many years; but I don‘t think that it is a good thing to call names 

anyway. I am against that. And you know there are little jokes that are cracked just to hurt you, 

personally, and I don‘t think that is a good idea. You hear those quite often too – to hurt somebody 

personally either about his looks or about his hair, or about his personal appearance. I think we should 

just talk politics and not use personalities. I think it is degrading and I would like to see that the 

members don‘t do that again, because it is not nice. 

 

There is another thing that they say, you know. For example, I can almost predict that the hon. Treasurer 

will get up tomorrow and say that we haven‘t said anything worthwhile about his budget; we haven‘t 

suggested anything, and the fact is he will say we haven‘t said anything. Now isn‘t it true that they get 

up, one after the other, and say that the Opposition hasn‘t said anything? Here we talk for hours and 

hours and they say we have not said anything. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Well, you certainly haven‘t! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Well, I would like to know why the Ministers have cleared out of the House. I am 

having a good time. I really feel sorry for the Premier . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — I am sorry for myself. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — You see, once upon a time he though he was the only smart-aleck in the province, 

but those days are gone . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — I thought you didn‘t like calling names. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — That was just a statement of fact. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — For example, there is one famous propaganda stunt that they pull off, and it was 

repeated tonight. It was repeated over and over throughout the province on the platform, and it has been 

improved upon by the Minister of Municipal Affairs. ―The Liberals, for the last 40 years, haven‘t done 

anything‖, that is, nothing was done until the C. C. F. came into power. That has been repeated over and 

over. They say we had 40 years of stagnation – it used to be 34, but now it is 40; and that is a thing that 

they repeat over and over and over again. 

 

Now I am not here, Mr. Speaker, to the cause of what the Liberal 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

65 

 

Party did up to 1944. I think I could well do it — I think I could recount it to you, Mr. Speaker, but it 

would take days and days to enumerate all they did. I will tell you one thing they didn‘t do; they did not 

engage in propaganda, and it is too bad for them that they did not tell the people of Saskatchewan what 

they were doing, because they were doing wonderful things. Now this group comes in and that is the 

first thing they do – out of a little molehill they make a mountain; a squeak is magnified to a roar; and 

Mr. Speaker, believe me, if these men sit here for another while, they will have everybody convinced 

that they were the fellows who built this Legislative Building. You see, they painted the walls; and did 

you hear the talk about it? They just painted the walls, they just coloured the walls, and I could bet 

anything that in a few years they will be saying that they built the whole thing. 

 

Now what did the Liberals do? I can‘t explain everything that they did, but just look around this 

Legislature – these wonderful Legislative Buildings – those wonderful marble columns and those 

wonderful steps, and they are really marvellous. I think it was built by the Liberals and I don‘t think that 

anybody across the House can deny that. I think that in Saskatchewan the roads, the telephones, those 

things were built by the Liberals. The poor Liberals did not talk about what they were doing – they were 

working. These fellows spend half of the people‘s money or a very large part of it, telling people what 

they are doing, using propaganda. I think the people of Saskatchewan are getting sick and tired of 

hearing that the Liberals didn‘t do anything, and I think that the C.C.F. members should bring to an end 

repeating that phrase over and over again, that the Liberals never did anything, that the Liberals were 

scoundrels, that they had political ―heelers‖. There is no difference. I know there are political ―heelers‖ 

in this Government and they cannot deny it. They were the ones who said there would be no political 

―heelers.‖ I know that there is patronage, party patronage in this Government, and they cannot deny it. 

In fact it is worse than it ever was, and they cannot deny it; and I challenge them to come up and deny it. 

I know that this Government has done the things they accuse the Liberals of – they are doing it 

themselves, so what is the use of telling people across the province about these things. They know the 

Liberals were human beings – there were all kinds of mistakes made, there is no question about it; but to 

say and to repeat over and over in various variations that they didn‘t do anything, is to deny the truth 

itself. The idea behind this is to put across the big lie that the Liberals did not do anything. That is a big 

lie; if anyone says that, he is lying. If anybody repeats that over and over again – it isn‘t true; because, as 

I say, here is this Legislature that was built by them. This Government painted it and they are taking 

credit in the province here about a coat of paint inside. I think it is a wonderful building, and going from 

this building out into the streets, out in the roads, and into the very corners of Saskatchewan, you will 

see the monuments to the pioneers, the Liberals of this province, and so don‘t say that they didn‘t do 

anything, because that is getting worn out and tiresome. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think I should close by saying that I am not going to vote for the budget because 

there are all kinds of contradictions and political propaganda in the budget speech, and there are ―digs‖ 

at the Opposition, because the Government acts as if it was the Opposition attacking the Liberals all the 

time. And because the budget is too large for the value we are getting, I am going to vote against it. 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

66 

 

Mr. L. L. Trippe (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, there is a certain advantage on being what is known as 

the ‗graveyard shift,‘ I guess, in this Assembly. The hon. members across from us are more docile at this 

hour of the night, and the only thing is that we have to divide up the next two hours, but we are going to 

be a little short of time. 

 

I wish, Sir, to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer on the budget that he has presented, and the fact that 

he needs no new taxes is quite nice; but the money is coming in so fast he can not spend it, and I guess 

that is the reason. The thing that I note about the budget is that when it comes in, it is just an old deflated 

50-cent dollar, or inflated 50-cent dollar, but when it goes out, why it is a 100 per cent good dollar. 

 

I will say about the Provincial Treasurer, that I regard him as a very congenial fellow and a man who is 

easy to get along with in House, and I will say that his Department, which is one of the largest 

departments in this Government, is courteous and business like and you can get a reply, if you write a 

letter in there, within a reasonable time, and I can not say that about all the other departments of this 

Government. 

 

I would like to say a word or two, Sir, about the policy in regard to land, the 33-year lease, and the fact 

that people can not get a hold of land, to own, very easy any more in this province, any land, anyway, 

that the Department has. This is what I would naturally expect of a Socialist government. It is part of 

their original policy, 20 years old. They never dropped it; they sidetracked it a little bit, but it is still 

there. They never repudiated it, and it seems to be working pretty good, right today. I am sorry that a 

great many of the people who take on this kind of a deal would find themselves with no estate to leave, 

and that seems to be very interesting to most of the people who would like to leave an estate, in land, to 

their heirs. Up in the northern part of my constituency there are large areas that have never been settled, 

and there is some very good land there – quite a large area of very good land. I know that, in the 

Pierceland and Goodsoil districts, representations have been made to open up some of that land for 

settlement. Representations have been made by some of their very good Government supporters, too, 

and they have shown no disposition to open it up. But if they do not do it, I will use the best influence 

that I can on the Liberal Party to see that they will do something about it, if they get into power in this 

province. 

 

In the matter of highways, I am not very enthused about the performance in the Turtleford seat; there has 

been no new construction whatsoever, in the past year. There was some gravel put on No. 26 and No. 

55, but those were what you might call ‗election‘ highways, and they have been lying there so long that 

it was cheaper to gravel them than it was to keep rebuilding them every spring when they washed out, I 

suspect. If there is any well-oiled political machine in the C.C.F. Party, I am sure it is in the Department 

of Highways. When the programme of this department is made up (and I expect there is something made 

up right now), no member on this side can find out what it is, as far as his constituency 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

67 

 

is concerned; but when the Minister decides that it is just about right to make an announcement, he 

comes out and calls a little meeting and tells them all about it. Now I really believe that the elected 

members who represent those constituencies would like to know what is going on out there – but as far 

as we are concerned, on this side, we never find anything out about it. 

 

I did write the Minister a letter on the 1st of June, 1949, and I know he was pretty busy because the 

Federal election was boiling at that time; but it took me till August 29th to get an answer, and that seems 

to have taken quite a little time, too. 

 

Now with regard to Crown Corporations – these are under investigation, at the present time, in the 

Committee; and there are some things that we will find out about them, I expect, before the Committees 

are over; but I would recommend this. My idea would be that the Government put in a non-political 

board of businessmen at the head of these Crown corporations and see what can be done with them. The 

politicians are really not the proper people to run them. 

 

Now, in regards to hospitals, I am sure, as they say, this scheme is being abused. The scheme, anyway, 

in some ways, is inefficient and extravagant, and it leaves the local people with a load of debt all out of 

proportion to what they really should carry. We know. We have been advised that a 20-bed hospital 

should cost, these days, about $160,000. This Province donates the magnificent sum of $20,000 to that, 

and the Federal Government, $20,000, leaving the province, in this case, with a debt of $120,000. That 

is an intolerable debt which has to be carried for a period of 20 years before they get it paid off, and by 

20-years‘ time the chances are that these hospitals will be obsolete and you will have to have another 

one. Outside of that, they pay the hospital tax, and, generally, deficits on operations, and the Education 

and hospital tax also helps to support this, and the debenture tax which comes on their land, and really, 

there is no one in this Government who can say they have given the people anything in the way of 

hospitals, because it is the people that have given themselves whatever they have got, or at least the very 

greatest part of it. This is what you might call, Mr. Speaker, a white elephant, and there is no doubt 

about that. 

 

Now, there are another couple of matters that I would like to refer to, and one is the speech of the hon. 

Minister of Social Welfare (Hon. Mr. Sturdy) on the 2nd of March, and I will refer particularly to the 

part concerning political patronage. And reading from the speech, here are some of the parts. It seems 

that a postmistress in Fort Qu‘Appelle, who had had that post office for some time, got pretty old and 

she was visiting around here and there and had been gone for months at a time, and the Department 

offered her to retire and give her a pension, which she accepted. She was not, personally, in charge of 

the post office, and perhaps did not give just the service that was required. Now the Minister went into 

that in considerable detail, telling about the record of her husband who had been an old veteran and he 

died and she succeeded him. Then, of course, there were some boys in the family too – five boys and 

four of them were in the services and the youngest one was there helping his mother run this post office, 

or running it himself. He says that the record of the family was good, and it was good; but more of the 

veteran sons wanted this job. He says that the youngest boy was helping his mother, and was ‗frozen‘ to 

his job by the postal authorities. 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

68 

 

That is not true. He was not frozen to his job by the postal authorities. The office is what is known as a 

revenue office and has an income of over $3,000 a year, and it is the duty of the postmistress to hire her 

assistants, which she did (she hired him in this case), and he was in no way frozen to this work at the 

post office. He wanted to enlist but they would not let him. I do not know who would not let him. It was 

not the postal authorities, I am sure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — May I ask the hon. member a question? 

 

Mr. Trippe: — No, I haven‘t got any time. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You talked the other day. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — On a point of privilege, I would like to know from the hon. member the authority 

he quotes, in which he states that man was not ‗frozen‘ to his job. 

 

Mr. McCormack (Souris-Estevan): — That is not a point of privilege. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I am entitled to know this. 

 

Mr. Trippe: — I am reading from your speech ―Because a Liberal ‗big-shot‘ in Fort Qu‘Appelle, the 

wealthiest man in the valley, wanted a job for his son, that widow was fired from the job‖. That was not 

true. Both statements are untrue there; and then he says, ―Well, I do not know . . .‖ 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker, I have stated that that woman was fired from 

her job. 

 

Mr. Trippe: — ―Well, I do not know . . .‖ And that is true, sure enough . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — . . . and replaced, February . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Trippe: — That is factual. She was made a proposition and she accepted it. Then he says: ―A 

petition was circulated and over 500 signed the petition that the widow be re-instated‖. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the petition did not require that she was to be re-instated at all. It was not for that purpose. The 

petition was that her son get the post office. That was the petition, and he did not have a chance. He did 

not have a chance because the law, in regard to the successors in these post offices, gives preference to 

veterans, and, unfortunately, the boy was not a veteran. The Legion in this country has been fighting for 

a long long time to get this preference for veterans, and in the year 1927, they did succeed in getting 

some legislation put on the books. That legislation in the statutes of 1927, beginning with Chapter 26, 

requires that in this class of a post office, among other things that competitive examinations must be 

held by the Commission; and in 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

69 

 

this case this was done. It requires that appointments of civil servants who have left their jobs for active 

war service will receive consideration. That did not apply in this case, and it requires that after an 

examination has been done, that a list of the successful competitors be posted, and this was done. They 

are having regard there – first, to persons who are in receipt of a pension attributable to war service and 

have not been successfully re-established in their job and desire to be placed on such a list, and this was 

complied with. A young man by the name of McNeill took this examination, qualified on account of his 

service, and obtained the highest marks, and was placed, according to the law. The record of service of 

McNeill was that he served in the R.C.A.F.; that his plane was shot down in enemy action, at which time 

he suffered frozen feet, and he was taken a prisoner, and he was, therefore, entitled to soldiers‘ 

preference, and also disability preference, and he was in receipt of a disability pension at the time. The 

young man is very well thought of in the district of Fort Qu‘Appelle, because, since that time, he has 

been elected president of the local branch of the Canadian Legion, and I believe that they are right 

behind him, and very glad that he has got this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker. This man has not been elected president of 

the Legion since this incident occurred. 

 

Mr. Trippe: — He was elected president of the Legion, last year, and he is president of the Legion right 

now. 

 

But there is another statement here made by the Minister in his speech, which was that the Legion wrote 

in. Nothing was done. I have been in communication, over the telephone, with the man who was 

president of the Legion at that time, a man by the name of R. W. Box, and he tells me that the petition, 

this inspired petition, was presented to him with a covering letter which he refused to sign, and it was 

not sent in, according to the best of his knowledge; and he has been president of this Legion branch right 

up to the time that Mr. McNeill was elected president. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Working against the veterans. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Again, Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, that resolution was sent . . . 

 

Mr. Trippe: — I‘m telling the story the way I have it . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — . . . in from the secretary of the Legion there . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Trippe: — You told your story and now I am telling mine. ―The Legion wrote in. Nothing was 

done‖. That is not true. ―As far as the people of the valley are concerned, they are not going to rest until 

this woman is replaced in her job.‖ There was no petition for the woman to be replaced in her job; I do 

not think she wants the job. Everybody seems to be satisfied except the Minister, and I submit that this is 

a gross misstatement, misleading and absolutely untrue. As far as I am concerned, Mr. Speaker, I shall 

not support the budget. 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

70 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker, no single statement that I made was, in any 

major instance, incorrect. It may have been that the president of the Legion did not send in that petition, 

but certainly the secretary did. 

 

Mr. Trippe: — You make your speech tomorrow. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Moreover, four members of that widow‘s family were in the armed services; one 

of them is still in the armed services, and one was killed. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Trippe: — They did not apply for the job. None of the veterans sons applied for the job. 

 

Mr. J. G. Egnatoff (Melfort): — Mr. Speaker, it was my intention to speak for only a few minutes this 

evening and I want to assure you that I have no intention of taking up any time tomorrow until the 

Minister of Social Welfare made some of his uncalled for interjections, which consumed some of the 

time of this House. 

 

I would like to say just a few words with regard to one major problem, this evening, which the 

Government of Saskatchewan is not solving in an adequate manner. As all hon. members know, this 

happens to be ―Education Week‖. Therefore I wish to deal, just very briefly, with the Government‘s 

failure to solve the most pressing problem in the field of education, namely, the problem of teachers‘ 

supplies. 

 

Hon. members of this House should realize that there are 57 per cent of our teachers who teach in rural 

schools. Now it so happens that, in Saskatchewan, only 13 per cent of all teachers have university 

degrees. There are five provinces ahead of Saskatchewan - Saskatchewan comes sixth in that list. The 

percentage of substandard teachers in this province, particularly in our one-room rural schools, is most 

appalling. In 1948, approximately one-third of all the teachers in our rural schools were substandard 

teachers. We should also realize that the teacher turnover in our rural schools is tremendous: 64 per cent 

of all the teachers who were in charge of one-room rural schools in 1947 were not in charge of those 

same schools in the following year. That means, Mr. Speaker, that two out of every three teachers in 

charge of our rural schools do not remain in those schools any more than one year. Now this is a very 

grave situation. Teaching and learning efficiency has been reduced to a minimum as a result of the 

teacher supply policies tolerated by the present C.C.F. Government. I think hon. members should realize 

that it takes even a well-trained teacher a considerable length of time to really understand each child in 

her classroom, to really know the abilities, the state of social and emotional development, the 

achievement level and in each of the fundamental skills, and the remedial requirements of each child. 

Hon. members should realize, too, that with the rapid turn-over of teachers in our rural schools, a 

condition which the C.C.F. Government is perpetuating, teachers cannot do the effective work they 

would be able to do if they remained in the same school for several years. 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

71 

 

Now what is the situation in this province? According to an answer tabled in the House, this afternoon, 

by the Minister of Education, an answer to a question with regard to the certain certificated teachers, we 

have, out of a total of 7,262 teachers, 2,994 who are holders of conditional certificates – that means they 

have less than grade 12 academic standing – who are holders of 12T certificate, 24T, letters of authority, 

interim first or interim certificates of any other description. Now that simply means, Mr. Speaker, that 

more than 40 per cent of all the teachers in charge of classrooms in this province in 1949-50 were either 

holders of interim certificates or were persons inadequately trained for the complex and multifarious 

tasks of developing human personalities – and these figures, Mr. Speaker, do not include approximately 

500 study supervisors who are placed in charge. 

 

Apparently the C.C.F. Government regards the problems involved in raising hogs more important than 

the problems involved in guiding the education growth and development of our boys and girls. To 

advise farmers on raising hogs, to identify weeds, to organize agricultural committees, to show projector 

slides, the Government of Saskatchewan requires that you have a university degree before you are 

appointed s an Agricultural Representative; but to take charge of children in our classrooms, the C.C.F. 

Government doesn‘t even require that you complete your grade 12 standing, and Mr. Speaker, that is no 

reflection on the people in charge of our schools. They are doing the best that they can. 

 

In my opinion, teaching is the most important of all professions. To it we should strive to attract the 

most capable of our young people and this is not being done in this province. And why is it, Mr. 

Speaker, that this is not being done in Saskatchewan? Why is it that only 13 per cent of our teachers 

have university degrees? I think the answer is simple; the salaries are simply inadequate. We find that 

the medium salary for all teachers in publicly-owned schools in this province in 1948, was $1404. That 

means that half the teachers in the province were working at salaries below $1404. British Columbia, 

Alberta, Ontario, Nova Scotia, Manitoba, all these provinces were ahead of us with regard to the median 

salaries of teachers. 

 

Now, frankly, I fail to see any real alleviation of the problem until our Provincial Government and our 

Federal Government assume a far greater proportion of the cost of education. I think that hon. members, 

particularly on your right, Mr. Speaker, should realize that, in 1944, they promised to the people of this 

province that if they were elected they would see that their government would assume the financial 

responsibility for Saskatchewan. I am sure that every hon. member on the other side will recall all their 

various speeches at that time, and they were all stressing that if the C.C.F. were ever elected, they would 

assume the full share of the cost of education. This they have not done, and because of that policy they 

are perpetuating a situation in this province whereby we cannot attract the calibre of personnel that is 

required to man our schools. I want to submit in all seriousness that the Minister of Education might be 

very well-advised to call a meeting of the Committee on Education of this Assembly to look into this 

entire problem of teacher supply. Incidentally, I would suggest to him that if his Department really 

wanted some advice on the revision of the elementary school curriculum, he should call a meeting of 

that Committee on Education of this Legislative Assembly. He says that his Department welcomes as 

wide a participation as possible in the revision 



 

March 6, 1951 

 

72 

 

of the course of study, and yet, he is not utilizing one of the most representative groups that is available 

and at his disposal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the present Government is indulging in many wasteful expenditures – too many 

automobiles driving too many miles throughout this province at too great a cost to the people of this 

province. Moneys could be spent more wisely simply by eliminating a wasteful expenditure such as the 

Minister of Agriculture indulged in when he spent nearly $5,000 of the people‘s money to send out a 

Christmas present in ―The Road to Survival‖. He distributed those books, and wasted, in my opinion, 

nearly $5,000 of the people‘s money. I maintain, that that item, together with hundreds of others one can 

find by going through the Public Accounts, could be used to pay the old-age pensioners of this province 

a supplemental allowance not of $2.50 without a means test, not of $5 without a means test – but a 

supplementary allowance of $10 without a means test. Financial policies of that type pursued by this 

present C.C.F. administration, Mr. Speaker, make it impossible for me to support the motion that you do 

now leave the Chair. 

 

Mr. Jacob Benson (Last Mountain): — Mr. Speaker, I would move the adjournment of the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly adjourned without question put at 11 o‘clock p.m. 

 


