



















































Hansard: February 05, 1951


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eleventh Legislature 

3rd Day 

 

Monday, February 5, 1951 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

MOTION FOR ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

Mr. Peter A. Howe (Kelvington): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to move an Address in Reply to the Speech 

from the Throne, I would like, first of all, to make a few remarks in regard to a certain period which was 

my first experience in this Legislature. From 1938 to 1944 I had the privilege to sit on the Opposition 

over there, and it was quite different to being on the Government side of the House; but what I wanted to 

say in regard to that period really relates to the administration at that time, how they were meeting the 

problems from time to time, or how they did not meet them from time to time. 

 

That was a period in which the people in Saskatchewan and the people all over Canada were living 

under very serious circumstances and difficult times. During that time, Mr. Speaker, there were some 

half a million or more unemployed young people in Canada going from coast to coast in search of a job, 

and the only alternative was to go to a soup kitchen or obtain relief somewhere. In other words, there 

was no rehabilitation programme when it was so much needed. Those were the days, too, when 

thousands of farmers in Saskatchewan were losing their farms and their homes on which they had spent 

the better part of their lives. In addition to that it was a time in which the livestock in this province was 

liquidated very disastrously in order that people could qualify for debt relief, for three or four head of 

livestock 

 

Those were the days, too, when too many of our schools were closed, teachers were leaving their 

profession, and while we were sitting on the opposition, Mr. Speaker — you, too, were there at that time 

— we would recommend to the Government to give work and wages to the unemployed. There were so 

many hospitals needed in those days, so many schools required; materials were cheap, labour was cheap, 

and we used to recommend to the Government, too, that they should give more security to the farmers 

on their farms; but all these suggestions, Mr. Speaker, fell on deaf ears. Of course we were told that we 

were communistic and dictators and all that sort of thing, that we were dangerous to the welfare of this 

province; but I want to remind the members of the Opposition, today, that while we, as an opposition 

group, could tolerate those things, there was one thing that the people of Saskatchewan refused to 

tolerate and that was the lack of action, lack of initiative and imagination and courage to meet those 

problems. The best proof of that, Mr. Speaker, was the results of the election in 1944 when the Liberals 

were almost wiped out of the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with a few things since 1944 which this Government has introduced. 

This government has introduced a lot of valuable legislation that lends itself to give people security in 

their home, 

  



 

February 5, 1951 

 

2 

 

security in health, security of education, and many things; but I cannot deal with too many of them, so I 

propose to deal with three Departments which were given a great deal of prominence in the Speech from 

the Throne. Being a farmer and knowing the important part that agriculture plays and which it must 

continue to play in the economic life of Canada and in the economic life of this province, I want to deal, 

first of all, with that. 

 

There are two things that farmers and workers are generally concerned about. In the first place, they are 

very concerned about what they are going to get for what they produce; and secondly, they are 

concerned about what they‟re going to have to pay for the things they have to buy. In other words, it 

does not matter whether the farmer gets 50 cents a bushel for wheat, a dollar or a dollar and a half, just 

so long as that price bears a fair relationship to all the things that wheat or grain or livestock must buy. 

But we have found, these last few years, that everything that farmers, or working people generally, have 

to buy has continued to go up and up all the time, and the basic products of the farm were finding lower 

levels from time to time. That is the problem that is facing the people of this province today, whether we 

are farmers, labouring people, school teachers, small business men, or what have you. 

 

Under the National Wheat Agreement we are guaranteed a minimum of $1.40 a bushel, or a maximum 

of $1.80, in American funds, basis Fort William. Now this last year, the initial payment of wheat was 

down 35 cents a bushel as compared with last year, or, in other words, 20 per cent of a reduction on 

every bushel of wheat on our initial payment. It is even worse than that because of weather conditions 

that existed last year, which meant that a big part of the production, last year, was a very low grade of 

wheat — No. 5, No. 6 and feed, and here we find that feed wheat is down 49 cents a bushel — or, in 

other words, 35 per cent less income on feed wheat this year as against last year. 

 

Now, it is very common practice for members of the Opposition, or other Liberals, to talk so much about 

the so-called increase in taxation in this province, which is wholly unwarranted; but it is estimated, Mr. 

Speaker, that, on the basis of the crop last year and on the basis of the reduced price of the initial 

payment, it meant, roughly, a hundred million dollars less purchasing power for the farming people of 

Saskatchewan last year, as compared to the year before. 

 

Those things really mean something to the people of Saskatchewan, not only to farmers but to business 

men, working people and everybody. It is quite common, of course, or I suppose it is the practice of 

many people to try to becloud these important issues by talking about taxation. Usually people strike at 

those things that are closest to them — municipal taxes, school taxes; but I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that people, generally, are always glad to pay taxes or any other obligations, providing that they are 

given a reasonable opportunity to do so. 

 

In regard to this I would like to bring to the attention of the House a quotation from the Britnell-

Cronkite-Jacobs report which is new to many people, and what do they say about real taxation? Here I 

quote: 

 

“The allegations that the municipalities are over-burdened and that land is over-taxed have been 

examined with great care. It has been found that in no sense can 

  



 

February 5, 1951 

 

3 

 

it be said that real property, in the average municipality, is being over-taxed, either absolutely or 

relatively, under present conditions . . . It is doubtful if the tax burden on real property has been lighter 

at any period during the last three decades than at the present time.” (page 2) 

 

I hope that members opposite will remember that when they go home and out on the hustings. 

 

Now, in regards to this price of wheat again, on the 5th of June, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Coldwell moved an 

amendment, seconded by Mr. Knight, from Saskatoon, as follows: 

 

“That Bill No. 252 should not now be read second time but that it be resolved that in the opinion of 

this House consideration should be given to the provision of an initial payment for the period covered 

by this Bill of $1.75 a bushel for No. 1, Fort William.” 

 

A motion was brought in to the House of Commons to amend the Wheat Board Act to provide for a 

reduction in wheat prices this year. Mr. Coldwell makes this amendment, not to give the Bill a six 

months‟ hoist, or to retard the progress of the Bill in any way, but merely asking that it be delayed for a 

little while in order to give more consideration to it: something that every Liberal in the House of 

Commons should have been able to support; but no, every Liberal voted against it, who was in the 

House at the time. 

 

Coming again to the problem of the cost of living, I want to say first of all, Mr. Speaker, that price 

controls, as you know, were imposed during the war, and I think they did a splendid job in that price 

control. In 1941, the cost of living index stood at 111, and in the following four years under price 

controls they rose only 8 points. But after 1945, for the next 5-year period, price controls were 

progressively being removed, particularly from 1947, and during that period between 1945 and 1950, 

the price index rose 53 points, so there is a mighty good argument, Mr. Speaker, for re-imposition of 

controls. It is affecting so many people and some of the most unfortunate people are being affected most 

by this decontrol of prices. I have in mind people living on fixed income — the old age pensioners, for 

instance. In 1939, they had a pension of $20 a month, in 1949, the Dominion Parliament passed an Act 

to provide for a basic pension of $40 a month, but today that same $40 a month is only worth $24.09 in 

1939 dollars. Those are things we must not forget. Then we have these people living on veteran‟s 

allowance, pensions, other people who purchased government annuities some years ago, hoping to have 

$100 a month on which to retire, but find themselves today with the equivalent of $60 a month. 

 

Then there are other things that enter into the problem of cost of production and the cost of living too, 

and that is the freight rates. In the last couple of years freight rates have increased 45 per cent. I have 

some figures I have produced from freight information services, and I have four examples here of how it 

affects the farm. Number 1, a combine weighing 5300 lbs. moving from Brantford, Ont. to Regina, in 

carload rates. Prior to 1948 that rate was $1.28 per 100 lbs. for a total of $60 on a combine, but by 

January, 1951, the rates had jumped from $1.28 to $1.99 per hundred pounds, or from $68 to $106, or an 

increase of $38 on a combine. Now we come to an automobile weighing 3100 pounds, moving from 

Windsor, Ont. to Regina, again 

  



 

February 5, 1951 

 

4 

 

in carload lot rates. Prior to 1948, the rates were $3.58 per hundred pounds or $110 on a car; but by 

January, 1951, the rate had risen from $3.58 to $5.20 and from $110 to $161, or an increase of $42.22 

freight on an automobile. Then we have the livestock. On the 2000 pound carload of cattle moving from 

Stalwart, Saskatchewan, to Winnipeg, Manitoba: Prior to 1948, the rates were 36 cents on a hundred 

pounds, or $72 on a carload of cattle, but by Dec. 15, 1950, the rate had risen from 36 cents on a 

hundred pounds to 59 cents, or from $72 to $118 on a carload of cattle, an increase of $46. I thought I 

had another one here too, which was in regard to purebred bulls, by the way. The Minister of 

Agriculture will be interested in this. I take it that you have heard all about it. The rates, however, 

between Regina and Maple Creek have been raised from 43 cents a hundred pounds to $1.49 a hundred 

pounds. I would like to put that on the record. 

 

We believe, Mr. Speaker, that price controls should have been re-imposed. We believe they should have 

been maintained in times of peace as well as in times of war. Indeed there were some 70 per cent of the 

people of Canada in the last Gallup Poll who recorded themselves in favour of price control, and on 

September 2nd, again Mr. Coldwell moved an amendment to the Throne Speech which called for the re-

imposition of price controls and subsidies. This amendment was rejected by every Liberal in the House 

of Commons, Mr. Speaker. We believe that price controls should have been reinforced, not only to keep 

prices from going up any further; but we do believe they should be re-imposed with power to roll them 

back. 

 

Well, there are some people, Mr. Speaker, who have done exceedingly well during this period of 

inflation. It is not the old age pensioners, or the veterans, or the people on mother‟s allowance. It is not 

those people, or the old age pensioners. No! It is some of these other people. I think you‟ll recognize the 

name when I bring it to your attention. I want to quote now from statements I have here — and I am not 

going to bury you with figures; but, for instance, the Massey-Harris Company in 1945 had a net profit of 

$1½ million. I am not considering anything except ½-millions because a few hundred thousand here or 

there doesn‟t make much difference anyway: $1½ million in 1945 as compared with $13 million in 

1949, an increase of 741 per cent. That is doing pretty good. Silverwood Dairies have an increase from 

$1/4 million to over $3/4 of a million in net profits, or an increase of 223 per cent. That is doing pretty 

good. Now, there are several others I could read to you, but I don‟t intend to do that, only to make that 

illustration. The members opposite usually try to scare people — “Oh, beware of the C.C.F.! Don‟t let 

them get into power, whatever you do. If they get in, why don‟t keep them there very long. They‟re 

going to take your farms away, they‟re going to take your freedom away from you, and all the rest of it.” 

But, I want to say, now, Mr. Speaker, that the kind of progress that has been made in the last few years 

by some people is one of the worst types of confiscation that has ever been perpetrated on the people of 

Canada. And I make no apologies for that statement. 

 

I want to come a little closer to our Hon. Mr. Nollet, Minister of Agriculture. Three-quarters of the 

wealth produced in Saskatchewan comes from the farms; two-thirds of the people live on the land in this 

province. In Saskatchewan the security of all citizens and the security of our entire structure of social 

services depend on the security of our basic industry agriculture. And yet, (I want you to listen to this), 

this basic industry of ours is forced to operate in extremely hazardous environment. Not only do we farm 

in a part of the world which is sub marginal for crop production 



 

February 5, 1951 

 

5 

 

and where crops must fight with some very efficient natural competitors, but agriculture must also 

struggle along under an unhealthy economic policy which I have mentioned, and over which we, in 

Saskatchewan, have no control. 

 

I would remind members that, in Canada, 43 per cent of the population are farmers. This large section of 

our people receive only 13½ per cent of our national income. Under these conditions it is extremely 

difficult for farmers to farm as efficiently as they might if they had had the added security which would 

come with their fair share of the total national production of this province. As long as we have our 

economic set-up in such a way as it is, that those who work the land are exploited, this exploitation 

must, by the very nature of things, be passed on to the land. When a farmer must struggle out of 

proportion to those who supply him with the essential needs in order to feed, clothe and house his 

family, he cannot be expected to properly accept his responsibility to future generations, in the manner 

in which he protects and conserves the land. 

 

The ‟thirties, Mr. Speaker, proved to all of us that agriculture in this country is out of balance. During 

those years, as a result of unplanned settlements, heavy debt loads, high cost of production and low 

income, a staggering relief debt of $187 million was built up. In one year alone the Saskatchewan 

Government paid out around $12 million for relief to the people of this province; and yet, it was not 

until a C.C.F. administration was elected that anything basic was done about this fundamental problem 

in this province. Prior to that time the Department of Agriculture had done practically nothing in a 

corrective way to remedy the root cause of agricultural depression. In the Department, at that time, there 

were very few trained agricultural scientist; there was no machinery for the physical development of our 

land resources; the expenditure for agriculture at that time was around $800,000 the last year I was on 

the Opposition, as against $2,600,000 by this Government, last year. Quite a change, my friends. We 

now have on the staff of the Department trained scientists in every phase of agricultural production — 

soil specialists, weed specialists, livestock, crop, farm mechanics and engineers. We have equipment 

valued at three-quarters of a million dollars, the majority of which is large earth-moving equipment for 

the irrigation and drainage development. This past year the Department of Agriculture and spent $3½ 

million in the comprehensive programme for dealing with both emergency and long-term problems of 

agriculture. 

 

Taking a look at our province as a whole, we find a total of 60 million acres of occupied land. All of this 

land has been surveyed and classified by the soil survey run by the Soils Department of the University of 

Saskatchewan. Of this 60 million acres, 27 million is classified as being not suitable for cultivation, in 

other words, 45 per cent of our total occupied farm acreage is waste land and must be utilized by some 

other means than cultivation. 

 

The significance of these figures is startling. We have always looked upon ourselves as a grain-

producing area, and yet a grain production economy does not balance off against our soil resources in 

this province. When we think of land usage, we must think of greater numbers of livestock — 45 per 

cent of our land resources can only be utilized by the raising of livestock; another 42 per cent of our land 

must be placed into the production of forage crops from time to time in order to maintain and protect its 

fertility and productivity, and this again implies more livestock production. We can all see, then, how 

our land-use pattern in Saskatchewan is out of balance. Much of the reason why the system has 

developed is because of Federal fiscal policy which has mitigated against the creating of a balanced 

agriculture. Inequitable price relationships that forced farmers to „mine‟ the land for immediate security 

and welfare of their families, and that has been the result. 

  



 

February 5, 1951 

 

6 

 

In this Legislature, as I have mentioned before, there is very little we can do about it, as fiscal policies 

again fall under the jurisdiction of the Federal Government. Our concern here is the production problem 

in this province. A long-term objective of our programme is to stabilize the economy by correcting the 

mistakes of the past. This will be done by obtaining a better pattern of land use, and by obtaining greater 

utilization of our land resources. Our approach to this problem, Mr. Speaker, is, first of all, with 

Agricultural Representatives stationed at central locations in 37 districts of the province, and with 

municipal agricultural committees in every rural municipality and local improvement district. The Ag-

Rep. encourages and assists these local committees to thoroughly study their own land-use problems; 

approximately a quarter of the municipalities in the province have now either completed or are near 

completion of comprehensive survey of the land use in their areas. From these facts the committee can 

determine where their agricultural economy is out of balance, whether there is sufficient summer 

grazing and winter feed for livestock; whether the summer fallowing is started at the proper time or not, 

and what waste land there is in the municipality which could be developed for various purposes. Again, 

with the help of these Agricultural Representatives, this information is reported back to the people. 

Where special problems are evident the Ag-Rep. can call on specialists, either from the Department in 

Saskatchewan, the Dominion department, or the University. Then the municipality is asked to develop 

their own municipal plan for the farm improvement programme in the various communities, according 

to their needs. At the present time there are 500 projects of various kinds in operation in this province, 

which involve a total expenditure of almost half a million dollars. 

 

Since livestock must eventually play an important part in our agricultural economy, I want to say 

something about what has been done to assist in such a programme. The Department itself as twelve 

feed and fodder projects on dry land, and five on irrigated land. Under current assistance, another three 

dry-land projects cover just over 40,000 acres. Some of them were started in 1949, but already more 

than 12,000 acres have been seeded down for hay production. During 1950, in the course of 

development, 4,400 acres were seeded to coarse grain. From the 17 projects of the Department this past 

year, nearly 83,000 bushels of grain have been harvested along with 415 tons of good quality hay. In 

irrigation development, some 6,000 acres of land are included in departmental projects. Already 1,000 

acres have been seeded to forage crop sand another 3,000 acres are in the process of development. The 

majority of the work of irrigation in this connection is with the Water Users‟ Association — a total of 14 

projects are under way in various parts of the province, nine of these involving nearly 16,000 acres of 

land, and they are well advanced in construction. Another five involving an additional 9,500 acres of 

irrigable land have been surveyed and studied for development. 

 

In the field of community pastures, too, work has been carried on this past year, on five projects 

involving an acreage of 3,300 acres. On these projects for 42½ miles of new fences were constructed, 60 

miles of fence repaired and two stock-watering facilities have been developed. Compare this programme 

of conservation and rehabilitation of our livestock industry with the policy followed by previous 

governments by previous Governments, which was one of liquidation of livestock and relief, 

unfortunately. I want to congratulate the Minister of Agriculture on the manner in which he has tackled 

this problem of rehabilitation of our livestock in the province. 

 

I want to turn now, for a moment, to the Department of Public Health. That, too, was given a great deal 

of prominence in the Speech from the Throne, the other day. When this Government assumed office in 

1944, its stated role, 



 

February 5, 1951 

 

7 

 

Mr. Speaker, was complete health services for all, to make essential care available on the basis of need, 

and to afford security against constant unpredictable illness. In this regard, perhaps, one of the most 

outstanding undertakings was the inauguration of our hospitalization plan. In 1947 — and, by the way, it 

was the first of its kind on this continent — this plan was inaugurated by this Government. Much is 

being done in order to effectively carry out this programme. 

 

Perhaps one of the most serious problems facing the Hospital Services Planning Commission was the 

shortage of hospitals in this province. It might be interesting to take a look at that problem for a moment. 

In 1944, the rated bed capacity in general hospitals was 3,179, and the number of beds set up under 

crowded conditions was 3,866. Today, the rated capacity in general hospitals has risen to 5,434, and the 

number of beds available to 6,520. This means that there are now 6.5 beds for every thousand people of 

the population on the basis of hospital capacity in this province, as against 7.8 actually set up per 

thousand people. These figures are probably the highest in Canada, and indicate that within a period of 

five years Saskatchewan has increased the number of beds available by more than 70 per cent. 

 

Another analysis which may be interesting is the distribution of hospital accommodation as between 

rural and urban centres. The urban centres, in 1944, had 1,047, or 33 per cent of the total. But by 1951 

this pictured has changed very considerably, and today the urban centres have 62 per cent of the beds in 

the province, against the rural with 38 per cent; so that this has lent itself, Mr. Speaker, to increase the 

hospital accommodation, particularly in rural areas. In fact this accommodation has increased so much 

in rural areas that the percentage has increased since 1944. 

 

These accomplishments were made possible by the organization of union hospital districts in rural areas, 

to which the people of this province have responded very well. In 1944, there were 26 union hospital 

districts, as compared with 99 at the beginning of this year. 

 

This programme has cost the people of this province a lot of money. The hospitalization plan, in 

addition to the $10 for adults, or a maximum $30 for a family, has cost the Government, last year, in the 

neighbourhood of $3½ million. In addition to that some $300,000 was made available, last year, for 

hospital construction in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I was really interested in the „Leader-Post‟, the other day, January 29, under the heading: “Failure to use 

Grants”. It says here: 

 

“The Provincial Government was criticized, Monday, by this Saskatchewan Liberal Association for 

using only a small part of the available Federal hospital construction grant”. 

 

Of all people, I think the Saskatchewan Liberal Association to be the last association in this country to 

say anything about that because, after all, if the province of Saskatchewan had not begun to give grants 

for that purpose in 1946 or 1947 the Federal Government would probably never have come along with 

these grants at all. We appreciate, Mr. Speaker, the assistance we are getting from the Federal 

Government in this connection, but we are only sorry that they did not come along a little sooner with 

this assistance to the people of this province. 

  



 

February 5, 1951 

 

8 

 

There is another problem that may present itself that will sooner or later have to be given some 

consideration and that is the distributional capital and maintenance costs of hospitals in the province. I 

notice from the 1948 annual report of the Health Services Planning Commission, although the figures 

are not right up to date they still give an indication of the trend of this distribution. According to the 

report of 1948, 34 per cent of the people in this province contributed to capital and maintenance costs of 

union hospitals, and only 18 per cent contribute under the municipal hospitals scheme, while 48 per cent 

of the people of this province make no contribution to the maintenance and capital construction of 

hospitals. It may have improved considerably, though, since 1948. 

 

In regard to other services rendered by the Department of Public Health, some comparisons should be 

made. For instance, expenditures for tuberculosis control were, in 1944, $273,000 against almost half a 

million dollars, last year. Expenditures for cancer and polio patients were, in 1944, $98,000 as against 

$624,000, last year. The old age pensioners alone, numbering some 19,419, received medical, dental, 

optical services and hospitalization at a cost of $785,000, last year; and all those people receiving 

mothers‟ allowance and their dependants, numbering some 9,362, received similar health benefits at a 

cost of $289,000. Then we have the unfortunate blind people, numbering some 709, who also received a 

similar service at a cost of $37,583. In other words, Mr. Speaker, we have in this province 29,469 people 

who have received complete medical services, hospitalization, at a total cost of $1,112,708.68, last year. 

I think this consideration that is given to unfortunate and aged people in this province, is something of 

which we ought to be proud. We were the first province, I am sure, to provide such a complete coverage 

of health security to our needy and unfortunate people, who would have otherwise been denied these 

services. Last year, the Government provided by way of grants to help regions and municipal doctors‟ 

areas, over half a million dollars, as compared to nothing in 1944. 

 

Now, again, I want to bring your attention to a paragraph from the Britnell-Cronkite report, because of 

the allegations made by Opposition members, from time to time, that taxation is being increased on our 

people in this province. I want to quote from page 38 of the report: 

 

“It would be wrong to assume that the municipalities have not benefited by extension of provincial 

activities such as hospitalization, medical care, of old age and blind pensioners, cancer patients, child 

welfare cases, and recipients of mothers‟ allowance. Municipal responsibility, although only 

contingent, was likely to be onerous in regard to the groups in question. The relief afforded 

municipalities, while indeterminate, can by no means be regarded as negligible.” 

 

So much for that. Then we have been giving certain mental services since 1944, and this has been 

expanded in a number of ways. The training school for 715 mental defectives is under construction. 

There are now 600 trained and well-paid persons caring for persons in mental hospitals — a long step 

forward from the former practice of having this work done by relatively untrained persons. The number 

of doctors, technicians and therapists has been greatly increased. Today we are treating patients so as to 

help them get well as soon as possible. There is concrete evidence already to indicate that this policy is 

proving of great benefit. In 1948, for the first time in the history of this province, the number of patients 

admitted to the mental hospitals was less than the number leaving the hospitals, and over the last two 

years 200 long-term patients, who 

  



 

February 5, 1951 

 

9 

 

had deteriorated to a relative helplessness through lack of attention, were returned to full participation in 

the activities of the hospitals. 

 

Dr. John D. M. Griffin, medical director of the Canadian Mental Health Association, told a public 

meeting in Saskatoon, last fall, and I want to quote from that speech of his. He said: 

 

“Mental and social sciences are lagging behind technical advances.” 

 

And further, he said: 

 

“Man has learned to control the physical world and the forces of nature and stood in fear of nothing, 

except one thing — himself.” 

 

He said, again: 

 

“Saskatchewan is really leading the way toward providing a new deal for hospital treatment of the 

mentally ill.” 

 

Dr. Griffin said the province needed more mental hospitals but it was doing wonderful work with the 

facilities it had. He also played paid tribute to two Saskatchewan psychologists, whom he termed “two 

of Canada‟s leaders in the mental health field” — Dr. Laycock, Dean of Education at the University, and 

Dr. McKerracher, Commissioner of Mental Health Services in the province of Saskatchewan. His 

statement, Mr. Speaker, I think is a tribute to the Minister of Public Health and to the Premier and to the 

Government; and I am certainly very proud of it myself. 

 

Just a word about our air ambulance, in closing my remarks on this department. In 1946 we transported 

to hospitals 172 patients, but this activity has increased so that by 1950 these had increased from 172 to 

732. Now this has cost the Government some money. In the 1946-47 fiscal year, it cost this Province 

over $136,000, but by 1949-50 it had risen to $154,000, and, for the information of members opposite, I 

want to say that the cash received from patients who were taken to hospitals amounted in 1946 to 

$1,023, but that had increased to $29,659.98 by 1950, so that, roughly speaking, I would suggest it 

comes very near being one-third of the cost. Now this service, Mr. Speaker, while it has incurred an 

expense to the people of this province, it would be interesting to know how many lives had been saved 

as a result of this programme. 

 

I want to deal, for a moment, with the Department of Social Welfare, which was set up in 1945. 

Previous to that time there was no department in charge of that work, which was distributed amongst 

various departments of the Government so that it did not receive the recognition it deserved on the basis 

of its importance. This Department, too, has done splendid work. They appointed a Commission to study 

our penal system, headed by Dr. Laycock as chairman. This Commission recommended that the 

Government of Saskatchewan adopt a preventive and remedial policy for the control of crime and 

delinquency; in other words, the emphases are on treatment and rehabilitation rather than on 

punishment. The results to date, Mr. Speaker, have already justified this new approach. In April, 1949, 

the Social Welfare Department was able to close the provincial gaol at Moosomin, since the population 

has been reduced so much. 

  



 

February 5, 1951 

 

10 

 

Young offenders, within the ages of 16 and 25 were removed to the Regina gaol, which is set up as a 

modified type of institution for the more reformable offenders. Others were transferred to Prince Albert. 

 

This programme has necessitated certain additional maintenance and personnel expenditures, but, in 

spite of these additional expenditures, amounting to some $100,000 annually, the final operation of the 

programme as a whole has resulted in a saving to the Government. Now that is significant. 

Saskatchewan‟s corrective administration has formed the astonishing feat of raising the standards and, at 

the same time, effecting an over-all economy. This is an experience, shall I say, which is practically 

unknown. 

 

Most important effect of the new approach in penal reform is that Saskatchewan‟s crime rate has 

declined in the last few years. I had the privilege, Mr. Speaker, to attend the official opening of the 

Saskatchewan School for Boys, last fall, when the Deputy Minister of Social Welfare, in accepting the 

key from the Premier who officially opened the school, said this: 

 

“I accept this key on behalf of the Department as a symbol of authority only, since the doors of this 

building are not going to be locked.” 

 

The main speaker that evening again was Dr. Laycock, and I want to quote something from his address. 

He said this: 

 

“This school exists to give boys who are in trouble practice in living in a wholesome way. To train 

boys in responsibility they have to be given responsibility, and that will mean that every so often a boy 

will run away from school.” 

 

And again he said: 

 

“It is extremely simple to put boys, and men for that matter, behind a mass of bricks or mortar, behind 

high walls, and locked doors; but you can‟t teach boys self-direction that way. 

 

“The job of the school, as of all the schools in the province, is to help pupils to find full outlet for their 

needs, for their affection, belonging, independence, achievement, recognition and self-esteem, through 

play, relationships and service to others, rather than through misbehaviour and mental ill health.” 

 

This Saskatchewan School for Boys is undoubtedly the only one of its kind on this continent. This 

Government, again, should be congratulated, I think, for adopting this method in treating juvenile 

delinquency problems in this province. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker I would like to say a few words in regard to Dominion-Provincial relations. I do 

not intend, however, to go into the Sirois report to any great extent, because all members, I am sure, are 

as well familiar with that as I am perhaps more so; but I think we should give some thought to what has 

been made of that very exhaustive and valuable report. 

  



 

February 5, 1951 

 

11 

 

It is now eleven years since that was made and outside of a few conferences, not nearly enough has been 

accomplished. At the August, 1945, conference the Federal Government made certain recommendations 

to the Provinces which were willing to enter into certain tax agreements. The Province of Saskatchewan 

did enter into certain tax agreements. Many other benefits, too, were offered by the Federal Government 

at that time. But at the last conference that was held recently it was agreed, I believe, that old age 

pensions to all 70 years or older, without a means test, would be brought in, with the Dominion 

Government during the carrying the full burden; a proposed pension, too, to those in the age group 

between 65 and 69, which would be on a 50-50 basis, Dominion and Provincial. 

 

But in 1945, the Federal Government also proposed a Health Insurance Bill, Mr. Speaker, that I want to 

deal with particularly, which provided that in the case of any Province which would undertake a health 

programme in line with the proposed Bill of the Federal Government, the Federal authority would pay 

up to 60 per cent of such a scheme to any provincial government. We in this province were the first to 

undertake such a programme, but to this day nothing has been done to implement the scheme. The 

proposed Bill that was recommended or suggested by the Government at Ottawa has not yet become a 

reality, and I am sure that, had the Government come through with their proposed Bill, by this time we 

would have complete health services to all our people in the province of Saskatchewan. I want to 

emphasize that the kind of Dominion-Provincial relations we may enjoy will determine to such a great 

extent how strong or how weak we are within our framework of Confederation. Let us not deliberately 

destroy our way of life because of selfishness on the part of any province which may be a little more 

fortunate than the weaker ones, or to permit any political bias to interfere or influence our decisions. The 

strength and stability of our province and of our democracies throughout the world depends upon how 

seriously we attempt to eliminate these maladjustment which exist within our borders. We should, Mr. 

Speaker, dedicate ourselves to eliminate fear and want and to permit freedom of speech and freedom of 

worship to prevail in our land. 

 

I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, 

 

Than an humble address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE JOHN MICHAEL UHRICH, 

 

Lieutenant Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan, 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 

 

We, His Majesty‟s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious speech which Your 

Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

  



 

February 5, 1951 

 

12 

 

Mr. Maurice J. Willis (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I am highly honoured in having the privilege of 

seconding the reply to the Address from the Throne, and to be associated with the hon. member from 

Kelvington who has already spoken. I feel that all members in this Legislature will join with me, Mr. 

Speaker, in welcoming you back after your sojourn in New Zealand and Australia, and I trust that if the 

members in this House become very unruly you will not use any kangaroo tactics on them. I hope and 

trust (and I feel sure that I am expressing the sentiments of all members) that the hon. member from 

Kinistino (Mr. Woods) will improve in health before many weeks, and will be able to take his 

accustomed place in this Assembly. 

 

Since our last Session, the hon. member from Gravelbourg has been appointed to the judiciary, and I feel 

confident that all members agree that miss him in this legislature for his qualities of thoroughness, good 

humour, and lastly, being a good fellow. However, I do hope the judiciary in this province does not take 

over the functions of the Senate of Canada. 

 

It is with regret that, over the weekend, I heard of the passing of my friend, and a friend to many of the 

members of this Legislature, Mr. Frank Jaenicke. I have known Mr. Jaenicke for a number of years. I 

know of his reputation in the community of Luseland. He was a man of integrity, highly esteemed in all 

community endeavours. He was district deputy of the Masonic Lodge for that area, and in the larger 

field when he represented the Federal constituency of Kindersley, he made a name for himself in the 

Dominion House, particularly when he brought in the resolution, which has been adopted since by the 

Federal Government, of making the Supreme Court of Canada the highest court in the land. And I, this 

afternoon, say this most sincerely: I have lost a personal friend and the people of Saskatchewan have lost 

a hard-working man of service at the age of 58 years. This afternoon, to those to those in that area of the 

Luseland and Kindersley district who are listening, I extend the sympathies of members of the 

Legislature. 

 

The international situation has not improved since we last met, and gives us all grave concern. We all 

had very high hopes in the formation of the United Nations, that we would be able through its 

organization to have peace in our time; but, unfortunately, some mistakes were made, and one of the 

greatest mistakes that was made was when we granted to the Security Council the right of any great 

power, the right of veto. We in the Democratic countries may have our differences, we may have our 

discussions, but the majority rules and no individual or no nation has the right of veto on the actions of 

the majority. 

 

Now the implications of third world war are very serious in that Canada could conceivably become a 

„Flanders‟ Field. We in Canada have no desire for war with any country, and our delegates at the United 

Nations have endeavoured to bring a peaceful solution by negotiation, and I am confident that, if a third 

world war should come (which, I hope it never will), we in Canada cannot be blamed for encouraging it. 

And I urge, Mr. Speaker and members, if there is a ray of hope to prevent a third world war, let us all 

unite in exploring those possibilities. Mankind cannot afford to lose another generation of youth. The 

military defeat of Communism will not prevent a fourth world war any more than the military defeat of 

Prussianism in the first great war brought the defeat of Prussianism in Germany and prevented the 

second world war. We must come to grips with the cost of the war. In time of war we give all our efforts 

to unselfishly eradicate the causes of war, and as long as three-quarters of the population of the world 

live in poverty and ignorance we will have wars, and as long as those nations that are better off only 

send armies to eradicate those ideologies that we disagree with, there will be no peace among mankind. 

  



 

February 5, 1951 

 

13 

 

War does not settle or finalize anything. To my mind the greatest changes that have been brought to 

mankind were brought 2,000 years ago, by a man, the son of a carpenter who never hurt anyone, never 

took up arms, who to his fellowmen of that day taught love rather than hate, and his influence still 

remains. What military man in the annals of history ever accomplished in his lifetime what one small 

Hindu man has? I am positive that when the history of the 20th century is written, Ghandi will be one of 

the greatest men who obtained for his country self-government, not by means of the sword, but by the 

outstretched hand of peace and goodwill. 

 

The question that might be asked is: what can we do in this Asian conflict? I would suggest that if we 

can prevent or get a reprieve or time allocated to us, let us then go on and take to these Asiatic people 

some of the things that we accept on this continent as part of our common right and heritage. Let us send 

them food. Let us then them doctors. Let us send them health services. Let us send them teachers. Let us 

show by our acts of kindness that we do believe in the brotherhood of man and that Christianity does 

mean something. Surely it is time mankind, in this 20th century, could use our scientific advances to the 

benefit of all mankind, and I again repeat: Canada has endeavoured to bring a peaceful solution to the 

Korean situation. Then let us continue to use all our efforts in that direction irrespective of party 

affiliation. 

 

A short time ago I was talking to a mother, a mother I know quite well; by my vocation as a teacher, I 

had taught her sons. I had left her town. She had four boys and a girl. They were all in the services. 

During the „thirties, two of those boys, by the persistence of both father and mother, were kept at school 

while they received a salary for the family of $30 a month. They obtained their grade 12, and when the 

call came in 1939 they in turn answered that call. Two of the five became fliers, and, unfortunately like 

many other mothers, she received the sad news both fliers were missing in action. Now, as I talked to 

that mother she has often said, “I do not want to see war again”; and I say to many of you here who are 

parents, and to those who spend their lives with young people in this fair land of ours, let us by all 

means endeavour to prevent a war. And so, if at times by negotiation it may be slow and sometimes, in 

some quarters (and very often quarters that are more interested in profits from war than they are for 

peace), they call that slow method of negotiation “appeasement”, yet if in turn we can prevent the third 

world war, let us show the way which, to my mind, in Canada we are making a very good job of it at the 

present time. Our delegates have sat on the „Cease Fire‟ Committee endeavouring to bring peace by 

negotiation, and I for one feel that as long as there is a hope let us continue to endeavour to negotiate 

rather than the immediately get into another devastating war. 

 

During the past summer we saw the prospect of a bumper crop ruined by frost in August; added to this, 

one of the worst harvest seasons known for a number of years. Consequently in many areas much of the 

crop lies under the snow at the present time. Today, we find there are no further payments being made 

on the 1945-49 crop or five-year pool. And to soften the final payment to the farmers of this province 

and other payment of 20 cents a bushel has been made on the crop of 1950-51. But what about these 

people that have not harvested a bushel? This interim payment of 20 cents a bushel is not going to help 

them. Now we were told in the last Dominion elections that if we sent more Liberal members from the 

west, the western farmers and workers would get a better deal. Now where does the better deal come for 

these farmers who have not threshed any grain this year? I think this interim 20-cent payment that has 

been paid on the 1950-51 crop is a token payment to subsidize for the final payment for 1945-49. Mr. 

Gardiner speaking at Calgary indicated 

  



 

February 5, 1951 

 

14 

 

payment would be small. I know that if a Federal election was in the offing, as was the case in 1949, 

wheat payments would be going out so quickly that the farmers would think that they had become 

shareholders in the International Nickel Company. 

 

Why should payments be held back on the 5-year pool? The grain has been sold. If it is five cents a 

bushel or if it is six cents, why don‟t they pay? Are they going to adopt the same tactics as before to buy 

the farmers‟ votes again? Why not pay the farmer his due allowance on his grain? The grain has been 

sold. We have been told that. Why isn‟t payment being made? Well, possibly if we had an election in 

this province, I think it might be a good idea, next year; we might speed it up. We might help the 

farmers out, and we would help our majority on this side of the House, too. 

 

Added to the delinquency of Federal Government, it has allowed the cost of living to soar until it has 

now increased to 72.5 points above the level of 1935-39, and this makes it more difficult for these 

farmers, and for our low-income workers, to carry on. Where are the voices of the Liberals now — those 

who were going to see that the farmers and the people of the west obtained a better deal? They are silent 

now, which reminds me of Hamlet: “The rest is silence”. They think that the farmers are going to be 

lulled by this interim payment, but I know the farmers, they are very restless at the present time and are 

not being lulled by this payment of 20 cents a bushel. 

 

I must commend the people of Saskatchewan for coming to the aid of the citizens of our sister province 

of Manitoba in the time of the devastating floods of last spring. Many people in Saskatchewan, during 

the ‟thirties, remembered how Manitoba sent carloads of food, vegetables, clothing to the drought-

stricken areas of Saskatchewan, and this time Saskatchewan readily met the challenge by reciprocating. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan, since 1944, have continually heard the cry, in the press and by the Liberal 

Party, that the C.C.F. were driving capital of the province, or capital was frightened to come into this 

province. Let us look at the figures . . . 

 

Mr. G. Herman Danielson (Arm River): — Your policy has not worked. 

 

Mr. Willis: —You will have lots of time to talk: You always take all afternoon. 

 

Let us look at the facts. Last year, $7 million has been spent in the search for oil in the province with the 

C.C.F. Government. Over 85 per cent of the surveyed portion of the province is under exploration 

permit. Another 12 million acres are held in reserve by the Crown, while 24 million acres of freehold 

land are held by oil concerns with a view to continued exploration. During the summer, at the peak 

exploration period, 31 geophysical crews were working. Saskatchewan ranked fifth among the United 

States and the provinces in North America in search of new fields of oil and natural gas. Sixty-eight 

wells have been drilled to date outside the Lloydminster and Lone Rock producing areas. A considerable 

number of the holes drilled this year have been deep wells, designed to substantiate and interpret the 

seismic and gravity meter work done previously. The cost of drilling these holes ranges between 

$30,000 to $70,000. 

 

The discovery of heavy black oil in the Maidstone area has extended the eastern limits of the 

Lloydminster and Lone Rock areas. The discovery of heavy crude at Hearts Hill, west of Kerrobert, has 

opened up the possibility 

  



 

February 5, 1951 

 

15 

 

of a new field which promises to be more important than the Lloydminster field. Saskatchewan has 

produced, in 1950, over one million barrels of heavy crude, the highest in the record of this province. Do 

these figures indicate that the C.C.F. have kept capital out, in spite of the efforts of the Liberals in this 

province? 

 

Mr. G. H. Danielson (Arm River): — Your policy has not worked. 

 

Mr. Willis: — Over $2 million has been spent in Northern Saskatchewan in search of base metals and 

uranium, and 48 concessions, each 25 square miles, were let. Underground exploration has taken place 

at Eldorado, Nisto, and the Nicholson mines, and 1951 should see two or three producers in the 

Goldfields area. 

 

Saskatchewan‟s economic expansion in the past few years has been steadily one of continued one 

advance, and great credit goes to those in charge of her natural resources and to those investors who 

have risked capital, who staked their future in the confidence of this province. 

 

The conservation programme is meeting with success. These programmes include the North 

Conservation Block system, the South Saskatchewan muskrat programme, and the organization of fur 

co-ops. The annual crop of beavers has increased from 139 in 1941 to 13,489 in 1950. 

 

To assure sustained production from our badly depleted timber stands, annual production is being 

gradually reduced from a peak of 150 million board feet to an annual production of 55 million board 

feet. Management plans have been completed to assure sustained yield from over 208,000 acres of rich 

spruce stands in the Armit and the Dore-Smoothstone areas, and plans are projected for an additional 

1,600,000 acres at present. The new utilization mill at Big River is in operation and is assured of a 

sustained supply from Dore-Smoothstone working circle and the projected Sled-Clarke project circle to 

the north. Fire losses in the province have been kept down to a minimum, due to improved detection and 

suppression organization and to increased public awareness of fire danger. The northern radio 

communication system, recognized as one of the best in Canada, has been steadily improved. The entire 

fire control organization is in constant radio contact and can be effectively alerted and directed at any 

time. In 1940-41, our radio branch operated 15 transmit-receiver sets. Now we have 180 of those sets. 

 

In the building of highways, the Trans-Canada Highway has made good progress in the past year, and in 

1951 the programme will be speeded up. The bridge (and I am sure the hon. member from Arm River 

will be glad to hear about this one); the bridge on the South Saskatchewan River will be completed at a 

cost of $850,000, $323,000 thousand of this money having been subscribed by the people of the 

province, and particularly the people of that area. The spirit co-operation of those people with the C.C.F. 

Government is being rewarded by its completion, after a wait of thirty years and many Liberal promises; 

but we would not hold that against you; we extend an invitation to come and help us open the bridge. 

We are trusting that you will accept this invitation and come up with us. You can see our water levels. 

When there is so much talk about the South Saskatchewan Dam project, use your influence to help us 

obtain that, too. 

  



 

February 5, 1951 

 

16 

 

Sometimes it has been said in this House that the condition of our gravel roads in this province is not up 

to the degree of maintenance that is in other provinces. This summer I had occasion to visit the west 

coast on a holiday, and I found that in the other provinces the condition of their gravel road was not as 

good as what I found in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In the field of education, this Government gave leadership in the field of larger units. At the end of 1950 

there were 48 school units in operation and 24 of those have completed their initial 66-month term; 21 

went on a permanent basis without a vote; two others continued, after a favourable vote; and some 

ratepayers in the other — Assiniboia — have petitioned for a vote for disorganization. Of the remaining 

24, 21 will have completed the 5½-year period of operation by the end of September; the remaining 

three, Watrous, Willowbunch and Rosetown, have terms up to four years to complete their initial period. 

 

During 1950, the 48 school units spent 1 1/4 million dollars on new buildings to provide 126 new 

schools including 178 classrooms. This raised the total of new school buildings by the units since the 

first one was established, to over 400. In 1950, renovation and repair of buildings in the units amounted 

to $750,000. Another outstanding contribution laid to the establishment of school units was the 

encouragement given boys and girls to obtain a high school education. Where students attend a high 

school in the units no fees are charged, but many units pay the student an allowance per day if that 

student attends high school outside the unit. This aid by the unit helps some students who otherwise 

would be unable to obtain a high school education. At the present time I have two students attending my 

high school from two different units who are obtaining assistance. Five units have provided dormitories 

for high school students to live in during the school year, except for visits home weekends and over 

holidays. These dormitories provide comfortable and supervised accommodation for students at a much 

less rate than accommodation could be obtained otherwise. 

 

The establishment of larger units has brought about a very important broadening in the course of studies 

available to students who live outside the major cities. Vocational subjects, such as wood-working, 

metalworking, electricity, shop work, motor mechanics, nursing and home economics — these courses 

are now are given in 35 centres in the province. School libraries have been built up: 46 of the 48 units 

provide circulating libraries so that a combination of classroom libraries and circulating libraries is 

available, and each unit school has the use of several hundred books a year. 

 

Teachers‟ salaries in the units have been negotiated on the basis of experience and qualifications, thus 

attracting to them the well-qualified teachers. Many units have employed a helping teacher to assist the 

superintendent. Many young teachers under the supervision at the beginning of the teaching service, 

avoid many mistakes and pitfalls. Thus the larger unit has brought to the rural boy or girl some of the 

opportunities that could only be obtained in the larger cities. 

 

This Government is to be commended on the leadership given in the establishment of the larger unit, and 

I am firmly convinced that it is recognized in the rural areas of the province. A revised course of study 

for the elementary school is being prepared. Discussions are taking place with teachers, with other 

groups, and the Department of Educations has set up an advisory committee 

  



 

February 5, 1951 

 

17 

 

representing several groups in the province which includes the Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation, the 

Saskatchewan Trustees‟ Association, Home and School Federation, Department of Health, Natural 

Resources, Saskatchewan Institute of Colleges, the Provincial Council of Women, College of Education 

of Homemakers, Co-op Union, Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, Congress of Labour, Trades and 

Labour Council, Chamber of Commerce, The Farmers‟ Union and the I.O.D.E. It is to be hoped that, 

after discussions with these groups, an elementary course of study will be evolved that will meet the 

needs of the Saskatchewan children. 

 

To date, 1,028 children have been aided financially to continue their schooling in institutes of higher 

learning. This Student Aid fund has been received well in the rural areas of the province and has made 

possible the opportunity, to many boys and girls in the rural areas, for higher learning. 

 

I was pleased to note in the Speech from the Throne reference to the plans for the expansion of electrical 

power, that over 2,000 new farm customers were provided with power, this year, and that 5,800 new 

customers were added in 1950. This is quite a contrast to the less than 50 farmers who were served prior 

to 1944. It once again demonstrates what can be accomplished by the people themselves owning their 

own enterprises, and it brings to the rural areas some of the conveniences enjoyed in the larger towns 

and cities. 

 

Lastly, while this cry goes on “to keep away from the province of Saskatchewan; it is a poor place to 

invest your capital”, we found in 1950 that 214 firms have been incorporated with the total capitalization 

of $23 million. Does it look to you that the people are frightened of the Government in this province 

when they will stake $23 million in 1950? 

 

Saskatchewan now is on the threshold of a new industrial era with rich potential minerals in the 

northland and in oil. Let us go forward with the confidence that these resources shall be used for the 

benefit of all the people of this province, and not for a few privileged and selected individuals. 

 

Mr. W. A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — I would like to just say a word or two of regret at 

the passing of Frank Jaenicke. When the hon. member who has just spoken said that he had passed 

away, I must say it was a terrible shock to me. I sat in the House of Commons with Frank Jaenicke, and 

I must say that he had a most likable personality and I think everybody liked him, on all sides of the 

House. There is no doubt he was a fine citizen. He was a conscientious member of Parliament, and he 

was not regarded as extremely partisan at all. I think that his passing is a distinct loss to the public life of 

this country. I‟m sure it is also a loss to the C.C.F. Party of which he was a highly respected and able 

member. So far as I am concerned, I would like to express to his widow and his children — I noticed 

from the „Parliamentary Guide‟ that most of his family served with the armed forces during the past war, 

and I heard before what a splendid citizen Mr. Jaenicke was and what a fine family he had raised; I 

would like to extend to Mrs. Jaenicke and Frank‟s children sincere sympathy from those I speak for in 

this Legislature, and also the sympathy of our Party to the C.C.F. Party in losing one of their really 

outstanding leaders. 

 

With those remarks, I would like to move the adjournment of the debate. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4.45 o‟clock p.m. 


