



















































Hansard: March 29, 1951


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eleventh Legislature 

40th Day 

 

Thursday, March 29, 1951 
 

The House met at eleven o’clock a.m. 

 

LIBRARY BOOK RATE 
 

Moved by the Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Minister of Education), seconded by Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): 

 

“THAT this Assembly, having learned through the Canadian Library Association that the Government 

of Canada proposes to increase the library book rate charged for library books delivered by post as 

from April 2, 1951, deprecates such action and requests the Provincial Government to make such 

representations as it deem necessary to have the present favourable rates retained.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I want to speak very briefly in asking the members of the Legislature 

to join with me in requesting the Government to request the Federal Government to reconsider its action 

with regard to increased postal rates insofar as it affects library books. 

 

I do not need to argue at this time, Mr. Speaker, the value of library services particularly to those 

communities where the books have to go by mail and have to be returned by mail. The position is that 

there will be a change in postal rates with regard to this class of mail, effective as from April 2. The 

present rate is 5 cents for the first lb. and 1 cent for each additional lb. or portion thereof. The new rate is 

7 cents for the first lb. and 3 cents for each additional lb. or portion thereof. In other words, the increase 

works out to, roughly, one of 50 per cent for agencies sending this type of book by mail. 

 

Just as an indication as to the effect of it, Mr. Speaker, the Public Information Library, as a result of this 

charge, will have to spend about an additional $1,000 next year in order to provide the service to our 

readers that we have provided this last year. It will cost, of course, other departments and agencies in a 

proportional way. Some of the services particularly affected will be our lending library services at our 

Normal schools, the Extension Department of the University of Saskatchewan, the Saskatoon Public 

Library carries on quite an extensive mailing service of this kind and, of course, the Wheat Pool Library 

is well known to all of the members, and it will affect them also. 

 

In consideration of that effect, Mr. Speaker, I move the foregoing motion, seconded by Mr. Walker. I 

may say that the Canadian Library Association has entered a similar request. 

 

The question being put on the said motion, it was agreed to unanimously. 

 

The Assembly then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on certain Bills. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11 o’clock p.m., without question put. 


