



















































Hansard: February 01, 1951


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eleventh Legislature 

1st Day 

 

Thursday, February 1, 1951 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, dated the eighth 

day of January, 1951, the meeting of the Third Session of the Eleventh Legislative Assembly of the 

Province of Saskatchewan, and the Assembly having met at 3 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber and, having taking his seat upon the Throne, 

was pleased to open the session with the following Speech: 

 

MR. SPEAKER, AND MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the Third Session of the Eleventh Legislature of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The birth of a daughter to the Their Royal Highnesses, Princess Elizabeth and the Duke of Edinburgh, 

has been the occasion of general rejoicing in Saskatchewan as well as other parts of the British 

Commonwealth. 

 

Since last Session of this Legislature, the international situation has further deteriorated. The 

Government of Saskatchewan joins with other peace and freedom loving countries throughout the world 

in the hope that a peaceful settlement to the conflict will be found within the framework of the United 

Nations. 

 

During the past year the Government of Canada and the Provinces have met in conference to devise an 

amending procedure for the British North America Act. My Government will continue to urge that there 

shall be sufficient flexibility in any amending procedure to permit the House of Commons and a 

majority of the Provincial Legislatures to make such changes in the British North America Act as are 

deemed to be in the best interest of the people of Canada. 

 

The Government Saskatchewan was represented at a Federal-Provincial Conference convened by the 

Government of Canada. The Saskatchewan delegation sought to discuss the implementation of social 

security and economic proposals advanced by the Federal Government at the Conference on 

Reconstruction held in 1945, but unfortunately the Conference was restricted to matters relating to 

Federal-Provincial Fiscal Relations and Old Age Security. 

 

Negotiations regarding a new Tax Rental Agreement are continuing. 

 

This Conference resulted in the proposal that the Federal Government assume responsibility for the 

payment of a forty dollar monthly pension 

 

  



 

February 1, 1951 

 

2 

 

without the means to all Canadian citizens seventy years of age and older. The Government of 

Saskatchewan is still of the opinion that the Government of Canada should provide a monthly pension of 

fifty dollars without a means test to all Canadian citizens sixty-five years of age and over. In the event 

that the Federal Government is unwilling to assume full responsibility for all Old Age Pensions that are 

now being paid in Saskatchewan, it is the intention of the Saskatchewan Government to ensure that 

existing pensions will not be reduced as a result of this change. 

 

It was further proposed a pension of forty dollars a month with a means test be paid to those in the sixty-

five to sixty-nine years age group. This is conditional on the provinces paying fifty per cent of the 

pension. In spite of the additional financial burden which this will involve, Saskatchewan will be 

prepared to co-operate with the Federal Government for the establishment of an Old Age Pension for 

this group. 

 

Arising out of agreement reached at this Federal-Provincial Conference, the proposed Constitutional 

Amendment permitting the Government of Canada to make laws respecting Old Age Security and 

permitting the Province to raise revenues by means of a retail turnover tax will be presented at this 

Session for your consideration and approval. 

 

The devastating effect of the spring floods in the Province of Manitoba was of great concern to the 

people of Saskatchewan. Immediate steps were taken to marshal the people and resources of 

Saskatchewan to facilitate the movement of flood control equipment into the stricken areas, and to 

provide accommodation for five evacuees, including hospital and sanatoria patients. More than half a 

million dollars was contributed by the people of Saskatchewan to assist in the rehabilitation of Manitoba 

flood victims. Tribute is paid to those who, with little notice and at great personal sacrifice of time and 

energy, rendered a neighbourly service in the critical days of the Manitoba flood disaster. 

 

The withdrawal by the Federal Government from the field of price control has contributed to inflation in 

the national economy to the extent that the cost of living is increasing at alarming rates with disastrous 

results. The control of evictions and rentals by the Provincial Mediation Board has forestalled some 

cost-of-living increases that have taken place in other Provinces. 

 

Saskatchewan has joined with the Western and Maritime Provinces in opposing the freight rate increases 

requested by and granted to the railway companies of Canada. The Government of Saskatchewan will 

continue to oppose freight rate increases and will advocate a readjustment of freight rates and the 

removal of the existing discrimination against Western Canada. 

 

The promise of a record-breaking crop was shattered by early frosts and poor harvest weather. The 

lower initial payment for wheat combined with increased costs of farm production has seriously 

curtailed net farm income. 

 

Saskatchewan’s long-term policy for overcoming natural hazards peculiar to this Province, with the 

object of bringing greater security to farmers of Saskatchewan has continued to make good progress. 

Provision is being made to expand programs associated with this long-term policy. 

  



 

February 1, 1951 

 

3 

 

Good progress has been made in land utilization, irrigation and drainage developments. Numerous 

community pastures, drainage, fodder and water development projects have been developed under the 

Agricultural Earned Assistance Programme. The benefits of this programme will again be made 

available to the farmers of Saskatchewan in the coming year. 

 

Classification and disposition of Crown Lands in the interests of proper land use and greater agricultural 

stability have made continued progress. One million two hundred thousand acres have been 

scientifically classified for long-term lease disposition. It is expected that the major part of classification 

of Crown Lands will be completed in the coming year. 

 

The Grasshopper Control Programme of the past year was extensive and effective. The campaign for the 

eradication of persistent perennial weeds has made excellent progress. 

 

Twenty-two Veterinary Service Districts are now in operation with full-time veterinarians. The control 

of Bang’s disease reached an all time high during the past year. Steps will be taken during the coming 

year to have the entire the entire Province declared a Tuberculosis free area. 

 

The rate of exploration for oil and minerals has increased greatly over the previous year. A number of 

agreements providing for continued exploration, including extensive drilling for oil, have been signed. A 

new oil field near Hearts Hill was discovered. Oil production in the Province now exceeds one million 

barrels per year. 

 

The Eldorado Mining and Refining Company, a Federal Government Crown Corporation, has proven its 

uranium ore body and announced its intention to establish a mine and plant a few miles from Goldfields. 

Two other properties in the far north are rapidly reaching the stage where decisions can be made to 

operate mines. Extensive prospecting and development work is being done in many parts of the north 

and in addition to uranium, nickel, gold and copper occurrences have been found. 

 

The-Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company has almost completed construction of a new nine 

million dollar plant in Saskatchewan to get greater recovery of metals in their operations. The company 

has also taken a large mining concession in the Province. 

 

The Geological Survey of the North and investigations of clay, magnesium, feldspar and asbestos 

resources are being continued. 

 

Work in connection with forest inventory, forest management and fire prevention and suppression has 

made good progress. My Government regrets that the Province has been denied national assistance in 

this important work because of the failure of the Federal Government to implement the provisions of the 

Canada Forest Act. Certain amendments to The Forest Act of Saskatchewan will be submitted for your 

approval. 

 

Biological surveys to make possible proper management of our fisheries have been expanded not only to 

ensure the future of commercial fishing but also to preserve the necessary resources for angling. 

Saskatchewan’s excellent fishing is attracting a greater number of tourists to the Province. A new 

Fisheries Act will be submitted for your consideration at this Session. 

 

  



 

February 1, 1951 

 

4 

 

 

The fur conservation programme continues to be popular with the trappers and more fur is being shipped 

direct to the Fur Marketing Service, thus bringing greater income to the trapper. 

 

Most Rural Municipalities are co-operating in a programme for control of coyotes. Evidence of success 

of the programme is now apparent. 

 

There was a noticeable increase in attendance at Provincial Park and local recreation centres. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has continued to expand the welfare services that are provided to the 

people of Saskatchewan. Services continue to improve in respect of Child Welfare, Mothers’ Allowance 

and Social Aid cases, Civilian Handicapped persons and Old Age Pensioners. Reports of the Dominion 

Bureau of Statistics reveal a further decrease in juvenile and adult delinquency in the Province. 

 

In order to assist needy families to achieve a greater degree of economic independence, the payment of 

Mothers’ Allowance for dependent children who are attending school is being extended from age sixteen 

to age eighteen. 

 

Preparations are under way at the present time for the operation of a new Nursing Home for the Aged 

and Infirm in Saskatoon. Construction on the Melfort Home for the Aged will commence during the 

coming year. 

 

Saskatchewan is co-operating with the Governments of Canada and the other Provinces in an endeavour 

to work out an effective national programme for the rehabilitation of disabled persons. 

 

The Corrections Act of the last Session was brought into effect during 1950. To further implement the 

recommendations of the Laycock Report, amendments to this Act will be introduced for your approval. 

 

Provincial and Municipal authorities, in co-operation with the Government of Canada, have sponsored a 

plan for Civil Defence. Legislation will be introduced for your approval which will provide for the co-

ordination of this programme. 

 

The work of improving our school buildings in 1951 will be effectively encouraged and sustained by 

continuation of the Government’s policy of grants and loans to school boards for capital expenditure. 

 

During the 18 months of its operation the Student Aid Fund has given assistance to one thousand and 

twenty-eight students. Because of assistance available through the Fund, there is little possibility that 

any student of ability requiring financial help now be denied opportunity to continue his studies beyond 

the high school level. 

 

During 1950 about one-half of the Larger School Units passed the trial of five years. Votes on the 

question of disorganization were held in two units, and both were sustained. 

  



 

February 1, 1951 

 

5 

 

In planning the revised programme of studies for the elementary school, the Department of Education is 

seeking the extensive co-operation of the teachers and public generally. Major decisions are being made 

as a result of such group planning, group discussion and group evaluation. As a result of such 

widespread participation our school programme will adequately reflect the legitimate hope and 

aspirations of the Saskatchewan people. 

 

Amendments to The Teachers’ Superannuation Act, which will extend the credit for war service, will be 

introduced for your approval. 

 

Through the operation of the Hospital Services Plan and the Hospital Construction Programme the 

people of Saskatchewan have been provided with the best hospital accommodation in the history of the 

province. Construction of the University Hospital at Saskatoon and the Mentally Defective Training 

School at Moose Jaw will go forward during the coming year. Blood banks will be established at 

Saskatoon and Regina. 

 

During 1950 the Government of Saskatchewan entered into agreement with the Government of Canada 

for the sharing of certain costs of construction of the Saskatchewan section of the Trans-Canada 

Highway. Construction of this highway went forward during 1950, and plans are being laid for the 

acceleration of the construction programme during the coming year. During 1951 the traffic bridge 

spanning the South Saskatchewan River at Saskatchewan Landing will be completed. The greatly 

expanded highway construction programme that has been carried out in recent years will be continued 

and accelerated during 1951. 

 

The Report on Provincial-Municipal Relations will be tabled during the Session. As an immediate step 

toward the implementation of some of the recommendations of the Report, you will be asked to approve 

an increase in the grant to Anti-Tuberculosis Sanatoria. In addition, Rural Municipalities will be given 

increased assistance which will provide for a more comprehensive bridge building programme. 

 

Legislation will be introduced for your approval which will establish a scheme of superannuation for the 

employees of Urban Municipalities and for the employees of Larger School Units. 

 

A revised programme of apprenticeship and qualification of tradesmen, designed to increase the number 

of skilled tradesmen in the Province and to secure the highest quality of workmanship will be in effect 

during 1951. 

 

A Wages Recovery Act to replace the Masters and Servants Act will be introduced for your approval. 

 

The expansion of the Saskatchewan Government Telephone Corporation during 1950 has been the 

greatest in the history of the system. More than seven thousand five hundred new telephones were 

added. Telephone services in the towns of Assiniboia, Moosomin and Biggar were converted to 

automatic. The addition of a substantial number of long distance telephone circuits has resulted in 

improved service, in spite of increased demands. During the coming year the Saskatchewan Government 

Telephone Corporation will continue the programme of expansion which, in the past five years, has 

enlarged the public telephone system by more than one-half. 

  



 

February 1, 1951 

 

6 

 

The Saskatchewan Power Corporation has made notable achievements in the extension of electric power 

services, particularly in farm areas. During the past year an additional five thousand eight hundred 

customers were served and one thousand six hundred miles of power lines were constructed. Over two 

thousand new farm customers were provided with the convenience and economy of electric power. The 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation has great plans for the expansion of the entire system to meet the 

continuing demand. 

 

During the Session you will be asked to approve amendments to The Rural Electrification Act which 

will enable the Power Corporation to make loans to farmers who are unable to pay their share of the 

construction costs. 

 

Financial reports of Crown Corporations for the year 1950 will indicate the largest surplus since their 

inception. These reports will be tabled during the Session for your consideration. 

 

Population movements since 1938 have resulted in a disparity in the number of electors that the 

Members of this Legislature represent. Amendments to existing legislation will be introduced for your 

approval which will adjust provincial constituency boundaries and provide for more equitable 

representation. 

 

A new Elections Act will also be introduced for your approval. 

 

The Public Accounts of the last fiscal year, together with Estimates for the year beginning April First, 

1951, will be submitted. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session, with full confidence that you will favourably discharge 

your duties and responsibilities in the best interests of the Province, and may Divine Providence 

continue to bless our Province and guide the Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor then retired from the Chamber. 

 

Mr. Speaker made the following statement: 

 

Hon. Members will recall that, on May 10, 1941, German bombs destroyed the historic Chamber of the 

British House of Commons. They will recall, also, that, in spite of that calamity, the British Parliament 

carried on without impairment of its spirit or break in the continuity of its work. 

 

On October 26, 1950, a New House of Commons, erected on the ashes of the old, was formally opened 

by His Majesty the King in an impressive ceremony held at ancient Westminster Hall. 

 

Recognizing the significance of the occasion, and believing that Members of this Assembly would wish 

to congratulate the Members of the British House upon their return to their restored Chamber, the 

Premier and I joined in sending the following cablegram to the Honourable Speaker of the House of 

Commons, under date of October 25, 1950: 

 

Colonel The Right Honourable Clifton Brown, M.P., 

Speaker of the House of Commons 

Houses of Parliament 

London, S.W.1, England 

 

Government and Legislative Assembly of Province of Saskatchewan 



 

February 1, 1951 

 

7 

 

unite in congratulating United Kingdom Members of their return to restored historic Chamber of 

Mother of Parliaments. May the light of this citadel of free democratic institutions continue to shine, 

as of old, for all the world to see, to admire and to emulate. May it continue to reflect the greatness and 

enduring qualities characteristic of the British people in war and peace. May Commons’ return to own 

House mark a new era for mankind of international harmony and co-operation. 

 

(signed) T. C. Douglas, Premier 

Tom Johnston, Speaker. 

 

On October 30, 1950, I received the following reply by cablegram from the Honourable Speaker of the 

British House: 

 

Speaker, Legislative Assembly 

Regina, Saskatchewan. 

 

I have received with great pleasure your telegram of congratulations on the occasion of the opening of 

our new Chamber. I shall communicate it to the House of Commons when we meet on Tuesday. 

Please accept and convey to the Premier and Members of the Legislative Assembly our grateful thanks 

and cordial greetings. 

 

(signed) Douglas Clifton Brown, 

Speaker. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 3.30 o’clock p.m. 

 


