



















































Hansard: March 02, 1951


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eleventh Legislature 

22nd Day 

 

Friday, March 2, 1951 

The House met at three o’clock p.m. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed, from Thursday, March 1, 1951, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the 

Hon. Mr. Fines: “That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair. (The Assembly to go into a Committee of 

Supply.)” 

 

Mr. Harry Gibbs (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, when we went in a huddle last night, and I finished 

my short address, we were talking in a very quiet manner, I think, about how the Opposition was 

complaining abut the high cost of the budget. I think I tried to explain to the members, very quietly and 

very casually, why they objected to the high cost of the budget. However, I noticed that, on the Order 

Paper, we have a resolution, I believe submitted by the hon. Member from Yorkton (Mr. Swallow) with 

regard to price control. Being a trade unionist and a member of a Trade Union, I would just like to point 

our for a few seconds, what organized labour is trying to do in Canada, to try and get price controls re-

established by the Federal Government. 

 

I think it is imperative that each and every member of this Assembly, both on the Government and on 

the Opposition side, should support price controls, because they know and we know that is one reason 

why our budget, at the present time, is so high. I would just like to read you, Mr. Speaker, with controls 

on in 1941 to 1946 (that was during the war), from December 1941 to April 1946, the cost of living 

index went up only 5 points. As a result, your 1939 dollar is now worth only 59 cents; you have lost 41 

cents on every dollar you earn. This means you can buy less food, less clothing, less of all necessities for 

your families. 

 

That proves conclusively just what we have been talking about in this House for the last two weeks 

about the inflationary period, the high cost of living and so on and so forth. I hope, when that resolution 

is put before the House, that each and every one . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. The hon. Member is out of order in referring to a resolution that is on the Order 

Paper. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — Well then, we will pass on to something else, Mr. Speaker, but I thought it would just be 

a nice hint, anyway. 

 

I just want to say a few words because I haven’t got much time today. I have to make about 25 yards in 

about 25 minutes for a touchdown. We have to have teamplay and I hope we get it, because if we get 

that I think, probably, I will get in under the wire. 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

 

2 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the constituency I represent, Swift Current, is quite a thriving little city, and 

I want to give credit to the C.C.F. Government for what they have done in regard to grants and 

assistance, financially, which they have given in various respect with regard to Swift Current. We have 

now, in construction, a union hospital, and I want to say, and give my thanks, to this Government for the 

very generous grant they have given towards that hospital. It is true the Liberal Federal Government is 

helping also, and I think when that hospital is finished we will have one of the finest hospitals of its size 

in Western Canada. It will be a credit both to the city of Swift Current and to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Also, our schools. I think I told you, last year, that we had one of the finest composite schools in 

Western Canada, built with the assistance of the Provincial Government, which our Liberal Opposition 

friends claim don’t do anything with regard to helping these matters out. I wish to tell them right here 

and now that, with the aid of the Provincial Government, we have got one of the finest composite 

schools in Western Canada in operation today. We have also been aided and helped in furnishing he 

museum there, which is another asset to any town or city or hamlet in this province: things we must 

have, things we should have, to further education and everything in that line. 

 

As you know, Swift Current is a railroad terminal. It is the hub of the busy distributing centre. We feed, 

through our distributing system there, railroads, from quite an area for miles and miles around the city of 

Swift Current; and as you know, we have quite a few government institutions there — courthouse, lands 

titles office. We also have a Highway depot, and a good one. They extended the warehouse, last 

summer. In helping to keep the roads in good shape, keep the snow removal down in the wintertime and 

so on and so forth, they are doing a real good job and I have to congratulate the Minister of Highways in 

that regard. 

 

We also have a power station, which has been equipped to feed hundreds of farm units and hamlets and 

villages surrounding Swift Current. Up to the inauguration of the C.C.F. Government and the progress 

of electrification, they had no such thing around Swift Current. Today, I am glad to say, that many a 

village and hamlet that had never seen electric light before, are using that power today which is a sure 

source and a sure indication of the progress which our Government is giving to the people of 

Saskatchewan, today. 

 

We also have a good telephone exchange. This last summer, they have rebuilt all the wiring — that is 

the main wiring and service wiring — and also put in hundreds of new cradle telephones, which is 

another asset compared to the old wall telephones, and another thing we can say is that, owing to our 

Government’s look to the future, I think it is all for the best, for better convenience and comfort all 

around. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that in a very short time, Swift Current will be supplied with natural 

gas, which will be another very great asset. I am hoping to see the time come when Swift Current will be 

serviced with another source of power in natural gas. And don’t forget: that small city of Swift Current, 

is noted, I think, not only 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

3 

 

Dominion-wide, but world wide, for its hospitality and friendliness, for the inauguration of what they 

call “Frontier Days”, and it is something worthwhile. I would invite each and every member of this 

House, if he has the opportunity around holiday time in the summer, around July, to drop up to Swift 

Current, take in the shows we can put on, and I am sure you will all have a real good time. 

 

As you know, Swift Current was the pioneer city with regard to the C.C.F. When we talked about state 

hospitalization and medicine, Swift Current was the pioneer and inaugurated the first Health Region on 

the North American Continent. I am glad to say that I think we are all proud to see that other regions are 

following suit and that, possibly before many years have gone by, we shall have a full comprehensive 

health scheme, under a C.C.F. and progressive government, which we have been wanting all these years, 

but never got under any previous administration that ever held office in this province. 

 

Our health builds up there are really wonderful — very well staffed; and it is a tribute to the Minister of 

Public Health. It is real tribute to the Minister and his Department for the good work he is doing in 

health and along those lines, and all I can say is I wish him Godspeed. I hope that, as the days go on, we 

shall probably get rid of some of the abuses that have taken place in the hospitalization and so forth in 

our province, and that the day will come very soon when we can get down to a minimum and possibly 

reduce the premium that we have to pay today, although it is very small as we all know. I think, 

possibly, one thing I would just like to mention and that is drugs. The sooner our province can get down 

to socialized drugs, I think that would be one of the finest things we could do in that regard, in order to 

bring down and mow down a lot of those abuses that are taking place, today. It is something scandalous, 

sometimes, what the low-bracket wage earner has to pay for drugs, and I think it is about time a stop was 

put to it. 

 

Well now, Mr. Speaker, I have got to come on to that well-known topic, which I think my hon. friend, 

the Leader of the Opposition knows already, because he has started to smile. He knows I am going to 

deal a little bit now, with the Saskatchewan Landing Bridge. As you know, this was the bridge that my 

hon. Friend evidently thought could never be built, now he is going to . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, let us get this straight right at the start and I won’t have to interrupt my 

hon. friend more that once. My attitude was that, when it was built, it should be built on high enough 

piers that, when the dam was put in at Elbow, it wouldn’t be under water. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — Well, we’ll take that explanation, Mr. Speaker; but at the same time, he said “It would be 

under water”. Anyway this bridge now is pretty well completed, and I would suggest to the hon. Leader 

of the Opposition that if he will go to the Department of Highways and Transportation, he will see a cut 

of the bridge in construction. It is a pretty good picture, too. But now all the six cement arches are 

completed, the steel spans are all finished; there is only the concrete floor to lay, and that will be laid 

just as soon 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

 

4 

as the spring and frost conditions will allow. Then we have the south approach to build and we are ready 

to go. I can also inform the members and am proud to inform the members that we intend to officially 

open that bridge on or about the first Wednesday in June, so I hope that you can all be there . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — . . . and I would certainly like to see the Leader of the Opposition there, because then I 

could definitely prove to him that the bridge was there and that he was on top of it, and if he were still 

doubtful, well, then, a little gush wouldn’t hurt — and I will guarantee he would be 20 or 30 feet below 

the bridge before he hit the water. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — The dam isn’t there yet, though . 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — I would recommend, anyway, that if he did go “over the top” we wouldn’t let him 

drown; I think maybe we would get him out some way. It would just prove to him that that bridge was 

there. So don’t forget folks: if you get a chance to come up there when the big show is on and when that 

long-talked-of bridge which the people of the southwestern part of this province had been asking the 

Liberal Government to build for pretty nearly 35 years, at long last it has been built by a progressive 

government, the C.C.F. Government of this province, and as I told you before, if we have a peoples’ 

government in this province — true, we have money to spend, we’ll have to spend money if we want 

anything, and that bridge cost plenty of money; but it proved to me, conclusively, that we have a 

Government sitting now in the province of Saskatchewan, that has both the will and the guts to do 

things. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Which has it got most of? 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — Well, Mr. Speaker, so much for the bridge. It is there. I know it is there, and I think it is 

well constructed. I don’t think we are going to have any reaction like the Duplessis Bridge down in 

Quebec. 

 

Now, we have talked quite a lot about natural resources, and there has been some very good information 

given about natural resources. We are finding oil and minerals. I don’t know whether our Liberal friends 

think that is to our credit or not, or whether they want us to find oil and minerals, because sooner or later 

that is going to be the pay-off in this province, and they know it, and I hope it will be soon. 

 

We are not only finding oil and mineral ores in this province, we are also finding fossils, Mr. Speaker, 

and I could name quite a few places where fossils have been found, and probably it is going to be quite 

an advent to the younger generation of this province, We can take Qu’Appelle and Saltcoats, Rosthern, 

Arm River — we have found fossils there, Mr. Speaker, and I am not speaking from terms of reference. 

The fossils we found in those places I have mentioned were dead, but they won’t lie down; and we can 

go one better than that, Mr. Speaker . . . 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

5 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You certainly can! 

 

Mr. Gibbs: . . . because I am positive that if Charles Darwin had been alive today he would patted us on 

the back, you know, we can go a little further north and up in a town called Redberry, I believe we found 

the missing link, I really do. I believe we found the missing link, and of course, I notice when my hon. 

friend from Arm River was talking, the other day, he had to mention about me getting back in the 

boilers. Well, when the Session is over I will have to go back to the boiler shop because that is my work, 

that is my trade, and that is where I will have to go. But I would like to invite the member from Arm 

River up to Swift Current and come to the boiler shop, and if it is at all possible I will try and rivet those 

loose plates he has in the upper story, and if necessary, I’ll caulk the seams to keep them watertight. I 

can’t do more than that. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, we have had quite a discussion on the floor of the House, about farms and about 

the 33-year lease, and all this, that and the other. Well, it might be all right, but I remember a few years 

ago, and I am not a farmer, but I own a lot anyway — or at least I think I own a lot; but it seems to me 

that we don’t own this land, we only think we own it. They give us a bit of paper and it makes you feel 

happy, but get behind a couple of years in your taxes and see how long you own it, and you know as 

well as I do, Mr. Speaker, that back there in the depression days . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Your Government will take it away from you. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — Oh, let him go, it’s all right; he doesn’t say anything anyway. 

 

We know that, when the depression was on, there were all kinds of farmers who thought they owned 

their own land who had to walk off it with nothing but a suitcase, and I saw householders the same way, 

too. Well, who got this land? They were supposed to own it; but the mortgage companies and what have 

you got it, because when the time comes that you haven’t the ability to pay, Mr. Speaker — yes it is nice 

to think you own something; but just get in arrears for a few years and see how long you own it. So, 

after all is said and done, I think this 33-year lease plan is a good plan. I really do, because it is 

protection all around, and you can be just as happy on a 33-year lease — you are there anyway, and it 

can be carried on — and you can be just as happy as having a bit of paper in a box in the cupboard, and 

think you own it — because you don’t. 

 

That brings me back to the nationalization of the mines in the Old Country, and I mind this when I was a 

kid. I heard an old Socialist talking on a soap-box, and I was only a bit of a kid at that time. He was 

talking about mines and lands and one thing and another, and he was talking about the coal pits of the 

lords and dukes. They all belonged to the pits and the mines up there. All the worker had to do was work 

his damned guts out and get nothing for it. And it strikes me right to this day, Mr. Speaker, and I think 

you have heard the same argument, that we have coal pits in the north of England 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

 

6 

running under the sea for miles, and the workings are three and four miles under the sea. The miners 

have to go out there to work. Do you mean to tell me that his Lordship or his Dukeship or whatever you 

like to call them, owns that — under the sea! Why, they no more own that than we can say we own the 

sky and the air — it is jut the same problem. So it is about time this thing is nationalized, and after all is 

said and done I think it conclusively makes the point I want to make — that we don’t own the land, we 

only think we own it; we are only lending it, as long as we live. So if we all get a good break while we 

are here and we can all make a good living, which we all try to do, why can’t we be satisfied? But no, 

the avaricious greed of man makes all the troubles in this world and that is one of them — the greed for 

land, and, by gosh! they have done it right in this province of Saskatchewan. Some of them are lousy 

with land. They can’t farm it alone; they have to take in labour and exploit farm labour. It is about time 

there was a stop put to it. I don’t care what you think about it; that is my opinion. As I was saying 

talking about land — a few years ago, in the depression, I was on the city council and we were giving 

city lots away for the nominal sum of $1 in order to get people to build on them so that they would 

become revenue-bearing. Today some of those lots, owing to the inflation and the greediness of the 

system we live under, are worth about $1,000 a lot. It is a lot of nonsense, I would say. 

 

Now then, Mr. Speaker, I am a Socialist and I am proud of it, and I think my Opposition friends can’t 

point a finger at me and say any different, because that it is the way I have been brought up — I never 

knew anything else. I have come through the bitter school of experience, and if I could make this life of 

ours better and give better conditions to the people, well, that is my aim. I don’t care how soon I go out 

or how long I am in, as long as I can make people happy in the communities of our province and in our 

Canada as a whole. 

 

I would just like to touch, for a second or two, on international affairs, and I want to say emphatically to 

each and every member in this Assembly that I concur with every word that our hon. Premier said with 

regard to international affairs, when he spoke the other day. I think he paid a tribute, not only to himself, 

to the people he represents, but to all the people of Saskatchewan and all the people of the Dominion of 

Canada, and I certainly want to be aligned with the thoughts, the splendid humanitarian thoughts, he 

gave out that day. 

 

We hear a lot about war, and I know that we had a peace delegation in these corridors, yesterday I know 

that the hon. member from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) made some snide remarks about it. Well, that is all 

right; that is his privilege. It was my privilege to go out and talk to those people because I believe they 

are not all Communists. I believe in peace; our Premier told you that he believed in peace, and I don’t 

think any one of you can point a finger, and challenge either the Premier or myself, as being 

Communists. But I am a peaceful man, Mr. Speaker, and I want to say to His Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition that I am still a peaceful man and believe in peace, and will do anything I can, while I have 

got life and blood in me, to keep peace. I don’t want war. A lot of these chaps that are talking about war, 

Mr. Speaker — have they seen it? Do they know anything about 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

7 

 

the devastations that war has caused? I know some of my friends in the Opposition have been through it, 

and I am certain they don’t want to see another one . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — . . . but just imagine: the battlefields of Europe are sodden and rotten with human blood 

yet, to this day, and we are still talking about other wars. I would just like a great number of Canadians 

to see the Old Country, to see the devastation, to go through Coventry. Coventry was wiped out, Mr. 

Speaker, as you know, and for years after that city was wiped out, it stank of death. They couldn’t bury 

all the bodies, Mr. Speaker, they couldn’t find them all — men, women and children that were 

diabolically slaughtered; so they threw a cement platform all over the city in order to bury them — to 

get the stench away from the city; and now the process of reconstructing Coventry is being done. That is 

not the only place, but several places in the city of London are being treated the same way. We don’t 

want to see that sort of thing again. 

 

Take the poor old British Isles: they no sooner had one war off than they had another one on. The people 

of that country are sick and tired of bloodshed and slaughter and war. Out here what have we seen? The 

average Canadian citizen doesn’t know what war is. They have never smelled gunfire, they don’t know 

what it is to see devastating bombs dropped and the slaughter of innocent women and children. They 

don’t know what it is to see houses demolished in a few seconds. They don’t know what it is to see their 

water-mains and sewers cut off. No, they don’t realize these things; but I do, and it is about time we 

started to talk about these things. That is one reason, Mr. Speaker, I never want to see war again, and I 

think, if we can get down to some intelligent thinking, and start to publicly speak about these things we 

don’t want to see any more probably we could get some action; I am not going to belittle any 

organization that has the fortitude to get out and try to bring to responsible parties peace measures and 

why we should have peace, because the world is sick and tired of bloodshed and slaughter — and I, for 

one, Mr. Speaker, don’t care who it pleases or offends. I say definitely, I am for peace and I will do all 

within my power, to bring peace and keep peace in this wonderful Canada of ours. 

 

Now I would just like to quote, because I know that, in many parts of Canada and many parts of this 

province, the Socialist is being condemned; but I don’t think there is any man or woman in this province 

of ours who has read anything about that “granddaddy” of the old Independent Labour Party, Keri 

Hardier, who would ever say that that man was anything but good. He has done a lot towards the 

foundation of Socialism in the British Isles. Keir Hardie, the good old Scotsman he was, rugged-looking 

gentleman, this is what he said, in defining Socialism: 

 

“What is Socialism? It is the return to that kindly phase of life in which there shall be no selfish 

lust for gold, with every man trampling down his neighbour in his mad 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

 

8 

rush to get more. 

 

“Socialism is the reign of human love in the room of hate. Socialism is not, as so many suppose, 

a thing recently invented by a few discontented, shiftless fellows. What is now known as 

Socialism is woven from the same loom as was the vision of Isaiah, and is also, without question, 

of the same texture as that Kingdom of God which the early Christians believed to be at hand.” 

 

There is wonderful tribute, Mr. Speaker, and there is wonderful grand old man. 

 

I guess I had better soon stop because I told you I had to make a touchdown in 25 minutes. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, just in conclusion, I would just like to make an appeal to my friends in the 

Opposition to stop playing, peek-a-boo and singing that song, “Is you is or is you ain’t”, because if they 

don’t they are going to be looking through the knothole at father’s wooden leg, and I don’t want them to 

go home from this Session with faces as long as fiddles and all worn out, because if they will get behind, 

as the hon. Minister of Natural Resources told them, yesterday, if they will stop fooling around and 

messing about, and support the budget — because they will have a lot to answer for if they don’t; well, I 

would say to them to get behind progress, get behind these things that the C.C.F. Government has given 

to the people of this province. You asked and received an explanation yesterday a very full explanation 

and I think if you do that you will go home singing, “Sing as you go and let the world go by”, and I 

think you will be very happy. So I appeal to you most earnestly to think it over, and I think you will all 

have a better conscience for doing it, if you will vote for this budget, as I certainly shall. 

 

Hon. J. H. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, by coincidence, the member who has 

just spoken, my old friend, Harry Gibbs and I were born on the same day, 58 years ago. Harry and I 

have many qualities in common, some good, some bad — I cannot hope to attain his size and his vigor 

and his wit, but as the years go by, Harry and I are at least alike in this: we grow more alike in our 

political thinking, in our loyalty to the C.C.F. movement, and our belief in the principles of ‘humanity 

first’. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in observing the usual courtesies, I wish to congratulate all the Government 

members who have spoken thus far in the Session. I wish to congratulate them on their constructive, 

sound and statesmanlike speeches. I would also like to thank the members for the Opposition for making 

the contrast in the quality of the speeches in the debate, so evident to the people of all Saskatchewan. 

Even the remarkable skill of the press reporters hasn’t been equal to the job of dressing up and adorning 

the speeches 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

9 

 

of the members opposite and making them acceptable and digestible to the people of the province. They 

have learned that you cannot make silk purses out of sow’s ears. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I have listened to the speeches of the members opposite during this Session, I 

have been more than once reminded of that ancient Roman philosopher who, on listening to the 

vaporizings of the opposition in the Roman Forum, remarked: “E nihilo, nihil fit” — out of nothing, 

nothing comes. Now, I wouldn’t want you to get the impression, Mr. Speaker, that I do not like the 

gentlemen opposite, because I do. They are friends of mine and some of them I have known for many 

years. In their youth, many of them gave promise of better things; bit it only goes to prove, Mr. Speaker, 

the deteriorating and stulifying influence of a long association with the Liberal Party. 

 

I should like to make one exception and that is the speech of the hon. member for Athabasca (Mr. 

Marion), yesterday, in the House. There we had the situation straight from an authority of the north. We 

in the south have been given to understand that everything the Government did in the north was bad. 

Now the sum total of the hon. member’s speech, yesterday, was this: he liked the things we were doing 

up there. He said, in effect, “We want the things that you are doing and we want them more 

abundantly.” 

 

I would like to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer for bringing down a budget that is both businesslike 

and humane. That is a rare combination that you can only get from a Socialist Government, and when 

we consider that this budget is less than that of the City of Vancouver for next year, it is less than half of 

the budget of the province of British Columbia, we conclude that it is, indeed, a very modest budget. 

 

Every one knows, in this province, that prior to the advent of the C.C.F. Government, in 1944, 

Saskatchewan as the “Cinderella province” of Canada, the most backward, the most neglected, the most 

undeveloped; a province lacking in social or other services. But during the past six years we have forged 

ahead until today Saskatchewan leads the rest of Canada in many fields; and that we can provide these 

extensive services that we now provide and for the development and the improvement that we visualize 

for 1951-52, out of this modest budget, certainly speaks for the efficiency, good government and careful 

planning of this Government. 

 

I would only wish, Mr. Speaker, that the budget had the purchasing power of the dollar of a few years 

ago, before the top-heavy, incompetent Liberal Government at Ottawa reduced the purchasing value of 

the dollar to almost fifty cents. This has been the biggest steal perpetrated on the people of this country 

in our entire history, and I would warn the Opposition that the people of this province and the Dominion 

are aroused. If conditions do not improve, you have surely sown the seeds of rebellion in this country. 

Instead of indulging in carping criticism and abortive speeches, you would be better employed for the 

remainder of this Session, in writing every day to your colleagues down in Ottawa, with the demand that 

they re-impose price controls and restore the dollar to decent purchasing value. They can bring about 

reductions when it is necessary, or when they deem it necessary, and at the expense of the farmers of 

this country. Five minutes ago it was announced on the radio that the price being paid on the 5-year pool 

to the farmers of this province is only 81/2 cents a bushel, instead of the 25 cents to which they are 

entitled. 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

 

10 

Now this damnable situation, Mr. Speaker, or inflated prices, of extremely high prices, bears especially 

hard on our low-income and moderate-income people, but it especially bears hard on the 5,000 people 

served by the Department of Social Welfare — the aged, the neglected, the handicapped the social cases, 

mothers’ allowance cases, old-age pensioners and blind pensioners — people, who by reasons of age, 

accidents, sickness or misfortune or other reasons, are unable to care for themselves. A Christian society 

demands that this Government help these people, and I was amazed to read in the editorial columns of 

the “Star-Phoenix” and the “Leader-Post” a request by those papers that the social spending of this 

Government be reduced. I read almost in the same papers that $455 million had been paid in national 

advertising to the daily newspapers of the Dominion of Canada in 1950. It comes with ill grace from the 

millionaire newspaper-owners this demand to cut down the services to needy people in this province. 

 

In dealing with Old-Age Pensions, Mr. Speaker, may I again bring to the attention of the House the fact 

that J. S. Woodsworth was responsible for bringing in old-age pensions in 1926. It is true that the 

pension was appallingly low, but it was a start, and for the next 16 years, from 1926 to 1943 — the last 

year of the Liberal Government in this province — the pension was only $18.75 per month. But from 

1944 to 1950, the pension more than doubled — it is now $39.20. In 1943, there were only 16,000 

pensioners in this province; now there are 24,000, because we have done everything possible, under the 

rigid means test imposed by the Ottawa Government, to bring as many people under pension as we 

possibly can. There were no health services in 1943 — and now we have. In 1944, this Government 

introduced free hospitalization, health, optical and dental services for our old-age pensioners and their 

dependants. 

 

This Government has set the example which Ottawa and one or two other governments have followed. 

This Government and the C.C.F. movement in Canada have carried the torch for better living conditions, 

more security for our old-age people. And, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that this determined and 

unrelenting effort of the C.C.F. on behalf of social security was never better demonstrated than it was at 

Ottawa at the time of the Dominion-Provincial conference in December last. That conference, Mr. 

Speaker, would have ended without an agreement, or without a definite commitment had it not been for 

the Premier of this province. I want every old-age pensioner in this province and in the Dominion of 

Canada to know that and to know the story. The conference dragged on for three days — no agreement 

had been reached. The treasury benches appeared to be pleased, because I am sure they did not want an 

agreement — and certain other provinces, or their representatives, appeared to be pleased. The 

Conference threatened to close without an agreement having been reached, but “Tommy” Douglas (God 

Bless him!) took up the battle. He displayed all the diplomacy of a Talleyrand, and the tenacity of a 

bulldog, and he refused to see that conference close without an agreement having been reached. He 

demanded that each province express its intention, and finally the Prime Minister of Canada consented 

to find out the opinion of the provinces. The Premier, T. C. Douglas, stated the position of Saskatchewan 

— that we were, first, in agreement with the granting of the constitutional amendment requested by the 

Federal Government; secondly, that we were in agreement with a $40 pension to those over 70, without 

a means test; and thirdly, that we agreed to the $40 pension for the age group between 65 and 69, with a 

means test, the Province to pay 50 per cent. 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

11 

 

It was interesting to see the action of the other provinces. After the Premier got up and declared his 

intention with respect to these three points, he was followed immediately by Newfoundland, then by 

New Brunswick; after some hesitation, by British Columbia; after a great deal of delay and hesitation, 

by Ontario, and then with further stalling and evident reluctance one province after the other got up and 

finally the 10 provinces gave their commitments with respect to these three things. Had that conference 

broken up without this action being taken, without an agreement having been reached, I am afraid, Mr. 

Speaker, we would have waited another 20 years before this next step had been taken forward in social 

security. It is true that, while at this conference, we pressed for a $50 pension and we also pressed for a 

pension or social assistance to the physically handicapped people, but that was not to be. 

 

Now, in respect to the health of old-age pensioners of this province, that has been taken care of by this 

Government. It is true their pensions have been raised, but much of the purchasing power of these 

increased pensions has been taken away by the high cost of living. There are two other matters which 

concern me — that is adequate housing for our senior citizens and the other is nursing care for old-age 

pensioners who require it but do not require active medical treatment. It is our policy to assume full 

responsibility for nursing care for all old-age pensioners in he province. To this end we have converted 

the Wolseley Home largely into a nursing care institution. Three years ago, the nursing home with a bed 

capacity of seventy-five, was established in Regina. Tomorrow we are opening a nursing home in 

Saskatoon with a bed capacity of one hundred and fifty to two hundred. It may be, Mr. Speaker, that the 

situation in Canada, the drastic shortage of steel that I found out about when I was in Ottawa last Friday 

and Saturday, may prevent our proceeding, but it will be no fault of this Government if that home is not 

started this year and completed in 1952. 

 

Now with respect to adequate, decent homes for these senior citizens of ours, the churches have done a 

good deal in this regard in the past and we consider it is a natural activity for these churches. We are 

encouraging them to assume this responsibility and will assist them in so doing. A few months ago I 

officially opened a home for the accommodation of ninety old-age pensioners in Saskatoon. There were 

delightful small suites for marred old-age pensioners and rooms for single persons of both sexes. These 

old people were extremely happy and we do want them to feel, these people who have done so much in 

the past in the development of this province, that they are not thrown into corners, that they are wanted 

and appreciated and are part of society. That is our policy, and so far our association with the churches 

in this fine humanitarian work promises to be mutually helpful and beneficial. 

 

I would like to speak for a moment on Mothers’ Allowances. Comparisons may be odious, Mr. Speaker, 

but we can most effectively gauge progress by making comparisons. Mothers’ Allowance paid in 1943-

44 were $520,000; in 1949-50, $1,083,000, and this does not include the cost of free hospital and 

medical care for all mothers and all their dependants. The monthly allowance has been more than 

doubled under the C.C.F. and the number receiving allowances has been increased by over eleven 

hundred. This increase has been due to a less rigid means test and the inclusion 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

 

12 

of such categories as unmarried mothers, divorced mothers, mothers whose husbands are incapacitated 

and so on. One noticeable thing, Mr. Speaker, has been the drastic drop from 1943 to 1950 in the 

number of widows receiving mothers’ allowance. The drop has been from 1,457 in 1943 to 886 last 

year. I am told that more and more widows are getting married and this has, no doubt, been due in part 

to the improved economic and social conditions in this province, and I have no doubt that bachelors are 

no longer afraid of the economic risk of marriage. Well, I had hoped that one or two members in the 

House would be influenced by the statement that I have just made. Naturally, we are interested in our 

Mothers’ Allowance Branch, in reducing the number of widows as much as we possibly can. 

 

Under the previous government, Mr. Speaker, allowances were cut off when the child reached age 16. 

Now they are continued until the child reaches 18, providing the child is in school and making progress 

that is satisfactory to the principal and to the Department of Social Welfare. The allowance has also been 

continued to age 21, with respect to children who are incapacitated and unable to work. 

 

Mothers with cash up to $2,000 and assets up to $5,000 are now eligible and all caveats have been 

removed from their property. It is true that a notice is filed in the Land Titles Office against their 

property, but this is merely as a protection, to prevent the widows from being victimized by high-

pressure salesmen, promoters and so on. We have a much more competent and better trained field staff 

today and these render invaluable service in counselling, advising and assisting mothers in keeping the 

families together and in helping to make the family independent and self-supporting. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with our veteran land settlement and our veteran policy in this 

province. Veteran rehabilitation has been the responsibility of my Department since 1945; also in that 

year, a legislative committee was set up, comprising all the veteran members of the House, as well as the 

three Armed Services Members of that time. I worked closely with this committee; I worked closely 

with the Legion, and I am happy to say that my associations with the D.V.A. of this province and the 

Dominion of Canada have always been most cordial and helpful — if I can keep the politicians out of it. 

 

This Government has done a great deal — maybe not enough; but it has done a great deal on behalf of 

veterans in this province — more than any provincial government in the Dominion of Canada. As an 

example, we have settled more veterans on provincial farms that all the rest of the provinces put 

together; and naturally it irks me when I find three non-veteran members of the Opposition attacking our 

policy because, I am sure, it has been so successful and so acceptable to the veterans of this province 

that they endeavour to sabotage what we are doing. We are accustomed to the sabotage tactics of the 

members opposite. They have tried these tactics with respect to every piece of our most progressive 

legislation — to larger school units, hospitalization, medical services, and all progressive things that this 

Government has introduced in this province. Why, they could teach the Communists how to improve 

their tactics in sabotage. I am quite sure of that. Fortunately, the general public, and particularly 

veterans, resent this sort of thing and, as far as the Opposition’s attack on our veteran land settlement 

policy is concerned, in the words of William Shakespeare, Mr. Speaker “I shall puncture their bloated 

bladder of lies upon the poniard of truth”. 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

13 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Stick your chest out some more. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — What has been the veteran land policy of this Government? Well, first, the 

allocation of Crown Lands to veterans on the basis of war service, need, marital status and other factors. 

It has been conscientiously and honestly done in contrast to the allocation of Federal land north of 

Melfort that went to Liberal political ‘healers’. Many veterans have told me, “Thank God; the C.C.F. 

Government was in power in this province when these provincial lands were allocated; otherwise they, 

too, would have gone to the friends of the Liberal Party.” 

 

The 33-year renewable lease, Mr. Speaker, is held in perpetuity by the veteran and his family and his 

heirs. He has absolute security. No one can take it away from him or deprive him of the right to pass it 

on to his heirs. There is no agreement that is more binding, more lasting and better than that agreement. 

The veteran pays one-sixth to one-eighth of the crop share produced, as his rent — and if the average 

crop falls below six bushels per acre in any one year, he pays no rent. Moreover, he has the right to 

purchase the land at any time after ten years of occupancy — not at war inflated prices. Look in your 

newspaper and you will find land advertised for $75 an acre today. I say not at war-inflated prices will 

he purchase his land, but on the basis of the long-term productive behaviour of that land. If a price 

cannot be agreed on, the Saskatchewan Arbitration Act will apply. A Judge of the District Court is 

chairman of the Administration Board and surely the members opposite have reason to have confidence 

in the judges of this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what has been the Government’s record of settlement: Over two thousand, as I have 

said, have been settled. This was our objective in 1945 and this is another C.C.F. promise that has been 

fulfilled. Now, over a hundred veterans have surrendered their lease agreements for one reason or 

another — health reasons, martial, inheritance and so on. If the veterans had owned those farms, they 

would have immediately sold them, naturally at the highest price that they could get for them. The 

veterans who have left these farms have been replaced by other veterans. If the veteran had owned the 

farm he would have sold it, naturally to the wealthiest farm in the neighbourhood, one possibly who 

already owned too much land. These hundred farms would have gone to the owners of some of those 

3,000 acres farms, in whom the member for Wilkie (Mr. Horsman) takes such pride. 

 

We have undertaken a large land clearance and settlement project east of the Carrot River. Over 100 

families have already been settled on co-operative and individual farms. This project any government 

can be proud of. It has been written up in the Montreal Stand, in the ‘Toronto Star’, in ‘MacLean’s 

Magazine’; you will find it praised in the national papers, but I do not suppose you will ever read 

anything about this project in the ‘Leader-Post’ or the ‘Star-Phoenix.’ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the only people who object to our rentals are those who say that they are too low. 

Undoubtedly the mortgage companies 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

 

14 

and absentee landlords complain that these mortgages are too low as it shows them up by comparison. If 

it is deemed advisable it is conceivable that these rentals to veterans may even be lowered further. If the 

member from Melfort (Mr. Egnatoff) was interested enough in this and wished to be of some guidance 

to the veterans he might have consulted with the vice-president of the Canadian Legion, who farms at 

Melfort, and who told me a very short time ago that if he ever had the opportunity of acquiring land 

under the provincial scheme, he never would have purchased land under any other agreement. 

 

Now, many veterans have told me that they do not intend to purchase their farms when the 10 years of 

settlement rolls around. If they have saved from $5,000 to $10,000, they are going to buy additional land 

for their growing families. Moreover they feel that they have absolute security in the agreement which 

they hold. They do not propose to spend several thousand dollars to acquire their land when they can 

keep it during their life-time and when they can will it to their heirs. Veterans, you know, are evidently 

much smarter than the members are. The only concern I have heard expressed by veterans is, “What will 

happen to our agreements if the Liberals ever get back into power!” Well I have assured them there was 

not a possibility of that happening, but if such a calamity should befall the people of Saskatchewan, the 

Liberals cannot interfere with those Veterans’ Agreements, or tamper with them either. If a veteran 

wants to purchase his farm, he will do it and it will not be determined by any action of the members 

opposite. 

 

I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that besides settling two thousand veterans, we built over seven 

hundred housing units directly after the war, in communities where the Federal Government would not 

build homes for veterans. As I look opposite, some of the members should be duly grateful for this: 

Melville, Estevan, Melfort, Assiniboia, Humboldt. Also, we have put these housing units into cities 

where the Federal Government could not keep up to the demand for veteran housing. Also, we provided 

housing and dining-room facilities for over six hundred veteran families or veterans attending University 

of Saskatoon. The Provincial Government went all out in assisting in the vocational and university 

education of our veterans in this province. That is not a bad record — is it? 

 

Now, let us contrast it with the Liberal record in this field. All veterans of World War I remember that a 

Liberal Government in Saskatchewan and Ottawa did absolutely nothing for veterans, except to sell 

them Crown Lands at exorbitantly high inflated prices. The veteran settlers slaved their guts out under 

an impossible burden of debt and over 14,000 to the 24,000 veterans settled in Canada left their farms in 

despair or were forced to give them up. And worse than that, Mr. Speaker. Now, after thirty years, 

hundreds of these veterans have still not secured the titles to their farms. They hypocrisy of the members 

opposite and their cheap political bribes! Well, the veteran knows the score and the veteran does not take 

kindly to the offer of a bribe. Listen to this article — these are the gentlemen opposite whose 

Government is going to give titles to veterans to their farms if they are elected. Listen to this. It is an 

article in the ‘Leader-Post’ of a few days ago — dated February 24th in this year of Grace 1951, and it is 

entitled “Vets (that is World War I) Land Debts Gradually Written Off”: 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

15 

 

“A persistent Irish farmer from the prairies, Wednesday, suffered another set-back in his annual 

battle to persuade the Government to liquidate the indebtedness of veterans who settled on farms 

after the first World War, and a Government spokesman said that $1,428.000 still owed by those 

veterans cannot be written off in one fell swoop. After thirty years, Labour Minister Gregg said 

the Government has been gradually liquidating the indebtedness of the old soldiers.” 

 

The Liberals are the most “gradual” people in the world, and after thirty years the veterans still owe 

$1,428,000 on their farms and they still have not got titles to their farms, and the gentlemen opposite are 

going to get the veterans in Saskatchewan titles right off the bat if elected. Do you think they believe 

you on the record of the Liberals at Ottawa? Yes, and on the record of the Liberals in this province do 

you think they are going to believe you? 

 

Now let us look further. A vote was taken as to whether these veterans should after thirty years be given 

their titles. Certain Liberals voted for it; all the C.C.F., the Social Credit and the Tories voted for it. Yes, 

there were a few Liberals; but not a single Liberal member from Saskatchewan, not even Brig. Mr. 

McCusker voted to give the titles to these old veterans. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that the veterans are not impressed by any promises made by the members 

opposite. 

 

I would like to say a word about the Veterans’ Co-Operative Farms. I am a believer in co-operative 

farming. Every one of the dozen or so co-operative farms which have been established in this province 

has been a success. They are economically and socially sound. They prevent the rural drift into towns 

and cities, a situation deprecated by the members opposite. The cooperative farms provide for 

diversified farming. I say that the utilization of our large one-economy wheat farms in this province as 

co-operative farms would settle every land-hungry veteran we have in the province. 

 

Now I was frankly told in Ottawa in December, when I conferred with officials of the Department of 

Veterans Affairs that “Jim” Gardiner has opposed the arrangement which I thought had been completed 

for allowing the veteran to use his purchase grant of $6,000 for the settlement of veterans on these large 

farms in Saskatchewan on a co-operative basis. Well I can well believe that Jim Gardiner opposed this 

arrangement. This is understandable, because the people opposite are all opposed to co-operative 

farming. You and I have heard the Leader of the Opposition in this House, and on the hustings, and in 

the newspapers, describe co-operative farming as regimentation, communal farming straight from 

Russia, the brain-child of Joe Stalin! Well, Mr. Speaker, would it surprise you to learn that the Liberals 

must have given Joe Stalin the idea of co-operative farming when he was approximately seventeen years 

of age. Listen to this! This is taken from the Statutes of Canada, Queen Victoria, Chapter 31, an Act to 

amend the Dominion Lands Act, June 13, 1898, when there was a Liberal Government in Ottawa. This 

is what that legislation states — this is what the 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

 

16 

amendment to the Dominion Land Act calls for: 

 

“The Minister may withdraw from general use and from settlement under the ordinary 

Homestead provisions of this Act any available Dominion Lands for Association of settlers who 

desire to engage in co-operative farming.” 

 

I hope the hon. Leader of the Opposition is listening to this. The amendment further stated: 

 

“Upon receiving from each association an application from ten or more members” (the condition 

was that ten or more members had to engage in co-operative funding) “stating they had formed 

an association for the purpose of engaging in co-operative farming”. 

 

I notice in the Hansard of 1898 that this was moved by Mr. Sifton, a good old Liberal, because the 

Siftons never change their politics; and it was ably supported by Mr. Davin, who was an early Tory of 

this province. Well, frankly, I do not condemn the Liberals for believing in co-operative farming in 

1898, but what I condemn them for is doing nothing about these good ideas which the Liberals had. It 

would appear that the present-day Liberals have gone to seed — or are infected by intellectual dry rot. In 

the past they had some good ideas and they had some good intentions, but they never got beyond the 

intention stage. Believe me, Mr. Speaker, the road to the Liberal hell has always been paved with good 

intentions and unfulfilled promises. They did nothing about co-operative farming although they passed 

the legislation over fifty years ago. They did nothing about larger school units although they passed the 

legislation in 1938. They did nothing in this province about hospitalization and health services or 

anything else that was progressive and for the benefit of the people of this province. 

 

A change has been made, Mr. Speaker, that this Government employs political patronage. That, coming 

from the Opposition, is a most amazing statement in view of the fact that their record in this province 

during their thirty-five years of office in the field of political patronage smelled to high heaven. The 

people of this province are now proud of the fact that patronage has disappeared and that our 

Government employees, our civil servants, are now being selected for their qualifications and their 

ability, and promotions are also being made on that basis. As far as veterans are concerned, Mr. Speaker, 

there are more than twice the number of veterans employed now in the civil service and Crown 

corporations than there have ever been in the history of this province. We do not ask the politics of a 

veteran when he applies. The fact that he has been a veteran and he has the qualifications is good enough 

for us. 

 

I did not intend to bring this matter up but I have not lived in this province since 1912 and I have not 

been a veteran without knowing and my friends experiencing some of the Liberal patronage and 

discrimination that has been going on down through the years in this province. I had not intended 

bringing this up, but the hon. member for 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

17 

 

Melville asked me, the other day, in the Public Accounts Committee, if the manager of our Metis farm at 

Lebret was still employed by the Provincial Government and I told him yes. That manager had been 

engaged by this Government on the basis of his experience and ability and as far as I was concerned he 

has been a good employee. He was a Liberal — that was well known; but that did not make any 

difference to us. I had several complaints and I ordered an investigation. An investigation was 

conducted, but on the basis of the report of that investigation, I did not think we were justified in 

dismissing him and his services were retained. Just a few days — this is what happed in Fort 

Qu’Appelle, a mile or so distant from Lebret, and I would ask the hon. member for Qu’Appelle-

Wolseley to lend an ear, and also the hon. member from Melville if and when he is in his seat. 

 

There the widow of a veteran who had been the postmaster for many years in Fort Qu’Appelle was fired. 

She had continued as postmistress at Fort Qu’Appelle after her husband’s death. Her husband had been a 

veteran, and two of his brothers had been veterans in World War I. Undoubtedly as a result of the 

wounds received by this veteran, he died prematurely, and his widow had taken over the post office. 

There were five members of her family, five boys. Four of them were in the services in World War II; 

one of them is still in the services, a high-ranking officer in the Air Force and decorated for gallantry. 

One of the other boys was killed in ferrying aeroplanes. That was the war record of the family. The 

youngest son was assisting his mother to carry on the work of the post office. He had been “frozen” to 

his job by the Federal postal authorities in World War II. He wanted to enlist, but they would not let 

him. This is a highly respected and much-loved family and this is the record of their services to Canada 

in two World Wars and to the community. Yet because a Liberal ‘big-shot’ in Fort Qu’Appelle, the 

wealthiest man in the valley, wanted that job for his son, this widow was fired from her job. 

 

I know the family well. I had taught four of those boys and I can quite understand and approve the 

indignation that exists in the Qu’Appelle valley today. Over five hundred residents signed a petition 

requesting that this lady, the widow of a veteran, be re-instated. The petition was circulated by the ex-

reeve of the municipality, a successful but hard-headed Scotch business man. I had never discovered that 

he was influenced by sentiment or that his emotions were easily aroused and I should know because he 

was chairman of my School Board for twelve years when I was principal of the school there. He 

circulated that petition, which went to Ottawa. Nothing was done. The Legion wrote in. Nothing was 

done! That is the contrast, Mr. Speaker, in the treatment of two employees by the two governments. 

Small wonder that the people of the valley are not going to rest until this lady is replaced in her job or 

that the position be turned over to her son who has rendered efficient services and has been a most 

popular postmaster. 

 

I would like to deal briefly with our Corrections Department, Mr. Speaker, and here again I must indulge 

in some comparison. Under previous governments the goals of this province were merely custodial 

institutions where the inmates were kept behind bars. They received no education, no training, no 

remedial treatment of any kind. Because 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

 

18 

of no segregation, the young inexperienced offender soon became a hardened criminal. Our gaols in 

those days were veritable schools for crime; repeaters were high and the incidence of both juvenile and 

adult delinquency was on the increase, except in periods of war. 

 

Now in 1947, on the recommendation of the Laycock Commission, the Corrections Branch was 

established under the Department of Social Welfare. Hugh Christie as director with a key staff of trained 

and skilled men have done a phenomenally good job in less than four years. The director and staff were 

given a job to do and they are doing it. They immediately changed the treatment of juvenile and adult 

offenders from punishment to correction and rehabilitation. By scientific means the causes of delinquent 

behaviour are discovered and treatment prescribed to remove the causes. The prisoners are given trade 

training and educational instruction. They are actively employed from six o’clock in the morning until 

ten o’clock at night, during the entire waking hours of their day. A uniform probation and parole system 

has been established across the province. 

 

I think I can best explain, Mr. Speaker, what has been accomplished by giving you the opinion of one of 

the United States leading authorities on penal work and a psychologist and author on this subject. I refer 

to Dr. Bromberg who spent several days in Regina, a couple of weeks ago. I am reading from the 

‘Leader-Post’ of February 24th: 

 

“Warm praise from the province’s correctional system and the manner in which the 

Saskatchewan Boys’ School and the gaols are being used to re-educate and rehabilitate the 

offenders was expressed Wednesday by Dr. Bromberg, an eminent American psychologist.” 

 

To use his exact words: 

 

“You have been most successful, more successful than we in the United States, in narrowing the 

gap between ideas or talks and actual accomplishments in the scientific treatment of offenders”. 

 

He declared he was greatly impressed with the philosophy, the programs, in the gaol system and was 

particularly enthusiastic about the school for delinquent boys. He referred not only to this, but Dr. 

Bromberg was struck by the relative youth and the obvious ability of the staff in the correctional 

programs. It reminded him of the business executive who attributed his success to choosing young men 

carefully and then giving hem authority to carry on. The institution and policies being carried out were 

clearly superior, Dr. Bromberg said. “You appear a progressive and progressing community.” 

 

Now, what are some of the results of our correction programme which has been operating for three short 

years? First, juvenile and adult delinquency in Saskatchewan is decreasing, while elsewhere it 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

19 

 

is on the increase. We have closed one gaol. In other provinces, new gaols are being built. We are 

currently spending less in 1950 in the Corrections Branch in this Government than we did four years 

ago. The number of repeaters in our gaol is decreasing and, above all, the scientific, humane and 

common-sense approach to the problem of delinquency is saving many young lives, making them useful 

to society instead of a detriment and a menace to society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to deal briefly with our Child Welfare Branch which has to do with the care of 

neglected children. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, when I became Minister of Social Welfare in 1948, I knew 

more about child welfare and child care than I shall ever know again. You see, I had been a teacher for 

many years and, besides, I was a father, and of course fathers know everything about children and 

especially if they are grandfathers. Now this Branch deals with neglected children, and if the neglect is 

continued or corrective measures are not taken, the child frequently becomes a program child and faces 

failure in life, a detriment to society instead of an asset, a potential menace with the penal institution 

more than likely its eventual goal. The problem is a sizeable one, when we consider that last year the 

Child Welfare Branch had 2970 children in care. Down through the years these children have come to us 

from broken homes; some of them are orphans, children of unmarried mothers and totally irresponsible 

parents who fail to look after their children. They have all been neglected or they are potentially 

neglected children. Many of them come to us with deep-seated emotional upsets and complexes which 

take a considerable time to correct. 

 

To my mind, Mr. Speaker, the work of this Branch is most important; the most exacting and difficult of 

any in the Department. Miss Parr, the director, and her associates are doing an outstanding job. They 

have taken as their philosophy “a home is necessary to a child”, and it is on this sound basic philosophy 

that the Branch has been organized. First, there is the Family Division, and it attempts to keep the family 

together. Family difficulties are many, especially in this neurotic era which we are under. Lack of decent 

housing and insecurity, low standard of living, immorality and a host of other causes lead to broken 

homes, separation, desertion, divorce and, Mr. Speaker, wherever there is a broken home or a 

maladjusted home, there is a potentially neglected child. The work of this Division is most important 

because it is in the preventive field. Sixteen Hundred and eighty-four family cases were dealt with in 

1949-50. The second division is the Unmarried Mother’s Division. Mr. Speaker, every possible 

assistance is rendered to the unmarried mother both before and after the birth of the child. Assistance is 

given in her rehabilitation, because she has gone through a harrowing experience. Employment is found 

for her and plans are made for her child’s future. Mother’s allowance is granted if she keeps the child. 

The putative father is contacted and made to realize his responsibility, financial and otherwise. I am 

pleased to inform the House there has been a decline in new cases from 912 in 1949 to 804 in 1949-50, a 

reduction of a little over a hundred. This is an important division, Mr. Speaker. These unfortunate girls 

were hitherto felt outcasts of society. They received very little assistance indeed; but now they are taken 

care of to such an extent that we have been accused of contributing to this defect; but such is not the 

case evidently, because there has been a reduction as there will be a further reduction in this if our 

educational programme is carried on. 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

 

20 

The third is the Child Care Division. Now we have over 2000 children in care at one time and emphasis 

is placed on finding good foster homes for government wards. No institution, Mr. Speaker, not even the 

best in the province, can ever replace the training, development, security and love which a child finds in 

a good home, and I want to express on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan the deep gratitude to the 

foster parents of Saskatchewan. I have visited many of these homes and there I find these children are 

living happily, well adjusted, receiving loving care, developing normally; and so I think society owes a 

debt of gratitude to the foster-parents of this province. We have four child-caring institutions for the 

reception of children pending their placement in foster homes, and they provide also for the continued 

care of difficult cases, occasioned by illness, serious neglect, deformities or other causes. 

 

The fourth division in the Child Welfare Branch is the Adoption Division, which places children for 

adoption and carries the process through until legal adoption has been finalized. Unscientific and 

haphazard adoption procedures in the past, Mr. Speaker, have led to many unfortunate adoptions with 

serious consequences to the children. In 1949, 320 adoptions were finalized, 200 placed in adoption 

homes on probation; nine out of ten of those were eventually adopted. One hundred and sixty-two were 

supervised by the Branch in the private placement of children; a total of 692 children in that year; 

children who have become permanent members of good christian homes — and again I wish to point out 

the importance of this branch and commend the staff for the excellence of the work which they are 

doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to deal with the other branches and divisions of my Department. The Social 

Assistance, with the work of the Rehabilitation Division, for the rehabilitation of handicapped persons 

— that is the only provincial government division of its kind in the Dominion of Canada. I would like to 

deal with what has been done and what we propose doing for the Metis population in this province. I 

should also like to deal with housing, but I will deal with that on the occasion when the private 

resolution on Housing is under debate in the House. I had intended dealing with it today, but I have not 

received from Ottawa a letter promised by the Hon. Robert Winters, who is responsible for the housing. 

That letter, I understand, will arrive in a day or two, but it was promised to me at the beginning of he 

week. It will outline the situation with respect to the supply of building material, particularly steel, and 

two and a half ton of steel goes into the building of every normal-sized home. The scarcity of these 

materials may interfere with the housing programme which we had so confidently hoped we would be 

able to go ahead with, this year. I have already received applications for approximately 2000 houses to 

be constructed in the various municipalities in this province, and it will be a great disappointment indeed 

if we cannot proceed with this housing programme due to the scarcity of materials. 

 

I shall deal with Civil Defence when it is discussed in committee and on the second reading of the Civil 

Defence Bill. 

 

Before sitting down, Mr. Speaker, I would like to pay tribute to D.M. Hamblin; one of the finest civil 

servants of my department and of 



 

March 2, 1951 

 

21 

 

this Government. He was one of our most conscientious, best liked, hard-working, efficient civil 

servants. Hours of work meant nothing to him. He had housing and Old Folk’s Homes under his 

jurisdiction, and he had taken advantage of the week-end, last weekend, to go to Saskatoon to put the 

finishing touches on the Nursing Home there which is being officially opened tomorrow. On returning to 

Regina, he and his wife were killed in a head-on collision between here and Saskatoon. I do wish on 

behalf of the Legislature to express our sympathy to the five sons who have been orphaned by this tragic 

accident, and again I wish to pay tribute to a very fine civil servant who died in performing his duty. 

 

Mr. A. H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6 o’clock p.m. 

 


