



















































Hansard: February 02, 1951


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eleventh Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, February 2, 1951 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

MOTIONS OF CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. T. C. Douglas (Premier): — At the beginning of each Session of the Assembly, it has become 

customary for us to take a few moments to give some thought to those members of the Legislature and 

former members of the Legislature who have passed away since we last met in this Chamber. 

 

It is always a somewhat sad thing to stop and think of members who were our former associates who 

have passed away. It is also a very fine thing too, I think, to pay tribute to the men and women who have 

served in the public life of the province, to remember with gratitude the service they have rendered, and 

to place in the record our tribute to their memory. 

 

There are three former members who have passed away since the Assembly last met: John R. Taylor, 

Nathaniel Given and William O. Fraser. I would like to put a few words on the record with reference to 

each of them. 

 

Jack Taylor served in four Legislatures and in part of a fifth, a fact which amply demonstrates the high 

esteem in which he was held by his neighbours in Birch Hills and his constituents throughout Kinistino. 

That he enjoyed also the confidence and respect of his colleagues of the Liberal Party during a long 

period of service with them may be taken for granted in that he was Party Whip for many years. Quiet, 

unassuming, never aggressively partisan, and always gentlemanly in debate, he was highly and 

affectionately regarded by all members, whether seated right or left of Mr. Speaker. As further evidence 

of his capacity for making friends and keeping them, is the fact that over a long period of time he was 

secretary-treasurer of his municipality. He was one of the prime movers in the formation of the 

Municipal Secretary-Treasurers Association. 

 

Mr. Taylor was born in England in 1882, but at an early age came with his parents to the United States, 

receiving education in Chicago public schools. Coming to Canada in 1905, he farmed in the Birch Hills 

district until 1914. He first became secretary of his municipality in 1912, and for time served as 

secretary of the local Grain Growers Association. First elected to the Legislature in the general election 

of 1917, he was re-elected in 1921 but retired in 1925. Persuaded to re-enter politics, he won the 

Kinistino by-election in 1933, was re-elected at the general election the next year, and again in 1938. He 

again retired in 1944. 

 

Mr. Taylor died of a heart attack suffered while playing golf on July 4, 1950, and is survived by his 

widow, his sister and one brother. 

  



 

February 2, 1951 

 

2 

 

A genial, friendly personality, the hurly-burly of active politics seemed almost distasteful to him; but he 

was assiduous in his duties as a member of this Assembly and constantly sought to advance the interests 

of his constituents and the welfare of the people of the Province. 

 

The same may well be said of „Nat‟ Given, who represented the constituency of Rosetown during the 

term of the late Dr. Anderson‟s Government. He, too, was not a polemical type of politician; his kindly 

disposition winning him the friendship of fellow members, irrespective of party affiliation. Born in 

Ontario in 1875, he was educated at Georgetown Collegiate. It was in 1906 that he came to the west, 

establishing himself at Delisle, Saskatchewan, where he was long prominent in the business and 

fraternal life of his community and of the province. An Orangeman of many years‟ standing, he was also 

for a period Provincial Grand Master of the Independent Order of Oddfellows. 

 

Mr. Given died at Guelph, Ontario, on August 18, 1950, and is survived by his widow, his sister and 

four brothers. 

 

William Oliver Fraser, who died on January 23, 1951, had applied himself to community affairs for a 

great many years to the time of his death. As Councillor and Mayor he had rendered such service that 

when he again stood for the office of Mayor in 1936, he continued to occupy that position for fourteen 

consecutive years, being elected each year without opposition. No greater tribute could be paid by a 

community to a pioneer resident. 

 

Mr. Fraser was born seventy years ago in Portage la Prairie, Manitoba, coming to Oxbow, 

Saskatchewan, in 1910 as manager of the Farmers Elevator Company. Later he established an elevator 

of his own and he continued in the grain business until three years ago when he retired in favour of his 

son. An ardent church worker, he served for almost forty years as superintendent of the Oxbow United 

Church Sunday School, and frequently conducted the church services in the absence of the minister. He 

carried the same spirit of service into his legislative work. Mr. Fraser represented the constituency of 

Souris, as a Conservative, from 1917 to 1921. He was not a candidate in the general election of the latter 

year, but re-entered the Legislature in the election of 1929 as a supporter of Dr. Anderson‟s 

Government, serving until 1934. 

 

Mr. Fraser is survived by two sons, three daughters, two brothers and four sisters. Another son, Flt-Sgt. 

John Michael Fraser, was killed in air action over France in 1944. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that all who knew these former members, or even those who were only, in part, 

familiar with their contribution to the public life of the province, would want to join in paying tribute to 

their memory, and, therefore, I am moving, and I am sure the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Tucker) 

will second: 

 

“That this Assembly regrets the passing, since last Session, of three greatly respected and highly 

regarded former Members who served in the Legislatures to which they were elected with distinction 

and integrity, namely: 

 

“John Richard Parish Taylor, of Birch Hills, Saskatchewan, Member for Kinistino from 1917 to 1925 

and again 

  



 

February 2, 1951 

 

 

3 

 

from 1933 to 1944; 

 

“Nathaniel Given, formerly of Delisle, Saskatchewan, Member for Rosetown from 1929 to 1934, and 

 

“William Oliver Fraser, of Oxbow, Saskatchewan, Member for Souris from 1917 to 1921 and again 

from 19 2019 1934. 

 

“In paying tribute to the worth and services of these departed former Members, this Assembly recalls 

their splendid contributions to the public life and welfare of this province, and expresses its sincere 

sympathies with members of the bereaved families.” 

 

Mr. W. A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, in seconding the motion which has 

just been moved by the Premier, I would like to associate all on this side with what he has said in regard 

to the public service of the three ex-members of the Legislature who passed away since our last meeting, 

and in the tribute which he paid to their service to their province and to their country. 

 

I was not privileged to know, personally, Mr. Given or Mr. Fraser. I only knew of them by reputation, 

and I know that they had a very high reputation for integrity and for public service, and I certainly want 

to join with the Premier in paying tribute to their service and also testifying to the loss which the 

province suffered in their passing. 

 

I was, of course, having lived in Rosthern while Jack Taylor was a member of the Legislature for 

Kinistino, the neighbourly riding, well acquainted with him and I also had a good chance to know how 

highly he was regarded by all his friends and neighbours of all parties. He was the kind of man who held 

to his convictions and beliefs and yet retained the affectionate regard of everyone, regardless of their 

differing beliefs. Of course, probably the greatest evidence of the esteem in which he was held, not only 

by our Party but by his own community, was that when he had left public life and had been out of it for 

eight years, when a crucial by-election came along he was prevailed upon to re-enter public life, and he 

did so and was elected in that by-election by a tremendous majority. Due to ill health he had ceased to 

take such an active part in public affairs and was always ready to give good support and advice when his 

health permitted 

 

We feel that his loss is a real loss not only to our party, but to the province and to the community of 

which he was such a beloved member. We certainly join with the other members of his House in 

extending to Mr. Taylors widow and his sister and brother, and also to the widow and sister and brothers 

of Mr. Given, and also to the sons and daughters of Mr. Fraser, our deepest sympathy in their sorrow 

and bereavement. 

 

Mr. Benson (Last Mountain): — I would like to associate myself with the Resolution that has been 

proposed. Being one of the two members who sat in the House with these three late members, I would 

like to say that they, at all times, were very kind individuals, were well liked by all members in the 

Legislature, and I think, 

  



 

February 2, 1951 

 

4 

 

performed their duties as members faithfully and well. I often think, on occasions such as this, it seems 

too bad that we cannot say some of the nice things about the people who perform public service while 

they are still living, and not always wait until they have passed beyond. I am very happy today, having 

been associated with all these men, to associate myself with the remarks that have been extended to their 

families. 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — I, too, would like to join with the other members who 

have spoken today, expressing my regrets at the passing of these three men who have been former 

members of this Legislature. 

 

Mr. Taylor, with whom I had only a slight acquaintance, I know was a very fine individual. I have had 

the opportunity of knowing, a little better, the former member for Souris, and I do want to say a word or 

two about Mr. Given, who, at one time, represented the constituency which I now represent. Mr. Given 

was a man who took a very active part in the social life of his community. He was very much interested 

in church work, and, as I recall, took a very great interest in the boys of the Sunday School of Delisle. I 

can well recall many of the activities with which he associated himself at that time. As stated by the 

Premier, he was an outstanding member of the Orange Order and also a very ardent supporter of the 

Conservative Party in that district. I would like, at this time, to join with the others in expressing my 

sympathies to his brothers and sisters who are left behind, and to the whole community of Delisle who 

will greatly bereave the passing of Mr. Given. 

 

Mr. J. E. McCormack (Souris-Estevan): — I would like to add a few words to the tributes that have 

been paid to the deceased members. I had the very great privilege of knowing Mr. W.O. Fraser for many 

years, and he was a man who played a highly important part in his community in the south-east part of 

the province. He served on the town council of Oxbow for over thirty-two years, and sixteen years of 

that time he served as Mayor. He was also the Superintendent of the United Church Sunday School for 

over forty years and, as has been pointed out on numerous occasions, he took the services when there 

was no ordained churchman available. Mr. Fraser was generous to a fault; in fact, he was a very warm-

hearted and kindly man, and there was no assistance that he would withhold from anyone if he thought 

they needed it. The town of Oxbow and district, and south-eastern Saskatchewan generally, deeply 

mourn his passing and regrets the passing of a man who has had such a high civic responsibility during 

his life. 

 

Mr. Peter A. Howe (Kelvington): I, too, want to join the others in saying a few words on the passing of 

these three. 

 

I had the privilege to know Jack Taylor; the other two I never had the privilege to meet. When I came to 

this House in 1938, we were on the Opposition for six years, and the late Mr. Taylor was the 

Government Whip, and we had a very splendid opportunity to get acquainted with Jack Taylor. We were 

always glad to see Jack when he came across the floor to the other side to talk to us. We always looked 

upon the late Mr. Taylor, not only as a very kindly personality, a very friendly human being, but he 

always impressed me to be a man who took his responsibilities very seriously. 

 

I am sure he assumed full responsibility and recognized the responsibility that he had to the people 

whom he represented in this House, in addition to the duties delegated from time to time by this 

Chamber. So I am very happy, Mr. Speaker, to join in with these other members of this House in 

expressing my regrets at the passing of the late Mr. Taylor. 

  



 

February 2, 1951 

 

 

5 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats): — I, like the member for Last Mountain, sat in this House with the three 

members who have been mentioned, and I think it is appropriate on my part to express my sympathies, 

with the rest of the members, on their passing. 

 

I knew Mr. Fraser and Mr. Given as sitting on the Government side at that time. Of course, like all 

Liberals, I knew Mr. Taylor better, but I can say this for every one of them, that I have never sat with 

anyone who took their responsibilities more seriously than they did. They were all men above reproach 

and did their work that they could best see would be for the best interests of this province and the people 

of their constituencies. As we know, we all have to pass some day. They have now finished their jobs so 

far as this side is concerned. We have only their memories to keep before us, and they have set an 

example for every one of us that is quite worthy of emulation. They had no enemies insofar as I knew, 

and they got their work done efficiently in spite of that. I want to express my sympathies, with the rest of 

the members, to the bereaved families. 

 

The question being put, the motion carried unanimously. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, there has also passed away one who will probably not be as well 

known personally to most of us who are now members of this Legislative Assembly, but who was an 

important link in the public life of this province, one who served in the distinguished position of 

Lieutenant Governor. I refer to the passing of Sir Richard Stuart Lake, K.C.M.G. I should like to place 

on the record a short notation with reference to him. 

 

Many tributes were paid to Sir Richard Lake at the time of his death on April 23, last, all of them fully 

justified by the thirty-five years of devoted service he rendered Saskatchewan and its people; many of 

these years falling in that transitionary period between Territory and Province, and in that arduous 

period between the First World War and its aftermath. Born in Preston, England, he inherited a tradition 

of public service and, for a time after leaving school, he was a member of the British civil service. 

 

It was in 1883 that he began farming in the Grenfell district, and it has been said of him that he brought 

to the district a “touch of the English country squire”, typifying the best of everything England has ever 

stood for. He identified himself with the prairie farmers of those early days; their problems were his 

problems, and as a doughty champion of their cause he was for a time vice-president of the Territorial 

Grain Growers Association. In 1894, and for some years thereafter, he was a member of the old 

Territorial Legislature in which he proved a strong advocate of responsible government for the 

territories. Later, as a Conservative, he represented the Federal riding of Qu‟Appelle in the House of 

Commons from 1904 to 1911. Appointed Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan in 1915, he immersed 

himself in various wartime activities, the chief being the Canadian Red Cross Society in Saskatchewan, 

of which he was president until 1921. As president, he took a prominent part in the inauguration of the 

invaluable peace-time activities of that great humanitarian organization which previously had confined 

itself to war work. 

 

Knighted by His Majesty King George V in 1918 for his manifold services, Sir Richard continued to 

devote himself to the causes dear to his 

  



 

February 2, 1951 

 

6 

 

heart until his retirement to Victoria, B.C., some 29 years ago. He had the dubious distinction of being 

torpedoed at the age of 79. With Lady Lake, Sir Richard was a passenger on the ill-fated „Athenia‟ on 

the night of September 3, 1939, spending almost nine hours in a lifeboat with 40 survivors before being 

picked up by a rescue ship. 

 

Sir Richard was in his 90th year when death came, appropriately enough for so fine an English 

gentleman, on St. George‟s Day — April 23, 1950. Surviving are his widow, Lady Lake, and four sons, 

one daughter and four grandchildren. 

 

I should therefore like to move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Tucker): 

 

“That this Assembly unites in paying tribute to the memory of the late Sir Richard Stuart Lake, 

K.C.M.G., former Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, who died at Victoria, B.C., on April 23, 

1950 in his 90th year, and to the distinguished services he rendered to this province and its people over 

a period of thirty-five years, as a pioneer farmer of the Grenfell district, as executive official of the 

Territorial Grain Growers‟ Association, as member of the Legislature of the Northwest Territories 

during the struggle for provincial rights, as member of the Canadian Parliament for Qu‟Appelle from 

1904 to 1911, as Lieutenant Governor of the Province from 1915 to 1921, and as President of the 

Canadian Red Cross Society in Saskatchewan during that war and post-war period. 

 

“Further, that this Assembly records is profound sympathies with, and expresses its condolences to, 

the members of the bereaved family.” 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say a word in supporting the motion of the Premier. 

The fact that we are passing a Resolution with regard to the death of a man who settled in the Grenfell 

District sixty-eight years ago, one of the first settlers in our province to commence farming, at least 

indicates the comparative newness of our province. It also indicates the tremendous job that was done by 

pioneers like Sir Richard Lake. To think that this is one of the first farmers in our province, and that he 

has just passed away, and yet when we look about us and see what has been accomplished under the 

leadership of the great old pioneers, makes one realize what great men they were, and Sir Richard Lake 

was certainly one of the outstanding men in that wonderful group of leaders and builders of this western 

province and of this western country. It certainly is a sad thing to see that pretty well all of that great 

group of pioneers have now passed away, but they have left behind them a heritage which we shall all 

cherish, and which, of course, is a greater monument than any which could be built of stone or wood. 

 

Mr. F. M. Dundas (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, having known the honourable gentleman 

for a great many years, since he came from my part of the country and sat in the Legislature as a 

Conservative, I can say that he was a gentleman who was respected by all political parties. 

  



 

February 2, 1951 

 

 

7 

 

I might say that I campaigned against him for quite a few years, but he was a hard man to say anything 

against. He was a gentleman from morning till night. His passing at 90 years shows us that a man who 

came to this country from the Old Country and settled in the Grenfell district served his country well and 

it was indeed a privilege to have known him. As Lieutenant Governor he was one of the outstanding 

men who have held that high position, and I am sure that the passing of Sir Richard Lake calls for the 

sympathy of all the people in the eastern part of the province. 

 

The question being put, the motion was carried unanimously. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to move, seconded by Mr. Tucker: 

 

“That the Resolution of regret and condolence, together with the transcripts of the oral tributes in 

memory of the Honoured Dead be communicated to members of the bereaved families, on behalf of 

this Assembly, by Mr. Speaker. 

 

(Carried Unanimously) 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Before the adjournment is moved I would like to direct a question to either the 

Provincial Treasurer or the Hon. Premier, in regard to the reports of the Crown Corporations. As Your 

Honour knows, reference has been made by the Premier to the record of the Crown Corporations during 

the last year, in a radio speech and also in other speeches, and I feel very strongly, Mr. Speaker, that it is 

only fair to the members of this Assembly and to the province that those reports should be made 

available at the earliest possible date, so that the actual facts upon which the Premier based his speeches 

may be known. I would like to know when we may expect those reports. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the radio broadcast to which, no doubt, the Leader of the Opposition 

is referring, copies of which are supplied to any of the members on request, make it very clear that the 

records of the Crown Corporations were not quoted from the financial reports which are tabled in the 

House. I made it very clear in the broadcast that it would be very improper for me to quote from any 

financial report, and that I would simply deal in general terms with the financial position and with the 

progress of the Crown Corporations. No specific figures were given, and the information, which is the 

property of this House, will not be given to the public until it becomes public property by being placed 

on the Table. The end of the fiscal year for some of these Crown Corporations is December 31, which is 

only a month away. The Crown Corporation reports will be tabled, as they are required by the 

legislation, within the first fifteen days of the sitting of the House, and I can assure the Leader of the 

Opposition that they will be tabled in plenty of time. 

  



 

February 2, 1951 

 

8 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one item which I am sure all members will be interested in noting, and that is the 

decoration of the Chamber since last we met here. The decoration has been done by the Department of 

Public Works and I think that the Minister of that Department ought to be congratulated on the fine job 

that is being done both in the appearance of a Chamber, and what we think are the improved acoustics of 

the Chamber, and the improved lighting. I am sure all hon. members will be pleased to see that the 

Chamber has had its face lifted, and I trust it will be a more comfortable place to work in during his 

Session, because of the work which has been done since we last met. 

 

I move that the House do now adjourn. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3.40 o‟clock p.m. 


