



















































Hansard: February 12, 1951


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eleventh Legislature 

9th Day 

 

Monday, February 12, 1951 

 

The House met at three o'clock p.m. 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed, from Friday, February 9, 1951, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

Mr. Howe for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, when the debate was adjourned last 

Friday night, I was mentioning that during the course of this debate a considerable amount of discussion 

had centred around the Wheat Board. I also mentioned in my opening remarks that evening, that during 

my part in this debate I would remain, as much an possible, within the boundaries of Saskatchewan and 

would only go outside Saskatchewan when the trail from here to Ottawa, or any other place, led 

Saskatchewan's interests across the border. 

 

For a good deal of the time at my disposal I will have to spend time on that trail, varying between 

Saskatchewan and Ottawa. Now I wish to point out that, during the course of his remarks in this debate, 

the hon. Leader of the Opposition mentioned that I was in the House, that I was paying attention to him, 

and that I was a long-time associate employee of the Canadian Wheat Pool. That is quite true. I spent a 

good many years with the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool as an employee and, previous to that, had spent 

some time in local organization work as a member of a farming community. I know the philosophy 

behind the movement, both from the grain marketing aspects of it and also the co-operative philosophy. 

I know something of the history leading up to the formation of the Canadian Wheat Board at the present 

time. I would like to spend some time — if it were available, which it is not — just dealing with some of 

the earlier aspects of grain trading on these prairie provinces, particularly in Saskatchewan or the matter 

of grading, docking and weighing, and the amount of distrust there was on the part of the farmers toward 

the people who owned private elevator companies and who operated the Winnipeg Grain Exchange in 

those days. I can only say, in passing, Mr. Speaker, that a great many of the inequities — and a person 

might even use a worse word — have been removed by the very fact that the farm organization, known 

as the Wheat Pools, has been established; but now we have a reasonably honest grain trade and farmers 

can be reasonably assured that their grades will be as their products indicate according to grain 

standards, that their dockage will be proper dockage, and that the weighing will not include taking the 

break of the beam or any unallowed amounts, in order to protect the elevator company that is receiving 

their grain. 

 

All those improvements have been brought about by the fact that the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool here in 

this province, and its subsidiary, the Saskatchewan Pool Elevators, have had a great deal — in fact, 

probably the most — to do with improving the methods of handling, grain in the country. But in the 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

2 

matter of marketing grain, elevators, of course, are not sufficient, and the Wheat Pools proper have to 

undertake the necessary steps to try and bring about what has been in the minds of a great many farmers 

for a good many years in this country — that is, some system of orderly marketing. 

 

We all know the history of the voluntary pools which operated from 1924 to 1930 in this country. We 

know the reasons why they were not able to do all the things they had hoped to do; but they learned 

many lessons. One of the lessons the Wheat Pool here learned was that orderly marketing provided an 

infinitely better price and much more stability for the grain grower than the speculative way, and, too, 

that with all the trade controls centred in Ottawa, and with the tariff advantages enjoyed by Canada's 

secondary industries, free trade, as understood and supported by prairie farmers, was a dream that would 

never be realized as long as a Liberal or a Tory government remained in office in Ottawa; and if the 

prairie grain growers were to have orderly marketing the job had to be done by a grain marketing board 

with the authority of the Federal Government behind it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a lot of work, educational work, had to be carried on by the Pool. In those days our 

Liberal friends, those who were opposed to the pooling system and who were supporters of the 

Winnipeg Grain Exchanges and others, accused these farm organizations of propaganda. The 

organizations themselves called it educational work — bringing to the public, the agricultural public of 

this country, the information they required in order to gain their support for the type of grain board 

which the Wheat Pool envisaged at that time, to bring it to an actual fact. 

 

That campaign started in the early thirties. There was a Tory government at Ottawa at that time and that 

government did not, in the early days of its administration, indicate any more interest in setting up a 

grain board or a wheat board than had the Liberal government which preceded it in Ottawa. Both had 

announced, in various terms that they were not in any way in sympathy with any movement that was 

going to interfere with the rights of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange and the private trading in grain. 

However, on the eve of an election in 1935, the Tory government did bring in a Bill for a Wheat Board 

Act, and we must remember, Mr. Speaker, if we are going to assess the future or even present, some 

history must be studied. I want the folks here to listen carefully to this statement. 

 

At the time this Wheat Board Bill was brought in by the Tory government, there were certain very 

important clauses which gave the Wheat Board the authority it required, because with trade centred 

under the authority of the Department of Trade and Commerce at Ottawa, it was necessary that a 

government-controlled Wheat Board must have authority to deal with all phases of the trade. 

 

At that time there was a Liberal Opposition to the Tory government, and anyone who reads Hansard will 

find that the Liberal Opposition was very intensely against some of the measures of that Wheat Board 

Bill. At that time the Liberals were as much opposed to a Wheat Board as they had been in the years 

previous, and as they continued to be for some few years afterwards, which I will deal with later. Some 

of the most ardent spokesmen of the Liberal Party were actually attacking the Wheat Pool. One member 

sits on the other side of the House now, in the front benches — the hon. member for Saltcoats — who at 

that time was very critical, and held public meetings with maps and 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

 

3 

charts to prove that the orderly way of marketing grain by the Wheat Pool was an uneconomic way, and 

we should return to the old ways before the days of the Wheat Pool. I expect . . . 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats): — I would do it again, too! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I expect the hon. gentlemen would do it again. I am not surprised or disappointed 

to hear him say so, I am simply pointing out that was the case. 

 

However, in spite of the opposition, a Wheat Board Act was finally passed. I remember when that 

Wheat Board Act was passed it was put out under the chairmanship of John I. MacFarland, who had, for 

a number of years, acted is manager of the Central Selling Agency of the three prairie Wheat Pools, and 

had conducted what were called 'stabilization operations'. While an old free grain trader himself, he had 

finally become converted to the idea of orderly marketing. His sympathy had been aroused by the plight 

of the prairie farmers, the wheat growers. Also, when he became chairman of the Wheat Board, in that 

year, under the last few dying days of the Tory regime, there was also given to him, to assist, an 

advisory committee of seven people, four of whom represented the producers; and after a considerable 

amount of controversy back and forth, there was a price established through the Wheat Board, of 87½ 

cents. 

 

In the early winter of 1935 and 1936, during the actual calendar year of 1935, a general election was 

called. The Tory government was defeated; the Liberals went back into power. They immediately fired 

John I. MacFarland, the chairman of the Wheat Board, and his Board, and put in charge of the Wheat 

Board, Mr. James Murray, an ardent champion of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange and the free or futures 

system of marketing. Let no one forget this history. They also abolished the advisory committee of 

seven, and to take its place they set up two other types of committees. One was what was called a Wheat 

Committee of the Cabinet, comprised of four Ministers of the Federal Government; Mr. Euler, Mr. 

McKinnon, Mr. Crerar and Mr. Gardiner. Mr. Euler, I suppose, knew as little about grain as it is possible 

for a man to know. Mr. McKinnon, coming from a prairie province, may have known the difference 

between oats and barley, but probably knew nothing whatsoever about the difficulties with which the 

producers of those products were faced. Mr. Crerar, who has since gone to the Senate but was at that 

time Minister of Mines and Resources, was a violent opponent of the Wheat Pool and an orderly system 

of marketing grain; and Mr. Gardiner had not yet at that time become a convert to orderly marketing 

through a government wheat board. 

 

That was the Wheat Committee of the Cabinet. Everybody here knows, and certainly I have learned 

since the time I have been a member of this Government, how difficult it is for people to get to see a 

Minister even in a provincial government, as often as some of them would like. How much more 

difficult is it to see a Minister in the Federal Cabinet — not because he may not want to see people — 

but because he is too busy. It was also very difficult to get the Wheat Committee of the Cabinet together 

to meet with people who were interested in orderly marketing of grain. Added to that, as I say, with one 

Minister violently opposed, another Minister still obeying the dictates of the Liberal Party and the 

Manitoba 'Free Press', two others not particularly or keenly interested in the matter, how were farmers' 

organizations ever going to get the ear of those men? 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

4 

To more, or less make up for the loss of the Advisory Committees of seven, however, the Liberal 

Government set up a committee of eleven, called an Advisory Committee. The original Advisory 

Committee of seven had very definite and powerful influence on the Wheat Board on behalf of those 

interested in the grain trade, with the majority representing farmers. What do our Liberal friends set up 

as an Advisory Committee? An Advisory Committee of eleven people composed of Mr. R.C. Brown, of 

Pilot Mound, Manitoba, representing the United Grain Growers, a violent concern, while called 

farmer-owned, violently opposed the orderly system of marketing grain, the Wheat Pool methods, the 

Wheat Board methods and others; Mr. F.L. Farnelles, of Halbrect, Alberta, a farmer, and I understand a 

good Liberal, but representing no organization either in Alberta or anywhere else across the country; Mr. 

C.E. Hayles, Winnipeg, Manitoba, representing the line elevator companies; Mr. J.C.A. Wijeam of 

Winnipeg, representing the exporters; Mr. J.A. McCowan, Summerberry, Saskatchewan, a farmer, and I 

understand a good Liberal, representing no group, no particular position in the organized group of grain 

growers; F. Pettypiece, Auld, Ontario, a farmer of no position, representing no organization; J.O. Roy, 

Montreal, Quebec, supposed to be representing the consumers, but his occupation is a feed dealer; G.H. 

Wesson, President of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, representing, of course, organized farmers here; 

E.L. Walker, Toronto, Ontario, representing the milling companies; Lou Hutchison, Calgary, Alberta, 

representing the organized farmers there in the Alberta Wheat Pool, and F.H. Glendinning, Vancouver, 

B.C., representing the shipping interests. 

 

We have there an advisory committee of eleven, five representing the private grain trade, one 

representing the U.G.G., who was hand-in-glove with the private grain trade and the Winnipeg Grain 

Exchange, an ardent supporter of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange, opponents of the orderly system of 

marketing grain; three farmers representing no particular organization, but picked out of the air or out of 

the voters' lists. That is the type of advisory committee our friends across the way have their friends set 

up as an advisory committee. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Might I ask the hon. Minister a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — If it is just a question, yes. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — The statement was made that the U.G.G. were violently opposed to the orderly system 

of marketing. I wonder if the Minister has anything to substantiate that statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Yes, history. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Any other than your statement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, the history is written. I have not time to read the history today. I am 

telling these things, and they can be substantiated by anybody who wishes to read the record of the 

various meetings that were held. 

 

Now then, under the pressure of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange, the Manitoba 'Free Press' and, because 

their sympathies were all with it, the Liberal Party when in power, suspended the operation of the Wheat 

Board. They went on for some years and their cry was what, Mr. Speaker? Their cry was: "You don't 

need anything but the private grain trade. The 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

 

5 

reason your prices have gone down is because there have been surpluses of wheat in this country, and 

just the minute we can move these surpluses out, prices will rise." While they claimed they were not 

carrying on a fire sale, nevertheless they were offering wheat to get rid of it to see what they called 'the 

floors of the bins'. 'Empty bins' is what they said we needed in order to improve the economic condition 

of the wheat producers of Saskatchewan and the western provinces. Get rid of the burdensome 

surpluses. 

 

Well, now, Mr. Speaker, in 1937 good old Mother Nature came along and helped them. We did not 

produce any wheat that year for market — the smallest ever in our history; I believe around between 35 

and 36 million bushels for actual sale, all of which, even of that small amount, was not raised that year. 

As everybody knows, that was a crop failure year. We saw the bottoms of the bins! Their 

prognostications were correct. The price of wheat did go up, because the following spring the farmers 

had to buy back seed. Why? Because the Liberal Government sitting here in Regina and a Liberal 

Government at Ottawa, made no provision whatsoever to hold back the meagre supply of wheat there 

was for seed, and farmers had to buy seed back, and the price was then up around a dollar and forty-odd 

cents a bushel, which the farmers had to go into debt to pay for, and the debt is still being paid — that 

which has not been cancelled by a people's government that eventually came in here. 

 

In 1938, nature again came to the rescue of the farmers a bit, because in 1938 we had, not a good crop, 

but most farmers had a marketable surplus. What happened that year? As I pointed out a while ago, 

originally when the Wheat Board had been set up, the price of wheat had been fixed in the Wheat Board 

at 87½ cents basis No. 1 Northern, Fort William. (Whenever I mention a price during the courses of my 

talk, it will be basis No. 1 Northern, Fort William, unless I state otherwise). In 1938 the Liberal 

government, who now claim to be so friendly to the western farmers and orderly marketing, cut off 7½ 

cents and reduced the Wheat Board payment to 80 cents a bushel, because there was a crop in prospect 

that year. And the following year, a few months before World War II broke out, in the spring of 1939, 

we were told that this county could no longer afford 80 cents a bushel for wheat, and that the Wheat 

Board payment would have to be reduced from 80 cents a bushel to 60 cents a bushel, and this aroused 

fear in the minds of the organized farmers and other people also, in this province. The result is that the 

Wheat Pool circulated a petition, which was signed by 156,000 people in this province, asking the 

Government not to decrease the price. They did not even ask for the 7½ cents to be added on to the 80. 

All they asked in that petition was that the Government at Ottawa not reduce the price below 80 cents a 

bushel. Because of the weight of that petition, the Government at Ottawa relented 50 per cent, and only 

reduced it to 70 cents instead of to 60, as had been their original intention. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — May I ask a question? What year was this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — In the spring of 1939. That continued for the crop year 1939, for the crop year 

1940, and for the crop of 1941. We had now entered into a war, Mr. Speaker. Prices of things farmers 

had to buy were going up, the costs of production were increasing; but the Wheat Board payment 

remained at 70 cents basis No. 1 Northern, Fort William, for three crops produced in this first three 

years of the war — the 1939 crop, the 1940 crop and the 1941 crop. Farmers were so incensed about 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

6 

this, and the agitation in the field became so great, that a series of mass meetings were organized in this 

country to decide what to do. The results of those mass meetings and other meetings held in the country, 

were to send a delegation, along with a petition, to Ottawa to ask for an increase — of what, Mr. 

Speaker? Not a lot of money, but an increase of from 70 cents to a dollar a bushel to take care of the 

producer's rising cost of production and living because of the advent of war. 

 

I would like to just mention some of those mass meetings; I was at a number of them. One of the first to 

be held was in September, 1941, September 16th to be exact, and I have a copy here of a press report 

from the Saskatoon 'Star-Phoenix' of that date. At these mass meetings, Mr. Speaker, not only were there 

Pool speakers there, directors, mostly the 'big guns' of the Pool, the president and the vice-president and 

the more important elected officials of the Pool, but they also invited the members of Parliament and the 

members of the Legislature, regardless of their political stripe, to come to those meetings and lend their 

support to what was being done. And so, the then member of Parliament for Rosthern, the present 

Leader of the Opposition here in this House, was invited to attend that meeting. The 'Star-Phoenix' does 

not give a verbatim report of Mr. Tucker's remarks at that meeting, so I am not going to say whether 

their statement is correct; but certainly the "Star-Phoenix' and the 'Leader-Post' have shown themselves 

inclined to give good coverage to any statement made by my hon. friend, the Leader of the Opposition, 

and this is what they say about this meeting: 

 

"Mr. Tucker, second speaker, stated that he was not prepared to say whether the Government was 

altogether right in refusing to grant the request of western agriculture or that Mr. Sproule was right in 

the statements he had made. He explained that he was not at the meeting to speak on behalf of the 

Government, he was there to speak on behalf of Walter Tucker, said that the time given him was not 

sufficient to present argument. Anything, Mr. Tucker stated, which held out hope for something better 

was grabbed at and supported by the farmers, and because of a diminishing standard of life during the 

last ten years, it was possible to stir up a great amount of animosity. It should be borne in mind, he 

said, that this was reconsecration week and that the people should be willing to sacrifice. Mr. Tucker 

said that there were people who would like to make the farmer better off than he had been before the 

war. He felt that this would not be fair when one considered the state of the people of England." 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. This purports to set out my stand. The hon. 

gentleman pointed out he is not saying that that is necessarily correct, and I want to tell him that that 

does not represent my position correctly at all. 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

 

7 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: Mr. Speaker, I hope that sometimes when statements are made in the press of this 

country about the C.C.F., the hon. member will realize that if they have been in error in reporting him 

they can also be in error in reporting others. I hope he will draw that to the attention of the editors of 

both papers, here and in Saskatoon. However, what I want to point out here is that in the latter part I 

stated that, according to the newspaper report he felt this would not be fair when one considered the 

state of the people of England. Now, let us see if other businesses were expected, as proper businesses or 

industries, to consider the welfare of the people of Britain. Private industry, the source of most of the 

Liberal campaign funds, were more successful in getting what they wanted. They we not expected to be 

concerned over the British plight, because, Mr. Speaker, in the House of Commons, on September 12th, 

the then member of Parliament for Weyburn, presently the leader of the Party on this side of the House, 

Mr. Douglas, asked the Prime Minister this question, as recorded in Hansard of September 12, 1939, 

And I will, read the question: 

 

"The Prime Minister stated that pending the proclamation of this statute, a Supply Board would be set 

up, (we are discussing war things now). May I ask whether it will take the place of the Defence 

Purchasing Board? Provision was made in setting up that Board, first for calling for tenders and, 

second, a limitation was put on profits when tenders were not called for. When the Prime Minister 

rises to reply, perhaps he will state whether there was any restriction of that kind with reference to the 

Supply Board that may be set up, pending the proclamation of this statute." 

 

To which Mr. Howe replied — Mr. Howe was then Minister of Munitions and Supply. I will not give 

the whole reply because there is a page and a half, Mr. Speaker, but I will quote the part that deals with 

the limitation of profits in Mr. Howe's reply to Mr. Douglas. I am quoting now: 

 

"The provision of five per cent was put in the last Act after a good deal of consideration as a minimum 

return for the service rendered, but it was one which men of considerable experience believed to be 

unworkable. I can say to my hon. friend that from that day to this the Defence Purchasing Board has 

done its very best to place contracts on that basis and has used every pressure brought to bear in the 

form of patriotism and so on, but to date it has not succeeded in placing a single contract on that 

basis." 

 

I think it is well for this country to remember. The thing I am dealing with here was the thing that is in 

the minds of a great many people, that there should not be profits made from war; that the munitions 

makers and the people who supply a Government with war material in Canada should not 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

8 

be allowed to become rich when other people have to go and get killed or get crippled in the 

performance, and that a five per cent profit was enough; but he says the appeals even to patriotism to the 

people who supply these failed to produce a single contract on the basis of five per cent. In other words, 

a strike of the suppliers of the munitions and supplies of war had taken place, and they wanted higher 

pay if they were going to be patriotic. 

 

Now, a delegation went down to Ottawa, 400 people. It was not composed only of farmers, because 

business people, professional people, were becoming concerned about the situation with regard to wheat 

in this country in that year, and so a delegation did go down — I might mention here, for those who do 

not remember the story, that that delegation went down financed by the nickels, quarters, dimes and 

dollars of the 186,000 signers of a petition throwing in the odd bit of change, as they do in a church 

collection plate on Sundays. That amounted to something over $40,000 collected from these 186,000 

people, which financed that delegation. The delegation went down to Ottawa. It presented its case, a 

number of things; but I am dealing now with the price of wheat. As I said before, all they asked for, Mr. 

Speaker, was an increase of from 70 cents to one dollar a bushel. One of the reasons that dollar was put 

in there was because they felt there should not be much difficulty in convincing the Liberal Government, 

who had won an election in Melville on the basis of pamphlets — "Dollar wheat will do this: send your 

kids to school; buy them hot lunches; pay taxes on your farm and do all that." They thought that, surely 

to goodness, a Government that believed that much in dollar wheat would not hesitate to increase the 

price during war-time from 70 cents to a dollar a bushel. 

 

The delegation was given a good hearing; then, of course, there was nothing more they could do, the 

matter had to come before the House of Commons. 

 

Now let us see what happened in the House of Commons. We will see the friendship of the Liberals 

toward this matter. At that time, two gentlemen who lead the two sides of this House were then members 

of Parliament for Federal constituencies in Saskatchewan. The Leader of the Opposition was then the 

member of Parliament for Rosthern. The Leader of this side of the House was then the Federal member 

for Weyburn. Who was it got up in the House of Commons and moved that the request of the delegation 

be granted and that they be given a dollar a bushel? Was it the Liberal member for Rosthern? No. It was 

the C.C.F. member for Weyburn, Mr. Douglas. The other member of Parliament. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — The hon. member from Weyburn did not make such a motion at all, and I challenge the 

hon. member to produce the evidence that he did make such a motion. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is now quibbling with words. I moved an 

amendment to the Bill which was brought in, to provide for one dollar a bushel for No. 1 Northern basis 

Fort William, and my hon. friend voted against it, and he has been trying to explain it away ever since. 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

 

9 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege: I pointed out at that time that the effect of the 

hon. member's motion would have been to kill the Bill to raise the price from 70 to 90 cents and would 

have left the price at 70 cents. It would not have raised it to a dollar at all, and they have been 

misrepresenting their position ever since. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I thought I did not make a motion! You just said I did not make a motion. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — . . . the terms, the hon. member just said . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — He must not to telling the truth. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, the history of this is well known: If I used the word moved a 

"motion", I could have used "amendment", but the effect was exactly the same. The hon. Mr. Douglas 

tried to got a dollar a bushel for the farmers of Western Canada and the hon. Mr. Tucker from Rosthern 

voted against it, that is the situation. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — On a question of privilege. The hon. gentleman has just said that the hon. member for 

Weyburn made a motion that would have given the farmers a dollar a bushel and I voted against it. I say 

that statement. is absolutely incorrect. The effect of the hon. member for Weyburn's motion would have 

been to kill the Bill to raise the price from 70 to 90 cents. It would not have given the farmers a dollar. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — It would have amended the Bill. It would not have killed it; it would have 

amended it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member from Rosthern knows that he is not allowed to get up and make a 

speech. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — The hon. member cannot misrepresent my position, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member is making statements on his own responsibility. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — He cannot misrepresent my position, Mr. Speaker, 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, I do not blame the hon. Leader of the Opposition for wanting to 

squirm out of this position; but the fact remains, everybody in the House of Commons and the country 

knew that the amendment moved by the member for Weyburn, Mr. Douglas, was intended to raise that 

to a dollar a bushel at they request of a delegation. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — And I voted against it — the usual misrepresentation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — There is no misrepresentation in it. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Absolutely, 100 per cent. 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

10 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we will go on a little bit further with some of our Liberals' 

friendship towards the Wheat Pools. I would like then, to review the attitude of the Federal 

Government's policy as applied to the Wheat Board in the distribution of cars to elevators, during the 

years of car shortage, during the war. A car allotment system was put into operation which militated 

against the possibility of the members of the Wheat Pool being able to deliver their grain to their own 

elevators in the country, because they were not granted sufficient cars. The cars were distributed to 

others, who otherwise would have had no claim to a Pool ember's business whatsoever. I would like the 

policy to be remembered about the distribution of lumber through the controller of lumber in the Federal 

Government during wartime, when the line companies had the lion's share of the lumber that was 

required to build the temporary bins in order to hold the grain because there were car shortages at that 

time. 

 

I want to remind the House also of another thing that our Liberal friends, both here and at Ottawa, when 

they think of it, like to take credit for. They like to use it as a background to establish their friendship 

with the method of organized marketing of grain. That is the time in September, 1943, when trading of 

wheat was closed and wheat was taken over by the Canada Wheat Board by decree of the Federal 

Government. The price was fixed at what? It was fixed at a figure close to open market price at closing 

that date — no relation to the actual value of wheat; but there was an attempt made by the people 

supporting the Federal Government and the Government themselves to prove that was a fair price for 

farmers at that time. And then to say they did that out of friendship for the farmers to protect them! 

There was no such intention in it. The reason wheat trading was closed on the Winnipeg Grain Exchange 

in September, 1943, was not to give any assistance to the farmers but because the open market for grain 

had got itself into an impossible position because the railway cars of this country were busy carrying 

munitions back and forth across the country and doing other war work. Anybody who knows anything 

about wheat trading, grain trading, and the futures market knows that what elevator companies buy one 

day they must hedge on the opening the next morning. When they hedge that contract they do it in 

October, December, May or July, whatever the contract month is, and they must deliver at that price at 

that time. And if they cannot deliver at the time the contract expires, on the contract month, they then 

have to buy it back. The result was, because cars were scarce and the open market was operating 

alongside the Wheat Board at that time, those elevator companies who bought on the open market were 

unable to deliver, or to be sure of delivery against their contract. The result of that condition is the 

possibility of a spread of possibly 50 cents of 60 cents between the price of grain on the street in the 

country elevator and the cash or spot price down in Winnipeg or Port Arthur. And so the government 

was compelled to do something about it, by the force of circumstances — not because of any friendship 

they had to the Wheat Pools, the organized farmers or the philosophy of orderly marketing of grain. 

 

Since that time, Mr. Speaker, the Wheat Board has been an instrument of Federal Government policy. 

Instead of being an instrument for the use and benefit of the grain producers of the prairie provinces, it 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

 

11 

has been an instrument to carry out, augment and complement the Federal Government policy, when 

they find use for it for that purpose. Ever since the day, Mr. Speaker, of the infamous statement of Mr. 

Chas. Dunning that everybody knows about in the early days of the formation of the Wheat Pools, when 

he gave out the statement, "For God's sake, read your contract," to people who were contemplating to 

sign a Wheat Pool contract up until the loss of the by-elections in Humboldt am Selkirk; from that time 

of Mr. Dunning's statement until the loss of those by-elections, the Liberal Party has been against the 

idea of setting up a Wheat Board. Those two by-elections gave them quite a bit to consider. 

 

Now, of course, having been driven into that position, what is the natural thing for them to do? Do as 

our hon. friend across here is trying to do today. Say that the things they said were misrepresented; the 

things that they thought, the actions they carried out, were not meant to be as they appeared to be, but 

that they have always been, according to them, very ardent supporters of the Wheat Pools and all 

co-operative enterprise. 

 

Let us have a look at a claim of that kind. I heard the Rt. Hon. Mr. Gardiner stand in the House of 

Commons and make the statement that the Liberal party was the father of the co-operative movement in 

this country. And, Mr. Speaker, I never missed an opportunity down in the House of Commons to deny 

it, and I deny it today emphatically, and I deny that the Liberal Party did anything to organize the 

co-operatives, nor did any other political party. We take no credit to be fathers of them. They have no 

credit coming, nor have the Tories. All right, they are trying to interject now, Mr. Speaker, and say that 

they are supporters. When they were in power here under Mr. Patterson, did they buy their supplies, 

their gasoline and oil supplies from the co-op refineries? Look up the Public Accounts or any other 

statement that shows the purchase of supplies and see. Did they give the 'Western Producer', a 

farmer-owned paper, any of their printing? The old members of this House, on either side, can answer 

that question. We do not need to go into these matters too much. 

 

Now again, let us come to another great expression of friendship they showed towards the co-ops. It was 

under a Liberal Government a few years ago, since the war, when the income Tax Act was amended at 

the behest of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange. The Act was changed so that co-operatives can be taxed, 

the Pools amongst them. Now, where was the Leader of the Opposition at that time? He was a member 

for Rosthern in the House of Commons. How did he vote in the matter of taxing co-ops? He got up in 

the House. I was there and watched him, and wondered what he would do. He was very uneasy. He said, 

"I do not like this. If I had only had 15 Liberal members from Saskatchewan instead of all that bunch of 

C.C.F.'ers over there, so we would have had more voice in our caucus, this would never have happened. 

But in spite of that I am going to vote to tax the co-ops," and he did, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — The hon. member has purported to say what I said in the House of Commons. Now, 

under the rules I am entitled to set that right in regard to myself, and I want to say that I said there was 

one aspect of this thing that I would have liked not to see there, but I said on the whole it took 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

12 

more taxation off co-operatives than it put on them, and so, therefore, I vote for it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, I accept the correction. I believe he did make that comment; but, of 

course, anybody who studies the Act knows that it did not take any more off them; it put some on. Mr. 

Gardiner voted the same way — both good Liberal members from Saskatchewan. Now, let us see when 

they put that taxation on, Mr. Speaker, what happens? Let no one be under any misapprehension about 

it, this is what happens. By the laws of Canada now you cannot operate a non-profit business in this 

country. The whole business of the co-operative movement in Saskatchewan as it stands at the present 

time is based on the philosophy of the Rochdale Pioneers, that people can band themselves together 

either to purchase or to sell the goods they require or the goods they produce for sale and to do it on a 

non-profit basis. But the amending of that Act and the application of that tax against them has and will 

as long as it stands on the statutes of Canada, states as clearly as it can be stated in English that there is 

no such thing and can be no such thing as a non-profit co-operative institution in Canada. That is the 

situation. Now, why did they do it? Who were the instigators of this? The Income Taxpayers' 

association; the Winnipeg Grain Exchange and its buddies, monopoly enterprises in Canada. Now, we 

have heard a lot . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. gentleman a question? Is he not aware that before that 

Act was brought in there had been a court ruling to the effect that co-operatives were liable to taxation; 

that this Act was to lift a lot of the taxation from them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, I will answer that question, but I wish they would not interrupt. I 

did not interrupt them. I never got up and asked a question. Mr. Speaker, the laws of Canada are under 

the control of the Federal Government and the House of Commons and the Senate, the Houses of 

Parliament, and if that court had decided as he says, which I believe he is correct in, they could have 

amended the law to prevent the courts from deciding that co-operatives can be taxed. All they had to do 

was amend the law and do it right, but they amended it to apply the tax. Now, we have heard, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — . . . I said in taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, I believe a little lesson in courtesy would not be any harm to some 

people. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I was just answering your leader. Mr. Speaker, I was just answering the Premier. He 

was talking to me so I was answering him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, there have been quite a few words said by our Liberal people in 

trying to get people to believe that, because of the greater farm income today, the farmers are much 

better off than they were before. Not so very long ago, just a few days ago if press reports can be 

believed, Mr. Gardiner made similar comments in Ottawa. I agree that the farm income has been 

increased, when you compute it in dollars and cents. 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

 

13 

But when you compare the farm income at the present time with the total national income we see we are 

no better off in so far as our share of the national income is concerned than we used to be. Now, for 

instance, the last federal census tells us that, in Canada, we have 733,000 farms. There are 3,200,000 

people living on those farms. In 1949, the Canadian farm income totalled $2,474,499,000. That is a lot 

of money, but you have to remember this, Mr. Speaker: in that year our national income was over $16 

billion. Now, on the basis of our population, if we had received our share of the national income on the 

farms of Canada, instead of receiving $2,474,499,000 we should have received $3,680,000,000. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Why do you want prices rolled back then? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — So the farmers lost in Canada $1,205,000,000, because they did not get their 

share of the national income, Now, we will take the prairie farmers. The farm cash income in the three 

prairie provinces totalled $1,272,000,000 in 1949. That was gross income. The same year the farm 

expense amounted to a half a billion, $500 million. That leaves a net cash income of $772 million. This 

$772 million net cash income has to be divided among 270,000 in these three prairie provinces, and that 

works out at $2,860 average farm income. I wonder if that will answer the hon. gentleman's interjection, 

"what do we want prices rolled back for". 

 

I will say, Mr. Speaker, right now, that at the first excuse that there appears to be, the first time there is 

an indication that there is a back-swing towards the old methods on the part of enough people, and 

enough pressure put on by the Winnipeg Grain Exchange and others who support the Liberal party, who 

do not like to see this method of orderly marketing under government or public control, particularly if it 

ever develops that we get a proper advisory committee, where the producers themselves have a large 

measure of influence. I predict that, when that day comes and the Liberal party can sense it, they will go 

back on the co-ops and the Wheat Pool just as far as they were back in the days of the 1920's and 1930's 

and up until, I say, they lost the Humboldt and the Selkirk by-elections a few years ago. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I could be wrong. But their history of the past indicates that at least I have good grounds for the 

suspicions I hold. 

 

Now, I want to make another thing very clear, Mr. Speaker. We people on this side of the House do not 

criticise the Wheat Board as such. I mentioned a while ago that we object to the Wheat Board being 

made an instrument of government policies. We want the Wheat Board. We want it retained; but we 

want it brought under some measure of control so that it will do the job for farmers, not do a job that the 

Federal Government wants done for itself. We do not want the Winnipeg Grain Exchange. I agree that 

my hon. friend from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) does want it. I think he has made himself clear. That is 

fine. I disagree with him most emphatically. I do not want to see speculation in the farmer's products and 

in the foodstuffs that people have to buy. I do not believe in it. Nobody on this side of the House 

believes in it. That is the important thing to remember. We want the Wheat Board retained; as I said we 

want it done in such a way that its operations rebound to the benefit of 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

14 

farmers at all times, not rebound to that of some particular political policy that the Federal Government 

may make. 

 

While I am at it I want to point this out. I said in the opening remarks of my address this afternoon, Mr. 

Speaker, that the operations of the farm organizations and the elevator business had cleaned up to a 

tremendous extent the things that used to be wrong, that were inimical to the farmers' interests. And I 

want to say that, because of all those things, all elevator companies, line or pool, will only engage the 

very finest type of young chap to man their elevators as elevator agents and in the main, I believe, we 

find some excellent fellows doing those jobs. These men, as elevator agents, are in effect the agents of 

the Wheat Board so far as handling the products that the Wheat Board has control over, and they do a 

most excellent job for the farmers of this country, and I think that their work should be appreciated. 

They have much narrower spreads than they used to have in the old days. I still know something of the 

old private grain trade buying days. I bought for them. I know the methods you were supposed to use. I 

know the methods they are supposed to use now, and there is not near the leeway. The farmers can be 

sure now of their right weight. The elevator agent has to be careful of his weighing now. He has got to 

be an honest man. He has to be careful to see that he does not waste it, otherwise he would find himself 

short. When we read the accounts of various elevator companies, we see that the dockage overages, the 

gross overages and grain gains are much less than they used to be. They have a very difficult, exacting 

and arduous position, and I think these something over 5,000 elevator agents in the prairie provinces 

(there are well over 3,000 this province) are a group of people to be highly commended for their 

efficiency and competency in the particular job they are in. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I had hoped during the course of this debate to be able to devote a considerable 

amount of time to the work of the Department over which I have the honour to preside at the present 

time, and I am going to assure my friends on the other side of the House that I will do so before this 

Session is over. I will this year, make no mistake about that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason I was compelled to undertake the address that I have given today in this House 

is because it is important to remind this country, those that happen to be listening on the radio, and 

remind our friends opposite and anybody who is in the gallery, of the history of the attitude of those 

gentlemen opposite and their colleagues toward the very important philosophy of orderly marketing of 

grain, of doing it under government control, because of the particular trade situation and trade controls 

that are operated in Canada. Their attitude has not been friendly toward orderly marketing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. W.S. Thair (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to associate myself with those members who 

have preceded me in congratulating the hon. member for Kelvington (Mr. Howe) and the hon. member 

for Elrose (Mr. Willis) who so ably moved and seconded the Address 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

 

15 

in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. At this time I should also like to bring greetings to the people of 

Lumsden constituency, whom I have had the honour to represent at this eighth session of the 

Legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in reviewing the world events since the Session of one year ago, one is reminded of a 

quotation from a recently published book in the Legislative Library, called, "The Pursuit of Plenty", by 

Mezerik, who says: 

 

"We are entering the toughest and roughest half-century in the memory of man." 

 

And I might add, with two devastating wars behind us, there are grave possibilities of a third world war. 

Even as we discuss this awful possibility we cannot help but realize that while we continue to talk about 

war, men are dying on the field of battle, and in some parts of the world the civilians are being subjected 

to wholesale slaughter. It seems, Mr. Speaker, as if the only peace that we have achieved in two world 

wars is but a fearful and ever-shortening interval before the next holocaust; and surely it is time we came 

to grips with the root causes of the wars, which are not just military. One of the greatest causes of war is 

the undernourished and half-starved peoples of Asia. If we would have peace we must begin to fight 

these root causes of war with the same valour and selflessness with which we fight war itself. 

 

It is over ten years, Sir, since Franklin D. Roosevelt, the great statesman and humanitarian, outlined to 

the American people and the world his four freedoms — 'freedom of speech, freedom of religion, 

freedom from want and freedom from fear.' We must ask ourselves to what extent these conditions of 

peace have been met, or are we travelling in another direction? If that is so, we here today, who enjoy 

comparative plenty, must bear a large share of the responsibility for the plight of our less fortunate 

follow man throughout the world. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with regard to agriculture. The past year has been a most unfortunate one for most 

grain farmers in Western Canada and, perhaps particularly, in Saskatchewan. From a possible 

record-breaking yield of 430 million bushels of high grade wheat, the Saskatchewan crop was reduced to 

about 260 million bushels of wheat. Of that amount it is estimated, according to Mr. Horner, the Fields 

Crop Commissioner, that probably 160 million bushels or 55 per cent, will grade No. 5, No. 6 and feed 

wheat. 

 

At the present time there is also, perhaps, more than one million acres, or 20 million bushels of wheat, in 

Northern Saskatchewan, unthreshed. It is doubtful if Canada will be able, even this year, to have enough 

of the commercial wheat to fulfil her quota under the world Wheat Agreement, and have sufficient good 

wheat for seed and domestic purposes. The financial loss to farmers, and business in general, accounted 

for by frost and bad weather, coupled with low grades and a low price for wheat, will probably reach the 

high figure of $200 million. Even in this City of Regina, the centre of the largest wheat area in 

Saskatchewan, all lines of business must feel this great loss of pur- 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

16 

chasing power because of the low price and crop conditions that I have just mentioned. 

 

In Saskatchewan it is also estimated that there is almost six million bushels of tough and damp wheat in 

bins, local elevators, boxcars, or in terminals at Fort William; and there is great danger, Sir, of millions 

of bushels of tough wheat sprouting when spring comes, unless superhuman efforts are made to 

condition or dry this wheat before seeding time. This wheat has a moisture content of from 14.4 to as 

high as even 32 per cent, and, working at top speed, the terminal elevators are only able to dry about 300 

million bushels a day. So, today, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan farmer is facing the combination of 

serious problems of low grades of wheat, low yields and tough grain, low prices for cereal crops, while 

costs of farm production, such as ever-increasing freight rates and highest machinery costs in the history 

of Canada, high cost of fertilizers, tires, farm fuels and general living costs have reached unprecedented 

high levels. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a farmer and a member of this Legislature, I am in accord with the parity price 

resolution which was passed by the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, at Calgary, on January 20, 

1951. These delegates, representing agriculture across Canada, voted unanimously to accept the 

principle of parity price for farmers' products. They opposed, as we do over here, the speculative system 

of marketing, and endorsed the orderly marketing procedure and international commodity agreements. 

Dr. E.C. Hope made some comments at this convention at Calgary. Dr. Hope is the secretary of the 

Canadian Federation of Agriculture, and with regard to parity prices, he said that by next summer, the 

farmers' dollar will be down to 50 cents, as compared with its value in 1942. I repeat, that is what Dr. 

E.C. Hope told the Canadian Federation of Agriculture in Calgary. Dr. Hope put the picture of the 

decline in the value of the dollar very realistically when he said that a man who bought a victory bond in 

1942 of $1,000, today it was worth away less than $660, and this goes all down the line as far as the 

inflationary measures are concerned. Then he spoke about farming particularly, and I quote: 

 

"The net income for a farm operator has fluctuated up and down, but the trend has been down since 

1942. Farm living costs have risen 49 per cent since 1942." 

 

This is the opinion of Dr. Hope, the secretary of the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, and I believe is 

the experience, and the opinion of most farmers in Saskatchewan today. We must remember that farmers 

form about 40 per cent of Canada's population at the present time, and actually only receive 13½ per 

cent of the national income. All the people of Saskatchewan, Sir, recognize agriculture as the basis of 

our economy. Agricultural wealth is the mainstay of most kinds of business, and upon it depends all 

welfare measures, various forms of health services and social security, that we grant to our citizens 

today in Saskatchewan. 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

 

17 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I hesitate to say very much about the 25-cent wheat payment. I realize that the 

preceding speaker has spoken of it and, as a former member of the House of Commons, is well informed 

in this matter. There is no disagreement between us on this; but I am going to cover this in my own way. 

The farmers across the three prairie provinces are generally interested in the final payment to be made 

by the Canadian Wheat Board on the four-year Anglo-Canadian Wheat Agreement. The charges recently 

made by the Leader of the Opposition that this Government was endeavouring to undermine the 

Canadian Wheat Board are to me simply fantastic and ridiculous. Even the 'Leader-Post' concedes this. I 

quote from the 'Leader-Post' of Wednesday, February 7. It goes on to say: 

 

"Mr. Tucker then managed to get Premier Douglas and the Winnipeg Grain Exchange both on the 

same side of the wheat marketing battle, which was probably the first time that ill-assorted couple had 

ever been paired off that way." 

 

Mr. Tucker: — There has to be a first time for everything. 

 

Mr. Thair: — Mr. Speaker, the Wheat Board was set up by the Bennett administration in 1934, and was 

suspended by the Liberal Government, in 1937, with the assistance of 18 Liberal M.P.'s from 

Saskatchewan, including the present Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Again in Hansard, page 1398, with regard to the C.C.F. movement undermining Canada Wheat Board, 

and in favour of speculative marketing in the Winnipeg Grain Exchange, I would like to make this 

comment, and I would quote from Hansard, page 1398, that the present Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Tucker) voted against the T.C. Douglas amendment which urged $1.00 wheat for the farmers in 1942. 

 

Then again in Hansard, page 1298, May 7, 1946, the present Leader of the Opposition opposed a Bill 

curtailing the activities of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange. Again in Hansard, page 1572-74, he supported 

the taxation of the Co-ops, and at that time, just because he did not have enough Liberals behind him, he 

wanted first 18, and then from 10 to 15 to help him; well, today they have 14, a remarkable victory, and 

we are not getting very much results from it. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — There will be more yet. 

 

Mr. Thair: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that one of the principles of the C.C.F. Party in 

Saskatchewan is, first, the wholehearted support of the orderly marketing of wheat and coarse grains 

through the Canada Wheat Board; and secondly, so far as I am concerned as a farmer, and I believe I can 

speak for a good many farmers, and for all the members of this side of the House, the use of the facilities 

of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool elevators; and third, the abolition of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange. In 

fact, I am sure even the Opposition will agree with me that the Winnipeg 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

18 

Grain Exchange actually looks upon this C.C,F. Government in Saskatchewan as one of its worst 

enemies. 

 

A great number of our farmers, Mr. Speaker, are asking for a 25-cent payment on the five-year pool, and 

I am not going to go into that matter any more than to say, first, there are funds now in the Canada 

Wheat Board account; and second, wheat used for domestic consumption at low prices; and thirdly, the 

wheat sold to Britain under the Anglo-Canadian Wheat Agreement. Time will not allow me to enlarge 

on this topic, but I would like to say, whether it is 13 cents or 25 cents, that there are a lot of 

organizations in the province here that are not noted for their C.C.F. activities, particularly I would like 

to add that the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the Alberta Wheat Pool, and the 

Farmers' Union in all three prairie provinces are asking for a 25-cent payment, while the Saskatchewan 

Pool has asked for a 15-cent payment as the minimum, so, if the minimum stretches a bit, it will also 

reach 25 cents. So far as I am concerned, there is no quarrel whatever between the Wheat Pool and other 

organizations. I am a member of the Farmers' Union (as probably the hon. member for Arm River and 

other members of this Assembly are, also), and I believe we should have a purely educational farm 

organization for the farmers. I might say that I am a very strong supporter of the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool, and have never bootlegged a bushel of wheat in my life. 

 

The farmers in Saskatchewan believe that the final payment is entirely the responsibility of the Federal 

Government at Ottawa. This principle is also recognized by the hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Tucker) who stated at the Liberal convention in November, according to the 'Star-Phoenix': 

 

"A further settlement, under the 'having regard' clause was owed to Western Canadian farmers, Mr. 

Tucker declared, although he felt confident that Britain would discharge its obligations fairly. He said 

that the Canadian Government should he prepared to accept full responsibility if Britain would not." 

 

Mr. Tucker: — And you proved what I say. 

 

Mr. Thair: — Mr. Speaker, with regard to taxes in Saskatchewan, I would like to say just a few words, 

particularly about the income tax on farmers . . . Being a farmer myself, naturally I am hit along with all 

the rest of them: rather an enjoyable experience at times. It is often said that Ontario and Quebec pay the 

bulk of the Federal income tax. This is true, I believe, as far as business and industry is concerned, but 

quite incorrect from the farmers' standpoint. A large portion of the tax paid comes from business done 

throughout Western Canada by individuals and companies whose head offices are in either Ontario or 

Quebec, and that is where the income taxes are collected. It is grossly unfair to credit all these taxes 

collected to Ontario and Quebec. The total Federal income tax paid by all farmers in the two provinces 

of Ontario and Quebec, in 1948, was about $3,000,000, or something less; in 1948, Manitoba, Alberta 

and Saskatchewan paid $14,168,000, despite the grasshoppers, drought, frost, rust, etc. 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

 

19 

Mr. Tucker: — And the C.C.F. in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Thair: — I would like to quote some figures published in the 'Maple Creek News' — and I do not 

believe it is a C.C.F. paper, Mr. Speaker. I quote: 

 

"Saskatchewan, reputed to be one province most in need of help among the western provinces (but 

does not get it), doesn't look that way when you look over the figures just released for 1948. 

 

"In 1948 the farmers in Saskatchewan paid nearly $6 million in income taxes while the farmers in the 

great Province of Quebec paid the paltry sum of $94,000." 

 

It is quite likely, Mr. Speaker, that, in the present Session, the House of Commons will increase the 

income tax. I would like to quote from a recent report from the manager of one of Canada's largest 

banks, at a recent annual meeting, with regard to income tax, and this is surely a portent of things to 

come. I quote: 

 

"The most powerful weapon in the fight against inflation is supposed to be a stiff increase in the 

income tax; but this would rule out drastic increases in corporation taxes, especially excess profits tax. 

 

"The personal income tax may hit spenders and savers alike, nevertheless it may prove to be the only 

weapon with sufficient power to check spending. Therefore any increase in income tax should be 

recognized as an attack upon inflation, and this can only be made by broadening the tax basis through 

a lower personal exemption." 

 

And I add, Mr. Speaker, that that policy of lower personal exemption and the broadening of the tax basis 

means that they are going to take in another half million to one million people in the lower income 

brackets, and western farmers, again, will be subject, it is altogether likely, to a lower personal 

exemption, and a higher rate of taxation. But I also remind you that the manager of this great bank rules 

out completely any increase in corporation tax and excess profits tax. I repeat that, if big business has its 

way in Canada, there will be a broadening of the basis for income tax purposes, but there will be no 

increase, to any extent, in corporation tax, nor will any excess profits tax be imposed in the 1951 

Session. We shall wait and see. It seems highly apparent, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Abbott, the present 

Minister of Finance, is even less a friend of the farmer and workers than his predecessor, Mr. Ilsley. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if I may, I would like to review, briefly, a number of the services which have been 

extended to our citizens since this Government came into power. Hospital Services have became so vital 

a part of the lives of the people of Saskatchewan that it is doubtful if any political party, even the 

Opposition, would dare to suggest its removal. I 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

20 

believe a recent Liberal provincial convention at Saskatoon generally approved of the Hospital Services 

Plan, and practically committed itself to carry out the scheme introduced in Saskatchewan by the C.C.F. 

Government, with certain specific reservations. With regard to these reservations, the Leader of the 

Opposition made a statement to the effect that if his party were elected they would reduce the cost of 

administration by a process of decentralization, or, in other words, I presume, go back slowly but surely 

to the municipal doctor or health plan they had prior to 1944, which actually brought much-reduced 

hospital services to less than 20 per cent of the rural population in Saskatchewan. It is my opinion, Mr. 

Speaker, that, in spite of the Leader of the Opposition or of his statement, if the Liberals were ever to 

obtain power again in Saskatchewan (and I don't believe they ever will), they would surely but slowly 

wipe out completely the present Hospital Services Plan. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Call an election and you will see. 

 

Mr. Thair: — And so I would like to emphasize that the Hospital Services Plan continues to be one of 

the most outstanding achievements in the field of health on the North American continent. 

 

The hospital costs have increased greatly, it is true, since the plan was put into effect four years ago, but 

in spite of this greatly increased cost, the plan is still operating on a fee of $10 a year per person, or $30 

per family. I would like to compare this, Mr. Speaker, with the British Columbia plan, which, according 

to the 'Vancouver Sun', has reached a new and alarming crisis in its management, administration and 

costs to the individual. In fact it is possible that the rate may be raised to $42 per family of two, or 

perhaps more — a sum about double the basis of charges fixed when the scheme was presented to the 

public late in 1948. 

 

And again referring to the 'Vancouver Sun', when the hospital plan was begun the hospital rates were set 

at $15 per person, later raised to $21 per single person, or $33 per family, and, I repeat, the fee is likely 

to be raised to $42 a per family or $30 per person, or the plan goes on the rocks. 

 

Since January 1947, when the plan went into effect, nearly 648,000 patients have been hospitalized in 

Saskatchewan; a total of over $35 million has been paid out for hospital bills. In 1950, it has hospitalized 

nearly 173,000 patients which includes 19,000 infants — some 21,000 people outside Saskatchewan 

have, since the plan went into effect, had hospital bills paid for them in such distant countries as 

Australia, Holland, France, Yukon, United States, British Isles, Norway, Greece, Brazil and other 

countries. 

 

Saskatchewan Air Ambulance has been another splendid service for our people. In 1950, the air 

ambulance carried nearly 800 patients. Since this service was inaugurated on February 4, 1946, it has 

safely carried 4,000 patients to hospital, and has flown nearly two million miles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Automobile Accident Insurance Plan, introduced in 1946, has paid nearly $6 million in 

benefits up to the present date, and nearly 30,000 people have received benefits under the plan. Because 

of the competition of the Saskatchewan Automobile Insurance, the 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

 

21 

rates of private insurance companies are actually being reduced in Saskatchewan but not in Manitoba, 

Alberta or British Columbia. The Wawanesa Company in Saskatchewan has endeavoured to give much 

lower rates. But where they have no Government automobile insurance, the rates in all other provinces 

are exorbitant, and particularly in Eastern Canada. In fact, such coverages as are given in Saskatchewan 

with every license, plus the package policy, for a total of $28.50, will cost from $75 to $140 in any other 

province in Canada. I have the rates here. I might run over two or three of them. The benefits granted by 

Saskatchewan Government Automobile Insurance costing $28.50, under private insurance companies 

will cost $87 at Regina; in Alberta, $119; in Winnipeg, $129 and $77 in the country; Ontario, $116 to 

$129; British Columbia, $154. The member for Arm River is getting a good laugh out of this. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I certainly am! 

 

Mr. Thair: — The North Dakota Legislature appointed a committee to study the Saskatchewan plan. A 

full report has not been given any publicity much in Canada, but only those sections which appear to be 

critical of the plan; but the main conclusion of the report was that the North Dakota insurance firms 

reduced their rates immediately after this was announced. I am going to read the major conclusion of the 

North Dakota report which was as follows: 

 

"that if, after a reasonable trial period, automobile insurance rates were not brought down to a 

reasonable basis, then the State might be compelled to seek means, such as the Saskatchewan 

Insurance Plan, to assure its citizens reasonable insurance rates." 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, no matter how one examines Saskatchewan's Automobile Insurance operations, 

there is evidence that the Government has given the coverage to all citizens, Liberals, Conservatives or 

anybody else, who may be insured in automobile accidents, as well as damage to automobile, and this 

coverage is given at a low premium rate that is probably unexcelled in the world. I have a good friend at 

Regina Beach who certainly works hard against the C.C.F. movement, and more than a little over three 

months ago he certainly did give the Government a pat on the back for the automobile insurance. It was 

one of the finest things we have ever done, but he said, "I still won't vote for you." 

 

Mr. Tucker: — He must be a good man. 

 

Mr. Thair: — He is a good Liberal, all right, dyed-in-the-wool. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a word about power, if I am not taking too long, I am interested 

in power, as I have stated in this House before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 1950 has been one of the greatest years for power construction in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. Over 1,500 miles of new lines have been built and the Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

now owns and operates aver 6,200 miles of line. The rates, since 1944, have been cut four times. During 

1950, the total number of rural customers has increased by almost 100 per cent. We are making power 

available now to more than 5,000 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

22 

farmers. It is a pretty good record when we compare it with what was done years ago. I would like to 

compare the six years previous to 1944, when the C.C.F. Government first came into power, with the 

past six years. In the period from 1938 to 1944, Saskatchewan Power operation had a deficit of $231,000 

or more, and were serving 12,000 customers in 140 towns and villages, and serving about 162 farm 

homes. Just imagine, after 20 years, 162 farm homes! I am pleased to say that I was one of them, and I 

got that under the Anderson Government. Today, we are serving over 500 towns and villages. The 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation is serving, today, more than 65,000 customers, which includes about 

5,000 farmers. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I bet you got it cheaper than you get it today, too. 

 

Mr. Thair: — From 1944 to the present time, the Government has spent upwards of $30 million on 

power. 

 

Now, regarding the Co-ops: I am sure the member for Arm River across the House, and others who have 

been strong co-operators and have worked hard in the co-operative movement all their days, will agree 

with what I an going to say. I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, with the growth of the co-operative movement 

in many fields of activity, and particularly during the last four or five years. In spite of the opposition of 

Big Business, the growth of monopolies, the taxation of co-operatives in 1946 — I believe Mr. Tucker 

had a hand in it; August 20, 1944, see Hansard, page 5087 — I won't rub it in any more! Under stiff 

competition in general, the co-ops have expanded rapidly. The C.C.F. Government, wherever possible, 

has given every encouragement to the co-operative movement in this Province, through the Department 

of Co-operation and through the Purchasing Agency and other government agencies which foster and 

encourage the co-operative movement. 

 

The Government, through its Purchasing Agency, has purchased all possible supplies from the local or 

Federated co-ops in the Province. This year, the Purchasing Agency of the Saskatchewan Government 

issued orders to the co-operatives for more than $600,000 worth of supplies, such as oil and other 

commodities. More than $600,000 — I would like to rub that in a bit! Back in the time of the former 

Liberal Government, previous to 1944, they bought nothing, at any time — only one mistake made 

when they sent an order across to the 'Western Producer' for $50 worth of business. 

 

The Saskatchewan Federated Co-ops, in 1950, did a business of over $17 million, with savings of 

$412,000. The Sherwood local Co-op, No. 224, of which I happen to be a member, is the largest 

consumer co-op in Canada, I believe, with over 11,000 members, and it did a business of nearly $2 1/4 

million in 1950, with net savings of over $400,000. 

 

I would like to quote an article, if I might, Mr. Speaker, from the 'Nebraska Co-operator', and it is this: 

 

"The co-operatives do not, and cannot profiteer. In co-operatives the owners are patrons, and they 

have no motive to profiteer upon themselves. If they did enter into any agreement to widen the 

margins, the profits would go back to the patrons in patronage dividends. 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

 

23 

"Co-operatives, therefore, furnish effective competition that keeps other lines of business from 

exploiting the public." 

 

We see this demonstrated in the way our co-op elevators, creameries, stores, oil set-ups and our other 

purchasing co-operatives, stop extortion. The co-operative method of keeping business from becoming 

exploitative and predatory is capable of extension to all parts of the economic system. 

 

Now, with regard to highways, I would just like to say that highway construction, Mr. Speaker, reached 

a new high in 1950, and I believe approximately $10 1/4 million was spent on highways in the Province, 

in 1950, compared with $3,320,000 in 1944. In 1950, the highway earth construction reached about 380 

miles, the gravel on highways, 490 miles, blacktop highways, 125 miles, I believe there were over 650 

miles of blacktop in the Province; and I believe it is the general policy, and only natural for the 

government and the governments of all countries, to connect up main blacktop highways to the main 

centres of population. It is the natural thing to do. That is why, in Lumsden, we have been getting a big 

share of blacktop highways in the past two years. 

 

I might say that the Lumsden constituency has, within its boundaries, two cities — Moose Jaw and 

Regina — and Saskatoon is not so far away; so it is natural that we have to connect up the three cities. In 

1944, when we came into office there was seven miles of blacktop highway on No. 6, in very, very poor 

condition, between Regina and No. 11, and some 25 or 28 miles between Regina and Moose Jaw. That 

was all the blacktop in the Lumsden constituency; but today the blacktop highway is extended away up 

into Arm River to Aylesbury, and I suspect it is going to cross Arm River constituency. The blacktop is 

extended to Aylesbury on No. 11 and to Regina Beach on No. 58, to Qu'Appelle Valley north on No. 6, 

and from Moose Jaw to Tuxford, 14 miles, and south of Moose Jaw about 5 miles. At the present time 

the blacktop on No. 6 extends into Arm River constituency and the next two or three years will likely 

see a further extension of both No. 6 and No. 2 highways across Arm River constituency. This is about 

the end of blacktop for Lumsden; but I am telling you that, in two or three years if the member for Arm 

River should be in this House (and we hope he will not), he will have about half a million dollars each 

year spent on blacktop in his constituency, and Lumsden will not have a cent. We are going to reverse 

the position; as we go towards Saskatoon the member representing Arm River constituency will have 

millions of dollars of blacktop highway on No. 6 and No. 2. I am not the Minister of Highways, so he 

must be patient, I am just saying, quite honestly, that over $500,000 was spent in Lumsden constituency 

on blacktop highways on No. 6, No. 2 and No. 11, in 1950. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a word about Saskatchewan Government Airways. I was much 

impressed with the operations of the Saskatchewan Government Airways when I visited Lac La Ronge 

some time ago. With the completion of a highway from Waskesiu to Lac La Ronge, the development of 

air service in the far north, with the assistance of the Department of Natural Resources, prospectors as 

well as tourists of all kinds have done more to open up and develop the far north in the past few years 

than has been done in the previous 40 years under the Liberal administration. In 



 

February 12, 1951 

 

 

24 

fact it is well known that, 10 or 12 years under the Liberal administration, the Minister of Natural 

Resources made a trip by train just two or three times up to Prince Alberta and that is all that was done. 

During 1950, the Government had 17 planes in operation; the passengers carried has increased 87 per 

cent, cargo 29 per cent up, and mail 89 per cent. During the last fiscal year the Government Airway 

planes carried 7,096 passengers — nearly 2,000,000 pounds of cargo, and 73,000 pounds of mail. In 

addition to the services provided to the prospectors and tourists in the far north, the Saskatchewan 

airways, this year (the Leader of the Opposition will be glad to know), has earned nearly $24,000, and 

provided all these services. It has been of inestimable value in opening up the great north land. 

 

Mr. Speaker we on this side of the House believe (on both sides of the House, I hope), that the highest 

good is the development of human personality; and when we survey the world today (and I am saying 

this in all seriousness); when we survey the world today, with millions of children starving and destitute 

and homeless, we cannot but think of the words of the Master of man: 

 

"Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." 

 

King George, in his Christmas message — which was broadcast to the Commonwealth, warned that 

mankind must make the most momentous choice of its history and must decide between the creeds of 

love and hatred and quoting directly from his speech: 

 

"For if our world is to survive in any sense that makes survival worth while, it must learn to love, not 

to hate, to create, not to destroy." 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall support the motion. 

 

Mr. R.A. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5.50 o'clock p.m. 


