




















































Hansard: February 14, 1951


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eleventh Legislature 

10th Day 

 

Wednesday, February 14, 1951 

 

The House met at three o'clock p.m. 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed from Tuesday, February 13, 1951, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of 

Mr. Howe for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Hon. L.F. McIntosh (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — The member for The Battlefords (Mr. 

Maher), in his address yesterday, severely criticized the operations of most of the Government Crown 

Companies. In doing so he made special mention of the sodium sulphate plant at Chaplin and brick plant 

operations at Estevan. Might I suggest to the hon. member that I would be very happy to accompany him 

to public meetings at Chaplin and at Estevan to enable him to place before the citizens of those 

communities his views with respect to the operation of these two Crown Corporations. 

 

Some mention was also made of the power utilities with special reference to the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation. I gathered rightly or wrongly from the remarks made by the hon. member for The 

Battlefords, that he would like to see power utilities operated as a service organization rather than as an 

organization that would be showing profits at the end of the fiscal year. Might I suggest to the member 

that he could profitably discuss the question of provincially or municipally owned power plants with the 

city council of Regina, and with the city council of Saskatoon. As he was, or is, a member of the city 

council of North Battleford, he will have some appreciation of the revenues derived by that city from the 

distribution of power in the Battlefords. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Hidden taxes up there! 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — I might also suggest, for the information of the hon. member that the city of 

Saskatoon feels rather disappointed if, in any year, the revenues from their public utilities are not equal 

to somewhere in the neighbourhood of 25 per cent of the total revenues of that city. 

 

I gather from the remarks made that the hon. member for The Battlefords would be rather critical of the 

Industrial Development Bank of Canada, as they show in their annual report to the Minister of Finance, 

for 1950, a loss of some $133,000. May I hasten to say, Mr. Speaker, in case any of the members 

opposite are labouring under any delusions that the Industrial Development Bank of Canada loaned, in 

the province of Saskatchewan, for the year ending September 30, 1950, $1,137,000; in Prince Edward 

Island, $54,000; in the province of Nova Scotia, $610,000; in the province of New Brunswick, 

$1,391,000; in the province of Manitoba, $1,200,000 and in the province of Alberta, $1,950,000. 

 

In the light of people being frightened to make investments here in the province of Saskatchewan, it may 

be of some interest, also, to the hon. members 



 

February 14, 1951 

 

 

2 

opposite to note that the Canadian Farm Loan Board, in the fiscal year ending March 31, 1950, made 

loans in the province of Saskatchewan to the extent of $1,387,000, giving a total over-all loans in the 

province, as at March 31, 1950, of $13,721,000. 

 

I noted that none of the members opposite complimented the Hudson Bay and Smelting Company on 

their expenditure of some $9,000,00 in plant extension, all of which was spent in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker I challenge members opposite to name any three companies that, in the 40 

years in which they governed the province of Saskatchewan, spent a similar sum in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from a report which I am sure the members opposite would consider 

very authentic. It is the annual report of the Prince Albert Board of Trade. It makes some mention of the 

development that has taken place in the northern part of the province of Saskatchewan since their last 

annual report. It makes mention of industries, and says that in 1951 the programme includes a plywood 

and a furniture factory, an oil refinery, a financial firm. It also mentions Kresges, Woolworths, and 

Safeway Companies are expected to construct new retail outlets in that city, in 1951. Woolworths have 

their basement dug. Safeways and Kresges have property purchased. 

 

The report goes on to mention the uranium developments in the northern part of our province. It says: 

 

"It is estimated that $2,000,000 was spent in 1950 on mineral development in Northern Saskatchewan. 

Most of this expenditure came from mining groups in this search for its proven uranium fields. 

Uranium finds were centred in the Athabasca, Black Lake and Lac la Ronge areas". 

 

At Lac la Ronge, the report mentions a Mr. A.R. Lee, geologist for Cando Mining Company, who is 

spending the winter in the area laying the groundwork for full-scale operations in the spring. Preliminary 

work has indicated the presence of approximately one million tons of radium ore in the area controlled 

by Cando Mining Company and the Lac la Ronge Uranium Mines Limited. It goes on to mention the 

Nicholson mines, a short distance from old Goldfields; the Nisco mines, and other minerals such as zinc, 

gold, silver and copper. 

 

Then it was said this Government was driving the fishermen out of this province; this Government was 

curtailing the operations of fishermen on the lakes! Well, this report goes on to relate a development in 

the commercial fishing industry: 

 

"Operations were carried out on 39 lakes during the summer season alone, with a catch of 3,500,000 

lbs of fish." 

 

It deals with the development of the port of Churchill, and in this connection mention is made of the 

activities of this Government since 1946. It mentions, for example, that in 1950, some 6,705,000 bushels 

of wheat left the port of Churchill for European ports. The savings on the shipment of this wheat are 

given as $810,000. There were 3,400 tons of imports. Reference is made to the reduction in Hull 

insurance effected both in 1949 and again in 1950. 



 

February 14, 1951 

 

 

3 

Then the report moves over to the Saskatchewan Government Airways. It points out that, in 1950, 

Saskatchewan Government Airways carried 7,096 passengers, 1,877,000 lbs of cargo, and just under 

3,000 lbs of mail. The Tourist Advisory Committees of the Board of Trade mentions here that more than 

72,000 persons visited the National Park last year; more than 5,000 anglers visited Lac la Ronge. It says 

the Park attendance showed an increase of 38.7 per cent over 1949. 

 

May I also mention, in passing, still quoting the annual report of the Prince Albert Board of Trade, that 

bank clearances in 1950 aggregated $75½ million. The power plant kilowatts distributed to the city in 

1950 were 18.5 per cent over and above the previous year; the rural distribution was 30.5 per cent over 

that of the previous year. I would like to assure the members opposite that, when we complete the north 

and south highway leading from the International Border to the gates of the Prince Albert National Park 

and when the Federal Government completes the hard-surfacing of the road within the Park, this road 

taking the most direct route and giving to the people of this province access to that route, the number of 

tourists from our own province, those from other provinces of the Dominion and the States of the Union 

will be very substantially increased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not going to dwell on the 1950 harvest other than to say that under the International 

Wheat Agreement the Dominion of Canada is permitted to sell 203 million bushels at a maximum price 

of $1.80 U.S.A. funds. That would probably indicate what we might expect as further payments on the 

1950-51 crop delivered to the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

I want to deal now with the five-year pool, Mr. Speaker. The five-year pool commenced its operations 

on August 1, 1945, and handled approximately $1,440,000,000 bushels. I might say these figures are 

within a range of 20 million bushels one way or the other. In the crop year 1945-46, export sales to the 

United Kingdom and other countries were close to 200 million bushels, which were offered by the 

Federal Government of Canada at $1.55, basis No. 1 Northern in store Fort William, the initial price 

being $1.25. A further payment brought the total payment up to $1.75. So, of the total of 1,440,000,000, 

200 million were handled for export in the crop year 1945-46, and the Federal Government had a voice 

in determining the price. The Canadian-U.K. wheat agreement was signed July 24, 1946. That 

agreement called for the delivery of a total of 600 million bushels of wheat. In each of the first two 

years, 1946-47 and 1947-48, 160 million bushels were delivered; in 1948-49, 140 millions and in 

1949-50, 140 millions. The agreement sets the price the first year at $1.55. 

 

I think we might keep in mind here, Mr. Speaker, that in the first year's pool the Federal Government 

had a voice in determining the price at which that grain was going to be sold to the United Kingdom and 

to other countries of the world, and $1.55 was the price which they suggested. So the first year of the 

British contract the price was $1.55 and the second year, $1.55. Also written into the agreement in 

respect of wheat bought and sold in the third year, in the crop year of 1948-49, was the price of $1.25; in 

respect to wheat bought and sold in the crop year of 1949-50, not less than $1.00 a bushel. The British 

Government paid $2.00 for the third year and $2.00 for the fourth year. In other words, the British 

Government paid to the Dominion of Canada $182 million in excess of the price quoted in the contract 

signed by James A. McKinnon, on behalf of the Government of Canada, and by P.A. Clutterbuck, on 

behalf of the Government of the United Kingdom. A total of approximately 630 million bushels of 

wheat was delivered under the Canada-U.K. agreement. 



 

February 14, 1951 

 

 

4 

Mr. Tucker: — Might I ask the hon. member a question? I did not follow the Minister's argument there 

— if he wishes to make it plain. This is the first time I have ever heard that suggestion. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — I doubt if I can make it clear enough, Mr. Speaker, I could go over it again if 

the hon. leader of the Opposition wishes. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Don't bother if you don't want to. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — Now let us then move from there into the domestic scene, because I think what 

we must keep in mind is that the Federal Government fixed the policy and price for a very substantial 

quantity of the wheat handled in this five-year pool. Coming into the domestic field we find that, during 

the period of the five-year pool, the domestic sales totalled 340 million bushels: the 1945-46 domestic 

sales of 80 million bushels at $1.25 a bushel; the 1946-47 crop year to February 17, 1947, 38 million at 

$1.25 a bushel; February 18, 1947, to July 31, 1948, 113 million at $1.55 a bushel; 1948-49 crop year, 

53 million at $2.00 a bushel, and in 1949-50, 55 millions at $2.00 a bushel. So a total of approximately 

340 millions of the 1,440,000,000 went into domestic sales at a price decided by the Federal 

Government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the important point in respect to the five-year pool is this: what did the 

Canada Wheat Board receive for the wheat which the Canada Wheat Board had the responsibility of 

actually marketing? In 1946-47, the Canada Wheat Board sold what is commonly known as Class 2 

wheat — 78 million bushels at $2.43 a bushel; in 1947-48, 17 million bushels at $2.88 a bushel; in 

1948-49, 75 millions at $2.23 a bushel; in 1949-50, an estimated sale of 30 millions at $2.15 a bushel 

plus 38 million bushels which were under the International Wheat Agreement that were used in the last 

year of the British contract to carry out the total deliveries and that were sold at the price established 

under the International Wheat Agreement, approximately $1.95 a bushel. 

 

I think, when we consider those figures, Mr. Speaker, that we can say without hesitation that the Canada 

Wheat Board made an excellent job of marketing that portion of the crop delivered to the five year pool 

which it had the actual responsibility of marketing. For that reason, the members on this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, are whole-heartedly and actively engaged in the support of the Canada Wheat 

Board. 

 

Some mention was made here, during the course of the debate on the Speech from the Throne, of 

criticisms levied against the Wheat Board that might militate against the future operations of that board. 

I want to say without hesitation, Mr. Speaker, that any comments respecting the operations of the past 

five-year pool, and any comments made in respect to the marketing of the 1950-51 crop, were levied 

against the policy of the Federal Government and not against the efficiency of the Canada Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 'Free Press' on February 10, said: 

 

"Manitoba's bitter coarse grain marketing controversy will be taken to the people at a special plebiscite 

to be held after 1950-51 crop returns are in,' stated Premier Douglas L. Campbell." 

 

And comments in respect to this statement published in the same paper of the same date say: 



 

February 14, 1951 

 

 

5 

"Date of vote to be held next autumn made one thing almost sure, spring and summer will see bitter 

speaking campaigns in rural municipalities." 

 

Does that not indicate that the Liberal Government of the Province of Manitoba is prepared to see that 

this particular system of marketing gets a complete airing in public? Then, in last night's 'Leader-Post' 

carrying a red headline, in the left-hand corner of the front page: 

 

"Ottawa, February 13 (British United Press and Staff): The Government, Tuesday, prepared a huge 

Valentine Day's gift to western wheat growers with a Bill allowing them to cash in on more than 200 

million bushels of frozen 1950 grain." 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Do you object to that? 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — No, Mr. Speaker, we do not object to that. What I am saying here is that this 

newspaper release would indicate that the Federal Government is giving to the wheat growers of the 

crop year 1950, a gift on 200 million bushels of wheat. Then, on the same page, under the heading of the 

five-year pool topic: 

 

"While the British have not agreed to change their minds as to making a further payment under this 

clause, the matter is not considered closed." 

 

Now, I am sure, Mr. Speaker, hon. members opposite will not criticize an article by one who is 

personally known to a number of them, in the person of Mr. H.G.L. Strange, of the Searle Grain 

Company. In his article in the "Monetary Times' Annual National Review, 1951, he had this to say: 

 

"A year ago the Government decided to take over the marketing of oats and barley in Canada, but for 

political reasons, the Government decided to permit the Winnipeg open futures market on coarse 

grains to function and gave permission to the Wheat Board to sell the coarse grains they had purchased 

from the farmers through the open market." 

 

"For political reasons" is the statement of Major Strange in respect to the handling of the oat and barley 

crops. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Is that a new friend you have now? We must be getting together more than we thought. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — Mr. Speaker, I should devote a few minutes, this afternoon, to dealing with the 

Britnell-Cronkite-Jacobs Report. I would like first to congratulate the complimentary remarks of the 

Leader of the Opposition relative to the personnel chosen to make this study. I hope, Mr. Tucker, some 

of the members sitting around you will take your remarks seriously. We on this side of the House are 

confident that you would have to go very far afield before you could find three man more capable of 

doing this kind of a job than the three men chosen by the Provincial Government. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — We would just like you to take their advice, that is all. 



 

February 14, 1951 

 

 

6 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — This committee was appointed early in 1948, and it presented an interim report 

to the Minster of the Department of Municipal Affairs in July of 1950. We undertook to send copies of 

that interim report to all members of this House. There was a terrific amount of research work involved 

in getting up the report. I am not going to deal with that at the moment. However, I would like to quote, 

for the information of the House, the opinion of the editor of 'Canadian Finance' in the January issue of 

that magazine: 

 

"This is the second and concluding instalment of a comprehensive analysis by Mr. Cruice of the 

Britnell-Cronkite-Jacobs report on the taxation structure of Saskatchewan. The report is the most 

valuable and significant document on Provincial Taxation ever published in relation to the Wheat 

Province." 

 

The history of municipalities in the province of Saskatchewan is well known to every member of this 

Assembly. It might be just as well to mention, however, that the North-West Territories Act, passed in 

1875, empowered the councils of the Territories to pass ordinances governing municipalities. The first 

of such ordinances was not passed until 1883. In that year the area of ten municipalities and two towns, 

Moose Jaw and Regina, were defined by proclamation, but only four rural municipalities and two towns 

were actually established. That set the pattern and the basis for the municipal institutions as they are 

known in the Province of Saskatchewan today. We have today within the boundaries of this province 

some 800 municipal governments — 302 rural municipal governments, some 84 town governments, 

some eight city governments, and the balance govern the villages of this province. 

 

Now the question of assessment. The assessing of the value of the property for taxation purposes 

becomes more important as the years go by. The Saskatchewan Assessment Branch undertakes to assess 

all properties, with the exception of the properties in cities in excess of 15,000 population. I might 

mention, in passing, that the cost of maintaining this service is some $135,000, and it is paid by the 

Provincial Government out of government funds. 

 

It is rather interesting to note that in 1947, the City of Regina, for example, secured from property tax, 

business licences, etc., 43.96 per cent of the total year's levy, and, from public utilities, 34.19 per cent. 

That will give you some indication of how important public utilities are in the minds of municipal 

governments. It is estimated that in 1949-50, the revenues of the Province of Saskatchewan were some 

$59 millions. If all levies had been collected in that year, the municipal revenue, based on their levies, 

was $47 million. In that year the Provincial Government paid the municipalities a total over-all, in all 

forms of grants, of $13 million, in round figures. This gave to the municipal governments of this 

province some $60 million to discharge its obligations. 

 

Might I say, in passing, Mr. Speaker, that, to the credit of the rural municipal officials of this province, 

their debt has been reduced by $60 million since 1938. A great deal has been said about the tax load 

which municipalities and their ratepayers have been asked to carry. It may be news to some of the 

younger members opposite to learn that municipal taxes were collected in this province as far back as 

1926, probably as far back an 1883; but the Britnell Report goes back to 1926, and the tables show that, 

in 1926, taxes amounting to $14,181,000 were levied. This was equal to 4.9 per cent of the gross 

agricultural income. As we go along through the years, we find that, in 1930, some $15,232,000 was 

collected in municipal and school taxes, or 12.4 per cent of the total gross income from agriculture. That 

increases, naturally, down through the 'thirties, and when we got to 1948 we find that 3.4 per cent of the 

gross income from agriculture goes to pay the taxes levied by the rural municipalities of this province. 



 

February 14, 1951 

 

 

7 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is no question but that you will all agree that taxes are an overhead cost of 

operation. They are a charge against the income of people. They are a charge against the income of 

agricultural people in the rural areas of this province. The question arises as to what percentage of the 

gross income from agriculture should be a charge against municipal services. Is it 3.4 per cent? Is it 4.9 

per cent? Is it 12 per cent as it was in 1937? Is it 18.6 per cent as it was in 1931? That is a question of 

vital concern to municipal officials and to their ratepayers. 

 

A great deal has been said in this House in connection with the burden of taxes. Comparisons have been 

made between Manitoba and Saskatchewan on the one hand, and Alberta and Saskatchewan on the other 

hand, so I thought it advisable to go to some little trouble to give to this House and to the air audience 

authentic information in respect to this question. The mill rate determines the amount of taxes one pays. 

The mill rate is flexible; the assessment is adjustable where improvements warrant. In 1945, Alberta 

rural municipalities collected an average of 27 mills for municipal and school purposes; in 1949, for 

general municipal purposes, 23.65 mills and for schools 21.3 mills. A total of 44.68 mills was the 

average mill rate in the rural municipalities of the province of Alberta in 1949. We go over to the 

province of Manitoba, and using the same years, we find that the average mill rate in that province in 

1945 was 29.50, and in 1949 it was 49.13. Now, in the Province of Saskatchewan, in 1945, the average 

mill rate for school and municipal purposes (using the same basis as they used in Manitoba and Alberta) 

was 19.4 mills; in 1949, 30.2. Let me repeat the figures: 44.68 in Alberta; 49.13 in Manitoba, and 30.2 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Municipal Affairs for the province of Manitoba, addressing the 1950 

convention of the Union of Manitoba Municipalities, said this: 

 

"In 1940 municipal levies were $7,900,000; in 1949 municipal levies were $15,300,000 — doubled in 

that period of time." 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Where are these figures taken from, or are they figures that were assembled in the 

Minister's Department? 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — It is rather unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, the minds of some of our citizens of this 

province. These figures, may I say for the information of the hon. member opposite, were taken from the 

records of the Department of Municipal Affairs of the Province of Alberta and of the Province of 

Manitoba. If the hon. Leader of the Opposition wishes any additional figures he can get them from the 

work-files that went into making up the Britnell-Cronkite-Jacobs Report. For the information of those 

opposite let us take one municipality in the province of Manitoba, the municipality of Wallace, and I am 

sure my hon. friend from Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) will be familiar with this municipality. They 

have, in a certain school district in that municipality, a mill rate of 94 mills. They have an average over 

the entire municipality of 60.4 mills. Now, that is taking one municipality, but I have been giving you 

the average figures. 

 

Something has been said in this House in connection with the abolishing of the Public Revenue Tax, and 

I understand from the amendment to the Speech from the Throne that the members opposite wish that 

done immediately. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — That is what your Commission recommended. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — The Britnell Report says the allegations that the municipalities are 

over-burdened and that land is over-taxed have been examined 



 

February 14, 1951 

 

 

8 

with great care. This was quoted yesterday, but I hope you will pardon me for quoting it again because 

the memories of some people are very short: 

 

"The result of the investigation has been somewhat of a surprise to the Committee for it has been 

found that in no sense can it be said that real property in the average municipality is being overtaxed 

either absolutely or relatively, under present conditions." 

 

But when the question arose as to whether or not the hon. members opposite were favourable to an 

increase in the Gasoline Tax, I think I heard, "No". I am sure the hon. members opposite are not aware 

that, at a meeting represented by eight municipal councils held at Wawota, at the annual district meeting 

of the rural municipal councils of the Regina district, and at a meeting of rural municipal officials held at 

Watrous, the vote was unanimously in favour of imposing an additional two cents a gallon gasoline tax 

on taxable fuel. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You should do away with the Public Revenue Tax. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I note that my time is practically up, but I would like to 

draw to the attention of the House that the question of taxation of Crown properties was raised in this 

province 14 years ago, and mention was made of taxation of crown properties in the Jacoby 

Commission's report to the then Liberal Government. Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, are sometimes 

inclined to the opinion that the only Crown properties we have in the province of Saskatchewan are 

those in the name of the Provincial Government. So, for their information, I prepared, or had prepared, a 

breakdown. There are $126 million of assessed tax-exempt properties in the province of Saskatchewan, 

of which $15 million is in the name of the Government of Canada, $18 million in the name of the 

Government of the Province of Saskatchewan, and the balance in the name of municipalities, 

educational, religious institutions and industrial and industrial and business enterprises that have been 

exempt from tax. Back in 1938 the Jacoby Commission had this to say, on page 182: 

 

"The committee accordingly recommends that appropriate legislation be enacted under which 

Saskatchewan Crown companies or commercial agents shall pay municipal taxes and levies to the 

same extent as private owners would be liable for such taxes or levies." 

 

This recommendation was made by the Jacoby Commission. The cost to the province would be in the 

neighbourhood of $250,000. The Liberal Government was in office for eight years following the tabling 

of that report, but they come along and say that the recommendation in the Britnell report must be 

implemented today, not tomorrow. The Jacoby Commission, Mr. Speaker, recommended the abolition 

of the Public Revenue Tax over 14 years ago, but the members to your left come along now and say this 

must be done today because tomorrow is too late. 

 

Might I conclude by stating that I am firmly of the opinion that a greater measure of progress can be 

made in the developing of provincial-municipal relations through co-operation, understanding and 

consideration between the Government of the province and the municipal officials of the province of 

Saskatchewan. The Britnell-Cronkite-Jacobs report will be submitted to, and discussed at, the coming 

Rural Municipal convention scheduled to be held in Regina the week of March 10th. At that time we 

will have an opportunity to gauge the opinion of the officials of 300 of our rural municipalities in respect 

to the recommendations and the implementation of these recommendations. 



 

February 14, 1951 

 

 

9 

Might I conclude by stating, Mr. Speaker, that the Britnell-Cronkite Committee recommended and 

suggested that it would take approximately three years to implement the recommendations contained in 

this report. With the knowledge I have of the contents of the report, I feel deeply obliged to vote against 

the proposed amendment to the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne and to support of main 

motion. 

 

Mr. J. Walter Erb (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to participate in this debate, I should like, 

first, to take note that this is St. Valentine's Day, and I hope that all married members, at least, executed 

their husbandly duty in sending their wives an expression of their continued love and affection. I was out 

last night for supper with the member for Hanley (Mr. Walker), and, as a matter of fact, I had 

completely forgotten St. Valentine's Day; but he solemnly reminded me that it was expedient that we 

send our wives a card, considering the fact that we are only home once a week while sitting in the 

Legislature. 

 

I should like to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the Address to the Speech from the Throne 

on the excellent manner in which they spoke. Listening to them, Mr. Speaker, it was obvious that they 

are men with wide experience in the field of their particular endeavour, and because of their fine 

qualities of heart and mind, I am very proud to be associated with them. 

 

I should also like to congratulate the hon. Leader of the Opposition upon his speech which was 

considered, I am sure, a very excellent one, by every member of the Opposition! I often think, Mr. 

Speaker, what a difficult position the hon. member has to fill as leader of His Majesty's Loyal 

Opposition. It must be an arduous and uninspiring task to act as chief critic against a Government that 

has brought such a profound and social economic change to the people of the province, while his party, 

through the years as a government of this province, were almost notorious for their inaction in meeting 

the inequities of the day. 

 

I also wish to congratulate the hon. Premier upon his remarkably fine address. I am sure the ego in every 

one of us tells us sometimes that we have reached a certain stage of maturity, but after listening to the 

Premier I feel relegated back to short pants, and I have a suspicion that my hon. friends from the 

Opposition feel even less mature — in three-cornered ones. 

 

I should like, Mr. Speaker, to take note of the seat next to the hon. Leader of the Opposition, which was 

occupied by the former hon. member for Gravelbourg, now Mr. Justice Culliton. Hon. members may 

recall that, last year, during the budget debate, I assured the hon. member for Gravelbourg that when this 

party makes the Government at Ottawa, I should, at that time, use every influence I might possess at that 

time to get for him a haven from the vicissitudes of political life. Now, Mr. Speaker, if this assurance 

was a suggestion to the Department of Justice at Ottawa, I want to assure my learned friends who still 

remain in the Opposition that I regret I am unable to make it an annual event. 

 

Seriously, Mr. Speaker, I believe I express the sentiments of this side of the House when I say that the 

former member of Gravelbourg was respected by everyone on this side of the House. While we may not 

have agreed with him, we never doubted his sincerity and ability. I am sure Justice Culliton is eminently 

qualified for the high office to which he has been appointed, and it is my hope that he may continue to 

serve in well-being for many years to come. 



 

February 14, 1951 

 

 

10 

I should also like to congratulate the other members who have taken part in this debate, which has 

probably been the most diversified one in this Eleventh Legislature. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that it 

is becoming increasingly apparent that the Opposition has failed in its attempt, during these past six 

years, to credit the C.C.F. Government. 

 

I can visualize the Leader of the Opposition going over the length and breadth of this province trying to 

convince his hearers that the Premier has discredited the Wheat Board in favour of the Winnipeg Grain 

Exchange, or that the Premier of Saskatchewan would line up the C.C.F. party with the Soviet Union in 

opposing the resolution of the U.N. branding China the aggressor, thereby trying to create the sinister 

impression that the Premier of this province has at last indicated where his sympathies lie. This attempt, 

Mr. Speaker, to create a Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde out of the Premier, who has spent more than 16 years 

of his life in an unceasing and selfless effort to establish a society based on economic justice, social 

justice and freedom, suggests nothing less, to me at least, than intellectual bankruptcy. 

 

Since Winston Churchill's address at Fulton, Missouri . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You must have a guilty mind. 

 

Mr. Erb: — . . . where I believe he coined the phrase "The Iron Curtain", we have associated the same 

with an abstract but impenetrable barrier to information in respect to the Soviet Union . . . 

 

Mr. J.E. McCormack: — You're on the east side though! 

 

Mr. Erb: — I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the Iron Curtain is not peculiar to Russia alone. The Iron 

Curtain has fallen in diverse places of the world, wherever and whenever a black-out was indicated for 

political expediency. An iron curtain, Mr. Speaker, surrounds Saskatchewan, erected and maintained by 

the collusion of the press, the Liberal Party and the Canadian Chamber of Commerce. These groups, Mr. 

Speaker, who so loudly rush to the defence of every moral and ethical promise of democracy, where 

their own interests are concerned, obstruct with singular and similar alacrity a free and unadulterated 

flow of information throughout Canada in respect to the social and economic achievements of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

I maintain, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Canada have a right to that information, free from 

adulteration and perversion. If all the people of Canada, Mr. Speaker, really knew about the great social 

and economic changes that have taken place in this province since the 'peoples' government' has 

administered its affairs, they would have demanded, and achieved, not only the social and economic 

security legislation that we have in this province, but all such legislation that would free them from the 

social and economic inequities of the present day. But, Mr. Speaker, the great majority of people of 

Canada, outside this province, have never heard of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, where, for 

a minimum fee of $10 per person, or a maximum of $30 for a family of four or more, the hospital 

insurance is guaranteed. I would like to add, too, to this, that, because of this Hospital Services Plan, the 

hospitalization costs have been greatly reduced in this province. 

 

I am sure, too, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Canada, outside this province, not know that the treatment 

and care for cancer patients is free, that Saskatchewan is the only place in the world where it is free, and 

that our cancer 



 

February 14, 1951 

 

 

11 

clinic is one of the finest in the world. And I am sure that they have not heard that the treatment and care 

of the mentally ill in Saskatchewan, is provided without cost to the patient or to his estate, or that the 

treatment and care is on such a high plane that more patients are being turned back to society as useful 

people, than in any other province or state on the continent. Or have the people heard of the great strides 

that this province has made in penology, so that the incidence of crime has gone down progressively, 

even to the extent where we had to close the provincial gaol at Moosomin, Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. L.L. Trippe (Turtleford): — And open two in Regina. 

 

Mr. Erb: — Now incidentally, Mr. Speaker, is it not strange what a different sense of values our friends 

in the Opposition have, when the proposition involves making a little political 'hay'. We have, for 

instance, a little one-room schoolhouse that is closed due to circumstances peculiar to such schools, the 

children of that school, of course, being provided with education elsewhere. But what happens? The hue 

and cry goes out from our friends across the floor that the people of the district are required to pay taxes 

and their school is closed. They do not stop to explain why the school was closed: it was just closed as a 

result of C.C.F. educational policy. But, Mr. Speaker, when this Government closes a gaol as a result of 

its progressive policies in penology, a hush falls over our friends in the Opposition, like the twitter of 

little birds that is hushed in the splendor of twilight. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask to what extent the insurance companies of Canada have allowed 

the true facts of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance to pass through the Iron Curtain to get through 

to the people of Canada, so that they may learn how, for $28.50, this province has the finest insurance 

policy in the world. Have you ever seen, Mr. Speaker, a comparative chart published by the insurance 

companies stating the rates for insurance and the coverage in each province across Canada? I haven't! 

Well, naturally I do not blame them for neglecting to do this, because this is what the chart would show: 

it would show that their rates for the same coverage provided by the Saskatchewan Automobile 

Insurance and the package policy are, on the average, six times higher anywhere else in Canada. And 

you may be interested to know, Mr. Speaker, that the cheapest protection offered by private companies 

is in Manitoba, at $77.20, and the costliest is in Quebec at $237, and this is compared to our insurance at 

$28.50 — but theirs does not include the accident coverage. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I just received on my desk, the other day, a report published and circulated by the 

Wawanesa Mutual Insurance Company, in which they, of course, tried to discredit compulsory insurance 

in Saskatchewan. And they say that compulsory insurance, in any form, is a negative approach to any 

safety programme, it insidiously produces, does not prevent, accidents. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

matter is only relative so far as this Company is concerned. It just depends who would sell the 

compulsory insurance. The Insurance Company of Canada does not only endeavour to discredit the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance outside this province, but within the province as well. We all 

remember, last year, when a well-known insurance company ran all these full page ads in the periodicals 

and dailies of Saskatchewan newspapers advertising a $16.50 extension policy. Now just whom were 

they trying to fool? Certainly not the people of Saskatchewan. For, Mr. Speaker, just across the 

Saskatchewan border, in Manitoba, the same company was selling the same protection for twice as 

much — or $52.00 Now I am quite sure that this $16.50 extension policy it advertised did not appear in 

the Winnipeg 'Free Press' and the Calgary 'Herald,' the Vancouver 'Sun', the Toronto 'Globe and Mail,' 

or the Montreal 'Gazette'. It appeared only in the Saskatchewan papers for Saskatchewan 



 

February 14, 1951 

 

 

12 

consumption, implying, of course, that the $17.50 package policy of the Saskatchewan Government was, 

after all, in the vernacular, 'not so hot'. 

 

More recently, Mr. Speaker, the survey of the North Dakota State Commission of Government 

Insurance in Saskatchewan was exploited by the insurance companies, and their ally the press, in an 

endeavour to heap discredit upon people's own insurance service in this province. I submit, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Iron Curtain which surrounds Saskatchewan, erected and maintained by the groups which I have 

mentioned, is as totalitarian in principle and application as the one which surrounds the Soviet Union. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, would the hon. gentleman permit a question? Is he aware that the 

Wawanesa Mutual is a mutual company — a co-operative? 

 

Mr. Erb: — Mr. Speaker, we have had many institutions that have tried to pan off their illicit operations 

as a co-operative. 

 

Mr. Walker: — What kind of co-operatives do you in the Opposition believe in? 

 

Mr. Erb: — Now, Mr. Speaker, there can only be only reason for this action on the part of these groups, 

and that is, namely the fear that if democratic socialism is not contained in Saskatchewan, it will sweep 

over the rest of this Dominion, bringing to an end the social and economic inequalities on which these 

groups thrive. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Who wrote that? 

 

Mr. Erb: — We of the C.C.F. Party, Mr. Speaker, realize that our struggle for political leadership in 

Canada is not an easy one, especially in the face of the powerful forces that are arrayed against us; but of 

one thing we can be sure, and one thing in which we can take pride, and that is the fact that many of the 

reforms advocated by the C.C.F. at Ottawa today are written into the Dominion statute books. 

 

I should like to quote Bruce Hutchinson, with whom I am sure all of you are familiar. He was writing in 

the 'Christian Science Monitor' and he revealed that, when he is not seeking Liberal votes, he is capable 

of more objective writing: 

 

"The recent decline in C.C.F. parliamentary strength does not mean that its theories have ceased to be 

an important factor in Canadian society. Paradoxically, many of the objectives of the C.C.F. have 

gained increasing public support and have been quietly woven more and more into the fabric of 

politics. 

 

"A good case could be made for the proposition that the C.C.F. has been one of the most influential 

movements in Canadian history." 

 

Of interest, too, Mr. Speaker, is the statement made by Finance Minister Anacomb of British Columbia 

on August 9, 1950: 

 

"If British Columbia's Coalition Party were dissolved, Progressive-Conservatives and Liberals, as they 

now stood, would have little chance against the strong C.C.F. Party." 

 

Such evidence that the C.C.F. is a strong, vibrant and growing force must, no doubt, create some 

consternations among the political hierarchies that have sought its inception. 



 

February 14, 1951 

 

 

13 

The hon. Leader of the Opposition, in his reply to the Throne Speech, and in particular to the statement 

made by the member for Elrose (Mr. Willis), that the Wheat Board's final five-year payment be made, 

took exception, saying that the final payment hinges on the 'have-regard' clause, which is now under 

review. Now, Mr. Speaker, in the spring of 1949 when the farmers of this province, and of the two 

provinces on either side, were not pressing the Wheat Board for money then, but they received more 

money in 1949 than they could conveniently handle in respect to income tax, but Mr. Speaker, there was 

a Federal election then. There is not a Federal election now, nor one in sight, and that is the only 

difference. The fact that thousands of farmers require immediate funds is only secondary to the Federal 

Government. The only 'have regard' to which the Liberal Government at Ottawa is concerned, is the 

regard to winning elections by buying the farmer's vote with his own money. 

 

Mr. J.G. Egnatoff (Melfort): — When is the provincial election coming up? 

 

Mr. Erb: — No one on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, directly or indirectly, made statements that 

would undermine and discredit the Wheat Board. The hon. Premier's appraisal of the situation is more 

than substantiated by the manner in which the Wheat Board has been exploited by the Liberal Party for 

political advantage. But what the Federal Government, in effect, is doing, is undermining the farmer's 

faith in an institution which he believed was to mark a new era in orderly marketing for his grain crops, 

so that he would be no longer the victim of a speculative grain trade; and I submit, Mr. Speaker, that 

only the Federal Government can vindicate the farmers' faith in the Wheat Board by actions that are in 

accord with the high ideals upon which this institution was founded. 

 

Thousands of farmers in the west are facing a real hardship as a result of the severely frozen crop. 

Thousands of acres were so severely frozen that they had to be burned, and in most instances the wheat 

that was harvested was of such poor grade and quality that it produced a yield only a fraction of that for 

which there were prospects earlier in the year. Now, adding to the hardship, Mr. Speaker, is the 

unwarranted boxcar shortage. Many elevator points have had no cars for the last several months, and 

elevator and annex facilities are filled to capacity. If the railroads and their friends, the Board of 

Transport Commissioners, and the Federal Government had any regard for western agriculture, they 

would have done everything possible to alleviate the congestion in country elevators; but, Mr. Speaker, 

it is no longer profitable for the C.P.R. to transport farmers' wheat. Their attitude is this: "Why should 

we haul a commodity whose rate is fixed by statute, when we received a 45 per cent increase in our 

other rates?" I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the case for the nationalization of the C.P.R. has never been so 

clear as it is now. As a: result of the combination of the factors I have mentioned, the farmers in 

thousands of instances are sorely in need of money. The increase of 20 cents per bushel in the initial 

price of wheat is not even the soothing syrup it was intended to be, because for thousands of farmers 

whose wheat is still lying in the swath, or lying in piles under the snow, this 20 cents is a lot of 

unadulterated eye-wash, as far as making immediate funds available to them is concerned. 

 

Now, lest my friends in the Opposition take up the cry that we are not only opposed to the Wheat Board 

but opposed to the initial price as well, I want to tell all my friends over there that increase in the initial 

payment should not have been 20 cents but rather this increase should have been 35 cents. 



 

February 14, 1951 

 

 

14 

Mr. Tucker: — Why be stingy? 

 

Mr. Erb: — Mr. Speaker, we are definitely opposed not to anything that the Opposition has said in 

regard to our stand on the Wheat Board, but to shabby principles employed by the Federal Government 

in respect to their dealings with the farmers. What the farmers want, and want, now, is the immediate 

payment of their wheat over the 5-year period and what the farmers want in the final analysis is a fair 

settlement of all their claims and nothing less. 

 

I do not intend to make a lengthy review of any Government department, Mr. Speaker, but I would like 

to touch on a few points concerning Highways, Education and Agriculture. 

 

Probably no other department of government has received more criticism and abuse than has the 

Department of Highways. But as the years have passed, Mr. Speaker, this criticism, if it has not become 

less, certainly has become almost entirely unjustified, and in this connection I should like to read some 

of the statements made by outstanding reporters about the condition of Saskatchewan roads. I believe it 

has been given in the House before, but I am quite sure that as repetition wears away rock, probably 

these facts will eventually sink in across the floor. Now, James H. Gray, writing from Calgary states in 

the Ottawa 'Citizen' on August 25, 1949: 

 

"In at least one respect this is one of the most sensational stories to blow in from the prairies in years. 

It is a report from the tourist just getting undusted after a 2,500 mile jaunt up to Winnipeg and return. 

The fact, hard and harsh as it may seem, is that Saskatchewan's gravelled highways in August were 

superior to their counterpart in either Manitoba or Alberta. So explodes a western myth that 

Saskatchewan boasts of the worst roads between here and Minsk and Pinsk — and Omsk as far as I 

am concerned." 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You should have read that at the C.C.F. Convention. 

 

Mr. Erb: — 

 

"Now, No. 1 Highway from border to border in Saskatchewan was in excellent shape. Tourists of 

earlier times said its lack of potholes and signs showed signs of careful maintenance, were 

astounding." 

 

Harold Simpson, of Vancouver, B.C., writing in the Calgary 'Herald' said this: 

 

"In traversing 4,000 miles of Saskatchewan highway I found most of these roads as smooth as a 

billiard table, graded at very frequent intervals and a few bad patches were infinitely better than a few 

good parts on Alberta No. 9. Irrespective of political viewpoint I believe in giving credit where credit 

is due and the Government of Saskatchewan can certainly point with pride to the condition of its 

roads." 

 

Now, Bob Tyre, our good friend who used to sit in the Press Gallery here, said this: 



 

February 14, 1951 

 

 

15 

"When the year was younger we travelled No. 11 Highway to the Manitoba boundary and said some 

harsh things about the roads. In our wanderings thereafter, we discovered some mighty fine stretches 

of highway in Saskatchewan; and we would not want to write '30' to the old year without a word of 

appreciation to Highway Minister Douglas and his road-builders." 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Take a bow. 

 

Mr. Erb: — And I should like to just quote what Phil Wade said in the 'Star-Phoenix.' The 

'Star-Phoenix' has been quoted several times, and I might add to it. I understand that for every once the 

'Leader-Post,' is quoted the 'Star-Phoenix' has been quoted 20 times: 

 

"Premier Douglas built a needed paved road through his constituency while Hon. J.T. Douglas looked 

after Rosetown suitably and in neither case should there be criticism. This reporter in the last two 

years has driven over most of the Highways in the north. Generally speaking, there can be few 

complaints. They have been well maintained and are better than Alberta's roads, much better than prior 

to 1944." 

 

The people of this province, Mr. Speaker, I am sure, can look forward with great confidence to even 

better roads and more of them. 

 

The larger school unit, which has received more abuse by the Liberal Party outside of this Chamber than 

in it, is an outstanding achievement of Saskatchewan's Government's educational policy. There are many 

who make great capital out of the fact of the rejection of a unit where a vote has been taken in that 

regard. They would offer this as proof positive that the Larger unit idea in Saskatchewan is not generally 

acceptable. The only real criterion, Mr. Speaker, as far as I am concerned, whether the larger unit is 

acceptable or not, is where this unit has been operating on a trial basis. It is interesting and gratifying to 

note that out of 24 units that have concluded the trial period only two petitions for a vote were received 

by the Department of Education, and in many of the remaining units there were not sufficient petitioners 

to constitute the required 15 per cent and in many there was not one single petitioner. I should like to 

add that the two units that did have the vote, which had petitioned for the vote, were sustained by large 

majority not only in the urban areas, but in the rural areas as well. And that, Mr. Speaker, I would say is 

proof positive. I am confident that eventually all school districts in Saskatchewan will be administered 

under the larger unit basis. 

 

The agricultural policies of this Government, Mr. Speaker, have proven so sound that one hears very 

little criticism about it; but the hon. member for Melfort (Mr. Egnatoff) took exception to the fact that 

the Government does not want all Northern Crown Lands. Now, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the 

hon. member for Melfort acquaint himself better with the planned policy with regard to Crown Lands. If 

he were aware of the security, as aware of the security as the settlers are aware themselves, he would 

probably not have tried to make a fake out of the fact that this Government does not sell Crown Lands. 

The settlers on these Crown Lands, Mr. Speaker, are perfectly satisfied. They are not asking that the 

policy be changed, enabling them to buy these lands. The only people, I submit, Mr. Speaker, who are 

really interested in the sale of these Crown Lands are those who would like to see the settler placed in a 

debtor position for their own ultimate gain. I am sure that the hon. member for Melfort did not make any 

votes for himself on this issue. 



 

February 14, 1951 

 

 

16 

Now, I should like to quote a few examples, Mr. Speaker, of what the C.C.F. Government has done in 

respect to its assistance in agriculture and compare the same with what the Liberals did in the last year in 

which they held office. Now, I am comparing the years 1943 and 1944 when they last held office and 

the years 1949 and 1950 under C.C.F. administration. The number of Ag-Reps we have today, 36; then 

there were 21. Land developed for feed and fodder; C.C.F. Government of 1949 developed 20,676 acres, 

the Liberals none. Irrigation of land brought under the ditch: C.C.F. 15,350 acres, the Liberals none. 

Self-help projects, such as local irrigation and land reclamation: C.C.F., 144 projects, the Liberals none. 

Cattle tested for Bangs disease: C.C.F. Government, 39,074 cattle, the Liberals none. Acres classified 

for re-settlement: one million acres under the C.C.F. in 1949-50, none in 1943-44. Now, the forage crop 

and seed distributed: C.C.F. 265,552 pounds, the Liberals none. Mr. Speaker, such records of the Liberal 

Government did, no doubt, prompt the hon. Premier to say they did it magnificently and they did it with 

dignity, but they did nothing. 

 

Now, before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, I should like to touch briefly on what has been said in this House 

on international affairs. What the hon. Premier said in this connection is the conviction in the hearts of 

millions upon millions of people throughout Canada and the United States. It is my conviction, and I am 

sure it is the conviction of every member on this side of the House. We are not pacifists, neither will we 

allow ourselves to become victims of hysteria. The hon. member for Melfort stated that if the U.N. had 

not gone as far as banning the Chinese action of aggression, the organization would have lost any 

semblance of authority and it would have meant its downfall. That statement, Mr. Speaker, is the most 

presumptuous I have ever heard in respect to the present crisis. It would be equally presumptuous to say 

that because the U.N. branded China an aggressor all hope for a peaceful settlement has vanished. One 

would assume that the hon. member for Melfort, being a teacher and presumably having studied Chinese 

history, should be capable of some original thinking. Confucius would have given him a very poor grade 

indeed. Who is to say what the . . . 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — Stalin would too. 

 

Mr. Erb: — Who is to say that the U.N. action is right any more than might is right? We have long 

since learned that might is not always right. History records the actions of generations and it condemns 

or justifies those actions long after a generation has passed away. Might not the course of history be a 

happier one, Mr. Speaker, had we recognized long ago the hunger, poverty and diocese and hopelessness 

form the perfect culture media for totalitarianism. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we are not going to settle 

international affairs in this Chamber, and it won't be settled in any chamber until men sit down together 

in mutual respect and understanding of one another's problems, and realize that to lose face after having 

led with one's a chin is not half as costly nor half so tragic as losing a million lives. To this end the least 

of our prayers shall be, please God we may muddle through! 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the motion. 

 

Mr. L.L. Trippe (Spruce Lake): — With your permission, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5.15 o'clock p.m. 


