



















































Hansard: March 07, 1952


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eleventh Legislature 

21st Day 

 

Friday, March 7, 1952 

 

The House met at three o'clock p.m. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed from Thursday, March 6, 1952, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of the 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair. (The Assembly to go 

into a Committee of Supply). 

 

Hon. J.A. Darling (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, during the short time I spoke last 

night before adjournment, I had complimented the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines), on his 

presentation of the budget. I had made a few comments with respect to the disposal of the Public 

Revenue Tax and I had outlined briefly the main projects which the Department of Public Works is 

undertaking during 1952. I was glad to have the opportunity of those few minutes last night in order that 

I might make use of the time at my disposal today to deal with the operations of the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation. 

 

There is no doubt that any minister becomes particularly interested in the departments over which he 

presides. That is natural, and proper. I am interested in Public Works and am also interested in 

Telephones; but the Power Corporation — there is something particularly stimulating about the work 

which concerns the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, mainly because it is attracting so much attention 

throughout the province, and we are continually under the public eye. It has been very pleasing to all of 

us in the Power Corporation that the efforts that are being made in power development in the province 

are meeting with very general approval. 

 

I would like, at this time, to pay tribute to the staff of that Corporation. The one characteristic of our 

organization is that it is a new organization. It is true that we had the Power Commission back in 1930 

and since, but for a long period of time, until, in fact, 1944, and after 1944 there was little development 

for reasons which I think everyone is well aware of. With the passing of the depression years and 

coming to the end of the war years, came the time for an era of expansion in power development in the 

province. And for that reason perhaps, because we had to expand at that time, we have built up a staff of 

which the predominating characteristic is youth. Even our senior staff are just in their prime and have 

many years during which they will have all the energy and drive which is needed in order to take care of 

an undertaking such as the electrification of Saskatchewan. 

 

We had a Christmas party, we have one each year, and at the last one we were honoured by a visit from 

the Premier. I remember his comment to me. (He was not there in time for the dinner, unfortunately). 

But after he had looked us over he came to me and he said: "Where did you get all the pretty girls?" He 

would, of course, notice that, it had 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

2 

escaped my attention. But, sitting on the platform there, the average youth of the Power Corporation 

staff had not escaped my attention, and I feel that we have a staff there which is in step with the job we 

have to do. They are doing a good job and if I should sound, during my few remarks today, rather smug 

or self-satisfied with the work that is being done, let me hasten to assure you that while we are pleased 

with what we are able to achieve, we are by no means smug; we are continually and persistently 

endeavouring to improve what we are doing to develop new techniques in order that we will have still 

further achievements. 

 

Now, Mr, Speaker, I have listened carefully during this Session and I am compelled to say that the 

criticism which has come from the members of the Opposition has been quite moderate and limited. In 

fact, I take no exception to any criticism which has come from across the floor on the work of the Power 

Corporation. In fact, I am obliged to those members who have criticized, because it has given me an 

opportunity to reply to those criticisms and to possibly explain the results of this information. Where we 

do get the criticism, Mr. Speaker, is from the green Liberal candidates out on the hustings. I have 

listened to a few of their speeches and, of course, we extend a degree of tolerance to those fellows who 

are just breaking into the field of public life, but I would be rather sorry for some of them if they should 

happen to find themselves on the same platform as someone who knows the facts, because they would 

certainly be due for a severe drubbing. 

 

The criticism that I want to answer first of all is that we are not going fast enough. That is quite a 

common criticism, that we should be extending more lines, that we should be serving more farms, that 

we should be carrying on an even greater programme than we are at the present time. I have spoken over 

and over again, outlining the development of the Power Corporation's system up to the present time. I 

think, however, that it is still necessary to repeat at least in outline, that development. I do not have to go 

back early in 1944 in order to justify what we have done. I do not find it necessary to criticize what was 

done during the 'thirties. The development of power during the 'thirties presented such difficulties that I 

doubt if anyone would have made much progress during those years. However, I think that since 1944 

this government is entitled to credit for what has been accomplished since that time. 

 

When we took over in 1944 we found a number of small patches of power development in about ten or 

twelve places throughout the province. There was, of course, some co-ordination in the centre from 

Saskatoon south. Apart from that there were just separate and distinct developments of small proportion. 

And we found too, that such developments as existed at that time consisted of the publicly-owned 

system and three main privately-owned developments. One of the first things that had to be done in 

order to develop a publicly-owned system that would serve the whole province was to purchase those 

privately-owned systems. That was done, and following that a good deal of development was undertaken 

with respect to the construction of lines which would connect towns and villages and form a network 

covering the entire province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it was necessary to do that first, and I would like to point out at this time that, since I 

have had anything to do with the Power Corporation, (and I have been chairman of the Board of 

Directors since the Power Corporation was set up in 1949), we have, with great care 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

3 

analyzed each project in order to determine that the revenue which could be anticipated from any line 

that we had under consideration would justify the capital expenditure necessary to construct that line. I 

think we have to do that, Mr. Speaker, when people talk about doing as they do in Manitoba, about 

spreading out all over the shop without any regard to economics, they are certainly not taking a rational 

attitude towards the problem of power development in this province. 

 

The Minister of Highways (Hon. Mr. J.T. Douglas), spoke just the other day. He has over and over again 

referred to the tremendous problem, not only of construction and reconstruction, but of maintenance of a 

system involving 8,000 miles and more of highway. Yet we have that problem to deal with. We have 

that undertaking to keep up with. Now can this province afford to proceed without some regard to 

economics, to spread power lines to the farms in Saskatchewan and cover this tremendous area without 

being careful that the returns that we can anticipate will bear some relationship to the costs of the 

operation? It is all every well, Mr. Speaker, to speak glibly about subsidization. Maybe subsidization 

will some day be possible, and it may some day be necessary to finish this job, I do not know. But I do 

know this; that subsidization if it ever does become necessary under government policy to carry out, can 

be undertaken to complete the last half of this programme much better than the first half, and those who 

are connected to the power lines during the first half of our programme will certainly be well served in 

that they got service much earlier than those who may benefit from any prospective subsidization that 

this government, or any other government, might decide is possible during the last half of the 

programme. 

 

I have said that the construction of the network covering this province, between the lines which connect 

our towns and villages, was built with due regard to the revenues which could be expected from those 

towns and villages. That is just another way of saying that the towns and villages constructed are paying 

for the construction of that network which covers the province. When the towns and villages have been 

served, we could stop there and we would still have an economic operation without connecting a single 

farm. 

 

One of the things that I hear occasionally is that the farmers are getting the short end of the deal because 

they have to make a contribution towards the erection of farm lines. But, Mr. Speaker, their contribution 

is made towards the cost of the line from this trunk line which is already on a paying basis in the service 

of towns and villages. Their contribution is simply a contribution towards the construction of the line 

from the 24,000 volt network to their farm. That contribution is necessary in order that the capital which 

the Power Corporation invests in the farm project can be taken care of by the revenue which can be 

expected from the project. 

 

Now I said that I was going to deal with the progress that we have made since 1944, and I would like to 

remind the House that the construction of most of this network of which I have been speaking has been 

built since 1944. I would like to remind the House of what I have told them before, that in 1944 we only 

had 12,989 customers — that is, meters in service But at the end of 1951 we have 72,700 meters in 

service, a very substantial increase. 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

4 

In 1944, 146 towns and villages were served by the publicly-owned system. By the end of 1951, 513 

towns and villages — again a very substantial increase. In 1944 we sold from the Power Commission 

generating plants, 75 million kilowatt hours of energy. In 1951 we sold 279 million kilowatt hours of 

energy. Those are figures which indicate a very substantial growth in that short period of time. 

 

I would like further to point out that in 1944 the plant in service (that is, the generating plant, together 

with the transmission lines, sub-stations, all property and all the capital investment of the Power 

Commission) was $8,800,000. At the end of 1951 we had a capital investment of $37,300,000. Those 

figures look as if we were making a good deal of progress. You will notice the figure which I have just 

stated, of $8,800,000 is the capital value of the plant in service in 1944, fifteen years after the setting up 

of the Power Commission. Compare that with the $8,050,000 which was added to the capital structure of 

the Power Corporation during this one year of 1951 — as much, or almost as much as the total of the 

fifteen years prior to 1944. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a little about what we have done during 1951. As everyone knows, 

1951 was a rather difficult year in which to carry on construction work. We had so much wet weather 

and, believe it or not, wet weather does affect very seriously the work of power wire construction. One 

can only think of the difficulty of getting the trucks though cultivated land when it is wet and even when 

the rain is not falling, so that the wet weather hampered very materially the construction programme. 

Nevertheless, we did have a very satisfactory construction year. When we started out though, in the 

spring, we had no assurance that materials would be available in the supplies that we would require, but 

we started out on faith and our faith was justified. We did get the materials that were required although 

they were used almost immediately upon being delivered. 

 

We served during that year, (and I want to mention that when I talk about villages, towns and hamlets I 

am just going to say towns and that applies to all of them. We have a habit, in Saskatchewan, of saying, 

"we are going to town," and we are really only just going to the post office, whether there is anything 

else there or not) — those are towns, villages and hamlets and will be listed in the annual report, and any 

member will be able to see any communities which are referred to, We served 84 of those towns and 

villages and hamlets. That is more communities than we have ever been able to reach before in any 

year's operations. 

 

Once the power line is energized and they are able to use it, it is very pleasing to go into one of those 

communities and share in the enthusiasm with which they greet the advent of transmission line service, 

after possibly, in many cases, years of high-cost power served from a local plant — unsatisfactory 

service which so many communities have had to put up with, and many communities are still putting up 

with it. But it is pleasant to go into a place and celebrate with them the opening of new power line 

service. 

 

Now, 84 towns, villages and hamlets were served during the year. Forty of those were served in the 

town and village programme, 44 were served as joint projects with farm areas. I said earlier that, in 

building 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

5 

our initial 24,000 volt network, the lines that were built were carefully chosen after analysis had been 

made to determine whether or not the anticipated revenue justified the capital expenditure. There are still 

a great many villages and hamlets left in this province which are not served, but we are nearly at the end 

of those which can be served on that basis. We are nearly at the end of the time when the revenue from 

the villages and towns and hamlets which remain justify the capital cost of the line which extends to 

them. That is why we are now having more and more villages and hamlets served as part of a joint 

village or hamlet farm project, and in those projects the village makes a contribution towards the cost of 

the line which serves it jointly with the farm area around it. It is pretty involved. I hesitate to attempt, in 

the course of an address, to describe the way in which this is arrived at, but the presence of a village or 

hamlet in a farm project reduces the cost of the project to the farmers in that project. 

 

Last year we served more than 2,500 farms in that type of project — joint farm-village project. We set 

our sights on 3,000 farms. We did not quite reach it by December 31st. We had at that time some 800 

farms, nearly completed and I am quite sure that by the time this legislature opened we had exceeded 

our 3,000 mark, although we had not quite completed it by the end of the year. While it is an extremely 

difficult figure to arrive at with accuracy, I believe that I can safely say that the figure of 8,000 farms 

served since, in the province, is as nearly accurate as we can arrive at, and when we started in 1944 there 

were 137. 

 

This programme involved the construction of 426 miles of 24,000 volt line — 426 miles. It involved the 

construction of 2,400 miles of farm line and we constructed also 130 miles of high-voltage line. That is 

the H-frame line that some of you will have seen stretching from Beatty south through Humboldt and 

down to Watrous. 

 

We also constructed a high voltage line from Tisdale north to Nipawin and some work has been done on 

a high-voltage line from Unity to Kerrobert. Now, Mr. Speaker, last year I think I forecast we would be 

constructing a high voltage line from Saskatoon to Wynyard. I am sorry to say that we were unable to do 

that part of our programme for the reason that we were unable to secure the 50 and 45 foot poles that are 

necessary for that type of construction. We employed 240 men on our construction gangs at the peak of 

our construction season and the reports which came to me were, for the most part, favourable insofar as 

their behaviour out in the country is concerned. Our men received many compliments from the country 

on the conduct of our crews. Of course, there were one or two others but, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

point this out. I spoke a little while ago about the youth of our organization. Of the 240 men who were 

working on our power construction gangs, only 60 of them had more than one year's seniority in that 

kind of work. Now, when you start to undertake a programme such as ours with so many men having 

such a short period of experience, it is bound to cause difficulty here and there. 

 

I want to tell you what we have done to add to the generating capacity of our system. It is useless to 

build power lines unless you have this plant with which to energize them. Last May we brought into 

service a 15,000 kilowatt generating unit at Estevan and that unit has been in operation ever since. I 

think I said last year that we were proposing to install a 10,000 kilowatt unit at Prince Albert. We ran 

into difficulty on that job. 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

6 

The contractor had difficulty in his excavation. He ran into quicksand and that, together with the wet 

weather, delayed the work. We anticipated that this 10,000 kilowatt unit would be in service by 

December 31st but, as a consequence of the unavoidable delay, it will not be in operation until June. 

Fortunately for us, our other generating plants have gone through reasonably trouble-free and we have 

suffered no inconvenience up to this point from the delay in the installation of the 10,000 kilowatt unit at 

Prince Albert. 

 

At Saskatoon we have completed the construction of an addition to the power plant building to house the 

new 25,000 kilowatt unit which will be delivered early in May. 

 

That represents practically all that has been done in connection with the development of generating 

plants. Now, Mr. Speaker, I said that I was obliged to anyone who would bring forward criticisms of the 

work of the Power Corporation. 

 

The hon. member for Humboldt (Mr. Loehr) spoke last Wednesday, if I remember rightly, and he 

expressed some appreciation for the fact that 900 farms had been served with power in his constituency. 

There is some concentration of farm development in the Humboldt area, partly for the reasons which the 

hon. member for Humboldt stated. I was a little surprised, however, at the general impression which he 

left with me of the attitude of his constituents towards that service. I do not suppose the hon. gentleman 

intended it, but I had the impression that his 900 farmers were a lot of sourpusses, who suffered from 

melancholia or constitutional misanthropy and, while they were slightly enlivened by the presence of 

power in their yards, they were not sufficiently so that they were prepared to give credit to anybody for 

putting it there. That was the impression that I got. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, whether my impression was justified or not; I recalled that the hon. gentleman had 

made a similar speech last year and, after he had made that speech I got a letter from a gentleman up in 

his constituency. I kept that letter and I looked it up after he had spoken. I asked my secretary to call this 

gentleman on the telephone and get his permission for me to read that letter to the Legislature. He said to 

my secretary, "By all means, Mr. Darling may use my letter. What I said in that letter stands good today 

and he may also use my name." Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to read that letter: 

 

"Dear Mr. Darling: 

 

"You will, I am sure, allow me to take up just a few moments of your time. Some time ago . . ." 

 

Let me remind you, Mr. Speaker, this letter was written on March 20, 1951, and it referred to the earlier 

speech of the hon. member for Humboldt. 

 

"Some time ago I heard Mr. Arnold Loehr, the M.L.A. for Humboldt, make slighting remarks 

regarding rural electrification. I was disappointed, and others too. I say, 'credit where credit is due'. 

Mr. Loehr was not guilty of mud-slinging but his remarks were slighting and I say to you honestly, his 

references 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

7 

do in no way reflect the attitude of our fortunate farmers who have been connected with the network of 

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 

 

"What I wrote you, sir, in January, while I lay ill in Humboldt hospital, is the true sentiment of our 

people here, namely deep gratitude. I am in constant close touch with these people and never in my 

life have I met with such smiles of gratitude and appreciation. These, as I said, I pass on to you and the 

administration of the Power Corporation. 

 

"It was with interest that I heard you some days later read part of my letter in refutation of Mr. Loehr's 

remarks. We are glad you read this letter in the Assembly for that is the way we feel and we want you 

to be encouraged to continue this type of work. 

 

"True, most of the work in our vicinity is done, but for that reason we do not intend to cease to be 

grateful. Furthermore, we want farmers in other areas to share these good things. 

 

"This letter calls for no reply, Mr. Darling, we just want you to know we are thankful to you and the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation and we hope that you will continue the good work. 

 

"With best wishes for a pleasant Easter holiday, I beg to remain, 

 

Yours very truly, 

(Signed) Father Matthew." 

 

I want to say that if the reverend gentleman is listening I certainly appreciated his letter and I trust that 

his condition of health which, I understand, even today is not good, will improve. 

 

The Power Corporation does not go around looking for gratitude. The Power Corporation has a job to do 

and if they can do a good job of extending power to the farmers in Saskatchewan they will be satisfied 

whether or not they receive a whole lot of bouquets. But I do object to anyone coming into this 

legislature, or anywhere else, and saying that power has been extended but there is no credit coming to 

anybody for doing that work. 

 

The hon. member for Humboldt (Mr. Loehr) also made comparisons with the Province of Manitoba. I do 

not mind comparisons with the odd thing in Manitoba, but I do get rather tired of continually drawing to 

the attention of people everywhere the very great differences which exist between the problem of 

serving the Province of Manitoba with electrical power and of serving the Province of Saskatchewan. In 

our organization we have at least three men who came from Manitoba and know how they do things in 

Manitoba, and yet they are not able to tell us how to do them here in 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

8 

Saskatchewan. Surely that is the answer. The Province of Manitoba, as everyone knows, has a much 

smaller area to serve with farm electrification. They also have the City of Winnipeg, which is so much 

larger than any Saskatchewan city that it makes a very great difference and makes a very great 

contribution to the problem of electrification in that province. I do not know why people should continue 

to proclaim that what can be done in Manitoba can be done here. The situation is entirely different. 

 

In Manitoba last year the water rates, largely paid for by the City of Winnipeg, amounted to $480,000 

and that sum was turned over to assist in farm electrification. $480,000, Mr. Speaker, will carry between 

$6 and $7 million of capital. We do not have water rates like that turned over to us. We have not a city 

in Saskatchewan, if all cities were put together, Mr. Speaker, they would not equal the consumption of 

Winnipeg. And even those cities which we have, as is well known, are operating under agreements 

which were signed many years ago and which are still in operation. The City of Regina has its own 

plant. The City of Saskatoon is still operating under an old agreement. This year we completed 

negotiations and did purchase the distributing system of the City of North Battleford and it is now part 

of the family. The City of Yorkton also is part of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation's system. 

 

I must say, Mr. Speaker, that the acquisition of the distribution system of the City of North Battleford is 

a development of importance to the Power Corporation and it was gratifying that the people in the City 

themselves recognized the benefits which would come to them from being part of an integrated power 

system. I feel that congratulations are due to those members of the Power Corporation staff who worked 

in North Battleford and who so successfully presented the case for sale to the Power Corporation. I 

might say that when the vote of the burgesses was taken there the vote carried three to one in favour of 

joining up the distribution system of North Battleford with the Saskatchewan Power Corporation lines. 

 

It is interesting to note, Mr, Speaker, an editorial here from North Battleford 'News': 

 

"Saskatchewan is quickly coming to the crossroads as far as its electrical power situation is concerned. 

Our cities and larger towns have, of course, had electricity for many years, but it has only been 

recently that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has begun delivering its commodity to the farmer. 

 

"One of the chief reasons our industrial capacity is low is because our electrical costs are high. For the 

most part steam is the province's only present generating source and it is very expensive. In addition, 

Saskatchewan's cities have used the distribution of the power as a means of taxation. In short, our 

present setup is backward and something will have to be done soon to modernize it. 

 

"Electrical power is one of the world's commodities which naturally tends towards monopoly. It takes 

millions of dollars in capital to produce it efficiently. 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

9 

It also requires a vast audience of users to make a large investment worthwhile. No city in 

Saskatchewan is, of course, prepared to generate electricity on the scale required to assure all the 

residents of the province receiving it at a reasonable price. 

 

"We recently saw where the Manitoba Government was forced to take over the generating facilities of 

the Winnipeg Power Company. The government was forced to do this in order to be able to give the 

greatest service to the greatest number. Saskatchewan is facing a similar crisis. If we are to get cheap 

power to develop our cities and farms we must change our present approach to the subject. 

 

"No matter which government is in power at Regina our cities, in the long run, must face this fact; 

their power distribution and taxation days are limited if the province is to expand industrially, if 

people of Saskatchewan are to receive their fair share of the conveniences which electricity can give to 

modern man." 

 

That is an opinion from the "North Battleford News". Still more interesting, Mr. Speaker, and I 

apologize for reading these editorials, but they do reflect public opinion in some of our city 

communities. This is published in "The Yorkton Enterprise" of December 6th: 

 

"Citizens of North Battleford on Wednesday voted in favour of selling the city's distribution system to 

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation which places that city, with regard to light and power, on similar 

footing to Yorkton. It is very likely that light and power users in North Battleford will benefit as a 

result of this decision. 

 

"The Saskatoon "Star-Phoenix" argues that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, having created a 

network of power sources, should step aside and allow groups of consumers, organized either as 

co-operatives or as municipal corporations, or as groups of municipalities, to look after the local 

distribution and sale of the energy. 

 

"The "Enterprise" at one time may have agreed with this policy — but not today, having seen the 

performance of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation here. Since the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation took over in Yorkton we have better service at lower cost and the city is not suffering too 

much either. 'Confession is good for the soul' is a trite saying but it is always well to admit when you 

are wrong." 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I will not read further. I read those editorials not because we are concerning 

ourselves so greatly with immediate action or policy in connection with cities, we have been very fully 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

10 

occupied with other things. It is true that very shortly we will undertake to negotiate an agreement with 

the City of Saskatoon. I would not anticipate by one hour what the result of these negotiations will be. 

The City of Saskatoon has not made its point of view clear in any official way, but it is interesting to 

note that the City of North Battleford and the City of Yorkton have expressed an opinion which 

coincides with the original idea of a provincial-wide power system which was put forward by a Royal 

Commission set up by the Liberal Party away back in 1927. That is still proving itself as being the 

logical ultimate development in the province. 

 

I was a little amused to note that one of the Liberal candidates in Regina is using the "hands off Regina 

unit" as an election issue in the forthcoming provincial election. I have been chairman of the Board of 

Directors of the Power Corporation ever since we have had a Board of Directors, ever since there has 

been a Corporation, for a matter of three years, and I cannot ever remember the Board wasting five 

minutes talking about putting "hands on" the Regina plant. It seems to me that he is going far afield for 

election issues. 

 

Now, just a few words about our programme for 1952. I have said that we propose to make still further 

additions to our town and village programme. The hon. member for Turtleford (Mr. Trippe) mentioned 

the fact that there had been no development in his area. That is perfectly true. That is one of the weak 

corners of the province insofar as generating capacity goes. We have not forgotten it and we propose to 

add a new 1850 kilowatt unit to the Unity plant. This will be a gas diesel engine and it will give us 

surplus power at Unity. We propose to construct a high voltage line from Unity to North Battleford 

which will increase the voltage up in that general area. With that high voltage line constructed, we can 

hope to give good service to the area between the towns and villages, in fact the area between Meota and 

St. Walburg, and the construction of such a line will serve the hon. gentleman's constituency and it is on 

our 1952 programme. 

 

We have raised our sights also with respect to the number of farms which we hope to serve in 1952. We 

have our plans made and the farms signed up for 4,000 farms during next year. That is a very substantial 

programme. I would like to point out, when you compare Saskatchewan with Manitoba, that in 

Manitoba there are an average of 65 farms per township, in Saskatchewan our average is 45, so that the 

same mileage in power lines to serve 4,500 farms in Saskatchewan would serve 6,500 in Manitoba. That 

is only by the way; so that we have a town and village programme which will serve a considerable 

number of towns and villages — I hesitate to state how many at this time — and will include 4,000 

farms. 

 

Last year I was able to tell you that if we were to imagine the power lines which we had constructed in 

1950 as being strung out in a single straight line beginning at Regina and going eastward, that the end of 

that long, single line would be in the City of Montreal. This year I illustrate what we have done in 1951 

by saying that if we were to begin in Montreal and come westward our power lines would extend as 

close to the City of Vancouver as we are from the town of Davidson, to date. 

 

When we talk about going faster, when we realize the tremendous amount of work in building up our 

lines to that extent, from Montreal 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

11 

almost to Vancouver in a single year, when we conceive of drilling holes six, feet deep for 47,000 poles, 

the work of transporting material to the scene of the job, the 768 railroad cars of material going into our 

construction, 15 freight train loads of 50 cars each, it is a major undertaking and it has required the very 

quick development of an organization in order to cope with a programme of that kind in the few years in 

which it has been built up. 

 

Now I have taken up a good deal of time, but there is more that I would like to say, because one hon. 

gentleman not too long ago made some reference to hydro development in this province. I hope it does 

not become a custom to assess the progress that we are making in power development in Saskatchewan 

by the hydro development, because hydro development in Saskatchewan is a very different proposition 

to hydro development in many other places. Last year I had an opportunity to accompany some 

members of the Power Corporation staff and two engineers from the Shawinigan Engineering Company 

of Montreal to the proposed power site at Fort a la Corne. I will never forget that day, we did it in one 

day from Saskatoon and we looked the thing over and got back again early the next morning. 

 

It is not surprising that people who are interested in power development should be attracted by the 

romance of harnessing a great river, of seeing a mighty dam thrown across that river and of seeing the 

turbines turning out electrical energy. Some day I think we will see that at Fort a la Corne. I want to give 

you, however, some understanding of the problem as it stands at the present time. 

 

The H.G. Acres report was turned in in 1931. Very soon after the Power Commission was set up. The 

H.G. Acres Company of Niagara Falls was asked to examine the hydro possibilities of the Saskatchewan 

River and they located the site at Fort a la Corne as the one which lent itself particularly to development. 

At that time they estimated that the cost of a dam and generating turbines there would amount to 

$12,207,000. That was back in 1931. But they also reported that it would not be practical to proceed 

with the construction of this development until 1944, at which date they anticipated that sufficient load 

would have developed in Saskatchewan to justify the construction of a power plant at Fort a la Corne. I 

might say that their original report in 1931 visualized service to the cities of Regina and Moose Jaw 

from Fort a la Corne. Since that time, of course, our power development has been such that before too 

long the northern half of the settled area of the province would be able to fully utilize the power that 

could be developed at Fort a la Corne. 

 

In 1946 the Acres Company was asked again to resurvey their former estimates and they, because of 

increased costs and labour and material costs, gave as an estimate in 1946, $16,641,290. Later on, 

Professor David Cass-Beggs made another survey at the Fort a la Corne project and he had the benefit of 

the Acres material at his disposal. He estimated that it would cost $18,305,419 and, later, he again 

reviewed his earlier study and estimated the cost at $28,928,000. 

 

After getting all those reports, each of which apparently was justified by undeniable increases in the cost 

of labour and materials, the Power Corporation felt that they would like to have another engineering 

opinion. It was then that we consulted with the Shawinigan Engineering 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

12 

Company and asked them to send someone out to make estimates, and it was then that I made the visit in 

company with the engineers and General Manager and others of the Power Corporation to the Fort a la 

Corne site. It is true that those engineers did not have all the data which they would need in order to 

make a complete and final estimate. Nevertheless, they were men of wide experience and they estimated 

that the cost would not be less than $30 million and might conceivably reach the $33 million figure. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that means that the increasing costs of hydro installation places it in a questionable 

position in comparison with the cost of steam generation. I would like to give you these figures: the 

present capital value of the generating plant of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation is $13,400,000 — 

132,000 horse power, $13,400,000; Fort a la Corne potential is 125,000 horse power, slightly less. At 

the cost of $33 million, according to the latest estimate. You can see from this that it is not an attractive 

proposition at the moment. 

 

I had an opportunity for a long conversation with one of those Shawinigan engineers. As a matter of 

fact, after we got down to the river level there came a downpour of rain and the road which had been 

hastily bulldozed in order that we could get to the site was in such condition that we could not get out 

and we had to send for a tractor to pull our cars out. That gave me a two-hour opportunity to discuss 

various matters with one of those engineers. He told me of a recently completed development in Quebec 

where power was generated by hydro development, in which the cost per h.p. had been $63. He told of 

another, also in Eastern Canada, where the cost had been $100 per h.p. The Manitoba Government has 

recently completed the Pine Falls development at a cost of $200 or $215 or $220 per horsepower. If we 

were to go forward at this time with the development of the Fort a la Corne project we would be paying 

$260 per h.p. 

 

Those costs are practically prohibitive and the Province of Manitoba, although it still has hydro 

developments which are within its own province, on the Dauphin River for example, has decided to 

construct a steam plant at Brandon in preference to proceeding with hydro development on the Dauphin 

River at this time. So it appears that the time is not yet when the Fort a la Corne site can be developed 

and the cost of power delivered from that plant compare with what can be developed from steam. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I feel that I have taken all the time which I reasonably can. The hon. Minister of 

Labour (Hon. Mr. Williams) is following me. He was very gracious about permitting me to take more 

than half the broadcast time, but the fact that he has been so gracious makes it all the more incumbent 

upon me to respect his rights in the matter. I have attempted, possibly not too successfully, to lay before 

you the operations of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. I hope that I have been successful at least in 

impressing you with the fact that we are doing a big job and that we are doing it with all the despatch 

which can be expected of us. We are doing it to the satisfaction of a great number of people in this 

province. We will proceed this year with a programme greater still than any yet which has been 

undertaken. In fact, we will connect half as many farms next year as are now connected after 20 years of 

power development in the province, and we will almost complete the service of towns and villages 

which can be reached on the basis of the town and village programme which we have been following 

thus far. 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

13 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that with those words I can leave the decision to the House as to whether or not the 

Power Corporation deserves credit or discredit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the Motion. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I would first like to congratulate the 

Provincial Treasurer (Hon, Mr. Fines) on his presentation of the budget and congratulate everyone who 

has spoken since. I think they have done very well on both sides of the House. 

 

I would just like to take a moment to express regret that the hon. member from Kinistino (Mr. Woods) is 

not in his seat due to being ill in the hospital. We hope that he will be with us in the next day or so. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the people in the province of Saskatchewan for having a government 

who will bring down a budget of this size, and, in my opinion, it is an indication that they have every 

confidence in this government and know that the money voted will be spent wisely and well. The 

$550,710 allotted to the Department of Labour in the 1952-1953 budget will be well spent in the 

interests of the wage earners of this province, and in the various safety branches which are included, but 

I will go into these details a little later. 

 

I think we all laughed yesterday when the hon. member from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) remarked that he 

was just finished making up his notes as he was asked to speak. I think perhaps he is going to regret that 

he did not take a little more time on those notes because some of the things he said are going to react 

very unfavourably against him and against his party in the next few months. I refer particularly to the 

remarks in regard to the late Mr. Woodsworth and the late George Williams, both of whom were greatly 

respected, not only by the members of the C.C.F., but by members of all parties in this country. 

 

I recall quite well, Mr. Speaker, the first time I ever entered this Chamber as a visitor. It was exactly 20 

years ago and at that time Jimmy Gardiner and Carl Stewart were at the height of their feud, (they are 

political pals now, by the way). But I recall a member on the opposite side of the House, a man with 

very dark hair, if I remember right, at that time made quite an impassioned speech, and the main subject 

was the abolition of Government House, so I asked the man sitting next to me in the gallery, "Who is 

that speaking over there now?" He replied, "Oh, that is Minty Loptson, the member from Saltcoats." 

Well, I never saw the member again until 1949. A little later on a recorded vote was taken, (the first one 

I had ever seen, as a matter of fact), and I do recall that the Anderson government, of course, was sitting 

to the right of where you are now, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal government were in Opposition as they are 

now, and I recall that when the recording came about for the Liberals to vote they all stood up and there 

was one lone person on this side of the House stood up with them, one member of the Anderson 

government. I turned to my friend and said, "Who is that voting with the Liberals?" He replied, 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

14 

"Oh, that is Jake Benson from Last Mountain." I merely say that in a spirit of levity because the member 

from Last Mountain and myself are very good friends. 

 

I am just going to take a moment or two to reply to something that appeared in the "Leader-Post" the 

other day, following the radio broadcast made by Mr. Menzies, one of the Liberal candidates in the 

coming election. Apparently he has been making the claim that the Regina members have not paid very 

much attention to the constituency in the last seven and a half years. Here are a number of things which 

have been done by this government for the constituency of Regina; I have three of them marked down 

here: 

 

(1) An outright grant of $75,000 to the General Hospital. I think that was about three years ago, and 

when that grant was received it enabled the hospital to get a similar amount from the Federal 

Government. The Gray Nuns' received quite sizeable sums too, but I have not the exact amounts with 

me. In addition, the Cancer Clinic was built there, which would run into a total of several hundreds of 

thousands of dollars. 

 

(2) An amount of $650,000 which the provincial government is providing for the pumping station at 

Buffalo Pound — the intake and pumping station, it is described as to assist this city in securing a supply 

of what is going to be called mountain water. A cheque for half this amount will be turned over to the 

city in a very few days, and the other will be, no doubt, presented when the work is done. I should 

mention here that the City of Moose Jaw and other intermediate points can eventually take part in this 

scheme and I would like to give the Hon. Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) credit for the 

amount of work he has done. He has been largely responsible for the work this government has done and 

he has had a good many meetings with the city officials and with the officials in Ottawa. 

 

(3) An amount of approximately $100,000 provided over a period of years to the Regina Exhibition 

Association for the erection of a livestock building. I believe it is out there. This will not only benefit 

Regina, but the stock growers in all parts of Southern Saskatchewan. 

 

I think too, that I mentioned a year ago we, in Regina, did not have to argue back and forth as to who 

was going to get a road or anything of that kind, but it is a fact that in the last two or three years the road 

from here to Lumsden, and then in to Regina Beach, has been blacktopped. The same applies from 

Qu'Appelle to Fort Qu'Appelle. This takes care of a lot of people who want to go to Regina Beach or go 

to B-Say-Tah Point, and I am not only thinking of Regina people there, but hundreds of others, 

thousands of others from various communities and from outside of the province. 

 

I do not know whether Mr. Menzies thought the two Regina members were out picking daisies when 

these things were under discussion or not but the fact remains that those things have been done and I 

think we are entitled to a certain amount of credit for them. 

 

Well, someone says the bus depot. I recall very well when it was first advocated that the bus depot be 

put where it is, and I do not think my colleagues will mind me saying that I was a little lukewarm about 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

15 

it at the start. Perhaps I had not been out of the City Hall long enough and it was a matter of civic pride 

with me that I thought there should be some big public building there at some future time. Well, maybe 

there will be. However, any criticism about the location of that bus depot has pretty well died down and 

I think everybody is happy about it now. 

 

He was also quite critical of the fact that the tannery is located where it is; an oil pilot plant on the corner 

of Elphinstone and the C.P.R., and the garage back of the Normal School. Well, I do not think those 

things, regardless of the zoning regulations, are doing any particular harm there. Certainly I do not recall 

that the city has ever complained about them, and there was always the possibility that had too strong an 

opposition been put up at the time, those things might have been taken to Moose Jaw, or my seat mate 

have got them moved to Saskatoon. 

 

Yesterday the hon. member from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) made some reference to the fact that five 

members on this side of the House were more favourably inclined to Russia than to the United States — 

I think that was about the substance of his remarks. Well, frankly I do not believe it. Individually, I find 

the Americans are a very fine people, and they live in a country which literally just about has everything, 

they have wealth and climate and everything you could think of, and I have the friendliest feelings 

toward them, Their generosity in lend-lease, the Marshall Plan and so forth is well known. I might repeat 

just for a moment what I said last year, that I do get annoyed sometimes looking at a map of the North 

American continent and seeing what has happened perhaps 100 or less years ago; where they have taken 

advantage and secured Canadian territory such as the northern part of the State of Maine and that strip 

down the northwest coast of British Columbia, to which they were not entitled. Since then I was rather 

amused to learn that a section in the southeast corner of Manitoba was turned over to the United States 

as a result of the surveyors getting lost. I thought that was the height of something or other. But perhaps 

at some later date, when things are back to normal and the world has settled down, they will consider an 

adjustment of these territorial grabs of years ago, in carrying out a good-neighbour policy. 

 

Just a few weeks ago an American senator advocated the annexing of Canada, which I think is really too 

silly to comment much about. He is probably one of those characters who, when you are down driving 

through the States, sees your license plate and comes up and asks you if Saskatchewan is in Ontario, or 

if you happen to know his brother in Montreal, or something like that. 

 

Now, as Minister of Labour, I am greatly concerned over the recent outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease, 

and I can sympathize with the individual farmers who are losing their valuable herds. In many cases that 

represents a lifetime of hard work. Also it is going to be an economic blow to the province, especially 

following the loss of millions of bushels of grain still in swath, and the poor grades and poor prices of 

threshed grain which has become damp or tough. Unemployment in certain industries is almost certain 

to increase and already I understand hundreds of packing house workers have been thrown out of work 

— about 2,000 I understand. 

 

Now, the question of immigration could be touched briefly at this point, and I am not one who points to 

a map of the North American 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

16 

continent and feels that Canada should support as many people as the United States because it is twice as 

big. Actually only a small percentage of the country is habitable in the usual sense of the word. 

Although there is no doubt there are large deposits of mineral in the north undiscovered, and we can 

expect, in the years to come, cities up there such as Flin Flon, Goldfields, etc. 

 

It would appear as though the immigration policy has not been any too well handled, as indicated by 

reports in the press from time to time, resulting in officials of that department being forced to resign or 

being dismissed for irregularities such as accepting bribes or improper screening of people entering the 

country. Just this morning, 'MacLean's' magazine came to my house and there is quite an interesting 

article in it. I am just going to read the title of it: "How Racketeers sold Entry into Canada." Corrupt 

Canadian government officials and unscrupulous travel agents have extorted thousands of dollars to 

smuggle Italian immigrants into Canada. This report on an international racket shows its tools include 

bribery and blackmail." 

 

Actually, I feel we should ask ourselves; "Can the economy of this province support many more people 

than are here now?" Following an expression of these views two years ago, I received a very indignant 

letter from the editor of a small town newspaper. He was all for unrestricted immigration and stated that 

we had lots of land. When I replied, I asked him to let us know where some of this land was, because the 

Minister of Agriculture at that time (and I still think he has) had hundreds of applications from people 

who want to go farming. And where would we find homes for these people if they are brought in on an 

unrestricted basis? Just yesterday, the 'Leader-Post' had a short letter which was published, and which 

said: 

 

"The outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease might provide tragic proof of the folly of the lax immigration 

policy in Canada. It was bad enough to read about cases of sickly immigrants we have been receiving 

at the hands of racketeering and bribes and narcotics tied up in immigration administration. 

 

"All of us regarded as a political affiliation should arouse ourselves to the dangers we face as a nation. 

The Federal government should shoot and smother with quick lime, and bury ten feet deep, its present 

immigration policy." 

 

Now, this is increasing in this province and only about six weeks ago there were 1,100 in the city of 

Prince Albert alone. It is difficult to understand the logic that the more people who come in here the 

wealthier we will be. I think that is something that the President of the C.P.R. advocated away back in 

the 'thirties, The Regina Selective Service advises that it is exceedingly difficult to provide clerical 

employment and, for example, they have been unable to place young Dick Bell who, many Regina 

citizens will remember, lost both of his legs when he was a boy, being run over by a freight train out 

near the Imperial Oil. He has had two years' office experience and, though he was born right in the city, 

there does not seem to be anything for him. 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

17 

I want to indicate to this House, Mr. Speaker, that I am not against an immigration policy controlled 

with common sense, and properly applied to our economic structure, but there should be some definite 

plan and not this hit-and-miss effort we have seen. What sense is there, for instance, in bringing people 

in to scramble for jobs with the unemployed who are in our urban centres now? Only a short time ago I 

had been informed that a group of displaced persons picketed the employment office in Toronto, giving 

as their reason that they came to Canada to work, not to go on unemployment insurance. I understand 

that the Regina Legion is drafting a resolution on immigration at the present time. 

 

I have a statement here which we get out each week, the Weekly Labour Report, and find some 

interesting figures there. We do not just think of these things in our day-to-day life, but here they are in 

cold print: In Regina on the 28th of February there were 2,145 unplaced applications, (that, no doubt is 

Regina and district). Saskatoon is almost as bad, 2,045. Swift Current, 692. Yorkton, 1,082. Prince 

Albert, 965, and so forth. The total on that date was 8,859 unplaced applicants and unfilled vacancies 

were only 456. Unemployment is now creeping up on us and this is something which I think we should 

take into consideration. 

 

I am just going to say a word about the high cost of living and am glad to see that a few days ago there 

was a fraction of a point in its reduction. That is an encouraging sign and I might just say this, (I had 

some notes on it but they have disappeared somewhere), that Percy Bengough, President of the Trades 

and Labour Congress, with headquarters in Ottawa, has indicated that the wage earners and labour in 

general are not after higher wages, and if the cost of living would remain where it is they would not be 

asking for any more. They might even come down a little with reduced living costs. I just mention that 

and wish I had a little more information on it, but there has been a great deal said in the past three or 

four years about the high cost of living, and I would only be repeating myself if I did go into it 

extensively. 

 

Now, Mr, Speaker, we know that approximately 65 per cent of the people in this province live on farms. 

Presuming that the birth rate is approximately the same as it is in urban centres, it follows that there are 

more young people entering the forces of labour from the farms than otherwise, to the urban centres. 

That is quite in order, of course, they have every right and we are very glad to have them come into the 

urban centres and I feel that these young people who come in year after year should resist every attempt 

made to drive a wedge between the farmer and the wage earner. Usually this wedge is driven purposely, 

although some of our good and enthusiastic supporters do not help matters very much by expounding the 

rather farfetched theory that whatever the benefits of the wage earner they are paid for by the farmer. I 

do not subscribe to that myself. While I do admit that the soil produces practically all the wealth of this 

province, I prefer to think that the farmer and the wage earner are just about the same kind of people, 

holding similar ideas and objectives in life. They should, and do, respect each other's principles and 

mutual problems. The wage earners, or labour as they are usually referred to, are only too pleased to see 

the farmer get a good price for his produce and, on the other hand, the farmer is glad to see the wage 

earner get a fair return for his work. 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

18 

Young people who have come from the farms to the larger centres and are now in the wage earner group 

should, might I suggest, discuss such matters with their good parents when they are home for the 

holidays or at Christmas time. I am sure that most of them appreciate what this government has done for 

the benefit of the wage earner and are in an excellent position to inform those who are still residing in 

rural centres. 

 

The C.C.F., as we know it today, was started by the independent Labour Party well over 20 years ago, 

then amalgamated with farmer groups to form the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation, and we 

should do everything possible to maintain and improve friendly relations between farmer and labourer. 

 

I am just going to mention fire prevention for a moment, Mr. Speaker. I was hoping this would get on 

the air, but it did not. Last year (I mentioned this last year, I might say) I was cut off just before coming 

to it, but I did make special reference to the unnecessary cause of fires. And it is a fact, Mr. Speaker, that 

most fires do not need to start, excepting, I suppose, we have no control over those started by lightning, 

but somewhere in all of them the human element has failed. I referred, at that time, to the danger of 

people smoking in bed. Perhaps it does not seem just an appropriate subject for a speech on the floor of 

this House, but I am going to repeat it. Last year I compared the individual who smokes in bed with the 

joker who rocks the boat and endangers the people in the boat, and the individual who points the empty 

shotgun which so often goes off. 

 

Well, inside of 12 hours after I had spoken here last February we had a disastrous fire in the eastern part 

of this province, a $150,000 fire and three people were burned to death. The investigation showed that 

the cause was someone smoking in bed, it could hardly have been anything else. It is a dangerous 

practice. I will end there, but will have more to say about the Fire Commission Branch a little later. 

 

Our department has not requested this legislature to pass very much legislation in the last four years. In 

1947 we passed the Hours of Work Act and that was the last really important one that we did pass. Since 

then we have been consolidating and improving and plugging loop-holes and so forth. Obviously too, 

we did not think it advisable to get too far ahead of other provinces in this regard; and also keeping in 

mind that Saskatchewan is an agricultural province with a comparatively small percentage of 

manufacturing and industry. 

 

I am going to mention two Acts regarding which other provinces have followed our lead. First, the 

Workmen's Compensation (Accident Fund) Act, when we came into power in 1944 we found that every 

province in Canada had a provision whereby an injured workman, when he was off work injured, only 

received 66 2/3 of his wages. We did not think that was enough. It costs just about as much to keep a 

household running whether the man is sitting around with a broken arm as it does when he is working 

and getting 100 per cent of his wages, so we raised it to 75 per cent. It was the highest then on either the 

Canadian side or the American side. Since then, Ontario, on the 1st of January 1950, raised theirs from 

66 2/3 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

19 

per cent up to 75 per cent. This year the province of British Columbia did the same. 

 

Now, we have around 12,000 people injured in this province every year. Ontario has 10 times that many 

— 125,000, British Columbia has a good deal more than we do. So every wage earner who is injured in 

either of those two provinces, (and there are thousands and thousands), may thank this government for 

securing three-quarters of his pay now when he is off injured, as he would have received before only 

two-thirds. 

 

Our Annual Holidays Act also passed in 1944, gives every employee (and this, I think, is the best Act 

we have) in the province, with the exception of farm help, and we thought we could not handle that 

administratively, gives every wage earner in the province, regardless of whether he lives in the city, 

town, hamlet, two weeks holidays with pay, or a proportionate amount. If he is only there for three 

months he will only get three days' holidays. Other provinces have the one week and I understand that 

Manitoba, last year, is following our example to the extent that an employee will now receive two 

weeks' holidays with pay after he has been employed for three years. 

 

The Statutory Holidays are also important and greatly appreciated by labour. For many years, Christmas 

Day, New Year's, Good Friday, Thanksgiving, the 24th of May and so forth — all it meant for the wage 

earner, if he did not have to work, was the loss of a day's pay. Now no deduction can be made and if the 

man or woman has to work on those days he receives an extra day and a half's pay. I will not go into any 

further detail although I will have a little more to say about it later on. 

 

We do not have much industry in Saskatchewan such as they do in British Columbia and eastern 

provinces where there are large automobile plants, steel mills, ship building yards, canneries and so 

forth. Employees of these industries are highly paid. Saskatchewan wage earners are largely those 

employed in wholesale or retail establishments, offices, railways and so forth. There is some 

manufacturing, of course, in the larger centres. Following such comparison it is easily seen why the 

weekly wage in other provinces is higher than it is here. We have, however, done everything possible to 

protect unorganized employees in the lower income brackets and I venture to say that in any comparison 

with these groups Saskatchewan weekly wage would be higher than that of any other province. I refer to 

those who are unorganized and who are not in the higher wage brackets. I have some figures prepared, 

Mr, Speaker, and I find that in manufacturing Saskatchewan is fifth. Personally I would like to see 

Saskatchewan first in all these but I must tell the truth. They are fifth in manufacturing, fourth in meat 

products, first in dairy products, fifth in construction, second in highways, fridges and street 

construction, fifth in trade, fifth in wholesale and so forth down the line. It is not as good an average as I 

would like to see and perhaps it can be explained to some extent that the employers are not as generous 

as they night be. 

 

Yes, they have other advantages too, as someone has just pointed out, they have holidays with pay, the 

statutory holidays and so forth. There are higher compensation benefits. I notice in building and 

structures 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

20 

they are sixth. British Columbia is $67.21 a week; our province is $47.80. But I am advised that the 

weather has quite a bit to do with that. I also have some information here regarding the average weekly 

wages and salaries. From Prince Edward Island it goes right down and includes all provinces. I have not 

figured out just how Saskatchewan stands there but they are well up, they would be around fourth or 

fifth I would say, which is not too bad an average for an agricultural province. A better average, I think, 

with this government than it would be with some others I can think of not so far away. 

 

Well, they say comparisons are odious, so let us be odious for a few minutes. I have the weekly 

minimum rates for experienced workers under Minimum Wage Acts, and this is a Federal government 

booklet got out by the Department of Labour in Canada, legislation branch, October 1951. It starts off 

with Nova Scotia, zone 1, the larger points — Halifax, Sidney, Grace Bay, Truro and so forth; they pay 

$16.80, for females in that zone, $15.80. Zone 2 — Antigonish, Bridgewater, Kentville, Wolfville and 

so forth; about 10 of those towns, $15.80. Zone 3 — Annapolis Royal, Berwick, Mahone Bay, 

Middleton and so forth; $14.80. That is what Nova Scotia does. 

 

We come over to New Brunswick. The rate is 35 cents an hour for females in factories and 55 cents an 

hour for males and that only applies to canning and processing of fish, vegetables and fruit. 

 

Quebec has 42 cents an hour in zone 1, which is Montreal, St. Lambert and so forth. Zone 2 is 38 cents; 

zone 3 is 34 cents, zone 4 is 30 cents and so forth. 

 

Ontario, $16.80 in zone 1, $15.80 and so forth. Manitoba is fairly close — $19.50 in city, $18.50 in 

rurals. 

 

Then we come to Saskatchewan. It is $24 in cities and larger towns and $21.50 in smaller towns within a 

five-mile radius. And it is just the same in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, for male and female employees. 

There is no distinction at all. 

 

British Columbia is 40 cents an hour for female, the same for male. 

 

There is only one exception in this whole page of statistics, Mr. Speaker, that is any higher than the 

Saskatchewan rates and that is in Alberta, where a male employee over 21 years of age gets $25 a week. 

Ours is $24 for both male and female. 

 

Weekly minimum rates and learning periods for inexperienced workers: we do not recognize that here, 

so I am not going to give you the rates or overtime rates under minimum wage orders. Now, where does 

Saskatchewan stack up here? One and one-half times the regular rate after 8 hours per day and 44 hours 

per week in the eight cities and 9 larger towns, and villages after 48 hours or, in each case, after hours 

permitted by order-in-council. Well, I do not think there is much use going over any more of these, Mr. 

Speaker. I think everybody gets what I mean. That we have the interest of the wage earners of this 

province at heart at all times, especially those who are not organized for one reason or another. 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

21 

I am going to briefly review the Workmen's Compensation Board. It is in excellent financial condition, 

with a surplus of over a million dollars. This Board was created in 1930, during which year there were 

3,210 claims, at a total cost of $293,000. This number of claims and the amount, of course, has gradually 

increased until, for the calendar year of 1950 there were 12,944 claims reported at a total cost of 

$2,156,734. An accident prevention campaign has been continued and over 85,000 pieces of literature 

were distributed last year, bulletins, posters, pamphlets and so forth. Monthly contacts have been 

maintained with plant safety committees and workshops, factories, construction jobs and assistance 

given in organizing new committees and furthering the activities of older committees. Safety films are 

being shown and safety talks given at various meetings to assist employers in developing a higher 

degree of safety consciousness among workmen. We feel that is very important, Mr. Speaker, and 

lessens the number of accidents. During the year of 1950 there were 26 deaths in industry in this 

province, which brought 19 widows and 27 children under the fund; 114 cases of permanent disability, 

which does not necessarily mean total disability, but permanent disability, that is, fingers off or hand or 

foot or something of that kind and 5,691 of temporary disability. Also approximately the same number 

for medical aid only. 

 

I just give this brief resume, Mr. Speaker, in order to report that this Board is functioning very well and 

in excellent financial circumstances and with complaints becoming fewer and fewer. 

 

I have a pamphlet here that is called "Sensational Record of a C.C.F. Government" — 83 facts about 

Saskatchewan, 14 of them about labour. That drew a laugh from the member from Arm River (Mr. 

Danielson), he has been looking kind of gloomy all afternoon. I am glad I said something to please him. 

However, I do not think I will read these all out, everybody knows about them. I will send them across if 

anybody wants to see them. We will take it as read. I will send them out to you for the approaching 

campaign, you can use them there. 

 

The Fire Commission Branch: I do not suppose everybody understands just exactly how that operates 

but it does operate on one per cent of the premiums on fire insurance in this province and it brings us in 

$59,500 and the branch operates on that. It does not get any money from the Provincial Treasury. They 

do a good deal of work, a lot of preventative work, and I have marked what I consider to be three of the 

most important things they do. The conducting of 12 volunteer firemen's training schools, they have a 

portable truck that goes out and — with hoses and one thing and another — and trains volunteer firemen 

in these smaller places. We find that the councils and citizens of these towns are greatly appreciative of 

the fact that we do go to that expense and trouble of training these men. During the past year they 

conducted six civil defence fire fighting forces and here are the rest of their duties, or what they did last 

year: conducted 103 fire brigade conferences, 112 fire investigations, 87 municipal council conferences, 

31 public meetings, 305 school lectures, and they go to a great deal of trouble to instruct the school 

children, both public school and high school. Official approval of 41 claims — I won't go into that. And, 

of course, there are a lot of licenses and installer's licenses and so forth. 

 

So I can assure this House, Mr. Speaker, that the office of the Fire Commission is doing everything 

possible to reduce the fire hazards 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

22 

in this province and save both life and property. I am going to suggest that when some of you get 

complaints that the Fire Commissioner or his men are rather harsh and seem to be asking for 

unreasonable things, just remember that they are dealing with something that concerns human life and 

are all greatly interested in preventing fires which could result in the loss of human life. I do not think I 

need to go into any more of that. If I had been on the air there are some further things I would have 

mentioned. 

 

We have the steam boiler and elevator branch. While I was in Public Accounts someone asked me what 

a boiler inspector did and all I could say was that he inspected boilers and I guess that is pretty close to 

it. There are other things too, such as pressure vessels of many kinds, and men have to know their work 

in order to test these to be sure they are safe. They conduct examinations, of course, and refrigeration is 

also in this particular branch. This is another branch that is self- sustaining. The item we are receiving in 

the budget is $71,180 and with licenses and fees and so forth the branch takes in $72,590, so that is 

hitting it pretty closely. 

 

Elevator inspection, that is the elevators that go up and down, are also included here. Electrical 

inspection is just about the same. It is self-sustaining, a little better than that. Expenditures, $114,000 

and the expected revenues $120,000. This is a most important branch and has been working closely with 

the Power Commission and it is a most important thing too, because this is the fourth on the list in the 

cause of fires in the province of Saskatchewan. That is, electricity, usually from bad wiring or 

appliances or something of that kind. So I would ask that everyone co-operate with these inspectors 

should they come to your premises, because they are there to help you, primarily to offer assistance. 

 

I am going to just briefly mention L.P. gas, Mr. Speaker. It is something that has grown up in the last 

few years and is now quite a business. I was surprised to find not too long ago that this L.P. gas not only 

provides the housewife with something comparative to electricity, and a refrigerator can also be used 

with L.P. gas. But there is this about it, it is very dangerous, has a highly explosive content and has to be 

carefully handled. I was rather afraid to mention that in view of the fact that the Power Commission has 

been talked about this afternoon, but I have been given to understand that people do not usually get it in 

along any lines where the Power Commission is, but it is more in isolated communities that have no 

power and little chance of getting any. Its use has increased tremendously in the last few years. 

 

Every year I have spoken here I have mentioned the fact of middle-aged or older men being kept out of 

employment. I am not going to change this year and am going to mention it briefly again, because I 

think my previous remarks had some effect. I do not think, Mr. Speaker, that because a man gets to be 

45 or 55 or even 60 that he should be discriminated against when he comes looking for a job. Some jobs, 

of course, do require younger men but I do not think, as a rule, that the older men should be 

discriminated against. This used to be known as a young man's country and that probably was true 35 or 

40 years ago, but now the people who were young then are getting up in years and if they require 

employment I think they should be given an equal chance. 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

23 

I have something here too on the physically handicapped. This goes on to show that many of these 

physically handicapped persons could take their place in society if they were given a chance, it is a fact 

that in Great Britain they have, according to law, every establishment with a payroll of over. 20 — either 

15 or 20 — must have a certain percentage, I think it is 5 per cent, of handicapped people. That is the 

law in Great Britain. They must employ them and they would be men injured both in the armed forces 

and industry and so forth. But that is the law in Great Britain. I had a very pleasant meeting with the 

Minister of Labour over there two years ago. I spent a full hour with him and some of his top men, and 

they gave me a good deal of useful information. I am not suggesting we do that here, but I do suggest 

that employers in this province do give the middle aged, the older, the physically handicapped a break 

when they come looking for a job. 

 

I have a lot of stuff here. I could go on for a long time. I told the gentleman following me, the Minister 

of Health (Hon. Mr. Bentley), that I would quit at five o'clock, so I have five minutes to go. 

 

I came across an interesting article a year or two ago about Karl Marx and must admit I did not know 

much about him up until then. I have a three-page article here, pictures and everything like that. I was 

rather surprised to know that he spent many of his years in England. It shows a picture of his old 

residence there in Soho, part of London. Marx' home for six years of his exile was a grubby cluttered 

two-room apartment in this building at 28 Dean Street in a poor London district. However, it makes 

some reference to Karl Marx, some good and some not quite so good. It says: 

 

"Karl Marx's terrible hatred of the world he lived in was fed by poverty but did not spring from it. His 

father was a prosperous lawyer in Tyranny, at the French border, where Karl was born May 5, 1918. 

But the time and place of his birth were both right for the making of a revolutionary. Marx suffered 

directly from Germany's flourishing anti-Semitism. Around him the young Marx saw the victims of 

the dawning age of factories which had begun to destroy the livelihood of millions of small craftsmen 

and put them at the mercy of the mill owners." 

 

I will just read one more paragraph. 

 

"Marx' mind and forceful personality made him a leader in the League and the International 

Workingman's Association, which he helped to found years later. But he was never a successful rabble 

rouser on the rostrum. He was too, lacking in stage presence, too harsh-voiced, too domineering. After 

1850, when Marx exiled himself permanently to England, his revolutionary activity was confined 

largely to his desk. Only once during his 33 years in London Marx applied for a regular job for the 

railway company. Turned down for poor penmanship, he never tried again. Scornfully resolved that he 

would not let bourgeois society turn him into a money-making machine, he picked up a little money at 

writing." 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

24 

He never heard of the C.C.F. No, he would not get a membership card. He might have helped the 

Liberals four years ago had he been living. He was a hundred years too soon. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have given a hasty review of the Department and what we have done, what we 

expect, to do in the next twelve months, and I can assure this House that our Department will have the 

welfare of the wage earners of Saskatchewan at heart at all times. We started that way in the fall of 1944 

and we continue, and I feel that the worker in this province gets the breaks just as well, I would say 

better than in any other part of Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I will support the budget. 

 

Mr. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I noticed a little while ago, Sir, that you 

drew attention to the fact that the House was getting down to the point where it hardly had a quorum to 

do work and I would like to draw the attention of the House to the reason for that. Under the initiative of 

this government over here, a conference was arranged between the officials of the Federal Department 

of Trade and Commerce to deal with the present wheat situation, damp wheat, and with the Minister of 

Agriculture of the Government of Canada and his officials to deal with the matter of the serious 

outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease among cattle in the surrounding area of Regina. Between those and 

representatives of the farmers' organizations, and representatives of the members of the legislative 

committee on agriculture of this House, it was natural that a great deal of interest would be displayed in 

that gathering which is taking place in room 267 and which accounts, Sir, very largely for the lack of 

attendance here. Having had the pleasure of an experience for one term of parliament in Ottawa, I can 

assure anyone here that I have seen the House of Commons, which is composed of over 250 members, 

with less people in their seats than are sitting here at the legislature at the present time, and many of 

those reading newspapers. So it is not surprising that a very important meeting arranged by this 

government would attract a number of the members of the legislature to that meeting. 

 

Mr. McCormack (Souris-Estevan): — Not when you were speaking. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, I want to first congratulate the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. 

Fines) on his budget speech and I suppose that all Ministers of this Government could congratulate him 

equally as enthusiastically as I can, but certainly none more so, for it has become my responsibility since 

becoming a member of the government to administer one of the greatest of the welfare agencies of this 

Government and which, of course, with rising costs of everything has become a very heavy spending 

department, and when I must come before the Treasury Board with an estimate of the amount of money 

that is going to be required to carry out the responsibilities of my office and the department, then it is 

natural that my estimates are going to be reasonably large. I want to congratulate the Treasurer for 

having made provision for me to be able to discharge, in the coming year, the responsibilities that have 

been laid upon me. 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

25 

I think he can be congratulated for other things. For the resume of history, for the indications that he 

gave this House, which I quite realize are not accepted by members of the Opposition; for they cannot 

accept anything, Mr. Speaker, that in any way detracts from what they hope will ultimately be the glory 

of the Liberal Party in this country which they so ignominiously lost in the days when they had an 

opportunity to be glorious. They do not want this government to have credit, or anybody else but 

themselves. But the Treasurer, in his budget speech, did give a resume of history which shows that there 

is a glory coming to this country and that glory had been started and we are going to reach it as long as 

the people of this province have confidence in this government, which I am confident they will do in the 

coming election. 

 

I want to congratulate some of the other speakers also that have taken part. I would even congratulate 

one or two from the other side. Some I won't. And later on in the course of my address I may possibly 

find occasion to mention those whom I cannot congratulate for the subject matter of their remarks. 

Before proceeding into a report of the Department I represent, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take an 

opportunity also to pay a tribute to one who has left our midst. I refer to Dr. F.D. Mott who, until 

recently, was Deputy Minister of the Department and prior to that time was chairman of the Health 

Services Planning Commission and who, in collaboration and partnership with the former Minister of 

Public Health, the Premier of this Province, was the master builder of many of the health services which 

this Province enjoys at the present time. He regretted very much his decision to go, but he was a citizen 

of another country, on the reserve of their army, his loyalty was naturally there and, while he came to us 

generously and gave of his ability and time, it was not to be expected that he was going to continue to 

remain in Canada when his own country called him to duties as great or greater, possibly, than the field 

he had to work in here. We are grateful for the time he spent with us. I want to say this much, that we 

are equally glad that we were able to retain the services and to promote to Dr. Mott's position. Dr. F.B. 

Roth, who we all have a great deal of confidence in, who is a native of Canada, will feel no pull to 

another country, who was born in Ontario of a long line of Canadian parentage, who has seen a great 

deal of experience in private practice, a good deal on the frontiers of our northern country, who has had 

a thorough training in not only hospital administration from a medical point of view, but also from the 

administrative point of view, and who already has, in his position, established a bond of confidence and 

friendship with all the various associations, both professional and non-professional with which our 

department must deal, including the Saskatchewan Hospital Association and the Catholic Hospital 

Conference. I can assure the House; Sir, that this province will have cause to be proud of the work that 

the staff of the Department of Health will do as time goes on under the able direction of Dr. Roth. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, quite a lot has been said from the Opposition benches about the failure of this 

government to carry out the loans or the recommendations of the Britnell-Cronkite-Jacobs report on 

what is commonly referred to now as the Committee on Provincial-Municipal Relations. I think the 

Treasurer and the Premier, the Minister of Municipal Affairs and others have given this House sufficient 

information to convince any reasonable body of people that want to have the truth and are willing to 

believe established facts when they are established, that this government has put into effect 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

26 

nearly all the recommendations, has indicated its willingness to, as soon as possible, put the rest of them 

into effect. And so far as our department is concerned, the one recommendation that had to do with it 

was that the grants to the Anti T.B, League should be increased to assist them more and hardly had the 

recommendation come out in print when I received instructions from the Cabinet to see that that was 

done. Mr. Speaker, that alone means an increase of $160,000 for the next fiscal year and it means an 

increase of $400,000 from the point where we were at the time the instruction was issued. Mr. Speaker, I 

say that is carrying out recommendations from the Government Committee very rapidly and I think that 

the Opposition has no moral right to say that we have not carried out commitments. There is one 

established — other Ministers of course, will deal with what they have done. 

 

I do not need to remind the House, I suppose, that we still enjoy the very enviable position in the field of 

T.B. control in this very province. I just recently had the pleasure of reading a draft of the report of the 

Anti T.B. League to its Board of Directors yesterday and we still maintain our position as one of the best 

in the line, not only in this country, but in the world. 

 

Now, talking about carrying out the recommendations of the government-appointed committees; I went 

to tell the House this, Mr. Speaker. That we have recently made preparation to carry out another 

recommendation. Only a short time ago the Rural Municipal Association had been feeling that the 

allocation of the municipal levy, as between urbans and rurals, was not on a fair basis. As everybody 

knows, 40 per cent of the levy is applied to the urban municipalities, 60 per cent to the rural 

municipalities. That has been in effect for a long time. The rurals feel that the changing conditions have 

caused this 60 per cent allocation to themselves to be a heavier burden than they should bear and made 

representations to me on that account. I took the matter up with the government and the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs was instructed, and carried out his instructions, to appoint a committee to bring in a 

recommendation as to the allocations. One member from the urban association; one member from a rural 

association, presided over by the Hon. Mr. Justice Thompson, examined the problem and they brought 

in an unanimous report. Mr. Speaker, for the edification of the House I am going to quote the report of 

that Commission: 

 

1. For the purpose of apportioning the cost of operation and maintenance of tuberculosis sanitaria and 

hospitals in the province, local improvement districts should be classified and treated as rural 

municipalities. 

 

2. That the portion of the cost of the operation and the maintenance of the said sanitaria and hospitals 

to be borne by municipalities should be apportioned as between urban and rural municipalities on the 

following basis: 

 

(a) For the year 1952 the proportion of the net estimated expenditure of the Saskatchewan 

Anti-Tuberculosis League, as, determined by the Board of the said League under Section 24 of the 

Tuberculosis Sanitaria and Hospitals Act, to be borne by the urban municipalities should be fixed at 

42 per cent. And the proportion thereof to be borne by the rural municipalities should be fixed at 58 

per cent. 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

27 

(b) Thereafter there should be an annual revision and the said expenditure should be adjusted and 

apportioned as between the urban municipalities and rural municipalities on the basis of first, their 

total equalized assessments for the preceding year; secondly, their total population as disclosed by 

the latest official figures then available; third, the total number of days treatment supplied to the 

residents of the said municipalities as disclosed by the records of the Saskatchewan 

Anti-Tuberculosis League for the preceding year. 

 

(c) That the said adjustment to be made in the years following 1952 should be made on a composite 

basis and equal rates should be given to each of the said factors of equalized assessments, population 

and patient participation." 

 

Mr, Speaker, that recommendation came in from the Committee not more than seven weeks ago. I will 

be bringing in legislation amendments which, if passed by this Assembly, will put those 

recommendations into effect. I would like my friends across the House, or anyone else anywhere in this 

country, to tell me one single instance where a Liberal Government anywhere in Canada ever 

implemented the recommendations of a committee as rapidly as this one has been implemented. 

 

Some Hon. Member (Government): — They never did anything. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — That is right, they never did anything. 

 

I want to mention the Saskatchewan Cancer Programme because that has been the subject of some 

criticism. I am glad the hon. member for Turtleford (Mr. Trippe) is in his seat. I would like to remind 

him though, Mr. Speaker, that when I asked him very courteously for permission to ask him a question 

yesterday when he was on his feet, he very nonchalantly waved his hand at the clock and was not even 

courteous enough to explain to me the reasons why he would not comply. My question was simple 

though. All I wanted from him was that he would tell me the name of the lady and the place where she 

operated a restaurant that he referred to yesterday. I would like to look into it. 

 

Mr. Trippe (Turtleford): — If you had written me a note, which you never did . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — We were on the radio — If you had let me know the name, even if you had 

implied that you would give me the name, I would be very pleased to look into that case. 

 

I want to deal with the Saskatchewan Cancer Programme, because, as I say, Mr. Speaker, it has been the 

subject of some criticism and the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) in his persistent, and I 

might even use a more powerful adjective if you would permit it, Sir, continues to claim that his party 

has done all the good work in cancer in this province. And I deny that emphatically, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — And proven it. 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

28 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member gets up and makes assertions when he is making a 

speech and then he says he has proven. He is like the hon. member for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) who 

spent a lot of time making straw men and knocking them over and then proves that he is a champion of 

Christian democratic capitalism in this country. And the hon. member from Arm River has been 

persistently saying anything he likes and says, "Now I have proved it because I said it." He has not 

proved anything of the kind. I am going to disprove his assertions before I am done, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Gibbs (Swift Current): — Just shadow-boxing, that's all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Our cancer programme is known all across this country, all across the North 

American continent, all across the civilized world. I want to point this out. To Dr. Munro, Minister of 

Health in the Anderson Government, in the early 'thirties, goes the original credit for having started the 

cancer programme which exists in Saskatchewan today. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is what I said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Well, that is the one place the can get together, because it is a definite fact of 

history that neither one of us could get away from, because I honour Dr. Munro, and the hon. member 

for Arm River could not get away from it, Mr. Speaker. But that is a minor point, we all agree on that. I 

am going to say this to the everlasting shame of the gentlemen opposite, who held office in this 

Chamber in this Province, from the time the Anderson Government went out until 1944, they did 

nothing to introduce free cancer services until late in 1944, two years after they should have gone to the 

country, an over-extended term of office, and a bit of window dressing then to help them get back into 

— what was it they said? To lead in peace as they had in war — their slogan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it was this government that actually instituted free cancer treatment in this province. 

I can see the hon. gentleman laugh. Well, he would laugh if he was reading Superman, and he would 

kick if he was in swimming. The Cancer Control Act was assented to on April 1, 1944. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What does that prove? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — But that is nothing. I have got better ones than that here too. The Cancer Control 

Act was assented to on April 1, 1944, the dying days of the last Liberal Government of this province, 

and came into force on date of proclamation. That was the day, the date that the free treatment was 

entered into the Cancer Control Act. It came into effect on proclamation . . . Yes . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Would the hon. Minister permit a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — No. 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

29 

Mr. Danielson: — You are afraid of it. 

 

Some Hon. Member (Opposition): — Will the Minister permit a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — A proclamation was issued on May 2nd, 1944, bringing the new Act into force on 

May 1st, 1944 . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is all right, it was written right into the Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Now, you know what I am talking about, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Member (Opposition): — You don't yourself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — . . . I have got the records always at my disposal. They could not get away with 

all the records, but I understand they got away with some when they went out of office. We have some 

records . . . 

 

Some Hon. Member (Government): — They forgot to burn some of them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Now then, here is the point. As I have mentioned, the proclamation was issued on 

May 2, 1944, bringing the new Act into force on May 1st, 1944. The development of an adequate basis 

for setting up the new tax-supported treatment programme was delayed until fall. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There hadn't been anything paid . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — The Liberal Government did nothing between May 1st and the day they went to 

the country to bring about an adequate free cancer treatment service. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There was nothing done . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Just a minute. I will tell the hon. gentleman some more. I know he does not want 

to believe it, Mr. Speaker, but there are some people in this country who want the truth. And I am going 

to tell it to them. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — They will have to go some place else to get it than go to you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, if I was as guilty of the discourtesy of making as much noise when 

he is speaking as he does when I or others over here are speaking, I would expect some severe censure 

from our Honour. The hon. member disputed my statement . . . 

 

Some Hon. Member (Opposition): — Will the Minister permit a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Here is section 18: 

 

"This Act shall come into force on a date to be named by proclamation by the Lieutenant Governor." 

 

That is written right into the Act. Is that convincing, Mr. Speaker? Or do you want to mumble some 

more and twist the words? 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

30 

Mr. Danielson: — Pure imagination. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I expect he thinks we have cooked that one up for him. I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, 

the development of an adequate basis for the setting up of a new tax-supported treatment programme 

was delayed until fall. On November 1st, 1944, new regulations were passed, after this government 

came into office, retroactive to May 1, 1944, which superseded the old regulations governing 

administration of the clinics and became effective on November 9, 1931, when the Anderson 

Government was in. This Government altered the regulations in November of 1944, regulations that had 

been passed by the Anderson Government many years before and had not been changed between that 

time and the winter of 1944-45, when this government was in office. 

 

These regulations set out various requirements in regard to pathological services at hospitals and clinics, 

the referral of patients to the Clinics by the physicians and the type of hospital care to be covered by the 

programme and the types of reports that the physicians were to send in. Now then, during November and 

December, Mr. Speaker, of 1944, when this Government was in office, to implement the regulations and 

to implement the Act that the hon. gentlemen opposite and their colleagues in the past had failed to bring 

into effect, this Government conferred with the College of Physicians and Surgery, kept on conferring 

all winter in order to establish a basis of operation that would provide for the physicians to give the 

treatment that was required to these cancer patients. On February 24, 1945 a final agreement was 

reached between the Premier of this Province, then the Minister of Public Health, and Dr. Hames, his 

Deputy Minister on one hand and the College of Physicians and Surgeons on the other, on the basis of 

payment to the physicians for the services that would be rendered. It took nearly one year to finally get 

those arrangements after those people over there had made no start. They had made no attempt to 

implement the legislation that they had brought into being after an over-extended period of office. And 

then they try to stand up across there now, Mr. Speaker, and say they are the fathers of the free cancer 

treatment in this Province. No such thing is a fact. 

 

Now, I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I do not blame the late Dr. Uhrich. I believe in my heart — I 

knew Dr. Uhrich and I had a high regard for him, personally — and I believe, Sir, that if he had had his 

way we would have had free cancer treatment years before we did. But he was unable to soften up that 

hard-headed capitalist crowd over there, who have more regard for a dollar bill than they have for the 

welfare of a human being. I will give you some evidence to show that they and their Liberal press in this 

Province still regard the dollar bill as more important than people are. 

 

I would like, just at this point, to give you some idea what the Commission did last year, during this 

year, rather. They have examined 3,886 new cancer patients. They have been treated at our clinics this 

year and 15,434 old patients have been reviewed. Well, that is an enviable record, Mr. Speaker. But I 

still want to draw the attention of this House, and to anybody 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

31 

else who may be interested, that we still have a long way to go. As I read the monthly reports from our 

various areas in the Province on our public health programme the lists of deaths and births and so on and 

the causes for the deaths, I am a bit alarmed at the number of deaths caused by cancer. So it is obvious 

that it was necessary and a good thing that the Treasurer made provision for us to carry on the kind of 

work that we are doing in that Commission and I would say that the Cancer Commission under the 

chairmanship of Dr. Hames and with the Director of Cancer Services, Dr. Watson, deserves a good deal 

of credit for what they are doing and my hon. friend, the Treasurer and his advisors deserve a great deal 

of credit for making the sinews of that campaign available so they can do it. 

 

I want to mention another thing. In the course of an address in this House the hon. member for Arm 

River (Mr. Danielson) mentioned — he speaks a little under his breath sometimes, not as loudly as I 

would hope always, and I do not want to credit him or discredit him with a statement he may not have 

made. But I understood him to say, in the course of one of his addresses, that under this government, a 

patient at a cancer clinic, when found not to have cancer, was required to pay for the diagnostic service. 

If I understood him wrong, Mr. Speaker, I will be willing to be corrected, but I wish to be corrected at 

this point. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — That is very simple. I said, "part of the expenses." 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — As I say, I could not hear the hon. member too clearly and I do not wish to 

ascribe anything to him that should not be ascribed to him, there is plenty that should be, which will 

serve my purpose. However, Sir, I want to point out this; that even though he said "part", let me just give 

a little record of what happened under their government. 

 

We answered a question asked by the hon. member for Turtleford the other day in the House and it is on 

the record, and I am going to give it now, and in case anyone thinks it is not so, I have also here the 

receipt which I will refer to in a moment or two if necessary. From the year 1932, when the Anderson 

Government, with Dr. Munro as the Minister of Public Health, introduced the cancer services in this 

Province, there was a fee of $10 charged to every patient that came into the cancer clinics. From that 

time until the 31st of March 1944, a $10 charge was made to every patient, whether the patient had 

cancer or not. That was abolished when this Government came in, and there were no charges made 

through 1945, 1946, 1947, 1948, 1949 and until March 31, 1950, when we introduced a $10 charge to be 

applied against patients going to the cancer clinic who, after diagnosis, had been proven to be 

non-cancerous, in the belief that those people would not object to a $10 payment for assurance that they 

had no malignancy in anything that was troubling them and that policy operates still. If anybody doubts 

what I have said, here is a receipt signed on December 31, 1943, by Mr. Oscar Kinneburg of Thunder 

Creek, Saskatchewan, when he paid his $10 to the clinic. 

 

I want to mention one or two other things here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, but I want to, in conclusion 

about cancer services, remind this House that there can be no doubt that the free cancer services to 

cancer 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

32 

patients in Saskatchewan today have never been equalled anywhere in the world we know of and was 

brought into actual operation by the C.C.F. Government sitting on these benches over on your right, Sir, 

and not by the colleagues of the members opposite there. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Pure imagination on your part, if you want to be fair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, what does it take to prove anything to the hon. member for Arm 

River? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, and you know it is not true. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I have given the documentary evidence this afternoon which, if my hon. member 

had any sense of judgment at all, even if not a sense of fairness, merely a sense of judgment, be would 

have to admit in his own mind, Mr. Speaker, this evidence is proof conclusive of what I have said here 

this afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Member (Government): — He is dead but he won't lie down. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I will go into another matter which has been dealt with 

somewhat differently, but still our friends on our left, Sir, have mentioned, as I say, in other ways, about 

our northern areas of this Province. Mr. Speaker, some of the gentlemen over there, when they are 

speaking, speak as though everybody over here was a babe in swaddling clothes and had never been 

around Saskatchewan before. Our friend over there from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) said yesterday he knew 

the lumber business. I was cruising timber all over Canada when he did not know, probably, one tree 

from another. I remember the Big River Lumber Company away back in the early days of the century, as 

well as the Prince Albert Lumber Company that operated up there. I was around this country to see — I 

have to smile to myself when they talk about the highways in this Province. They cannot tell me 

anything about highways. I have driven as many miles in this Province as any man in this House in the 

course of my travels and I know highways from one end to the other, and when they were good and 

when they were bad. 

 

I want to mention the northern areas and what my Department does up there, which that outfit over 

there, that strange crowd, never thought of doing, Mr. Speaker, when they were in office. This 

Government over here believes that the people in the northern areas are human beings. They believe 

they are entitled to the same kind of services as the so-called civilized gentlemen get over here, even 

though some of their skins may be a different colour. We believe in their rights and we have established 

in that country certain health services which we are expanding all the time. We have four hospitals 

operated by my department, the only four we have in the province, and they are not big enough and 

there are not enough of them, I will grant you. 

 

Remember, Mr. Speaker, at no stage in my address will I say that we have reached perfection. I say we, 

as our friend from Milestone (Mr. Erb) said in his address a while ago, we saw the end of stagnation in 

1944 and are now expanding the field of health services, as in other services. So we operate four 

Government-owned little hospitals, at Cumberland Bay, Sandy Bay, Stony Rapids and Buffalo Narrows. 

We also recognize, by proper 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

33 

patient day payments, the privately owned hospitals at Ile a la Crosse and LaLoche and we recently 

opened a nursing station up at Goldfields which we hope will be the start of a programme of public 

health and other types of health care in Uranium City when it is established and we are on the ground 

there watching, and have the full co-operation of the departments administered by my hon. friends here, 

the Minister of Natural Resources and the Minister of Education, who also has quite a departmental 

operation in that country. 

 

In co-operation with the Federal Government — because we do co-operate with them whenever they 

will with us, and we get along very well when politics are left out of it — we maintain a doctor and pay 

our share at Ile a la Crosse. Dr. Lavoie, who was mentioned by our friend from Athabasca (Mr. Marion) 

the other day. Unfortunately Dr. Lavoie has reached the age where he feels that he must retire and we 

are doing our best to find a replacement for him. We appreciate the services that Dr. Lavoie has given up 

there. Those are some of the things that we do that are not often mentioned. I suppose they may be too 

small. Maybe they are minor things, Mr. Speaker. We also have the prevention of blindness programme 

and the care of indigents, and it operates very largely in that northern area. I flew across that country last 

year with the director of those services from our department, Dr. Totten, and had a look at these places 

and tried to satisfy myself that we were doing all we possibly could at the present time, and trying to 

envisage places and things that we could do which would increase the services to those people. And I 

want to say that I believe our programme is working out very well out there and we will eventually get 

to the point where we can give those people, as far as it is humanly possible, the same type of services 

that they would get if they lived in the centre of Regina or Saskatoon. 

 

Now, other indigents, of course, in other parts of the province also have the right to care under that 

particular division. I would like to point out that, it may not sound very big but it is important to the 

people who got them, we provided glasses for 240 people last year who otherwise would not have had 

glasses. And I ask anyone here who requires glasses to read or to do any of their work or any of the 

activities of life, just what it means to a person to have glasses when they find they need them and what 

it would mean to that kind of people if they were deprived of glasses when they do need them. This 240 

are not a lot in the Province of Saskatchewan but they are 240 human beings which we regard as having 

some right and so we give them attention to those little details. The 240 votes would help us, but it is not 

a political thing, Mr. Speaker. It is purely a humanitarian thing to try and take care of these people that 

need it. And again, Mr. Speaker, under that same division, you may say they seem very small, but we 

did provide eye operations and paid for them for nine people. Only a small number, but nine people who 

might have been blind today had they not had those operations paid for by this Government. We believe 

that is worthwhile doing. 

 

Some Hon. Member (Government): — They would never have got them under the Liberals. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr, Speaker, our friend — I am sorry he is not in his seat — the hon. member for 

Redberry (Mr. Korchinski), in the course of one address to this House this year, referred to the daily 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

34 

press of this Province as the "Liberal" press, so I can be forgiven, I presume, Mr. Speaker, if I refer to 

them the same way because they get all the support of that Party and they give all the support they have 

got to that Party on your left, Sir, and so if I refer to them as the "Liberal" press. I presume I am not 

doing anything other than the member for Redberry did. 

 

Now then, they say some of the services we are giving are top-heavy. I am going to produce a little 

evidence to prove the statement I am making now. Mr. Speaker, I took the trouble to cut a cartoon out of 

their paper, the cartoon was supposed to be drawn by a gentleman with a sense of humor, who can do his 

utmost to make human beings look as ridiculous as possible in the hope, of course, that the public will 

regard them as unfit to be in the positions of trust that they occupy. Therefore, they refer to the Premier 

of this Province (Hon. Mr. Douglas) and the Treasurer of this Province (Hon. Mr. Fines), and here is the 

cartoon; a great big roof and, underneath that, a lesser structure and, under that, four wobbly legs, and 

the Premier and the Treasurer are represented as a couple of workmen with a pick and shovel, going out 

to build a foundation under what the "Liberal" press says is a top-heavy social structure. And to prove 

they mean it — that is, they have left no doubt about what they mean, because the "S" in social and the 

"S" in service have a dollar sign. The only sign they know anything about is the dollar sign. 

 

So, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that proves conclusively my statement that the Liberals believe these things I 

am speaking of, the Liberals believe that the services that I am responsible to see are given to the people 

of this Province and for which the money provided for in the budget are frills that they would not have 

anything to do with. They prefer to have that money saved for the profit to any business they personally, 

or their friends, are interested in. 

 

Now then, Mr. Speaker, in my talk last year I gave a pretty complete account of our psychiatric services, 

another field where we feel people should have a great deal of consideration as human beings. And 

when illness of a mental nature strikes a button being that person should be regarded as just as worthy of 

treatment service and all the treatment that can be given, to rehabilitate that person, that would be given 

to a person with stomach ulcers or broken leg or an appendix, or any other physical ill that may attack 

him. And to make that possible, a great deal of expansion and improvement has been made in the 

psychiatric services of this province. I am going to mention them in dollars and cents and I am going to 

remind the House that it is frequently said by people over there that we do not spend any more money in 

terms of purchasing power than they spent. I would disagree with them. I say we spend it in the right 

direction and get more value for the dollar. 

 

In 1943, Mr. Speaker, to give some idea of how our friends across there in their Government regarded 

the mental patients of this province, I will remind the people here that they spent $661,000 in that year 

in the three institutions and the Munro Wing. In 1949 and 1950 this Government spent $4,190,000 and 

this year it will be over $5 million on treatment services of all kinds for these people. There were 21 

beds in the Munro wing in 1943 and 1944 and there are 40 beds in the Munro wing now 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

35 

and that, I believe, will have to be extended some time in the not too distant future. We have full time 

consultive and treatment clinics with full time medical directors now, in two places, Mr. Speaker, in 

1943 there were none. There were no part-time consultive clinics in 1943 not up to that time. We have 7 

now. There were no teacher psychologists, that is people specially trained for consultive and educational 

work with teachers, who have a great deal to do with the mental hygiene of the young people of this 

Province. There were none in 1943 and 1944 because that would have cost money and they would rather 

it were spent somewhere else. This government makes that money available for competent people and 

we have seven of these people now. I am going to refer to the "Liberal" press again in a few minutes, 

Mr. Speaker. I say though, before I get to that, that the comparison in our psychiatric services is 

certainly not creditable to the Liberal Party who sat in these benches prior to 1944. 

 

I told the House last year also that eminent scientists from all across this country and even across the 

sea, had come to view our institutions and our treatment programme. I am not going to be foolish 

enough to say they found everything perfect, because the Treasurer, will tell you himself that I am 

continually telling him what I need to improve them. They are not perfect, but they are so far ahead of 

everything else that we ever had here, and so far ahead of other things on the North American Continent 

that if there is any such thing as perfection at this time, we come closer to it than anywhere else, and that 

is not just my word now. Recently, last fall, we had a visit from one of the noted American psychiatrists, 

Dr. Karl Menninger, who is well known again as not only an expert in the treatment services, but in his 

ability to inspect and assess the value of the kind of services that are given. And even the "Liberal" 

press, Mr. Speaker, was compelled to recognize his visit and his words to a meeting held here in Regina. 

 

I am going to quote from a 'Leader-Post' editorial of October 1st, 1951. I will not quote it all, but I will 

quote the pertinent parts. But I am going to say that, to some extent, I am glad the 'Leader Post' did it. I 

do not like the way they did it, but at least they went along a little way in giving Saskatchewan some 

credit. Now I quote from the 'Leader-Post'. 

 

"Over the years Saskatchewan has won many plaudits for her leadership in health services. We 

virtually led the world in the fight against the once feared scourge of tuberculosis, and our Province 

became one of the first areas on the planet to provide T.B. treatment at no cost to the patient. 

Likewise, in the establishment of free cancer diagnostic clinics, and then free cancer treatment, 

Saskatchewan was well in advance of the times. 

 

"We also took the lead in prepaid hospitalization, which culminated in the first province-wide system. 

It was with gratification that the Saskatchewan people learned the other day that we continue to add to 

our laurels — this time in the field of psychiatry, where the treatment of mental ills is required. The 

bearer of these glad tidings was Dr. Carl Menninger, of the famed Menninger Clinic of Topeka, 

Kansas, who is acknowledged to be one of the world's leading psychiatrists. Dr. 



 

March 7, 1952 

 

 

36 

Menninger told a Regina audience recently that in this comparatively new field of health, 

Saskatchewan has made so much progress that, 'you ought to be proud of yourself'. 

 

"Previously, in an interview, he pronounced Saskatchewan's psychiatric leaders as supreme in their 

field. To his knowledge, Saskatchewan is the only area in the world that has all the competent 

psychiatrists it presently needs. He also declared that the psychiatric aide training being carried out in 

Saskatchewan is envied throughout the world, and is being copied as fast as other areas can arrange 

it." 

 

I will skip one paragraph, and am quoting again now, the fourth paragraph of the editorial, which is the 

last quote I will make, but I have given the reference and anybody can read it all: 

 

"The notable progress to which Dr. Menninger refers has taken place in the last five years, since the 

maintenance of mental hospitals and the treatment of mental patients was placed under the psychiatric 

service branch of the Provincial Department of Health, under Dr. G.G. McKerracher. Federal direct 

aid of about $300,000 a year has been a help, but Saskatchewan has carried the bulk of the higher 

cost." 

 

That is a good editorial, and I say I appreciate it, but I would like to draw the attention of the 

'Leader-Post' to one thing. They admit that it happened in the last five years; they admit that Dr. 

McKerracher is an able man on the job, but they fail completely, in the editorial, to mention who it was 

that went out and found Dr. McKerracher, and brought him here to undertake this project. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — And the man who did that sits on this side of the House now, leading this 

Government in this Province, and they did not have the courage to go along and complete, and follow 

through on their drive, Mr. Speaker, and say that the credit for finding Dr. McKerracher, for giving him 

the scope to work in, for making it possible for him to acquire these psychiatrists that we need, and to 

give this treatment. They did not have the grace, or the courtesy, or the courage, to give the credit where 

the credit belongs. That is the only fault I have with the editorial. 

 

Now, Mr, Speaker, I have not been able to cover anything like the whole department, and I propose to 

proceed with that on Monday. So with your permission, I would like at this point, to beg leave to 

adjourn this debate. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5.50 o'clock p.m. 


