



















































Hansard: March 17, 1952


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eleventh Legislature 

27th Day 

 

Monday, March 17, 1952 

 

The House met at three o‘clock p.m. 

 

The House resumed from Friday, March 14, 1952, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. 

T.C. Douglas (Weyburn): 

 

That this Assembly, recognizing 

 

(a) that in recent years the rapid increase of farm mechanization and the widespread adoption of new 

agricultural methods have resulted in basic changes in rural life and the farm economy of 

Saskatchewan, and 

 

(b) that these economic trends are creating new rural social problems as well as adversely affecting the 

ability of our young people to become established in the agricultural industry, and 

 

(c) that these trends also offer an opportunity for further extending the amenities of rural life, 

 

agrees it is advisable that the Provincial Government should appoint a Royal Commission to 

investigate and make recommendations regarding the requirements of the maintenance of a sound farm 

economy and the improvement of social conditions and amenities in rural Saskatchewan, and 

recommends that such Commission, in its inquiry and recommendations, have particular reference to: 

 

(1) the problems involved in present day trends in agricultural production, land use and farm costs; 

 

(2) the need for farm capital and credit; 

 

(3) the further adaptation of social services and educational facilities to meet changing rural conditions; 

and 

 

(4) the further development of rural transportation, communication and community services. 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, in the few minutes I was speaking on 

this resolution before it was adjourned, I referred to one of the causes for the fact that there was a trend 

away from the farms on the prairies, that in addition to the ones mentioned in the resolution, was the 

question of economic well-being. In the resolution it is set out that the rapid increase in recent years of 

farm mechanization and the wide-spread adoption of new agricultural methods resulted in basic changes 

in rural life and 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

2 

the farm economy of Saskatchewan. I suggested that perhaps the rapid increase of farm mechanization 

was, to some extent, a result of the change in economic conditions. I think that it is quite clear to those 

who have studied the situation that if there had not been a great change in farm mechanization, it might 

be very hard for farmers to produce at a profit under present conditions, and that there is a question of 

how far this reduction and cost of production can go on. There is a limit certainly, to which the cost of 

production can be reduced by increased mechanization, and that problem — that question — is one 

thing that the Royal Commission might very well look into. 

 

If the trend continues, which has been taking place to some extent in Canada, of people living in cities, 

particularly those who are engaged in industrial enterprise, and who are well organized, if that trend, in 

their case, towards shorter hours, better working conditions and better conditions of life generally, 

continues without a corresponding increase and better conditions of life for the farmer, better economic 

rewards, and so on, the trend away from our farms will go on. 

 

In other words, the thing that affects trends into and out of a profession, or into and out of a country, are 

to a large extent, economics; and if any particular part of the country is better off economically than 

another part, then of course, there is a trend from the part that is not so well off economically to the part 

that is better off. It is one of the things which I pointed out in regard to the situation here in 

Saskatchewan. The proof that working people are better off elsewhere than they are in Saskatchewan is 

not to be found in statutes; it is to be found in the fact. Where are the working people going to and where 

are they going away from? It is quite clear that working people are tending to leave the Province of 

Saskatchewan and go elsewhere where they might be better off. 

 

The same thing is happening in regard to transfers between the different economic groups. If people in 

the cities and towns are better of economically, and better off in their living conditions, then there will 

be a tendency for people to leave the farms and go to the cities and towns. I think that is one of the 

things that must make everybody very much concerned, that there has been this great trend away from 

the farms towards the towns and cities. It is something that must give a certain amount of cause for 

concern to far-sighted people, including far-sighted leaders of Labour, because if they are not interested 

they are not wise, but I think most of the far-sighted people are interested in seeing to it that the farmers 

who produce the food, which is an important part of what they work for, fare well — if they are not 

interested in that, increased wages does not do them much good if the cost of food rises too fast. 

Obviously, if too many people leave farming (particularly mixed farming) and go to the cities and 

towns, there is going to be a reduction in the amount of dairy products, and a reduction in the amount of 

meat products, and so on, produced. 

 

It is one of those things that certainly confronts not only Canada, but the whole world today, and that is a 

proper interest in the conditions of the people that produce the food of the world. I do not 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

3 

think there is any question about it — that is one of the fundamental problems that faces mankind in 

general. We are told that a tremendous proportion of the people of the world are actually short of food; 

we have not reached that stage here in Canada, but we still hear of people who have to live on pensions, 

old-age pensions and the like, and find that the rising cost of food is a very great burden to them. 

 

If we do not make conditions on the farm better for the farmers, from the standpoint of the kind of life 

they are able to live there with their families; if we do not make the rewards commensurate with rewards 

they can get in the cities and towns, then the number of people who are willing to engage in looking 

after cattle; in looking after cows; producing the dairy products, producing meat products, will go on 

decreasing in numbers, and the time will certainly come when even in Canada there will be a shortage of 

these foods. 

 

Now then, that is of interest to everybody, including the farmers. For the farmer it is a matter of seeing 

to it that he gets a reasonable measure of justice; it is of interest to other people because they will be 

affected if the farmer does not get a fair deal. But for the farmer himself, it is a matter of seeing to it that 

he gets justice, and that is one of the reasons why we have definitely taken the attitude that there should 

be a real interest in making conditions on the farm as far as possible, as good as conditions are in the 

cities and towns. Because, if people are not willing to stay on the farms, work on the farms, produce 

food, well, it will not be long until the people in the cities and towns of the Province will suffer very 

severely. 

 

That is one of the reasons why we have advocated for several years that the Province as a whole should 

take some interest in providing electrical facilities for the farmers. Several years ago a Commission 

looked into this matter and reported to the Manitoba Government; they found that practically every 

country in western Europe, except Great Britain — where the population is much more densely settled 

than it is in this country — but they found practically every other country in western Europe felt that the 

country as a whole, should pay part of the cost of bringing the benefits of electricity to the farmers. I 

think it was a Minister of the Belgian Government that took the attitude that they regarded that as a 

measure of fighting against the depopulation of their rural Communities. That is the reason why we have 

urged this Government not to take the attitude that the farm electrification programme should be 

expected to pay the entire cost of carrying it on. As farmers are absolutely necessary to our whole 

economic setup, particularly so in Saskatchewan, then the Government as a whole — and the people of 

the Province as a whole — should be ready to pay some part of the cost of seeing to it that the farmer 

and his wife get the benefit of electricity. 

 

They are a necessary part of our economic setup and there is no doubt in the world that everybody 

should be willing to take an interest in seeing to it that they have some of the amenities of life that they 

would get if they lived in the cities and towns. Surely the farm wife is just as much entitled to electric 

lights, and to the benefits of electrical washing machines, electrical radios, and all the other 

improvements in conditions that she could get if electricity is brought to the farm buildings, as her sister 

that is living in city or town throughout the 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

4 

Province. We feel that the trend of population away from the farms, which we all realize must be halted 

in the best interest, not only of the farmers, but of the Province as a whole; that if that is to be halted, 

something definite should be done along that line. 

 

I am quite aware that the Government says: ―Well, we are doing something‖, but we are taking the 

attitude, for example, that a farmer has to pay $600 or $700 to get the electricity connected with his 

buildings. Well, that is bound to hold up the development of farm electrification, because on top of that, 

they have to pay for wiring their buildings, pay for getting fixtures, and so on. This extra $600 or $700 is 

bound to make it difficult to get a reasonably complete sign-up in any district. Unless you can get a 

complete sign-up in a district, then it does not warrant taking the electricity in to that district. 

 

And so that is the main reason, I am satisfied, why Manitoba now has 46 per cent of their farms 

electrified, while we have somewhere between 6 and 7 per cent of our farms electrified. People who find 

fault with this programme say: ―Why, it would be ridiculous for the Province as a whole to pay the cost 

of taking electricity to certain parts of Saskatchewan.‖ Well, even parts of Manitoba has recognized that 

electricity cannot be taken to the farms in those parts. It is only proposed to electrify 50,000 of the 

58,000 farms in Manitoba. There are parts in Manitoba which recognize that it is too expensive to take 

electricity to farms in those areas. 

 

We have never suggested at any time that electricity should be taken into a district where the population 

is so sparsely settled that it would be quite unreasonable to do so. What we have said is that where it is a 

reasonable proposition to do it with a certain amount of help from the Province as a whole, then it 

should be done there; and we say had it been done when it was being done in Manitoba, some of the 

people today who are off our farms in Saskatchewan, would still be on them, because there is no doubt 

that if electricity had been taken to the farmers of Saskatchewan as fast during the past four years, as it 

has been in Manitoba, people would have appreciated live on the farm with that improvement, with 

having electricity, so much that I am satisfied a lot of people today who have left the farms, would be 

still on those farms here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I quite realize that if, following the election which may take place in June, that if the Liberals are elected 

to office, and we bring in to . . . 

 

Hon. Member: — Ha! 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, my hon. friend laughs. It is for the people of Saskatchewan to decide, and none of 

us know what is going to be done — it is a matter for the people to decide in their wisdom. I do not 

think the record of the Government is such that they can be so very sure — they have no right to be sure 

about the results. 

 

But, I was going to say, that if we are elected to office following the election, we could immediately 

bring into effect a similar 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

5 

policy to that which has been in force in Manitoba for the last five or six years, that will halt the flow 

away from the farms, but it will not put a lot of people back on the farms who might have been there if 

this policy had been in force when it should have been as soon as possible after the second war, when 

the various materials were available. Now that is one of the things we feel would have done a great deal 

to help stop the movement away from the farms towards the city. 

 

Another thing we have mentioned has been the provision of better market roads so that the farmers can 

get access to the cities and towns in winter as well as in summer. We feel that instead of squandering 

millions and millions of dollars on schemes that this Government sets such store by, they should have 

given more help to municipalities in building better market roads, and municipal roads out of the 

tremendously increased revenue; the extra amount given by this Government to assist in that regard is 

really very, very small indeed. 

 

We have emphasized the necessity of better school grants so that the teachers could be kept in the rural 

schools; qualified teachers, who would not be leaving our Province in hundreds and leaving our schools 

to be manned by ―sitters‖ who are not qualified to teach. The result is that farm mothers and fathers who 

are anxious to have their children get the benefit of a good education, have come to the conclusion that if 

this is the sort of school they must send our children to, then they might better move into the towns and 

cities. And that has definitely been a contributing factor. 

 

Our attitude has been that we have a Government here that has been very, very blind toward the needs of 

the farmer, and after eight years in office, after this tremendous movement away from the farms towards 

the cities and towns, which they have done very little to try to stop in any way, or even halt, they now 

come along and say there is no real programme to lay before the people now, but they say ―We will 

appoint a Royal Commission to look into it and see what can be done.‖ Well, we do not think that every 

possible suggestion to help the farmer has been worked out yet, and for that reason, if the right kind of a 

Royal Commission is appointed, we are quite ready to support the idea. But we do not think it should be 

an excuse for inaction in some of these things I have mentioned; and if the people in their wisdom 

decide to replace the present Government by a Liberal Government, then there will be action taken 

along these lines, without waiting for the report of the Royal Commission. 

 

These are steps which should have been taken long ago . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — 34 years ago. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — While I hesitate to mention the fact of the low income of the ‗thirties, I pointed out this 

Government will likely spend, during the coming year, more than the total farm income in 1937 and 

1938, and more than half of the total farm income even in 1941. 

 

So when my friends talk about why more was not done in the days of the depression, and why as much 

was not done as was done by this Government when they are spending in one year (proposing to spend 

in the 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

6 

coming year) seven times as much as governments in the days of the depression had to spend. They are 

fooling nobody by that dishonest argument, and when they talk about why rural electrification was not 

carried on during the war, when on the admission of the Minister in this Government himself, you could 

not even get material until the war was over at least a year, and in some cases two years, and so when 

they say why did we not do this during the depression, and why did you not do it during the war, I say 

let them ask their own Minister about that. 

 

There is no use trying to put across on the intelligent people of this Province dishonest and foolish 

arguments like that. Now then, I say that if a Liberal Government is elected during this coming election, 

we will go ahead and carry out this programme that I have announced, without waiting for the report of 

the Royal Commission. 

 

This resolution proposes that the Commission in its enquiry and recommendation, should have particular 

reference to the problems involved in present day trends in agricultural production, in land use and farm 

cost. That brings up the question of farm costs. I would have been happier if it had been put in there as a 

relative economic position of the people living on the farms, but the suggestion there is that the farmer is 

being hindered by rising costs, and I suppose it has in mind that his economic position should be looked 

into. Any Royal Commission, I fancy, would feel that that was one of the fundamental things that they 

should look into. 

 

In looking into that, and looking into it properly, it seems to me that the makeup of the Royal 

Commission would be most important. The value of this Royal Commission will depend, to a large 

extent, upon the personnel of the Commission; upon the wisdom and the vision and the experience of the 

Royal Commissioners who may be appointed; and when we are looking into the point of the problems 

involved in present day trends in agricultural production and farm costs, and land use, it seems to me to 

have that done properly there should be on that Commission, without any doubt, a representative of the 

farmers themselves, one who has a real background of experience on what has happened in this western 

country for the last 20 or 30 years; and surely, there should be a representative of the farm women who, 

in many cases, have borne the brunt of the isolation of our farms and the difficulty of getting the 

children educated and so on; they have borne the brunt of it, and perhaps have suffered even more and 

felt it more than the farmer himself. 

 

Then there should be, on that Commission, it seems to me, if a good job is going to be done, an 

economist who has made a real study of western conditions, and is very familiar with developments in 

our western economy, if a real good, far-sighted job is going to be done. 

 

Then the second suggestion of the resolution is that they should look into the need for farm capital and 

credit, and along that line there is, no doubt, much that should be looked into; to what extent the bitter 

and violent attacks that have been made from time to time on people who have extended capital to 

people engaged in the industry of farming in 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

7 

Western Canada, by the members of the C.C.F. Party, and by the attitude taken by them — not so much 

now, because it is deemed wise to soft-pedal on that at the moment — but it would be interesting to see 

to what extent it is felt that that has created a situation whereby there is no capital available for young 

people to get started in farming in the west, in the same way that there has been in the past. 

 

Also, there is no doubt that the matter should be looked into again to see to what extent the Provincial 

Government might be expected to do something in regard to the matter. We are all familiar with what 

happened in that regard in the past, and why the Saskatchewan Farm Loan Board entered the picture. It 

was the result of a recommendation that the Provincial Government should do something about it, and 

the thought was that the Provincial Government would borrow money and re-loan it to people who 

engaged in farming. Well, when the Federal Government entered the field, I think it was felt that they 

had much more in the way of financial resources than the Provincial Government, and that the 

Provincial Government could withdraw from the field, and it has been withdrawing as rapidly as 

possible for several years now. 

 

There may be some way in which the Provincial Government can re-enter that field in some way, and it 

would certainly be in order for the Commission to look into that situation, because it is one of the 

tragedies of present-day circumstances that young people who would like very much to stay farming, but 

find it impossible to do so and they see land which they might farm if they could get some credit, go into 

the hands of some person who is already a large farmer, trying to extend his holdings; and that young 

man who might have stayed on the farm goes to the town or city and then later, perhaps, leaves the 

Province altogether. 

 

The third suggestion in the resolution raises again the necessity of having a good economist, who is 

thoroughly familiar with western conditions, being placed upon this Royal Commission. The third 

suggestion in the resolution is the further adaptation of social services and educational facilities to meet 

changing rural conditions. There is something that has had an affect on the movement of the people from 

the farms, as I have already said. The feeling of every father and mother that they want to get the very 

best possible chance for their children — and if the best that they can hope for is a person who is not 

trained to teach — who can only be a study supervisor or so-called ―sitter‖ in their schools, then they 

have the feeling that if they move to the town or city they can take advantage of the benefit of well-

trained teachers. That is almost enough, regardless of any economic pressure, to cause most fathers and 

mothers to say, ―Well, we will make the sacrifice to make sure that our children get a good education.‖ 

 

My own feeling is that our neglect of the educational system, so far as it affects the rural people of this 

Province, has been during the last four or five years, when the revenues of this Government have been 

so large, but the refusal to use a reasonable amount of those revenues to help our rural schools keep 

teachers, without having to raise 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

8 

taxes beyond anything they can bear — I think that that attitude on the part of this Government is one of 

the things which the people will censure at the first chance they get, when an election is held. 

 

But, in any event, that is so significant to those of us who live in Saskatchewan, with a background like 

we have, that that might be one of the most important features of this Royal Commission. So it seems to 

me that on that Royal Commission we should have a person who knows a great deal about educational 

problems, and knows a great deal about the development of our educational set-up in western Canada, 

and who brings to bear all the wisdom, vision and knowledge that he may have accumulated from his 

past experience and study of the situation; and that member of the Royal Commission would be one of 

the most important members of it. 

 

Then there is also the question of social services as well as educational facilities. It seems to me that 

here we need somebody that is a trained sociologist and also has a background of a great deal of 

experience in Western Canada, who might be considered as a representative of the churches. Perhaps the 

representative of the churches should be included in this Commission in any event, because if there is 

any group of people who have taken a real interest in that branch of our set-up in Western Canada, it has 

been the various churches who have done so much good in Western Canada. 

 

Then the fourth item in the resolution is a further development of rural transportation, communication 

and community service. That brings up some items I have already mentioned. In this day and age, when 

there is more community feeling — more desirability of people meeting together, more than in the 

pioneer days when it was simply not possible — if people are not going to be given the opportunity to be 

able to attend church and meet their neighbours — not only during the summer, but during the winter — 

by having proper transportation facilities, we are going to have them leaving the farm and continuing to 

leave the farm. That is where real help to our municipalities in regard to the great problem of 

transportation in our rural areas is so very important. 

 

So it seems to me that somebody who has had experience with the problems of the municipalities as they 

have tried to deal with this question of communication and rural transportation – some representative of 

the municipalities who has had a real background of experience, as they have tried to struggle with those 

problems — should find a place on that Commission. 

 

I feel that what we want in the way of a report from this Commission is a report that is based upon the 

accumulated experience of the people who have settled in Western Canada No imported planners — no 

people that are not familiar with our conditions — but people that are thoroughly familiar with what the 

people who have settled here have been up against; and what we have been up against as we have tried 

to develop our civilization here on these western plains. That is what is needed on this Commission — 

people not only with the ability, the vision, the wisdom, but also the accumulated experience, and who 

know what is likely to be feasible and what is likely to be purely visionary — something that 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

9 

might look good on paper, but which, from past experience, would be known to be of no use if it were 

tried. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while I want to emphasize again the appointment of this Royal Commission is no 

excuse for the past inaction of this Government in regard to assisting our farmers and while it cannot be 

permitted to be an excuse for inaction for another two or three years — and we will not permit it to be so 

if an election is held and this Government is replaced by a Liberal Government — still, as I said before, 

there are so many deep-seated problems here that if a Commission with the background of experience 

(and there are many, many people who have that background of experience in our midst in Western 

Canada); people who have had that experience and are well-trained in regard to these various branches 

which I have mentioned; I feel that if a Commission like that is set up and has the full backing of the 

people of the Province, and of the Government of the day, they may be able to bring in 

recommendations and suggested lines of conduct for the Government that may be helpful, not only to 

the farmers of our Province, but to the Province as a whole. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, we will support the motion. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — In rising to support this motion and expressing a few thoughts 

that I have on this matter, Mr. Speaker, I thought when the Premier introduced this motion on Friday last 

that we might discuss this on a high plane — on a plane which would be above party politics and all that 

sort of thing. And I am going to give credit to the Premier that he did do very, very nicely. He did very 

well; but, lo and behold, his Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) got on his feet and I would say to 

you now, after he has embarked right into the political arena of this topic I am going to say a few words 

he might not like before I get through telling him. I would rather like to point out to him that before he 

sat down he made a statement which I tried to draw to his attention and he could not find anything else 

to say in order to take up the radio time, so he said, ―You know, Danielson over there, he does not like 

the Ag. rep. service; he is against it.‖ Well, now, Mr. Speaker, just for the information of the hon. 

gentleman and the rest of the members of this House that statement is absolutely untrue and he knows it. 

I have never at any time attacked the Ag. Rep. service in this Province and I have no intention of doing 

so. In that service you have many good men — men who were there in the old days. We had an Ag. Rep. 

service in the Province before we ever knew the C.C.F. Government. I knew many of these men. I do 

not know many today, but I met a few old timers that were there before the advent of this Government. 

And when the Minister of Agriculture, in order that that impression should go out over the air into the 

Province that I, as a member of this House, was antagonistic to or has done anything or said anything 

against that service — he is absolutely talking through his hat and he knows he is telling an untruth. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I do not want to interrupt the hon. gentleman, but surely he knows it 

is against the rules of the 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

10 

House to suggest that a member is making a statement which he knows is an untruth. I am not going to 

get into an argument with my hon. friend about it, but surely that is totally uncalled for. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It has been done time and time here. I even told you that myself, so you should be 

used to it by this time. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I am used to anything from the hon. member. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is all right; it is about time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — I have heard the hon. member criticize the Ag. Rep. 

service on various occasions. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, now he is going to suggest that everything is true when he made that 

statement. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the Premier because this was one time when he was 

talking on this motion that he stayed in Saskatchewan. He did not go to Korea; he did not go to China; 

he did not go to Formosa; he did not go to the United States. He stayed right here in the Province of 

Saskatchewan to talk about some of the problems we have here. It is rather interesting, Mr. Speaker, 

after almost eight years of C.C.F. Government in this Province, that came in with a cut and dried 

programme that was absolutely perfect; it was planned and mapped out by the best farmers in the 

Dominion of Canada and what they were going to do for agriculture in the Province of Saskatchewan — 

bringing in a resolution at this time, in the dying days of this Government (and I think the dying days of 

the C.C.F. Party ) — this resolution; when I read it today and read the declaration of policy and the 

principles and policy that the Premier laid on the floor of this House — almost like 1944, only stronger 

— I cannot believe that the same Premier was sitting in the seat at that time. He said this: 

 

―Let not those who sit in high places lull themselves into a sense of false security. This Government 

has pledged the development of co-operative commonwealth federations in this Province and will put 

this programme into force just as soon as we are given the power of this legislature. Those that argue 

that the issue is free enterprise, as opposed to state control, were basing their argument on a completely 

false hypothesis, because free enterprise does not exist. The choice now facing the people is either 

social control, or economic responsibility.‖ 

 

In other words, that should be clear enough to any person that this socialistic party in this Province were 

going to solve all the problems; and certainly there was no doubt about it, if the C.C.F. were elected. 

 

Well, let them be happy, but after all, when I read this 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

11 

Resolution, or Motion, before the House and read some of the statements made by the Premier in days 

gone by, not so very long ago — it was about a year ago now that he spoke to the Dairy Council, the 

National Dairy Council of Canada at Saskatoon and he said this: 

 

―While Saskatchewan needs more population it does not want them on the farm. With increased 

mechanization we need fewer people on the land.‖ 

 

Well, is that the same gentleman who introduced this Motion, Mr. Speaker? I can hardly believe it, and 

that is only one year ago. This was dated March 19th and it was just two or three days before that time 

that he made his speech. But after all, let us lay aside all this, because it is a serious situation that exists 

in this Province — extremely serious — Mr. Speaker. There is no doubt about that. 

 

I came down on the train yesterday afternoon with a young man from my constituency. He is farming 

considerable land and he said this to me; ―You know, the farmer that has land to rent at the present time 

does not want to rent it for farming to a farmer that might have a half section or one section; but they 

want to rent it to farmers with two sections or three sections.‖ I said, ―What could be the reason‖ and he 

said, ―I‘ll tell you the reason. If they rent it to a farmer who operates an extremely big farm at the 

present time a person like that does not need the buildings. He can forget about the farm buildings out 

there; they are not going to be an expense as far as he is concerned, as far as upkeep and maintenance is 

concerned.‖ Now that is the situation. And it is a serious thing. 

 

During the nine months during this current year, Mr. Speaker, in the first nine months of 1951 and 1952 

there were 2,281 families receiving family allowances that moved into Saskatchewan and 3,862 families 

moved out. That is only families that are on the family allowance list, Mr. Speaker. 2,281 families came 

in and 3,862 moved out, so there was a loss of over 1500. So that is the situation in regard to families 

who have a growing family. Well, I have not got the figures, but no doubt this figure can be increased 

considerably if we had a record of the families who moved out and went away and left their farms; who 

do not have any members of their family who are in receipt of this family allowance. So we say that this 

thing is going on all the time. 1500 families that have left Saskatchewan more than the ones that have 

come in here in nine months of the last fiscal year. That is a serious matter and one that should make 

everyone sit up and take notice. 

 

Even the Governmental services here realize the seriousness of the situation. At Swift Current, on 

August 1, 1951, the Minister of Agriculture had a meeting there and this matter was up for discussion 

and one or two of them took very serious views of the fact that the farm population is decreasing all the 

time. There was a gentleman there by the name of Mr. Dame, pioneer from the Tugaske area, and he 

said this: ―That the rural areas were washed up and buried four years ago.‖ And he supported this 

argument by the fact that there was only one rural home 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

12 

now, to ten in the past, and that farmers were operating in the summer time and moving into the town or 

city in the winter. He pointed out some of the reasons for it. The Premier probably won‘t laugh when he 

hears the whole story. There were two main causes. He said: firstly, education was obtained on a much 

higher level in the cities and in the towns. That is true, Mr. Speaker — it has always been true. It has 

always been true in Saskatchewan that the farmers on the land — ever since they built schools and 

settled this country, that they taught certain grades up to a certain level in the rural schools and then the 

children were taken into the towns or the cities for their high school education. That is not a new thing; 

it has always been done; but he says this: ―In some larger school units (and he points out the larger 

school unit) many of the schools were closed in the winter and it was necessary to get the family into the 

towns and cities to go to school.‖ I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that any enquiry, any Commission 

that looks into this matter under the provisions of this Motion, and does not look into that particular 

phase of the matter misses something that is very, very important, because I say this — and I know that 

the Minister of Education disagrees with me very violently on that — but I say that the educational 

questions and problems in the rural areas of the Province of Saskatchewan today are probably having 

more to do with the problem of people leaving our farms than any other single factor in this Province. 

And that is the thing that has come to pass, that has come into the picture the last four or five or six years 

since this Government took office. There has been nothing done to meet that problem, absolutely 

nothing. Things have not been done which should settle either of the problems, and I could tell you 

many, many cases, but I am not going to do that, here. 

 

Now, those are things that must be taken into consideration. There is also in the Province of 

Saskatchewan a great need for more land settlement which calls particularly for young men; and the 

former Deputy Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Hartney — and I want to pay tribute to Mr. Hartney, 

because I think he was a remarkably good man and that is no reflection on the present Deputy Minister, 

not by any means; but he said at the convention of the Agricultural Institute last summer, ―Twenty 

thousand Saskatchewan farmers are in desperate need of more land. There were 40,000 more asking for 

additional land. It is true that a million to one and a half million acres might become available for 

agricultural purposes in northern Saskatchewan, but these would be developed at high cost of clearing 

and drainage.‖ Well, there is one of your — next to the Minister, the highest agricultural official in the 

Province — and I think you will grant one of the finest men, speaking a fundamental truth. There is need 

for more land for settlers in this Province, but it also needs some policy which will put the people back 

on the central plains of this Province, Mr. Speaker, whereas now you can go four, five, three, two miles 

and you never see a house of any sort, or a hen, or a cow, or any livestock whatever. These are the things 

that are taking place in this Province. Then they have been forced into the cities and into the towns and 

one thing that has more to do with it than anything else is the problem of education to rural children in 

this Province. 

 

I am not going to take a great deal of time with this thing, because I think it has been very well covered 

by the previous speakers, but I want to point out one thing and that is this: I know we have had the 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

13 

last few days one Commission sitting here enquiring into certain phases of implement prices and one 

thing and another and I have no fault with that, but one thing that struck me and that is the number of 

witnesses coming in from the Government with long written briefs and statistics which I think every 

farmer has, if he wants to look them up in his own home, if he gets magazines. There is the Dominion 

Bureau of Statistics which goes into many, many farm homes in the Province today; but they come in 

here and spend hours and hours reading them and then file them away. I do not say they are useless, but 

after all, there have only been one or two witnesses before that Committee to date that have really given 

the Committee something to think about, any real good facts which might benefit us in our decisions 

when this Committee is going to report. I want to say this; that I think when this Committee sits — the 

Royal Commission, as you call it — and is going to hear evidence, there should be less of that; and do 

not forget to ask some of the farm movement officials — some of the farmers themselves, some 

municipal officials that come in here and tell the Royal Commission some of their problems and what 

they think about it. They might be able to bring in a brief to this Royal Commission all nicely made up. 

But I think if you were to bring in some of the women out on the farm who probably wonder how they 

are going to get an electric washer, and where they are going to get power to use that washer, or an 

electric iron. Or the farmer who milks cows — used to do it — and they will have to do it again, Mr. 

speaker. If he can get an electric motor to put on his cream separator; and the municipal councils can 

build 12 miles of good road and raise it high enough so the farmers can drive over that road into town 

any time without getting stuck in winter time — those, I think, Mr. Speaker, are some of the things we 

should get first hand and get down to the roots of things; and then, if you have the men which I hope you 

will get, they can recommend something to be done, something which is practical that they can put into 

practise and which really will justify the amount of money that this Commission is going to cost. I am 

not complaining about the cost of this thing, but after all, this Government has been in office for nearly 

eight years and they should have done this two years ago, because they are not going to use it before 

election. They are doing it now in the dying days of their term of office and they are going to try to take 

a lease of life by being able to explain to some plain folk that sometime in the future, if this Commission 

comes through with a finding — which they expect them to do — then they are willing to go and (I 

should say) rectify some of the mistakes they already have made, because many of the things that are 

wrong with the farms today is due to this Government and there is no doubt about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, with these few remarks, I want to assure you that I shall support the Motion for the setting up of this 

Royal Commission and there is no need of me going over what the Leader has already done. I have 

pointed out to you some of the men, some of the practical men, some of the types of individuals who 

should be on that Commission; the background of these individuals — they should be practical men — 

and we do not need any Cadbury from Old England, or we do not need any Shumiatchers or McGraws 

or anybody else. We want practical men and practical men who do not look at everything through 

political eyes. Let us hope we do. I hope that will be the result; and with these few words, Mr. Speaker, I 

shall support the Motion. 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

14 

Hon. Mr. J.A. Darling (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, I had not any intention of 

speaking in this debate until the Leader of the Opposition dealt so drastically with the programme of this 

Government with respect to farm electrification. He has done me the credit on several occasions to say 

that I am always fair in my arguments, that I do not bring forward statements with respect to what 

occurred prior to 1944, and claim that the government of that day might have accomplished something 

in the way of farm electrification. I appreciate that tribute, Mr. Speaker, but I think, in return, he might 

be equally fair in dealing with the same subject, because unquestionably he is not fair in drawing 

comparisons between Manitoba and what is being done in Saskatchewan and he is not fair when he says 

that we might have done what we have done now, several years ago. 

 

I have so many times dealt with this in the Legislature that I feel it is a needless repetition. However, 

there is so much repetition on the floor of this House that perhaps it will not be out of place if I say the 

same thing two or three times over. 

 

In the first place, Mr. Speaker, the hon. gentleman said that the whole Province — that is, the town and 

city dwellers — ought to make a contribution to farm electrification. No one is going to dispute that, Mr. 

Speaker. We are doing it. I wish that it were possible to paint a map on the ceiling of this Chamber 

showing what the Power Commission lines were like in 1944; and also showing what those lines are like 

today. Until we had built the main transmission lines that make up our present grid, farm electrification 

was out of the question and it was the town and village load which made the building of those 

transmission lines — which take the power to the farm areas — possible. In that way, of course, town 

and village people have — or will — through their consumption of electrical energy, pay the costs of 

those main transmission lines. The contribution which the farmer makes simply takes care of the tap-in 

off those lines which, roughly speaking, you can say the villages and towns have paid for, out to the 

farms. 

 

Hon. Member: — Partly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — Yes, partly. Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to take just a very short time on this 

subject. But the Hon. Leader of the Opposition in this House several times has referred to the 

contribution which the farmer makes as between $600 and $700 per farm. I am quite sure, although I 

have not the accurate figures with me, that the average paid by the farmer would be somewhere between 

$450 and $600. Some have paid more because of excessive mileage, but I am quite sure the average is 

somewhere between those figures. 

 

The Hon. Leader of the Opposition said that if we had gone forward, as they have done in Manitoba, that 

we might have had so many more farms served at this date. If we had been putting the power in to the 

farmers free of cost we could not have served one additional farm. We have never lacked for farms to 

serve at that contribution. Consequently, that has had no effect whatsoever on the extent of our 

programme and 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

15 

I might say that it was not until 1948 that there was any relaxation in the scarcity of materials that was 

retarding the construction of electrical power lines. And even in 1948 we could not have had all that we 

could have used. It retarded even the construction of the main transmission lines between towns and 

villages and, as I said previously, those main transmission lines had to be served before we could 

proceed with farm electrification. And it was in 1949 that the Farm Electrification Bill was brought into 

the Legislature and we have had to build up an organization to take care of farm electrification since that 

time and we have been building it just as rapidly as it is possible for us to build it. You cannot pick up 

the type of man, the type of trained personnel, who can be useful in the power corporation organization, 

off the street. They have to be trained and we did not have them in the Province, or available to us. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am not going to take up more time, but I do feel that this item that I received today 

in the mail is a matter of some interest. This was mailed to me from a gentleman whose name I have 

forgotten — I wish I could express my thanks to him, but it just came attached to a covering letter — it 

is ―The Provost News‖ from Alberta and it is headed ―Co-operatives Formed to bring Electricity to this 

District.‖ The first part of the article simply names the members of the Co-operative, and the directors 

and so forth. Then it goes on to say: 

 

―One of the happy features of the Co-operative is the fact that by joining now before construction of 

the lines begin, it is cheaper for everyone concerned. However, if some people plan on waiting until 

the line is erected and then ask for membership they will undoubtedly find that they are required to 

wait many months before a crew will be back in the district to hook them up. Therefore, the cost to 

them will be higher than if they joined the Co-operative now before construction begins.‖ 

 

Now, this is the important part, Mr. Speaker: 

 

―The estimated cost of construction is $900 per mile, plus $257 per subscriber for a transformer, plus a 

share of the sub-station which is estimated at $4,000. The estimated cost to the shareholder is therefore 

$1385, based on a mileage of 1¼ miles.‖ (That mile and a quarter includes the tap-off which is only 

slightly more than the average that we build in our system.) ―From this it may be seen that the more 

subscribers, the less mileage per subscriber, and hence lower unit cost.‖ 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

16 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the rest of the article is not of importance, but in the Province of Alberta this 

is undertaken by private enterprise, and although their rates are lower, in the Province of Alberta the 

main transmission lines have been built and the towns and villages are paying for those main 

transmission lines. All that the farmer has to take care of is the cost of generation, the cost of his line and 

the cost of generation; consequently, his rates can be much lower because the Calgary Power Company 

has no investment in the farmer at all. All he has to pay for is almost the equivalent of our run-off rate 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to see the people of this Province properly informed with respect to our power 

programme. 

 

Mr. B.L. Korchinski (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words about this 

Resolution. It was strange enough to see the Minister of Public Works get up now and admit that prior to 

1948 there were no materials available for expansion of power, although . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, I did not say ―no materials.‖ 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Very few; although, up to that date, we have been hearing continually from the 

Government members that Liberals did not do anything in 1944 or previous to that; but they never said 

why it was not done. And now, they come up themselves and admit, one by one, that there was no 

possibility of doing anything in the war years because there were no materials available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ground was pretty well covered by the previous speakers, but there are one or two 

things I would like to discuss. In my opinion, the farmers leave the land and move into the cities because 

they lack roads — all year-round roads — and because they lack educational facilities out in the rural 

areas and because there are not as many recreational facilities as the young people find in the cities. The 

time has come now that the roads that lead off the farms must become more and more a provincial 

responsibility. At the present time, due to the policies of this Government, I know very many places 

where farmers themselves are building the roads, without any aid of the municipalities, because the 

municipalities are so overburdened with the various problems that they have to face, that the farmers 

themselves get together and without any aid from outside, put out their own money and build their own 

roads. I know very many cases where that has happened, and I know very many cases where the farmers 

have organized the so-called snow clubs — snow-removal clubs. They have spent a great amount of 

money to remove the snow from the roads so that they could go into the towns and villages to do their 

shopping. When we kept on telling the Government, during these last four years, that something should 

be done about this snow removal in the rural areas and that the Department of Highways should take the 

initiative — oh, they thought it was a joke and we were criticized with the stock criticism that we 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

17 

suggested a reduction of the budget and yet we suggested increasing services. The one excuse that this 

Government has when we suggest something good is they say, ―Well, look at the Liberals, they say we 

should reduce the budget and yet they suggest more services.‖ In our opinion both these could have been 

done and will be done after the next election. The budget could be reduced and services could be 

extended and the people of Saskatchewan know that, too. 

 

What we need now, Mr. Speaker, is more farmers on the land, because the farmers have moved away 

from the land in such great numbers that this Saskatchewan of ours is becoming like a desert. If the trend 

keeps on we will not need the Legislature here — all we need is the mayors of the various cities and 

they will be able to run the cities without the help of the Legislature — because there are so many 

farmers that have moved away that the place is becoming a desert. So we must change that trend. There 

should be a back-to-the-land movement but I don‘t think there is anything that is being done by this 

Government to encourage a back-to-the-land movement. I have not heard anything said, any place — on 

the radio or in any publications — where young people are encouraged to go to the farm. I hear all kinds 

of propaganda speeches from the various Crown Corporations and the various Government branches, 

extolling the paradise that we have in Saskatchewan, but we have never heard where there was 

somebody saying that the best life is the life on the farm. 

 

I feel that our educational system is to blame very much, not only for the fact that the rural schools are 

disappearing, but for the fact that the courses themselves do not seem to try to sell farming to the young 

people of Saskatchewan. It seems that everything that we do in the schools tends the other way, and I 

think that we should try to change the plans and try to encourage the young people to settle on the land 

because that is actually the best place where a man can feel independent and enjoy life so much more. 

 

I think the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Education should embark upon 

programmes of education of our Youth in such a way that our young people will love the farm and go 

back to the land. We need small farms. I do not think we need any of these large, very large, farms; and I 

think it is due to the economic policies of this Government that the farms are becoming larger and 

larger. I believe that we should set our economic policies in such a way that the small farm is 

encouraged. And we need privately-owned farms. I do not think it is a practical idea here in 

Saskatchewan to have this idea of Government land lease to farmers. I do not think it is a practical idea 

any place wherever it has been tried. But, perhaps the people of Saskatchewan are not aware of what is 

happening. It is one of the theories of socialism not to have privately-owned lands. It is absolutely 

necessary, if you want to install socialism in a country that you do away with all privately-owned land, 

because for example, if I may be permitted to roam away from Saskatchewan, the best example is the 

U.S.S.R. They did away with privately-owned land and why? Why did they do that? Well, it is 

necessary to the socialist plans. 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

18 

You see, a farmer who lives on the land is the most independent individual that you can find in human 

society and he cannot be pushed around and he cannot be regimented in any way. He has his own ideas. 

A very good example of this — how the farmers love the soil and how they will defend it with their 

lives — is the example of the French farmers. We know that France has very many small farmers, 

prosperous farmers, and they were the ones that, during the first world war, were the stand-by of the 

French army. They said that they would not let the enemy pass over their land. And that is true. 

 

Now the Socialists cannot put their plans into effect if they have privately-owned land because the 

farmers will not be planned — they cannot stand planning, they cannot stand regimentation — and 

planning and regimentation is one of the essential things of socialism. They are basic things and we do 

not hear much about it now because I do not think that socialism is very popular in Saskatchewan today. 

In fact, we hear very little, outside of the member for Swift Current (Mr. Gibbs) who quite often pounds 

his chest and says he is a socialist. We do not hear anything from the Government members at all about 

socialism. The socialists — they were going to cure all the ills of Saskatchewan — it is not mentioned 

very much now. One of the things of socialism is the planned economy, but we have never heard about 

this planned economy and that is a basic thing in socialism — the planned economy — and if we did 

hear, it was just simply mentioned, it was never explained, what this planned economy means. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I would like to have the hon. member 

inform me on what Resolution he is debating now. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Natural Resources was not sleeping in the House he 

might have heard. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I can get more when I am sleeping 

than he can when he is awake. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Mr. Speaker, I am talking about the setting up of a Royal Commission to 

investigate problems on the farms. 

 

As was said before (and I did not want to repeat the same statements) the Socialists in Saskatchewan 

have been in power for eight years almost and now they realize that the election is coming on and 

probably something should be done to pacify the farmers because even the simplest person out in the 

country sees that something is wrong with our farm economy and nothing is being done by this 

Government, so now they are going to set up this Commission and I am talking on this Resolution 

 

I maintain and I sincerely believe that socialism cannot solve our farming problems because their 

planned economy requires that everybody should be planned — there should be plans made for 

everyone in the human society. And, as I said, independent small farmers cannot be planned. They will 

not stand up, they will not subject themselves to any planning. Therefore, this socialist idea is absolutely 

impractical in 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

19 

Saskatchewan. I was going to say that we have heard from those socialists the fact that some of the 

socialists believed partly in private enterprise, which is absolutely an impossibility. Either you are 

socialist, or you are not. Now, if you are not socialist you had better say so and come out on this side; 

and if you are socialist, then say so, so the people of Saskatchewan will know what you are, because this 

masquerading under different colours whenever it suits your convenience — well, I do not think the 

people of Saskatchewan will stand for that kind of stuff. 

 

As I say, Mr. Speaker, socialism cannot solve our social problems because they believe — and you can 

study socialism in every country where it was tried — they believe that the only way they can put their 

policies into force, into effect, is that once they have a landless population, when they people who move 

from place to place . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask you, is the hon. member arguing for or against the 

motion now? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I am just giving my opinion as to what should be brought before this Royal 

Commission. They should be told that socialism cannot solve the Saskatchewan Farm economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — O.K. then . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Well, this is the preamble to the Commission‘s setting up. I am trying to say that 

socialism for Saskatchewan cannot solve Saskatchewan‘s farm problems, because basically the socialist 

philosophy believes in landless proletarians — that is workers who have no land — who can be shifted 

from place to place. The main thing in socialist philosophy is that there should be dissatisfaction and the 

labourer is always dissatisfied and the socialists thrive on that. Now, the small farmers cannot be 

regimented, as I said, therefore I maintain that socialists cannot solve their problems and I think that we 

should have small farmers. We should have small farms and we should have many of them. And I think 

we should have vaster educational facilities all . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Isn‘t there such a thing, in the book, Mr. speaker, about monotonous repetition? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I was thinking about that. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — There is no more monotony, Mr. Speaker, than the C.C.F. here usually talking 

about this thing that the Liberals did not do anything in 34 years — in fact it is very sickening. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! I might point out to the hon. member that as far as repetition between 

the groups is concerned I have not ruled on that, but I am going to rule on tedious repetition in one 

speech by one speaker and you were getting very close to the line. 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

20 

Mr. Korchinski: — Mr. Speaker, I was going to say that the 33-year lease that this Government has in 

this Province is one of the causes why the people are moving away from the land, because this is an 

attempt to do away with independent privately-owned land where farmers can enjoy their own land in 

their own way and I was going to say, Mr. Speaker, that one of the steps that should be taken is to do 

away with that Act that provides for this kind of a setup where a person cannot buy Crown lands any 

more in Saskatchewan, but must lease them and be a tenant of the Government. 

 

I think that this is again a socialist idea, because they want to get as many people as possible to eat out 

of their hands so that they can be in control. You see, it is quite a setup. Rent the land to the farmers so if 

you are their landlord they must be more or less friendly to you; likely they will vote for you; set up as 

many as possible Crown Corporations and hire half the population of Saskatchewan into those and those 

also will likely support you; so with all these things you can be sitting pretty. I think this 33-year lease is 

one of the causes why our people are moving away from the farms in the country and into the small 

villages. 

 

So, to summarize, Mr. Speaker, I think we should see to it that the rural people have all year round 

roads; that a snow removal programme should be instituted and these people who have organized these 

clubs should be assisted in a small way with their club work, because the greatest enemy today of the 

farmer is the snow on his road. When he was using horses he was able to get around, but now because 

he uses his car, if his road is blocked p he cannot get into his town or village and he must find some way 

to get there and I would like to see the Government do something about the snow removal on our rural 

routes; and I would like to see something done to improve our educational facilities; and if possible, 

something should be done to improve recreational facilities in the rural areas. I think that there are quite 

a few lakes and places that could be turned into parks and I am sure that something could be done in that 

respect. 

 

I am going to support the motion, Mr. Speaker, because I think that something absolutely drastic must be 

done now to turn this trend of the farmers moving from the land and going to the cities and the villages. 

 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, this being March 17th and after listening to members 

of the Opposition, I am reminded of my friend, Pat, when he first came to this country and he asked 

―What is the Government here in Canada?‖ and before the person had an opportunity to answer Pat says, 

―Don‘t answer that, I am agin it anyway.‖ Well, my friends n the Opposition do not apparently have the 

courage to come right out and oppose this Resolution, but it appears to me what they have done is damn 

it with faint praise and the hon. member for Redberry (Mr. Korchinski) who has just taken his seat, did 

not even get around to faint praise of this Resolution. It appears to me that they are aware that any 

constructive study of any of the problems that face us today and the solutions that any constructive study 

might arrive at, must be contrary to the policies advocated by the Liberal 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

21 

Party and by the members of the Opposition. I think that in spite of the faint praise that they have levied 

towards this suggestion by the Government to set up a Royal Commission to study the problems facing 

the agricultural industry, that they would be prepared to see no solution brought forward, rather than to 

see a solution brought forward which would be advantageous to the policies of this Government and to 

the policies which have been inaugurated and put into force by this Government. I am satisfied, Mr. 

Speaker, without presupposing the recommendations that any Royal Commission — or any 

investigation — may make, I would assume that the solution of our problems must lie in greater co-

operation between ourselves as individuals and between ourselves as governing bodies and between 

ourselves as a part of different organizations, including farm organizations and organizations which have 

been organized in urban centres. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition suggested that the setting up of the Royal Commission should not delay 

any activity which this Government might make in promoting a more stable agricultural economy in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. I think that the people of Saskatchewan, and certainly the members of this 

Legislature, appreciate that this Government, or the members on this side of the House, have never taken 

this as an excuse for not attempting to do that which we thought was in the interest of the agricultural 

economy and in the interests of the people of Saskatchewan. Time and time again we, in Saskatchewan, 

have been in the foreground in advancing ideas and policies, which later have been adopted by other 

provinces of Canada — policies which have proven of benefit to the people, and particularly to the 

people in the rural areas. I doubt if there has been any single action taken by this Government, or by the 

members on this side of the House which has not been, in the final analysis, in the interests of the rural 

people and in the interests of those people engaged in agriculture. For it matters little whether you 

improve the living standards of the people in our urban homes, or whether we improve the living 

standards of the people in the rural part, the wealth from which these improvements are made must come 

from the agricultural industry and the improvements in either the urban or the rural areas reflects back 

on an improved agricultural economy in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

As we look over what has been attempted by this Government within their jurisdiction to improve our 

agricultural economy, the story is indeed long. The Minister of Public Works very briefly referred to the 

inauguration of a policy by this Government, which has definitely improved the stability and the living 

standards of those people within our agricultural industry. 

 

It is true that the activities in the Department of Education, the establishing of the larger unit, has 

stabilized our agricultural economy in certain areas and in certain portions of this Province. And all of 

those things, and if we take them all collectively, we have done much within our jurisdiction to stabilize 

and make our agricultural economy secure. But I cannot feature a Royal Commission making 

recommendations strictly within the realms of the jurisdiction of this Government. 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

22 

I can very well feature a Royal Commission indicating whereby I, co-operating with my fellow farmers, 

may see a more stable economy. We may be able to set up more co-operative movements and encourage 

and extend those co-operative enterprises which we, as farmers, have set up so that we may, to a greater 

degree, stabilize our agricultural industry. I can very well feature a Royal Commission making 

suggestions that must be fulfilled on a national level, within the Federal jurisdiction before we can 

expect complete stability within our agricultural industry; and before we can expect that we, in 

Saskatchewan, a primary agricultural province, can get the amenities of life as compared with other 

occupational groups in other parts of Canada. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that a Royal Commission has a much bigger job to do than simply suggest 

certain things that this Government may do and legislative action it may take to meet those requirements 

of the agricultural industry and I further suggest that by meeting the needs of the agricultural economy 

and improving the agricultural economy, they will be definitely improving the whole Saskatchewan 

economy and in the final analysis the economy of Canada as a whole. 

 

My hon. friend from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) referred to the decrease in population and he suggested 

that possibly one of the reasons for the decrease in our population in Saskatchewan has been agricultural 

economy of the Province of Saskatchewan. I agreed that with the increase of mechanization within the 

Province of Saskatchewan and in our agricultural economy, and with a changing trend of our 

agricultural economy, and as we have improved the security of the whole of the people of the Province 

of Saskatchewan in other industries relative to agriculture, that as we have raised the opportunities for 

people other than in the agricultural industry, it is only natural that we should have a trend from rural 

areas to urban centres. I do not suggest that that is necessarily a bad thing, if we have in some cases a 

trend from rural areas into urban areas, because we expect — and I think we have a right to expect — 

that these people who have moved into urban centres may, in their position by living in urban centres, 

better serve the agricultural industry and our agricultural economy than if they had remained strictly as 

rural people in the rural areas. 

 

I suggest that it requires the co-operation of those people in urban areas as well as the co-operation of 

those people in our strictly rural areas, because as our advancements have shortened the distance 

between countries and made the world smaller, it has made the relationship between rural and urban 

groups of people smaller in comparison as well. Advancements that we have made in our agricultural 

industry, advancements that have been made in mechanization, have definitely brought the rural people 

closer to the urban people. It has made the rural people, in some respects more dependent upon urban 

people, and in reverse it has made the urban people equally more dependent upon the rural areas. I think 

that today we have seen, as we have never seen before — and I think the people in the urban centres 

appreciate more than they have ever appreciated before — that their prosperity depends 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

23 

upon the prosperity of our agricultural economy and they are as interested in the welfare of our 

agricultural economy, or at least they should be as interested in the welfare of our agricultural economy 

as those people actually living on the farm. 

 

My friend from Redberry (Mr. Korchinski) suggested that socialists cannot solve our problem and then 

he went on to suggest that we needed a plan for the individual to fit into our economy. Well, I am going 

to suggest to him, who is going to do the planning if it is not people who are prepared to spend some 

time in an overall plan which we, as individuals, can fit ourselves into our society? And I suggest that 

anybody who is truly socially conscious, one who is prepared to study the problems of the day and study 

them constructively is, in my opinion, a socialist; and the type of socialist philosophy to which we on 

this side adhere and which we believe. 

 

Referring back again to my friend from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) he made reference to the Farm 

Implement Inquiry which is presently being conducted. I certainly do not want to inject the Farm 

Implement Inquiry into this debate or into this Royal Commission. I think that either one of them in 

themselves has a big problem on their hands and a big job to do. But I think that the suggestion which he 

made indicates the philosophy of many of those people who do not want an answer to the problems 

which are facing us at this time. If we are going to obtain a true picture in a Farm Implement Inquiry, or 

a true picture of our agricultural economy then we must be prepared to do a lot of study and we must be 

prepared to compile a lot of statistics and information that can be made available and compile it in such 

a manner that we can digest it intelligently and from there arrive at an intelligent decision. I do not think 

that this Commission can go at a job in a piece-meal manner, any more than the Farm Implement 

Inquiry. We must be prepared to look at the whole problem. But I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the 

little that has been done in this inquiry in itself indicates the necessity of doing something that will give 

a study to the even greater overall question than that of implement inquiry. There have been, in my 

opinion, many factors come before our inquiry which we, who are enquiring on implement prices, can 

do very little about. But it does indicate, in my opinion, the necessity at this time of sitting down and 

very seriously considering the trend that has been created in our agricultural economy and try to figure 

out where we are going, why we are going and how we are going; and possibly, what is most important, 

to, if possible, point out to ourselves and to the people of Saskatchewan where we can expect to end up. 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that a Commission at this time is very important. As the Premier pointed 

out when we passed through the industrial revolution there were many problems created and the 

solutions of which some of those problems have not yet been arrived at. 

 

I do not think a Royal Commission is going to set up a Utopian society here within Saskatchewan, or 

that a Commission of this type is going to be able to suggest means by which we could set up a Utopian 

society within Saskatchewan. But I do think that a Commission of this type will realize that we are 

dealing not only with our agricultural economy, but that we are dealing with the people within that 

economy, 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

24 

and as such, all of the people of Saskatchewan and that their welfare must be considered. We must not 

only consider the welfare of the people who may be directly engaged in agriculture, but we must also 

consider the welfare of those people engaged in servicing the agricultural industry within the Province 

of Saskatchewan. As I suggested a moment ago, I doubt if this Commission will come up with a 

complete solution to all the problems; but if this Commission can point out to myself, as an individual 

farmer; if it can point out to those people in the service industries — those industries servicing 

agriculture; if it can point out where they, as individuals, or as organizations, can better fit themselves 

into an agricultural economy in some small way, then I suggest it has done a useful purpose. If it can 

suggest to this Legislature some things which we have not yet done, or have not seen ourselves able to 

do, it will have served a useful purpose. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if it can suggest a way by 

which we collectively can make any further advancements, that it will indeed be well worth while and 

will justify any efforts and any costs which it may entail the people of Saskatchewan — if we can bring 

stability to the province and particularly to the agricultural industry. 

 

And for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I am indeed glad to support the Motion moved by the Premier. 

 

Mr. Jacob Benson (Last Mountain): — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity of expressing a 

few opinions in regard to this particular Resolution. First of all, I want to congratulate the Premier for 

having introduced the Resolution. I think it proves two things: first, that the policies followed by the 

Government during the past eight years have failed to solve the rural problem; second, it proves that 

when you have a serious problem to consider, that a party administration is not the proper body to 

consider that problem. 

 

The Resolution asks for a Commission, which, I presume, will be free from all Parties and influence. If 

it is not free from that influence, then my opinion is that you might as well not appoint the Commission. 

(For sure, I am making a plug for Independent bodies). 

 

Any time a group of people discuss and consider any problem, no matter who they are, they help in the 

solution of that problem. I believe that as far as our rural problem is concerned, the application of some 

of our labour laws in rural areas has intensified that problem, rather than help to solve it; it has 

intensified it in many ways. 

 

The Government of the province has failed to solve these fundamental and basic problems, because 

these are the problems of individuals; they are problems of local communities; they are provincial 

problems; they are national problems and they are international problems. Before we can satisfactorily 

solve our rural problem in Saskatchewan, we will have to take consideration of that whole field. 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

25 

Products that we produce on the farm, and the way they have to be marketed, brings into consideration 

matters that are definitely national and definitely international. I think this Royal Commission is going 

to have a big job on their hands in considering the whole field that will finally bring a solution to this 

problem in Saskatchewan. The first step to the solution of any problem is to admit that the problem 

exists; second step is to consider and recommend solutions; and the third step is to find ways and means 

to put those recommendations into effect. 

 

I notice in the Resolution here that it is pointed out that these economic trends are creating new rural 

social problems as well as adversely affecting the ability of our young people to become established in 

the agricultural industry. Then we go down to No. 2 and review the asking of this Commission to study 

the need of farm capital and credit. Several years ago we had a Farm Loan Board operating in this 

Province (it ceased making loans, I think, in 1929) and then a few years later, when this Government got 

into power it brought in a Bill to abolish the Farm Loan Board as a lending institution. At that time I 

voted against the abolition of that Farm Loan Board as a lending institution, and at that time I pointed 

out there would be a time in Saskatchewan in the near future, when it would be necessary to make loans 

to young farmers in order that they might become established on the farms of this Province. I am not 

much of a guy to say, ―I told you so‖, but on this occasion, I feel like saying ―I told you so.‖ 

 

I am going to say a little bit about the old Farm Loan Board. The Provincial Treasurer will no doubt tell 

us that the Province lost several million dollars because of that Farm Loan Board operations. Every 

mortgage company that operated in the Province of Saskatchewan during those ten years also lost 

millions of dollars, and I believe that the losses of the Farm Loan Board were perhaps increased because 

of the fact that there was a little too much political influence in regard to the operation of that Board. I 

believe that any lending institution — and I might mention to the House that I was a member of the 

Committee that was set up by this Legislature that examined into the loans made by the Farm Loan 

Board; and I well remember some of the loans that were made, and it was the political influence that was 

brought to bear in order to have those loans made. I want to say that if there is any loaning institution 

established in this Province, to make loans to young farmers (and I think there should be) then that 

institution should be devoid from entirely any political influence whatsoever in order that it might be a 

success. 

 

I believe there is need today — and there has been need in Saskatchewan for the past several years — 

for an institution of this kind to make loans to young farmers in order that they might be established, and 

I think that is one of the main reasons why young farmers have left the land. There was no chance — no 

opportunity for them to become established. Sometimes we are told that in order that such an institution 

as this might operate it must have a large capital. I want to point out to the House that if we had 

established a Farm Loan Board with a little loaning capacity six or seven years ago, it would not have 

meant there would have been need for a large amount of capital to 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

26 

start. The capital expenditures would have grown as the demand grew. Every co-operative institution 

that was started in this Province, started out with practically no capital, but because of good 

management, and so on, those institutions all developed to the size they are today. 

 

It says here in No. 3 that the Commission should study the further adaptation of social services and 

educational facilities to meet the changing rural conditions. I want to point out that every time we solve 

one problem — not every time, but often — when you solve one problem, you create a new problem. 

We were told, and have been told in this Province that the larger unit is the solution for our school 

problem. I think the larger unit has helped to solve our school problem, but it has created other 

problems. There will have to be a new look taken at the educational system in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

No. 4 says ―the further development of rural transportation, communication and community services.‖ 

When the rural school was closed, when the building was sold and moved out of the district, we 

removed the centre of social activities for that community, and I regretted to see that done, because I 

believe that those local communities were the fundamental base of our democratic institution. That is 

one reason I regretted to see them go. 

 

In regard to rural transportation, communication and community services . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. member a question? 

How many rural schools does he know of that have been sold and moved away? 

 

Mr. Benson: — Oh, quite a few. They are advertised every day. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Thousands. 

 

Mr. Benson: — I just received ―The Saskatchewan News‖ and it says here: ―Two hundred and twenty 

miles of highways were blacktopped in 1952 — a master network of highways taking place in the 

Province of Saskatchewan.‖ What the farmer needs in the municipalities is a master network of rural 

market roads, in order that he — and that should be given, in my opinion, prior consideration to the 

building of a provincial highway system. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — You are opposed to No. 6 then, are you? 

 

Mr. Benson: — No, I am not opposed to No. 6! It is all right for the Minister to say that ―You are 

opposed to No. 6.‖ I am going to tell him that I am going to keep fighting for my share of the money 

spent on No. 6 just the same as these other fellows are in their own constituencies. If the Government is 

going to spend all this money on provincial highways, then I want to see it properly spread around. 

 

As far as these rural roads are concerned, this last year, because of the wet conditions, they got into a 

terrible state, and I think 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

27 

there are a few where the Provincial Government could do more than it has been doing to establish a 

good market road system in every municipality in this Province; and I think that should come before the 

highways. After all, these people who use market roads, travel on them perhaps 50 times to every once 

they travel on a Provincial highway, and I am not trying to belittle the needs for Provincial highways 

when I say good rural roads should come in preference to Provincial highways. Of course, I can 

understand these fellows who live in the cities — they want a good Provincial highway so they can get 

in their car and go from place to place — I also want a good road to drive on when I want to come to 

Regina or go to Saskatoon, or anywhere else. 

 

I do not want to take any more time, but would like to commend the Government, though, for having 

admitted there is a problem there, and having admitted that they have failed to solve it so far. 

 

I hope that this Royal Commission that is set up will be able to bring in recommendations which we can 

apply ourselves, as individuals; recommendations that the local communities can apply; 

recommendations that the Provincial Government can apply; recommendations that the Dominion 

Government will apply; and also recommendations that can be worked out internationally, so that we 

can sell our farm products. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I wish to inform the House that the mover of the Resolution may exercise his privilege 

of closing the debate. Anyone wishing to speak must do so now. 

 

(Closing debate) 

 

Premier T.C. Douglas (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, it is not my intention to detain the House very 

long, but there are a few remarks I should like to make in winding up the debate. 

 

Frankly, I am somewhat disappointed, as there seems to be a failure in some parts of the House to have 

come to grips with the real problem that is set forth in this Resolution. I was inclined at first to agree 

with the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) that I thought this would be a topic that would be above 

partisan discussion, and was very pleased when he started out by saying that he hoped it would be non-

political. It was not very long, of course, until he got around to talking about the Government being in its 

dying days and that we were doing this to save our political life. I thought this was a strange way of 

being non-partisan. 

 

He was also very glad that I had managed to ―stay in Saskatchewan‖ in the course of my remarks; I wish 

he had been able to keep the Leader of the Opposition from wandering into Manitoba, and the member 

from Redberry (Mr. Korchinski) from getting into the Soviet Union, and over into France; but I suppose 

that was really too much to expect. 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

28 

Mr. Speaker, there are two fundamental errors, it seems to me, that have been evinced as a result of the 

discussions which have taken place. The first is that the members of the Opposition have endeavoured 

on this occasion (as they have on others) to put forth the argument that depopulation in Saskatchewan, 

and shifts from the rural to the urban area, is somehow connected with the policies of this Government. 

They talked about rural roads and schools, and the lack of rural electrification at being the reasons why 

people have moved from the rural areas into the towns and the cities. If that is true, Mr. Speaker, and if 

it is the policies of this Government that have been responsible, they should have told us (and I hope 

sometime they will tell us) why, from 1936 to 1946, during which time we had a Liberal Government 

for eight and a half years, that 98,559 people left Saskatchewan? The C.C.F. Government did not come 

into office until the summer of 1944. 

 

If you look at the rural population, the picture is even worse. In that ten-year period, 135,000 people left 

the rural areas of Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, that cannot be attributed to the C.C.F. It cannot be 

attributed to roads and schools and lack of rural electrification under a C.C.F. Government. The Leader 

of the Opposition said: (I took it down and I think these were his words) ―Working people tend to leave 

Saskatchewan for places where they are better off.‖ Well, Mr. Speaker, let us have a look at how people 

left the rural areas, and what happened to them. I believe I put the following figures on the records the 

other day, but I just want to refresh the House‘s memory. From 1936 to 1941, 50,428 people left the 

rural areas of Saskatchewan; 14,873 of these moved to the towns and cities of Saskatchewan, and the 

rest left the province. That does not take any cognizance of the natural increase. From 1941 to 1946, 

84,918 people left the rural areas of Saskatchewan, and only 21,614 of these moved into Saskatchewan 

towns and cities; the rest apparently left the province. From 1946 to 1951, 83,170 people left the rural 

areas of Saskatchewan, but 82,210 found employment and lived in Saskatchewan towns and cities, 

which left only 960 who apparently went out of the province. 

 

Now, that does not substantiate the contention of the hon. Leader of the Opposition that people left 

Saskatchewan in order that they would be better off in other places. For the first time in a 15-year 

period, what we were able to absorb in the towns and cities almost balanced what had left the rural 

areas. Therefore the policies of this Government, rather than being held responsible for any loss in 

population, can claim the credit for almost completely stopping the loss in population that had been 

going on for the ten years prior to our taking office. 

 

Now, the other fallacy, it seems to me, that has been advanced is the statement that after this 

Government has been in office for eight years, we are now finding out there is something wrong with 

the rural economy; therefore we have to set up a Royal Commission to see what is wrong with it. The 

member for Last Mountain (Mr. Benson) says we are now admitting our mistakes. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I do not need to go into the details because they have been done into in 

the budget debate. But the fact of the matter is that we are doing more today for the building 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

29 

of rural roads than was done by any previous government — five times as much being given by this 

Government as by previous governments to assist in the building of rural roads and the construction of 

bridges. We are doing more in terms of helping education. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition says, ―That the refusal to use our revenues to provide rural education is 

responsible for the people moving out.‖ Why, he has only to look at the estimates to see that grants for 

education have gone in some eight years from $2¾ million to $8½ million, to say nothing of loans to 

schools and building grants and so on. 

 

The assistance given in draining swamp land, in bringing new land into cultivation, in irrigation, all of 

these are expenditures being made by this Government that were not made by previous governments. 

 

We are not presenting this Resolution because these present rural problems are not being dealt with. The 

problem of rural municipal roads and bridges is being dealt with. The problem of rural education is 

being dealt with. The problem of rural electrification is being dealt with. When the Leader of the 

Opposition says that ―People would have stayed on the farms if electric power had been provided at the 

same time and in the same manner as it was provided in Manitoba.‖ I want to say that the Liberals are 

rather late in finding that out. Electric power was being provided in Manitoba when I was a boy 25 years 

ago; but they had a Progressive Government. At that time in Saskatchewan we had a Liberal 

Government, who did nothing about it. There has been a constant attempt to hide behind the fact that 

there was low income in the 1930s. The Leader of the Opposition says, ―Why, it is dishonest to keep on 

saying that the Liberals should have done something during the depression years.‖ Well, if it is 

dishonest, I can think of someone very close to me who was then, therefore, very dishonest, because I 

heard the Leader of the Opposition in 1930 standing up in the House of Commons and saying, ―What is 

physically possible can be made financially possible; we can put the people to work; we can irrigate the 

dry land; we can build roads, hospitals, schools; we can put everybody to work, if we will only utilize 

the credit of the people of Canada.‖ 

 

That was a good speech. But where has it all gone now? There was no reason in the 1930s for not having 

rural electrification. There were plenty of supplies, lots of poles, and certainly there was an abundance 

of idle and unemployed people. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, we are applying ourselves to those rural 

problems. We are not suggesting the setting up of this Royal Commission because these rural problems 

are not being tackled, or because we need the advice of a Commission on how to tackle them. What we 

are saying is that in the years that lie ahead, in view of the technological changes in agriculture, there 

must be corresponding changes in the sociological pattern under which we live. 

 

For instance, when you talk about fixing up rural roads, what do you mean? Is it suggested that you try 

to build all of the 200,000 miles of surveyed municipal roads in the Province? Would that be possible? 

No, my friends says, and I agree with him. Therefore, where are you going 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

30 

to build these roads? Even if you build main market roads, how are you going to get to the people who 

are not on the main market roads? In other words, how do you get your population in a sparsely settled 

country like ours, so settled that they can be served by the minimum number of miles of market roads, 

the minimum number of miles of transmission line, and the minimum number of schools so as to benefit 

the greatest number of people at the smallest possible expense? 

 

It is that sort of plan which has to be worked out. It is not that we just start haphazardly and say, we are 

going to take a power line and connect every farm, no matter where that farm is; we are going to put up 

schools all over the place; we are going to try to build every market road up to a high market road 

standard; we are going to try to set up the necessary type of farm form of organization, by which it will 

be possible to serve a greater number of people than it is possible to serve at the present time. 

 

Now, I do not think I need to spend very much time dealing with the statement made by the member for 

Redberry that what we want to do is abolish privately-owned land. Mr. Speaker, this movement with 

which I am proud to be associated, came into existence because privately-owned land was being 

abolished by mortgage companies, and that thousands of farms were losing the private ownership of 

their land. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — Would you permit a question? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Yes, I would be very glad to. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — If that is the policy of your Government, why is it that you have deprived more than 

2,000 veterans from the right to own their own land? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the statement is inaccurate, of course, and the hon. member knows 

that it is inaccurate. He just likes to hear the sound of his own voice. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. That statement, if it is inaccurate, is a statement 

made by the Minister of Social Welfare. He said in Saskatoon the other day, at the Rural Municipal 

Association meeting, that there were more than 2,000 veterans who were under lease on Crown lands. 

Those veterans, and the Premier knows it, cannot get private ownership to that land. If you believe in 

private ownership of land, Mr. Premier, I wish you would explain to this House why it is that you have, 

in effect, deprived more than 2,000 veterans from the right of private ownership of land. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I can explain it once more; and while I can give the explanation, 

unfortunately I cannot give to my hon. friend the capacity to understand it. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — I want to assure you that I can understand any honest answer. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. gentleman . . . 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

31 

Mr. Speaker: — The Premier is now proceeding to give the answer. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — I asked for an explanation, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will the hon. member keep his seat? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I am proceeding to give it, if the hon. member will just contain 

himself for a few moments; if the hon. member will just hold on to his wings, well, I will be right with 

him. 

 

I said the hon. gentleman was making a statement which was not correct when he says that we have 

denied the 2,000 veterans the right to own their own land. As the hon. member knows, the Government 

announced last year that these veterans would be allowed to purchase the land, and that they have the 

right — and if they want to — they can purchase that land after a period of ten years; and if they ask 

now, they can have the price given to them at which they will be allowed to purchase. Mr. Speaker, here 

is the amazing thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You can explain it all over! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Let us stop the clowning for a moment. Mr. Speaker, here is the interesting 

anomaly. The gentlemen opposite, one after the other, have complained about the fact that when a piece 

of land is vacant and some young man wants to get it, somebody with a lot of money comes along and 

buys it. (That is what the member from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) was complaining about; and others 

complained about it.) I agree with my hon. friends that it is true, but at the same time they are 

complaining about that, they want the Government to take Government land and put it out. What would 

happen? The people with the biggest pocket-books would be the people who would get that land. 

 

Hon. Members: — Oh, no, no! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Absolutely. The only way. We would be back to having hotel-keepers and 

druggists and lawyers getting some of these leases, instead of the boys who want to farm the land. The 

Government holding ownership of that land ensures that land being made available to those who want to 

farm it. We are thereby preventing that land going into the speculative market, and going to the highest 

bidder. That is certainly what would happen. 

 

But the most significant factors, Mr. Speaker, is that over 25,000 more people want that land than there 

is land available to be given out under lease. I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, that I do not think it helps 

the situation any to have a member like the member for Redberry (Mr. Korchinski) say that the province 

is becoming a desert and that we will not need this Legislature here very much longer because we will 

not have much left to legislate. That is certainly a great way to boost the province! Mr. Speaker, I hope 

he is not teaching that to the children in school. If he does not know, the fact should be shown to him 

that this Province in the last 12 months has produced more wealth, 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

32 

agricultural and otherwise than it has ever produced in its history. This Province is far from becoming a 

desert. It is one of the most productive areas in the Dominion of Canada, whether you are talking about 

grain or livestock, or many of the other products which this Province is able to produce. For somebody 

to go around feathering their own nest by talking about the province becoming a desert, it seems to me is 

not meeting the situation at all. 

 

While we are setting up this Commission we should recognize that this Government is tackling (and I 

believe tackling with more success than has ever been shown by any previous administration) the 

problems that confront the rural areas of Saskatchewan. It is advisable at the same time, that having in 

mind the technological changes going on, and likely to go on in the future, that we should be looking at 

the overall picture in order that we may plan intelligently for the future. 

 

When you look to the east of us and see that in the Province of Manitoba today only 40 per cent of the 

people live on farms, as compared with 61 per cent ten years ago; when you look at Alberta and see 

there only 45 per cent of their people living on farms, as compared to 67 per cent ten years ago; you 

recognize that this is a trend that is going on all over Canada and all over the North American continent. 

If you see that a trend is moving in a certain direction, then you must plan, in order that you may meet 

the problems that this trend is likely to place on your doorstep. For that reasons we are asking this House 

to approve the terms of reference which we will give to a Royal Commission. 

 

The member from Redberry (Mr. Korchinski) said that we did not talk very much about planned 

economy any more. Mr. Speaker, this is the basis of planned economy. That is how you have a planned 

economy — by sitting down and studying . . . 

 

Mr. Erb: — They could never understand it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — . . . the economic trends, studying economic costs, studying what are economic 

units, what are the best farm organizations hat can be set up to meet the problem of mechanized 

agriculture, and in the light of the information that is brought forth, then to plan your programme for the 

future. 

 

Now that the Opposition members have said they are going to vote for this, I hope the fact that I said it 

was the basis of planned economy will not cause them to change their mind and vote against it. I want to 

thank both the Leader of the Opposition and the member for Arm River for the concrete suggestions 

which they made. The Leader of the Opposition said it was most important that we have the right kind of 

personnel and with that I heartily agree. I think that the value of this Commission will be in direct 

proportion as the kind of people appointed to it commend themselves to the people of Saskatchewan, 

and have the confidence of the people of Saskatchewan. Unless they are the kind of people who carry 

some authority, who are outstanding in their own particular field, and who at the same time have a 

practical grasp of the problem confronting this country; then, of course, unless that is done, the 

recommendations of the Commission will not carry very much weight. You may be 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

33 

sure, Mr. Speaker, that the government will give careful thought to the appointing of the Commission 

and we shall certainly take under careful consideration some of the suggestions that have been made by 

the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Also the member from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) wanted them to go out and give the farmers a chance 

to say what they thought about this problem. That, of course, is absolutely necessary. I would hope that 

such a Royal Commission would have hearings in various parts of the Province where farm officials, 

farm organizations, farmers, municipal officials, people interested in social questions, such as members 

of the churches, and school teachers, and social workers, and business men, may come and express their 

views in a most informal manner, because I agree that while you require on a Commission like this, 

people who are trained economists, and people who are familiar with economic laws, it is also necessary 

that we shall have the grass-root opinion of the people of the Province. 

 

Now, as I said, the Government will do its best when it appoints this Commission, to select a 

Commission that will recommend itself to the people of the Province as being a Commission that can do 

this job and do it very adequately. Naturally, we do not know what the recommendations will be and I 

am not going to commit myself in advance, and say that we will carry out the recommendations of such 

a committee, when royal commissions are set up, they are set up to gather certain facts and to put 

recommendations before the Government of the day, along with supporting data as to why those 

recommendations should be carried out. But, of course, in the final analysis the responsibility must 

always lie with the Legislature and with the Government as to whether or not those recommendations 

will be implemented. But I do want to say this, that if the Commission is the right kind of a Commission 

(and we will try our best to see that it is) I feel confident that the kind of recommendations which they 

make will be recommendations that can be carried out, and recommendations that will, when carried out, 

resound to the benefit of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, unanimously. 

 

RE LIVESTOCK AND LIVESTOCK PRODUCTS 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Nollet, seconded by Mr. Thair: 

 

―That this Assembly, regretting the failure of the Government of Canada to take complete control of 

movement, market and price of livestock simultaneously with the announced outbreak of foot-and-

mouth disease in Canada and that certain Provincial Governments consequently felt it necessary to 

impose embargoes against entry of livestock and livestock products, urges the Government of Canada: 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

34 

(1) to take immediate action to remove such embargoes; 

 

(2) to assume complete control of the movement and marketing of all livestock and livestock products; 

 

(3) to maintain the minimum price for livestock at price levels prevailing during the week ended 

February 23, 1952, until markets return to normal; 

 

(4) to provide compensation for slaughtered animals at full replacement value plus additional 

compensation to farmers affected for loss of income, and 

 

(5) to provide adequate compensation for loss of income to packing house employees affected by lay-

offs consequent upon the outbreak of the disease.‖ 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, in speaking in support of the Government 

Motion on the Order Paper, reading as above, I think it would be well, first of all, to just review the 

background in regard to the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in Saskatchewan. 

 

The disease was first discovered November 16th and it was reported to the Dominion Health of Animals 

Branch on November 28, 1951. The first quarantine was established for stomatitis December 2nd, on the 

Waas farm. On February 20th a general quarantine for stomatitis was imposed and then on February 

25th, after the results of the laboratory test at Hull, Quebec, were determined, an announcement was 

made that the outbreak was foot-and-mouth disease. On February 26th the United States placed an 

embargo on live animals and meat, hay, straw and animal by-products from Canada. And then, on 

February 27th members will recall, I wired the Prime Minister expressing concern over the affect on the 

livestock industry generally, particularly with reference to market conditions. And to refresh the hon. 

members‘ memories, I will again refer to that wire and read it, in order to indicate that the resolution that 

is before the Legislature is consistent with the wire that I sent to the Prime Minister on February 27th, 

reading as follows: 

 

―Great concern felt regarding calamitous effect on livestock industry of Canada due outbreak of foot-

and-mouth disease to date confined to relatively small area surrounding Regina stop Suggest a market 

panic poses greater threat to industry than disease itself. Livestock men throughout Canada already 

face extremely heavy financial losses due above factors stop In interest of protecting livestock industry 

and general public would suggest invoking national emergency powers immediately for federal control 

of market movements in Canada and that producer price of all livestock be maintained at the same 

level prevailing during the week ending February 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

35 

23rd until the disease has been brought under complete control and normal market circumstances again 

prevail stop Any action less than this could be a serious blow to the livestock industry.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform the House that I have not, to date, received a reply to that wire sent to the 

Prime Minister. But, in the interval, a good deal has happened, as everyone knows. The Provincial 

Governments began to place embargoes on the movement of livestock and livestock products 

interprovincially, adding confusion to an already panicky situation. And, as a result of the imposition of 

provincial embargoes it was finally found necessary, by the Dominion Government, to impose an 

embargo on the shipment of meats from the United States to Canada. The one purpose that was intended 

was revealed in the statement issued by Mr. Gardiner in which he said that it was hoped thus to retain 

the Canadian market for Canadians. But when one looked about at the Canadian markets that were 

supposed to be retained for Canadians, we discovered, in Saskatchewan and Alberta, that there was no 

Canadian market available for our livestock. And, similarly, consumers in British Columbia and Ontario 

were denied meat products that could have come very handily from the western provinces. The result 

was a completely chaotic market situation; in some areas prices were advancing to the consumers, in 

other areas drastic drops in the price of livestock took place to producers. I cannot imagine a more 

confused situation. There never was a time when, in my opinion, emergency powers were more greatly 

needed. As a matter of fact, emergency powers were used by the Dominion Government in restricting 

the importation of meat and meat products from the United States. If that emergency power was used in 

that case, it was so much more necessary that the same emergency power should have been used, if 

necessary, if there was any question about jurisdiction, and applied to the movement of livestock and 

livestock products in the Dominion of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — If the provinces saw fit to impose an embargo, how would 

the Minister have gone about forcing them to be lifted? Would he use the troops or something, or would 

he have gone to the courts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, my presentations right along have been — and the spirit of this 

Motion is — that we are criticizing the Dominion Government for not having announced that they were 

taking over complete control of the movement of all livestock in Canada and maintaining the price when 

they announced that they were taking over complete control of the movement of all livestock in Canada 

and maintaining the price when they announced the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease, because they 

should have known what was going to happen — and it did happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And on these grounds, if the hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Tucker) wants us to be critical, we 

certainly have an opportunity. There was a complete neglect on the part of the Dominion Government, 

Mr. Speaker, 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

36 

Mr. Tucker: — He did not answer my question though. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I have answered the hon. Leader of the Opposition‘s question. I have stated frankly 

what action should have been taken by the Dominion Government; and subsequently the provinces, in 

self-defence, began to impose their own provincial embargoes, confusing the situation no end. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Will the hon. minister permit another question? Is he saying that if the Dominion had 

taken these steps the provinces necessarily would not have put on embargoes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I am saying exactly that. I am saying that in this situation, if 

there was any question at all about constitutionality or whose jurisdiction the control of contagious 

diseases came under — if there would have been any question at all about that — the Dominion 

Government could have invoked their national emergency powers and declared that they were taking 

over complete control of the movement and marketing and setting the price for livestock and thus 

preventing the terrific economic loss and financial loss experienced by our livestock producers and 

throwing the entire economic situation in Canada into complete chaos. Now, Mr. Speaker, I did not 

intend to be critical at all; I just wished to express disapproval that the Dominion Government did not 

act, and I think we have an obligation to point that out to the public of Canada. You may be assured of 

this much, Mr. Speaker, that as far as I am concerned, I will not move to the low level of debate that the 

hon. members opposite have in this House in any criticism that I have to offer to any government. And 

any criticism that I have to offer can be well substantiated with facts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There was some question, too, as to whether Canada could legally restrict the movement of meat 

products from the United States, where they have no foot-and-mouth disease, under certain treaties and 

agreements. And that has been referred to in the press. As a matter of fact, Dominion Government 

officials were running down to Washington, asking Washington to relax their embargoes against the 

importation of meat from Canada. But . . . 

 

Mr. Loehr (Humboldt): — I would like to ask a question if you will permit it. You made the statement 

several times that the Government should not have placed an embargo against cattle coming in from the 

United States. You amplified the statement by stating that ―in the United States, where they had no foot-

and-mouth disease.‖ You still do now know — we do not know — nobody knows — where it came 

from; it may have come from the United States. How do you know that it did not come from the United 

States? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, this is not a question. It would be almost impossible to get down to 

the proper level to try to even attempt to answer a question like that. We know this much, Mr. Speaker, 

we know that the United States is free of the disease. We know we have the disease in Canada. And I 

can say this, that the American authorities have far more justification for placing restrictions on meat 

coming from Canada 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

37 

to the United States than we have in imposing embargoes on meat from the United States to Canada. 

Now, I think a forthright . . . 

 

Mr. Korchinski (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, may I ask a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I shall endeavour to get done by 6 o‘clock; if I cannot, I will have to 

adjourn the debate. I will take the hon. member‘s question, I am sure it will be profound. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Why didn‘t you make this statement at the meeting when Mr. Gardiner was there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I asked the Minister to state clearly whose responsibility for the 

control of contagious animal diseases came under. He stated at that meeting very clearly that it came 

under the Dominion Government. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The only people who are afraid of Mr. Gardiner sit on the other side of the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that an embargo was placed on the importation of 

American meat and meat products into Canada was to endeavour, by that device, to induce the 

Provincial Governments to remove their own embargoes. That was one of those old round-about tricks 

of lining people up . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — There are one or two schoolmasters over there and I think if they would exercise their 

disciplinary powers on the little group around them, instead of creating confusion in the Chamber, it 

would be more in line with their occupation. You have been one of the main offenders; you are not 

acting in a decorous manner at all. I do not think for one moment you would allow your pupils to act in 

the way in which you are acting, and it may be necessary for me to take more excessive disciplinary 

measure than you have to take. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, the position expressed in the Resolution before the House and the 

representations that we made to the Prime Minister have been endorsed and approved by various 

meetings. For instance, I have here in front of me a Resolution that came from a meeting sponsored by 

the council of the R.M. of Moosomin, and the representative organizations at that mass meeting were 

representatives of the Wheat Pool, the S.F.U., the Moosomin Chamber of Commerce, the Moosomin 

Retail Merchants‘ Association, the Ivanhoe Farm Forum, another New Hastings Farm Forum, 

Orangeville Co-operative Association, the Moosomin Wheat Pool Committee, Moosomin Co-operative 

Association, The Red Jacket Wheat Pool Committee, Fleming Wheat Pool Committee, Fleming Lodge, 

S.F.U., the Wapella Lodge, S.F.U., the Moosomin J.C.‘s, Town Council of Moosomin, the R.M. of 

Moosomin and the Moosomin Co-op Creamery — a pretty representative organization. And here is the 

Resolution that they passed: 

 

Hon. Member: — What was the date of the meeting? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The date of this meeting was — I replied to the letter I received on March 11th — 

it was just previous to March 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

38 

11th, although in this particular correspondence I have here there is no date. Wait a moment, we might 

find a date here yet. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I wish to rise on a question of privilege. It is not screamingly funny — the fact 

that a foot-and-mouth disease has upset the entire livestock industry of Saskatchewan — and if the 

member for Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Dundas) is not interested he could absent himself from the 

House; but he does not need to disturb the entire discussion of the House of something which is a very 

serious problem and something which is affecting the welfare of the people of this Province. 

 

Hon. Member: — The people of MacLean would like to know it too. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! It is just getting to the point where, as far as I am concerned, if there is 

not better decorum in this House I am going to adjourn the meeting. I certainly will not sit in this chair 

much longer and have the example that is being set for the people of this Province in the way the 

members are conducting themselves. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out to you that this is not the first time that this has 

happened. When I was speaking, I have a good voice and it was almost impossible for me to be heard 

above the din kicked upon the opposite side of the House, and you sat there and said nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, it is not the first time, but it probably is going to be the last time. Most of the 

disorder in this House has been created by statements that simply lead to it and I have tried to keep those 

statements down as much as possible. But what is happening this afternoon is not even aggravated in 

that way. 

 

Hon. Member: — The present speaker has been the worst offender of all. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — He has not. The hon. member is speaking; the interruptions have come without any 

cause or any provocation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — To proceed; the Resolution was as follows: 

 

―We, the undersigned organizations and committee of Moosomin and district, urge that the 

Government of Canada take the following immediate action for the protection of the livestock 

industry: Immediate suspension of trading in cattle prices below the prices prevailing during the week 

preceding the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease and see that indemnity to producers in the quarantine 

area to be paid at the above market value, plus bonuses and payments to be made to further indemnify 

owners of dairy herds, owners of breeding stock and owners of unfinished stock.‖ 

 

The above last paragraph was amended in the open meeting to read: 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

39 

―and that owners of dairy herds, breeding stock and unfinished stock be paid at replacement value, free 

from income tax.‖ 

 

Further: 

 

―Take immediate steps to enforce floor prices for hogs.‖ 

 

And wires were sent outlining this Resolution to the Minister of Agriculture in Ottawa, and similarly, to 

myself. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — To keep the records straight, I would like to inform the Minister 

that the people concerned in Moosomin who drew up these resolutions are very pleased, incidentally, 

with the efforts that have been made by the Federal Government to control this foot-and-mouth disease. 

I happened to be there a few days ago . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Are you asking a question or trying to make a speech? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I am giving you the facts of the case. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The hon. member, Mr. Speaker, can take part in the debate and give the facts if he 

wants to; he does not need to interrupt the speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, this Resolution certainly does not express pleasure and the covering 

letter certainly did not express pleasure and the innumerable resolutions that I am getting from U.F.C. 

locals do not express pleasure and satisfaction. Who could be happy when they are getting from 3 to 8 

cents a pound less for their livestock than they did a week preceding the outbreak of foot-and-mouth 

disease? Who could be happy? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, would the Minister table the covering letter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Let the hon. member sit down for a while, I have answered enough questions. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I have as much right to stand up here as you have. I want to ask that the covering 

letter that is being referred to, is tabled. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is quite in order, if he is prepared to table it. He does not have to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — To go on, Mr. Speaker. I will take an unbiased opinion this time. We will go back 

to the Winnipeg Free Press and see what they think of the statement made by Mr. Gardiner on March 

3rd, I believe, Monday, March 3rd. And the Winnipeg Free Press is commenting on this statement and I 

will refer to Mr. Gardiner‘s statement in a little more detail. It says as follows: 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

40 

―The larger facts are these: It is Ottawa which is conducting the campaign against foot-and-mouth 

disease in Saskatchewan; it is Ottawa which is responsible for the quarantine; it is Ottawa which is 

paying compensation; it is Ottawa which is acting to alleviate the export situation through 

representations which have already brought important modifications in the U.S. embargo; it is Ottawa 

which has intervened to protect the price structure. In these circumstances, it is only reasonable that 

any measure necessary for the protection of herds in provinces outside Saskatchewan should also be 

left to the federal authorities. Certainly there was no request from Ottawa that provinces such as 

Quebec and British Columbia should intervene to impose barriers in the channels of interprovincial 

trade. Neither, once the outbreak was identified, was there any suggestion of federal dereliction which 

might conceivably have justified such action. Any fancied case which might have been offered 

collapses in any case with Mr. Gardiner‘s decision to set up an inspection which will make it perfectly 

safe for other provinces to accept Saskatchewan cattle. Yet in these circumstances, and despite its own 

virtual admission that a ban on through shipments is unconstitutional, the Manitoba Government has 

acted to make a confused situation chaotic, a veritable Chinese puzzle.‖ 

 

It is quite apparent that everyone agrees that this was a responsibility belonging to the Dominion 

Government constitutionally. And everyone realized too that under the circumstances, and considering 

the wide implications of announcing the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in Canada, that 

simultaneously some action should have been taken to control the movement and marketing and price of 

livestock throughout the Dominion of Canada. I think that neglect is unwarranted, Mr. Speaker, and I 

believe this House would be derelict in its duty if it did not say to Ottawa, ―We do not like it that you did 

not take the action that you should have taken.‖ 

 

Now, speaking of markets, taking a quick look at what happened, I have mentioned already that the 

prices on the western markets dropped from $3 to $5 a hundredweight, comparing the period ending 

March 13th. I have figures here — I do not intend to quote them in detail, Mr. Speaker, but when 

comparing the prices in the week preceding the outbreak of the disease and the week ending March 13th, 

there is a very drastic decline in prices, particularly on the Winnipeg market; and I might mention this, 

too, Mr. Speaker, that originally — do not let the members opposite forget this — originally the 

Dominion Government put a ban on the movement of livestock from Manitoba eastward, in the hope 

that they could retain 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

41 

Ontario for the U.S. market. But the American authorities put a ban on the importation of livestock from 

any part of Canada. And Manitoba did not like it. Manitoba asked us if we would protest to the 

Dominion with them against the ban on cattle moving from Manitoba eastward. And later on, in self-

defence, Manitoba had to put on a ban against cattle coming from the provinces of Saskatchewan and 

Alberta. If they had not, they would have had a glut on the Winnipeg market and they would not have 

had any place to find an outlet for their beef and would not have been able to handle the livestock. 

 

I have some figures on livestock marketings here. In the week February 14th, for instance, in the western 

yards, that takes in Winnipeg, Calgary, Edmonton, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Regina and Lethbridge, 

there were marketed 4,500 cattle. In the week of March 6th there were marketed 1,982 head of cattle. 

And if the Dominion does not take control of the situation, when the embargoes are lifted we will have 

an equally confused situation, with farmers rushing cattle to market and probably a further depression in 

prices in certain areas. To give you some examples, on the Winnipeg market, for instance, choice steers 

were selling February 21st for 30 cents a pound and on March 14th those steers were selling for 25 to 26 

cents a pound. And good steers 28 to 29 cents a pound February 21st; March 14th, 23 to 24 cents a 

pound. And other random examples would be choice heifers were selling for 26 to 28 cents a pound 

February 21st and 22 to 23 cents a pound on March 14th. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, is the Minister going to give the figures during the same period for 

Toronto? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The eastern markets I do not have in this particular column, but in the same period 

of time the market price, I might say, in the east did not fall quite as drastically from $2 to $3 a hundred 

weight and it went up in some areas. There was quite a variation between the Toronto market and the 

market at Montreal as well. 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats): — May I ask, Mr. Speaker, when did the Dominion Government put a ban 

on livestock going into Ontario? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — If I recall the date correctly, I think it was on February 26th or 27th. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Why didn‘t the Provincial Government do it itself? Is that not within the jurisdiction of 

the Provincial Government of Ontario? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — That is a different matter. The Government of Ontario also asked the Dominion 

Government to place an embargo against livestock and livestock products, but the government at Ottawa 

said they were going a little too far but they would place an embargo against the movement of live 

animals to Ontario, and that was done. 

 

Now, in regard to hog prices. It is not only cattle prices that have suffered, but hog prices similarly 

suffered. And I wish to point out that we were supposed to have a floor price on hogs, which was put in 

effect, if I recall correctly, February 16th, before the outbreak of foot- 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

42 

and-mouth disease at all, and when the foot-and-mouth outbreak was announced hog prices went down 

too and the packers very happily began to buy hogs below the market price. I have a pretty good 

example of this, Mr. Speaker, in correspondence that I just received this morning from a Saskatchewan 

hog producer who, fortunately, got a hog to the Winnipeg market before the embargo went on. And he 

writes to me and says: 

 

―I am writing in regard to the floor price on bacon pigs. I shipped one out that dressed 163 pounds and 

got grade ―A‖ pay for it. The price they paid was $23 per 100 pounds. But the floor price at Winnipeg 

is supposed to be $24.50 a hundredweight.‖ 

 

And this man had a grade ―A‖ hog and the packers paid him $23 a hundred for his hog and he was 

wondering why . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Has the Minister taken that up with Ottawa? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The Minister is going to take this up with the proper authorities immediately, and 

the hon. Leader of the Opposition does not need to talk about it. There is nothing wrong, Mr. Speaker, 

particularly, except this; that the floor price is not guaranteed to the producer; it is guaranteed to the 

packer, that is the rub. And the packers have taken advantage of this situation to force prices down as 

they always do at every opportunity, to the producers of the raw materials. That is all that is wrong with 

it, Mr. Speaker. And I want to point out again . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, might I ask a question of the Minister? Has it not been announced that the 

packers, if they do not pay the full floor price they will not get the premiums refunded to them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — That has not got anything to do with this, Mr. Speaker. That has got to do with the 

overweight hogs that are being allowed now, that cannot be marketed, and if the packer does not pay the 

full floor price, as Mr. Gardiner said, he would be denied the premium. 

 

I am using this illustration to point out the necessity of the Dominion taking over the entire marketing of 

livestock all across Canada and setting floor prices prevailing at the same level as the week preceding 

the outbreak of the foot-and-mouth disease, which was not done. Mr. Gardiner says in his statements 

here, speaking with regard to the banning of meat products coming from the United States; 

 

―We have, therefore, under the Emergency Power Act, provided that no livestock or meats may be 

imported into Canada except on permit.‖ 

 

If he could do it in the case of the United States meat, they certainly had jurisdiction in Canada to do the 

same thing, Mr. Speaker, and they did not do it. I know that the hon. members opposite do not like that 

but there are times, I think, when the hon. members opposite can 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

43 

conscientiously criticize the Ottawa Government for things — for their failure to do things. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I did not follow the Minister. Where does the Minister say that the Federal Government 

should have imposed a ban on importation in respect of any province? He says they enforced a ban 

against the United States and he said they should have done it inside of Canada. I did not follow — 

where does he think a ban should have been put on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I did not talk about any bans inside of Canada. The only ban that needed to have 

been in Canada was in the Regina quarantine area and the buffer zone surrounding, Mr. Speaker. That is 

the only ban that was required as far as Canada is concerned. And when meat and animals are inspected 

by the Dominion Health of Animals Branch and are declared free of disease and the meat is declared fit 

for consumption, then that meat or animal should move any place in the Dominion of Canada. 

Otherwise, Mr. Speaker, we have not any constitution at all; we have nothing but a Balkanization and 

Balkanization is not good at any time; it is particularly not good in an emergency such as we faced, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, I have been trying to follow the Minister and understand him. If the 

province saw fit to impose a ban, what steps does the Minister say should have been taken? The other 

day I said if this Government took steps to enforce the right of interprovincial trade, I meant that in any 

reasonable steps taken by this Government to enforce those rights under the Constitution, we would give 

them support. Now . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister has answered that question, I am sure now, twice. He 

has pointed out that if the Federal Government has authority to use emergency powers, which they did 

use to prevent importation from United States, those same emergency powers could have been used to 

meet a national crisis in Canada and to have taken over the entire marketing of livestock in Canada on a 

National basis, which would have made any interference by the provinces in the matter of setting up 

embargoes unnecessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Instead of interrupting so much and arguing the point across the floor, would it not be 

much better if the hon. Leader of the Opposition made notes and then came back with rebuttal? If he is 

asking for a point of information and the speaker is quite willing to give it to him, that is all right, but I 

do not think we have to . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I am not trying to engage in an argument; I am trying to understand the Minister of 

Agriculture. What steps does he think should have been taken by the Federal Government if the 

province saw fit — in facing what it believes to be a violation of the Constitution — to put on an 

embargo? Does he think we should have gone to the courts and asked for an injunction, or what — that 

is what I am trying to find out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — No, Mr. Speaker, the thing is very clear. First of all the situation got confused 

because the Dominion Government did not take over the complete control of the situation. And 

secondly, 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

44 

after the provinces did get into the picture as a result of lack of action on the part of the Dominion, then 

they could still have invoked their emergency powers to deal with the situation. I think that should be 

clear enough, and I think it is high time. 

 

I want to draw another parallel, Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of the hon. members opposite. As they 

know, Newcastle disease has been a very serious disease in poultry and it is very pronounced in British 

Columbia and in Ontario to a lesser extent. We are importing hatchery eggs and baby chicks from 

British Columbia and Ontario and any Newcastle disease we have had in Saskatchewan has come either 

from the east or from the west, but we did not put up any barriers because it posed a threat to our 

industry. Because that is the constitutional responsibility of the Dominion Government, not only health 

of animals and control of contagious disease, but controlling the interprovincial movement of goods, and 

we have not done it. 

 

Now, if we wanted to have done that, Mr. Speaker, we could have stepped in and put in a few 

embargoes of our own against poultry products coming in from British Columbia. Supposing we had 

retaliated, like some provinces apparently felt inclined to do? We would have had the whole picture 

confused more than ever. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that as long as we have a constitution and we are a 

Confederation, there are certain responsibilities that come under the jurisdiction of the Dominion 

Government and, in the case of animal diseases, we have recognized that. I am saying all the way 

through here, Mr. Speaker, that federal jurisdiction has certain fields and none of the provinces should 

trespass into that jurisdiction under any circumstances, particularly as far as contagious diseases are 

concerned. 

 

Now I have had the representatives of the produce dealers come to me. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We are getting very close to recess, if there is any point in your address where we can 

call it 6 o‘clock. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I will call it 6 o‘clock, even though it is four minutes to six. 

 

The House resumed at 8:00 o‘clock p.m. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, when I called it 6 o‘clock I think I was 

starting to talk about other problems in other products that were affected. Mr. Speaker, it is now 20 days 

since the announcement of the foot-and-mouth outbreak in Saskatchewan and, with the passing of each 

day we have evidence of new and increasing problems. The other day I had representatives of the 

Western Produce Association come to my office to discuss the accumulating surpluses of poultry 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

45 

products in the storage facilities in Saskatchewan, and they pointed out that storage facilities here were 

very limited and they were very much concerned regarding the accumulation of storage space and the 

impossibility of handling additional poultry products unless they found an outlet very soon for these 

products. It was pointed out to me by the representatives that, under the embargo against the importation 

of meat from the United States, poultry products were exempted and they were very much afraid that 

British Columbia would import her poultry products from the United States, thus crippling the outlet to 

the west for Saskatchewan poultry products. I perhaps should read an extract from the letter sent by Mr. 

Brown and Mr. Sharpe to the Minister in British Columbia. They requested me to take some action in 

the matter too, and I wired the Minister in British Columbia as follows: 

 

―Representations received from poultry produce dealers of Saskatchewan expressing concern re 

embargo poultry products to British Columbia and possibility of B.C. importing from the U.S. 

Carrying heavy stocks of storage products here. Appreciate removal of embargo on poultry products 

coming from Saskatchewan to British Columbia. Immediate reply appreciated.‖ 

 

I had the reply from Mr. Bowman, the Minister of Agriculture in British Columbia a day or so later, in 

which he said: 

 

―No change in embargo at present stop Expect information within few days which may enable us to 

relax stop Regret inconvenience your producers.‖ 

 

I hope that this particular embargo on poultry products will be relaxed because it has been pointed out 

that in the processing of poultry they are exposed to temperatures that would kill any virus that might be 

evident and the poultry products that are expected to go to B.C. come from outside the quarantine area. 

Mr. Wilson, the secretary of the Western Canada Produce Association wrote to Mr. Bowman following 

up the wire which I sent. He said: 

 

―May I present for your consideration a recommendation on behalf of the members of our organization 

which consists of approximately 90 per cent of the produce trade in the four western provinces, and of 

the poultry industry in general in those provinces, a suggestion that dressed poultry, including turkeys, 

ducks, geese processed and packed by registered grading and packing stations be exempted from the 

provision of order-in-council No. 476 (that is British Columbia‘s order-in-council) of February 27, 

1952, and may I present the following as our reasons for asking that consideration: 

 

(1) that it is the opinion of veterinarians that poultry is not subject to infection with foot-and-mouth 

disease, and 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

46 

(2) that in view of the fact that poultry processed in registered grading and packing stations are 

scalded at temperatures from 125 to 135 degrees Fahrenheit during the killing and dressing 

operations, it would seem to provide assured protection against it being a carrier of this disease, and 

 

(3) that the Department of Agriculture of the United States does not include dressed poultry, turkeys, 

ducks or geese in the provisions of the embargo imposed by them to prevent the spread of the disease 

to that country.‖ 

 

This indicates, Mr. Speaker, the extreme precautions that have been taken by some of the provinces in 

their fear regarding this dread foot-and-mouth disease, and I just read that to indicate to you again the 

problems that are developing. I had further correspondence very recently from a gentleman who deals in 

frozen beef hides. He pointed out to me that the normal market for hides to Manitoba had been cut off 

and he was at a loss to know what to do with his accumulation of hides in view of the fact that the warm 

weather was coming and there was every possibility of spoilage. We are hopeful, therefore, that the 

embargoes will be removed in order that trade can get back to normal once again, but, as I pointed out, it 

is now 20 days — and it will soon be a month — since the first announcement of the foot-and-mouth 

outbreak. Surely, Mr. Speaker, that is sufficient time for some very definite action to have been taken. 

And it is for that reason that this Resolution has been presented to the House and we hope to follow this 

Resolution up with further representations and, if necessary, a conference between provinces in order 

that this matter may be satisfactorily dealt with as soon as possible. I should mention, Mr. Speaker, one 

of the reasons too, that the Resolution is somewhat critical — and I think justifiably so — is since this 

does establish a very serious precedent in dealing with any contagious diseases, as I mentioned 

previously, provinces have already shown indications that they wanted to put on their own embargoes. I 

am one who has full confidence in the Dominion Health of Animals Services and their inspection staff 

and, in my opinion, that matter can be more adequately dealt with by the Dominion Government. 

 

Now the dairy industry is also under serious handicap. I would like to mention to hon. members that 

normally we export between 50,000 and 60,000 dairy cattle to the United States. That market will be 

shut off and certainly none of us lay any blame whatsoever on anyone for the import restrictions to the 

United States. But the fact remains that those dairy cattle will still remain in Canada this summer and it 

will lead to increased dairy production, which is a good thing, but it means, too, that our seasonal 

surpluses of dairy products will be larger this summer than they have been in any previous year; and the 

effect will possibly be a further downward trend in the price of dairy products, an industry that is already 

suffering under quite excessive strains. As a matter of fact, in looking at this evening‘s paper, and 

perhaps some of the hon. members have looked at or read the statement made by Mr. Turnbull, 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

47 

the president of the Co-operative Creamery, and who is now the National President of his dairy 

association, in which he says: 

 

―Canada‘s huge dairy industry, doing about $750 million worth of business a year, has been a victim of 

Canadian government policy,‖ J.S. Turnbull, Regina, president of the National Dairy Council, said 

Monday.‖ 

 

And he gives this pretty much as his reason; because of the fact that prices have not increased at the 

same rate as other products, Mr. Turnbull felt that the industry was entitled to expect more sympathetic 

attitude and appreciative understanding of our situation by the Government and consumer. In other 

words, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that the Government at Ottawa has been inclined to put price control 

on farm commodities when there is any tendency towards a rise in prices and at the same time the goods 

and services required by farmers are permitted to advance in price. Now this situation will be aggravated 

as a result of the fact that we will not be able to export the usual number of dairy cattle to the United 

States, and it is just one more good argument that market control and price control is particularly 

necessary at this time; and not only at this particular time but more so when the embargoes and the 

restrictions are being removed, because there is no doubt, with the backlog of marketable livestock that 

has accumulated and that should have normally been marketed two or three weeks ago, there will be a 

flood and quite heavy marketings will no doubt take place. Therefore, I believe that the need for 

immediate action to remove the embargoes, to assume complete control of the movement and marketing 

of all livestock and, more particularly, to maintain the price of livestock at levels prevailing during the 

week ended February 23rd is justified, until the markets return again to normal. 

 

I should say something about the quarantine control. I should like to mention to the members of the 

House that the Provincial Government is co-operating very closely with the Dominion Health of 

Animals Branch. We have some 8 or 9 cars that we have made available; we have made other equipment 

available and we have made about 17 members of our staff available to the Dominion services. There is 

no doubt in my mind but what the disease is now under control and that it will be stamped out 

completely, we hope, in the very near future. All indications point in that direction. In other words, Mr. 

Speaker, there has been a whole lot of alarm, a whole lot of sensationalism and a whole lot of 

unnecessary market panic that could have been avoided. Again, and I hate to be critical — and I am not 

one to cry over spilled milk — but here is a case, I believe, that demanded pretty strong measures and I 

feel that much economic loss and confusion could have been avoided. And it is only sensible to suppose 

that when a major announcement of that kind is made, that simultaneously the Dominion would have 

taken over the control of movement, marketing and more particularly sustaining the price of livestock 

and other agricultural products that might be affected. 

 

Now, as I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, there will be a greater demand than ever for orderly marketing once 

the restrictions and embargoes have been removed. I therefore hope and I trust that the Government at 

Ottawa will give a favourable reception to the Resolution passed by this 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

48 

House. I should make some reference, too, Mr. Speaker, to the compensation for slaughtered animals. I 

believe the seconder of the Motion, the hon. member for Lumsden (Mr. Thair) will deal with that matter 

in more detail. It is my understanding that a Board of Review is being set up and we have every 

expectation that the farmers will be adequately compensated. 

 

Then there is the other matter of providing compensation for loss of income to the packing house 

workers, and no action has been taken in that regard. I was very pleased to have been able to arrange a 

meeting between Mr. Gardiner and the representatives of the Packing house Union and I want to say that 

Mr. Gardiner expressed a great willingness to have such a meeting and it is my understanding that such 

a meeting was held, at which the workers were able to present their problems. We are hopeful therefore, 

too, that the men who have been laid off through no fault of their own will receive adequate 

compensation for loss of income and loss of time. 

 

Now, I was almost going to say, Mr. Speaker, with these ―few‖ words, I now move, seconded by Mr. 

Thair, the above motion. 

 

Mr. Wm. S. Thair (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet), has 

dealt very fully with practically all sections of this Resolution now before this Assembly. I would just 

like to say that most of the infected herds are in my own constituency of Lumsden which I have the 

honour to represent. Indeed, a number of the farmers affected very lightly are my close neighbours and 

friends. And I have been very deeply interested in clause (4) and I am going to quote it: 

 

―That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to provide compensation for slaughtered 

animals at full replacement value plus additional compensation to farmers affected for loss of income.‖ 

 

I say that I am deeply interested in this particular section of this Resolution — that the farmers may be 

compensated adequately for their losses — and I would like to make a few general statements with 

regard to Section 4 of this Resolution. 

 

Before doing so I would like to say that up to the present time over 1,300 animals have been destroyed 

and more than a thousand of these have been in my own constituency — a great many of them, as I 

stated along the Wascana Creek where many of the farmers, while being big wheat farmers, are also in 

the cattle business because of the pasture in the Wascana Valley. The Leader-Post makes a statement 

this morning to the effect that the cost will run very high for compensation and expenses — probably 

half a million — and I am not taking any time to go into the details of these expenses, or as they name it 

here, costs of compensation and other expenses; but if payments are made on an adequate basis of 

compensation or on a replacement basis, plus the loss of income, I would 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

49 

predict that if it should cost three-quarters of a million, or even a million dollars it will be money well 

spent if it should do away with this dreaded disease, and if the compensation is adequate and the loss of 

income is accounted for also, I believe it will take upwards of three-quarters of a million dollars to 

adequately compensate the farmers. 

 

As pointed out by the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Nollet), the Federal Government is giving 

consideration to all owners of slaughtered herds who may not be satisfied with the appraisals made by 

the officials of the Federal Government. Up to the present time I believe all compensation has been 

made under an old Act which has been in force for many years, and I believe that was to the effect that it 

would be the commercial value plus $40.00 for ordinary commercial stock, $100 extra for purebred 

stock. But I understood, in speaking to Dr. Christie today that a new Act is to be put into force very soon 

— if not already under consideration and under these new arrangements settlements will perhaps be 

carried out on a little different basis and may allow for replacement value, which I hope is the fact. 

 

And I was also informed today from reliable sources, that two others have been added to this Board — 

you are well acquainted with the members of the Board — Mr. Robertson, the Wheat pool, a gentleman 

from P.F.R.A., and a gentleman from the Ministry of Finance at Ottawa. I have been informed today by 

a man — my neighbour — who appeared before the Board both on Saturday and this forenoon, that Mr. 

Stillborn and Mr. Loveridge will also act in an advisory capacity to assist them in establishing values 

under this new Act on slaughtered animals on a replacement basis. I think that will give them more 

consideration than they would get under the old Act. An additional compensation to farmers will be 

granted and we had hoped, also, the loss of income that will occur to many farmers over a one or two 

year period at least. 

 

Some of my neighbours — one in particular — a man on a rented farm for years, has 400 acres of 

valley, and his entire herd of 35 head has been slaughtered. It is a commercial herd and he can neither 

take in stock to pasture, nor can he start a herd for another year or possibly more. A small experimental 

herd may be tried for a few months. His loss of means is practically wiped out for two years, until he is 

established again, a hard-working conscientious farmer. And I feel that we should go the second mile in 

any consideration that can be given to any of these farmers because, after all, if we stop it now it has not 

been a very great cost. 

 

I understand that the two officials and the Board will make recommendations; that is, this Board that has 

been set up and the two officials will make recommendations to the Federal Government as to the final 

settlement for slaughtered herds. This neighbour of mine who was in this morning made reference to his 

purebred herd — there is more than one purebred herd, I might say, out in this area close to my own 

farm. I feel men like Mr. Loveridge and Mr. Stillborn are qualified to act in an advisory capacity with 

regard to lines of breeding and the pedigrees of all purebred beef cattle — also the pedigrees and the 

milk records of dairy cattle. I believe they have them, according to Mr. Brockelbank of the Production 

Branch of the Provincial Agricultural 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

50 

Department. If at all possible, they are ordered to ascertain the actual value of these animals. But with 

regard to loss of income I am given to understand by this gentleman who was before the Board both 

Saturday and this morning, that nothing is to be done about it; it has so many ramifications, so many 

conditions that affect even the income of every farmer who has cattle in the country, as pointed out by 

the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Nollet), the lower prices that are likely to be paid, and all the conditions 

entering into it, even to the packing house workers. The loss of income, he pointed out to this gentleman, 

will not be considered. I think it is unfortunate, but probably they could not take that into consideration, 

although they did say that in the replacement value they might take in and give some consideration to 

loss of income under that heading. But otherwise, loss of income, I am given to understand, will not 

likely be considered. Again I repeat, it is rather unfortunate for these people who have no income. Take 

the dairy farmers — one gentleman out here, Mr. Hahn, with 180 cows — has no income, only the 

compensation value. 

 

There is nothing more I need to deal with. I trust that the recommendations of this Board and the 

Advisory Board are ample and will take into consideration the loss of income to these farmers who have 

lost their herds in this unfortunate scourge. And I believe, and I know that from talking with the 

gentleman who made the first appraisal of livestock — an official of the Federal Government — he said 

that he appreciated very much the co-operation of the Hon. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Nollet) and 

other members of the staff, Brockelbank and some others, who, over the past three weeks have given the 

best of co-operation in order that this may be dealt with and the scourge eradicated and the farmers 

compensated adequately. 

 

Now there is not any more I need to say on this matter and I might make many other statements of 

human interest stories. I might give you one or two of them. I was told the swath was all to be burned in 

some areas out there because the cattle had roamed over this swath previous to being slaughtered. 

Another man said that it was vital that the deer be shot. I understand Mr. Paynter has made a survey by 

plane the latter part of the week and they were only able to rouse out some 52 and with field glasses they 

were able to ascertain whether they were affected with the foot-and-mouth disease. He claimed he saw 

no signs of any dead animals. They do not necessarily die, but no danger of infection could be seen in 

any way. 

 

And of course, you know the newspapers have not failed to play up and even the picture shows. I 

understand a show downtown has a picture of foot-and-mouth disease and how fatal it is to human 

beings, which has really thrown a scare into the people who are going to eat meat and anything of that 

nature. In fact I have had one or two people refer to me about this matter. 

 

I take pleasure in seconding the Motion, Mr. Speaker. 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

51 

Hon. Mr. J.W. Corman Q.C. (Attorney General): — I did not intend to speak on this but I notice, 

under (5) is a recommendation that adequate compensation for loss of income to packing house 

employees affected by lay-offs consequent upon the outbreak of the disease be provided. 

 

Naturally I have a direct interest in that, with two packing plants in the City of Moose Jaw; and I know it 

has been a serious matter for them and it will be more serious if it continues and I would like to give 

support to the whole resolution, and particularly to that section. I believe this is a National calamity. 

 

I remember the last time I was in Ottawa there had been a serious fire in the Province of Quebec in some 

town and the Federal Government was doing something to help the people; quite properly so. I submit 

that packing house workers in Saskatchewan, who are affected by this National calamity, should be 

looked after. Whether we live in the city or live in the country we are all one people and I know the 

people in the City of Moose Jaw will support the part of this resolution that attempts to do something for 

the farmers, just as I am sure that the farmers of Saskatchewan will want to see that the people who 

work in packing plants do not suffer. 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to speak at any length 

on this Motion, because with most of it, with the purpose that is expressed, I think we would all be in 

agreement. 

 

The part of it that I feel is unfortunate is that an attempt has been made in the preamble to make out a 

case against the action of the Government of Canada. Now, the actual wording is: 

 

―This Assembly, regretting the failure of the government of Canada to take complete control of 

movement, market and price of livestock simultaneously with the announced outbreak of foot-and-

mouth disease in Canada, that certain provincial governments consequently found it necessary to 

impose embargoes against entry of livestock, and livestock products.‖ 

 

Now, I listened to the Minister, and so far as I know he brought forward no proof whatever that it was 

the failure of the Dominion Government to take complete control of the movement, market and price of 

livestock which caused the provincial governments to set up these embargoes. There was absolutely 

nothing brought forward that I heard that established that; and when we are asked to pass a Resolution 

asking for certain action, it is unfortunate there is put in the first part of it something that is not proved at 

all. As far as I could understand, as I listened right from the start of that conference that was called by 

the Minister of Agriculture, and presided over by him, there was nothing brought out in that conference 

either that bore out that suggestion. What was said there, 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

52 

without contradiction by anybody, was that these embargoes were put on in order to make sure that the 

disease did not spread into those provinces, and it is unfortunate that the Minister of Agriculture, who 

was there and heard that, took no issue with it whatever. Nobody who was there and heard that, took no 

issue with it whatever. Nobody took any issue with it. Now he comes into this House and asks us to 

endorse a statement of fact that has not been proved, and that nobody suggested was the case, until he 

brings it forward in this Resolution. 

 

I suppose if we say anything about it, there will then be an attempt made to represent that we are against 

the main representations of the Resolution. Well, while that may be very smart politics, if the trouble is 

as important as I think it is, then I think this is one Resolution that the Minister of Agriculture might 

have left a little bit of his petty politics out of. 

 

As was pointed out in his presence, and was accepted by all the farmers there — not dissented to by 

anybody — that the reason why these quarantines were put on was because the provinces concerned 

wanted to make doubly sure that they kept the disease out of those provinces, it was not the failure of the 

Dominion Government to declare an emergency. 

 

I think that the Attorney General — I was hoping that he was going to speak on this aspect of the matter, 

on the right of the Dominion Government to override the constitution in time of peace by declaring an 

emergency. I doubt very much if the Dominion has rights like that. Supposing the province does not 

agree with the Dominion — even supposing they do have those rights — supposing that it was 

established that they have those rights, but supposing the provinces do not agree with that viewpoint. 

How much further off are you if you take drastic action like that, arousing the animosity of the provinces 

and they say: ―All right, we have as much right to our viewpoint of the constitution as you have to 

yours.‖ Then what does the Minister of Agriculture propose to do about it? I asked him over and over 

again this afternoon, what action does he think the Dominion Government should have taken that it did 

not take? Now I do not know whether the Minister of Agriculture did not understand that simple 

question, or whether he deliberately avoided answering it, but he knows very well that that was brought 

up at that conference; and I think most of us from Saskatchewan have a great deal of sympathy with the 

viewpoint that we do not want this country of ours to become Balkanized. We do not want interference 

with trade between one province and another. 

 

We were very much in agreement with that viewpoint, that any steps that would encourage the opening 

up of the trade channels, subject to making sure that the disease was not permitted to escape from the 

quarantined area, that everything possible should be done to re-open the markets within Canada. When it 

was brought out about British Columbia putting on an embargo against the import of cattle from Alberta 

and Saskatchewan, the Minister of Agriculture (Dominion), recalled the discussion in that regard and 

asked them where they expected to get their meat from. The answer was ―from the state of Montana to 

some extent‖ and it was pointed out the cattle that came from the state of Montana 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

53 

might come from closer to the area where the disease existed than if they took cattle from parts of 

Saskatchewan and from Alberta. I thought their attitude in that regard was not consistent. 

 

I also felt that the argument brought forth by the farmers at the conference — I had a great deal of 

sympathy with it — that here we are; it is bad enough to have the loss arising out of the disease and the 

loss necessary that arises out of the slaughter of these cattle (some of them very fine and almost 

irreplaceable) and all the dislocations that it leads to, but there is a worse thing still that arises out of this 

and that is the loss of the markets in the United States. 

 

Any one of us that remembers the long fight to get the embargo against the importation of cattle from 

Canada to the United States lifted — and the opposition to it, allegedly on the basis that it was feared 

that there was foot-and-mouth disease in Canada — will remember that it fitted in very well with the 

interested groups in the United States that did not want cattle imported from Canada. We have seen how 

much it has meant to our cattle industry to have that great market there, and what it has meant to those 

men in the past and what we hoped it would mean in the future. 

 

Now, to have those people who want to keep our cattle out given an excuse now, to continue keeping 

them out for perhaps some considerable time, they are justified under law in keeping them out, I think, 

for 60 days after it has been established that the disease is completely cleared up; and in view of what 

happened before, there is the danger that it will be very difficult to get the embargo lifted for some 

considerable period after that. 

 

There is the possibility of tremendous damage to our livestock industry, and the farmers at that meeting, 

I thought, were very understanding. Their attitude was this, Mr. Speaker. They regretted the tremendous 

amount of publicity that this matter received over and above what was absolutely necessary. They felt 

that this was going to make it much more difficult to get this embargo in the United States lifted; that the 

tremendous amount of discussion that had taken place in Parliament and some of the publicity appearing 

in the eastern papers — and which had got down into the United States papers — apparently had done a 

lot of damage. They seemed to feel that the less we said about it, in the way of making a big fuss about 

it, the better. 

 

Another thing that was quite clear to me was this; that they felt that the Dominion Minister of 

Agriculture‘s suggestion that the best way to get these embargoes lifted was to go quietly to these 

fellow-Canadians of ours and tell them, ―There is no longer any risk in you taking cattle from 

Saskatchewan and Alberta, because we have made sure that the disease cannot escape from the 

quarantine area.‖ As I understood the argument — and I felt that the farmers agreed with it — there 

were two reasons at least why they felt that the proposed action of the Minister of Agriculture was wise: 

one was this; that it was likely to be more speedy if they could be satisfied that there was no 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

54 

danger in taking cattle from Saskatchewan and Alberta; then naturally, as good fellow-Canadians, they 

would certainly lift the embargo without any necessity of taking drastic action. They would do it, it was 

expected, very speedily, as soon as they felt that there was absolute safety from the standpoint of 

protecting their own livestock industries in those provinces; and knowing something of the delay 

entailed in court action, I think they were right in that regard. 

 

There was some suggestion made at the conference in all good faith, to get an injunction. Well, the 

dominion might apply for an injunction. Who knows how long it would take before they would be able 

to get an injunction that would prevail against the decision of a provincial government which they are 

allegedly taking, under their rights under the constitution, to protect the health of the animals within the 

province? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Under what rights under the constitution? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, they have the right under agriculture, for one thing. The Provincial Government 

has a right to legislate in regard to agriculture. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Has it the right to stop interprovincial trade? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — There again are conflicting rights. Now then, it has always been regarded that the right 

to not interfere — the prohibition against interference with interprovincial trade does not override 

certain rights to prevent disease from being spread around and the like. That is a provincial matter — the 

question of protecting health. I would not, at this time, be prepared to argue the constitutional question, 

but I do know this, that I think myself when it is all thought over, there would be no doubt that these 

provincial embargoes at present — and when it is quite clear that there is no real risk of the disease 

spreading, I think a court would hold that the province had no right to maintain those embargoes. I hope 

so — and I think so — but that was not the argument. The argument was this; even assuming that they 

were right, to get this decided by a court it would naturally give them a month or so to prepare 

arguments; and by the time the thing was decided by a court, it might run into three or four months. 

 

That is the first thing; then it was felt by the Dominion Minister of Agriculture that if he did everything 

humanly possible to make sure that this disease could not get out of this infected area, by first of all 

drawing a line around it; then putting a buffer area around that of considerable depth; if he could go to 

these provinces and say, ―There is no risk to you of getting this disease by taking cattle from 

Saskatchewan and Alberta.‖ He felt that he could persuade them to lift the embargo. He felt certain, and 

I think it is still likely true, that if we do not take too strong an attitude towards our fellow-Canadians in 

Manitoba and British Columbia — do not shake a big stick over them, or threaten them — I think that if 

we go about it by way of friendly persuasion, we are likely to get quicker action than if we say to the 

Dominion Government, ―You should have asserted your rights under the Constitution 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

55 

and gone to court if necessary.‖ I think you would still get quicker action. 

 

That was the first argument — to get action as quickly as possible. Then there was another thing which I 

must say influenced me in my thinking. And mind you, Mr. Speaker, I am just as strong as anybody 

against this idea of trying to Balkanize Canada. I think we are one country, and while there are certain 

rights given the provinces which should be respected fully, I certainly want to see everything done to 

preserve the unity of our country. But there is this other question, and that is the question of publicity. 

Supposing action were taken and the provinces then thought it was a matter of protecting and 

establishing their rights that they should fight this thing, not as a matter of anything else except 

establishing their rights under the Constitution, and we get it into the courts, and the thing is fought over 

in the courts and reported in the United States. Then the idea gets around, ―Well, (the people who are 

against importation of cattle into the United States will say) how can they expect us to let cattle into the 

United States when fellow Canadians of other provinces will not let cattle into their provinces?‖ And if 

you get a fight going, and that sort of an idea gets abroad that Canadians have so little faith in our Health 

of Animals Branch that they felt it necessary to establish and maintain provincial embargoes, then how 

much damage have you done to the whole situation? 

 

The moment you bring a court action, then the question comes up of people who are wanting to maintain 

these provincial rights, and you might have a fight where otherwise you can avoid one. 

 

Then there is another reason. First of all, there is the reason of time and then there is the reason of the 

effect upon public opinion in the United States and other parts of the world in regard to it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — May I be permitted a question? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Yes. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Does he not think that the American public pretty well know now that these 

embargoes have been put on by various provinces? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Oh, I think so, but I think this; that if they can be persuaded to take the embargoes off, 

the thing will be forgotten about much more quickly than if we start a court action and one of these 

provinces gets into its head that they should fight to maintain the right to keep that embargo on, as a 

matter of constitutional right. Then, of course, if we get the thing fought over in the courts, the thing will 

go on much longer and it will attract attention in the United States and other parts of the world. 

 

So, to put it shortly, Mr. Speaker, I thought the explanation of the Minister of Agriculture, the Dominion 

Minister of Agriculture, setting out the steps we are taking under the advice of some of the finest 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

56 

experts on animal diseases in the world, covered the situation. We are taking them in conjunction with 

some of the outstanding experts on animal diseases in the United States. Once we have taken these steps, 

then we are going to go to the other provinces, and as a matter of persuasion say, ―There is no reason to 

maintain these embargoes‖; and from anything I have heard, I think the Dominion Minister of 

Agriculture is still working along those lines. Certainly the farmers attending that conference, and 

anyone who was there agreed fully with that attitude of the Minister of Agriculture. I must say that 

sitting there, I was under the impression that the Minister of Agriculture of this Government was in 

agreement with that view — that he wanted these embargoes lifted as soon as possible, but that he was 

in agreement with the idea of proceeding as the Dominion Minister of Agriculture suggested — by 

persuasion. 

 

I am glad he nodded his head, because I felt that was right, and I am glad we are not in disagreement 

about that. I still think that we should go by those methods until it is quite clear that they are not going to 

succeed. But I think they will succeed. I have enough faith in my fellow-Canadians in British Columbia 

and the other parts of Canada, to believe that once they feel there is no longer any danger of this disease 

spreading from the infected area, I think that those embargoes will be lifted. I think that the attitude 

taken by the Government of Canada in refusing to be stampeded into taking too strong an action was an 

attitude which should be commended, not found fault with, because there were people who were so 

incensed with what they felt was an interference with the right of interprovincial trade, that for the 

moment they felt some drastic action should have been taken. 

 

But, as the Minister pointed out, suppose we do declare this invalid. How are we going to enforce it? 

How are we going to enforce it against a province who sends it officials to stop animals being imported 

from Saskatchewan into Manitoba? The only way you can stop it, short of calling the army out, or 

something of the sort (which I do not think anybody would suggest) would be to get a court injunction 

against those officials doing that very thing. So that I feel the Dominion Government, by not taking 

drastic action that would arouse animosity, and would cause publicity, that by following ways of 

persuasion, I think they are entitled to credit, not condemnation. 

 

Now then, in regard to the actual things that we were asking for — leaving aside the recital — the first 

thing is to take immediate action to remove such embargoes. We all agree with that, I think. We think 

that action should be continued to get those embargoes off as soon as possible, and I think that this has 

been done and is being done. I asked the Minister if he wanted a court action brought, or what he had in 

mind, and he did not say so. I would hate the idea to go out from this Legislature that we are endorsing 

some drastic court action, or something. I would rather have it felt that we are endorsing the idea that is 

being carried out today, by trying to get this done by negotiation, and pressing for it as quickly as 

possible; and let it be known that we feel that they should be taken off right away, because we think that 

the disease is now contained, and there is no danger of it spreading. 

 

If that is as far as we are going, I am all in favour of it; 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

57 

to let our fellow-Canadians know that we feel that we have perfect confidence in the work done by the 

Health of Animals Branch; that they have the disease under control; that we think they have taken steps 

to stamp it out and have taken steps so that it will not spread from the infected areas, and it is quite safe 

to take cattle from Saskatchewan and Alberta. 

 

If we move a vote of confidence like that in the Health of Animals Branch, then I think it will do a lot of 

good, but I regret that it is coupled, as I say, with a recital which sort of indicates that we have not got 

faith in them, because those farmers there who know very much about it, unhesitatingly and 

unanimously passed confidence in the work being done by the Health of Animals Branch in regard to 

the handling of this disease. I was glad to hear that, because if we do not establish in the eyes of the 

world that we have confidence, the power and the will to stamp out a disease like this, then we are going 

to shake our position in world markets. 

 

I think we, as a Legislative Assembly in this Province, should stand behind the farmers in their attitude 

that we have faith in our Health of Animals Branch. 

 

Then the next item is this: ―To assume complete control of the movement and marketing of all livestock 

and livestock products.‖ Well, I do not see myself, what is to be gained by that. If we get these 

embargoes lifted, why should we upset things more and cause more commotion and more trouble, by 

interfering with a setup that has been working well up until now. Again, it gives undue importance to 

this matter, because it was only an outbreak in a very small area. It was not a serious outbreak of this 

disease — I mean, it was not a serious form of this disease — and I do not think that we should ask our 

Dominion Government, on account of an outbreak in a small area, to change the whole system of 

marketing. I doubt that, but as I say, if it is the feeling of this Government that it is in the best interests 

of our producers to ask that, they have the power to carry this Resolution in this House by a majority, 

but I regret that this is in there. I doubt the wisdom of it. 

 

Now, No. 3: ―To maintain the minimum price of livestock at price levels prevailing during the week 

ended February 23, 1952, until markets return to normal.‖ I see no reason why we all should not be able 

to agree on that, because those markets have been affected by the outbreak of this very bad disease, and 

I do not see any reason why the livestock producers should suffer on account of that. It seems to me that 

that is a good suggestion. That is what the farmers asked for and it has our support. 

 

Then the 4th item: ―To provide compensation for slaughtered animals at full replacement value, plus 

additional compensation to farmers affected by loss of income.‖ Now, I read over the debate in the 

House of Commons when this Bill was passed to deal with this matter. It goes much further than any 

previous legislation, as it properly should, and my understanding of the setting up of this advisory 

committee, conjoined with the very general terms of the legislation. It was deliberately done that way to 

make sure that full justice should be done to people who lost their 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

58 

livestock, or suffered damage on account of their stock having to be slaughtered because it was either 

infected, or was exposed to possible infection of the disease. 

 

The legislation is drawn in very broad and general terms, and the suggestion was made that the kind of 

people who are being put on the advisory board, headed by Mr. Robertson, Secretary of the Wheat Pool, 

that we could rely on that board to make recommendations that would be fair to the farmers, and the 

suggestion was that because of the general nature of the legislation, the Minister of Agriculture would 

have power then, to see that full justice was done to our farmers. So I think what is asked for here is 

really envisioned in the Dominion legislation, and I think again that when we are passing Resolutions, 

saying that we are favourable to this, we should not couple it with condemnation of the Federal 

Government for what they have done in the matter, because they have done the very thing we are asking 

for here. 

 

Item No. 5 — I would be personally in favour of that myself, because again I think that this laying off of 

workers arises out of an attempt to stamp out a disease. It is not a normal thing. It is not a lay-off of 

workers that you might think would be covered by unemployment insurance legislation. This arises not 

only out of doing away with the animals that were sick, but doing away with all the animals that were 

exposed to infection; and interfering with movement out of a tremendous area to make sure that the 

disease is not spread, and then closing up packing houses for fear that they may be a centre from which 

the disease may be spread out. 

 

And so, the closing of packing houses, it seems to me, is part of a campaign to wipe out the disease, and 

I do think myself that a very good case can be made out for compensation for these people, much 

beyond the ordinary provision of the Unemployment Insurance Act. That, however, is a matter for the 

Federal Government, but is something, I think that is quite proper for us to pass a Resolution on, 

expressing our views on the matter. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do not want to speak unduly on this matter, but just to sum up, I feel that the first 

item, the Dominion Government is doing what is recommended in it; and we in effect are endorsing 

what they are doing. I hope that is our attitude and I believe from the reaction of the Minister of 

Agriculture in this House, as I have been speaking, that he agrees with that. 

 

In regard to No. 2 — ―to assume complete control of the movement and marketing of our livestock 

products,‖ I was not convinced that it is a good thing to have it in there, but I do not think we would be 

justified in voting against the whole resolution just because that is in there; but I think it would be better 

if it were out. 

 

We are wholeheartedly in favour of Item 3, ―maintaining the minimum price of livestock at these 

levels.‖ We think that Paragraph 4 is the proper idea, and we think it will be done under the existing 

legislation; and we are in favour of Paragraph 5, so that in effect we are in 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

59 

favour of the whole resolution, except we doubt the wisdom of Item 2. I really wish the Government 

would re-consider that, because if you are trying to say that, is our opinion, this thing is now under 

control; we have it stamped out, then should we go on to say that we should take the whole livestock 

industry under control? Floor prices is part of the policy of the government, and it is not necessary to 

have the whole industry under control to apply floor prices. Had that been in there in place of Paragraph 

2, I would have said that — the actual time of the Resolution — we could vote for them all. I do regret 

that when we are working together here in a co-operative effort in regard to this disease — and when I 

saw such harmony that seemed to prevail between the Government here and the Government at Ottawa, 

in dealing with this disease, in getting the farmers together so that they could give their expressions of 

their views on the matter; and when certainly there was the greatest amount of confidence expressed in 

one another‘s departments, and the work that had been done — I do regret that in connection with this 

matter, we express the feeling in any way that the Government of Canada failed in the matter. That 

certainly was not the attitude of the farmers. I do not think it is the attitude, really, of the people of the 

province as a whole. 

 

I think the way they would want us to deal with it is the way they dealt with it, to say we have faith in 

our own fellow-Canadians, both in the Health of Animals Branch, provincial and federal; we have faith 

in the people of other provinces, that they will do right in the matter, and we suggest that what has been 

started shall be continued and in this national calamity, the losses suffered by our farmers, livestock 

men, and working people, should be assumed by the nation as a whole, and not left on the backs of 

individuals. 

 

I think from that you will see, Mr. Speaker, that we certainly do not intend to do other than to support 

this Motion, because it has so much in it with which we agree, despite the fact there are points in it with 

which we do not agree and which we would much rather have seen omitted from it. 

 

Mr. F.M. Dundas (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, the disease happened to be first allocated 

in the constituency of Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley, on the farm of Leonard Wass and I might say I have been 

in contact with Mr. Smith, Mr. Wood and Mr. Wass, and that they are fully confident that the Federal 

Government will compensate them to their satisfaction. I might also say that the man who came around 

with me and told them what their cattle would weigh — they were perfectly satisfied that he was giving 

them perhaps a little more even than they actually weighed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Wass‘ herd is a dairy herd, is it not? Are they 

being compensated on the basis of weight for dairy herds? 

 

Mr. Dundas: — Yes, it is a dairy herd. I am talking about the weights. The man who came around 

valued them by weight, and the farmers 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

60 

were all satisfied. But they have not received any compensation yet; but they thought, from Mr. 

Gardiner‘s talk, which they had with him the other day, that he was going to do what was right and I 

think you can depend on that; they have done a wonderful job to stamp out the disease as well as they 

can, because it was a new thing for the veterinarians of Saskatchewan, and I am sure that the people of 

the province will have their cattle in the hands of Mr. Gardiner and I think he will compensate them 

quite adequately; and I am sure they will be satisfied. 

 

I am sure I will see to it and I have some authority at Ottawa (Mr. Gardiner is a good friend of mine; his 

seat is just across the river, and my seat is the other side, so we get along wonderfully), and I know Mr. 

Gardiner will do what is right. I am sure I will support the Motion. The only thing I regret of the 

Minister of Agriculture, is that he always puts politics into it — just like the Minister of Social Welfare, 

— and I do not believe that is the right thing. I think we should forget about politics in a calamity like 

this. I will support the Motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take 

this opportunity to say just a few words on this Motion. There has been some objection taken to the 

words in the recital that ―This Assembly, regretting the failure of the Government of Canada to take 

complete control of movement, market and price of livestock simultaneously with the announced 

outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in Canada.‖ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the Federal Government knew very well that once this disease was 

recognized as foot-and-mouth disease, there would immediately be an embargo on all animal products, 

and animals, going to the United States. They knew, too, that we have been exporting quite a bit of those 

products to the United States. That alone, leaving out the question of the provincial embargoes — 

which, incidentally, are just some of the provinces who are supposed to be friends of Mr. Gardiner‘s, but 

are not acting like it — but leave out of the question altogether the provincial embargoes; the fact that 

there was an international embargo on was quite sufficient to create a situation which could actually 

cause far more loss to the rest of the stock-growers of Canada, than the direct loss from the disease 

itself, although, of course, the direct loss is concentrated in a small area and upon a few individuals. 

 

When they receive compensation — and I certainly hope they receive the generous compensation which 

they should receive — there will still be a lot of farmers in Canada, who, during the last few weeks and 

during the coming months, will have livestock to sell, and on account of the way this has been handled, 

they are going to lose very substantial sums of money, because you cannot crowd unlimited supply of 

livestock into a market when you curtail the outlets of that market. 

 

I was at Prince Albert over the weekend; I heard of a farmer out of Prince Albert who brought in a baby 

beef. Last fall he had sold a similar baby beef at 34 cents a pound. He was offered 17 cents a pound 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

61 

for that baby beef, and he took it home again. But that is not very satisfactory. I think it is right, Mr. 

Speaker, that we should voice our disappointment at the fact that these controls were not taken over and 

in No. 2 in the Resolution we asked the federal Government to assume complete control of the 

movement and marketing of all livestock and livestock products. I think that is necessary, because when 

you have too many livestock ready to go to market, to supply that market — and let us remember there 

are only a limited number of cold storage facilities — and unless beef and pork is going to be frozen 

there is only a limited time that it can be kept in a chilled condition. So that you can only handle a run of 

livestock without an outlet for a very short time. What can be done about it? Well, there certainly could 

be a study made of the situation with a view to encouraging people by financing them, to keep that stock 

on the farms which would continue to improve and add value and not have it go to market. There is a lot 

of flexibility in the marketing of livestock, by planning it properly; either a whole lot of stock can go to 

market — good stock — or, if it is properly planned, a lot of that stock can stay on the farms and feed 

the market as it needs it. If ever there was a time — an emergency — when there needed to be some 

regulations, some control in the marketing of livestock, I think it is now. 

 

Members on the other side, Mr. Speaker, have expressed their approval of Item No. 3 ―to maintain the 

minimum price for livestock at price levels prevailing during the week ended February 23, 1952‖, and I 

do also agree with that; but I think if you ask the Federal Government to do that, and at the same time 

take any objection to some control and regulation in the livestock business at the present time, you are 

putting the Federal Government in a tough position, because undoubtedly, if that price is maintained, 

that will encourage (unless there is some counter-balance) the flood of livestock to go to market. So I do 

not think it is very reasonable to on the one hand say that the Federal Government must not take control, 

they must leave this marketing situation alone, and on the other hand guarantee a floor price. It is only 

reasonable, if we ask them to guarantee a floor price, that we say, ―Assume control of this; regulate this 

in the interests of the farmer first, and the consumers in Canada second.‖ I certainly agree with No. 1 

that steps should be taken to remove the embargoes. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Tucker) made quite a point of the idea of going to court with this 

thing. Well, naturally, most people do not run into court without giving it some serious thought, and I 

am sure that no one had any idea of the Federal Government running to court with this thing; but I do 

think that there is a battle to fight here, and you may talk about some provinces standing on their rights. I 

would bring to your attention, Mr. Speaker, that the Province of Saskatchewan and the Province of 

Alberta have some rights, too, to the trade and commerce of Canada, as well as the other rights that have 

been talked about with regard to Manitoba and other provinces. 

 

I was glad to hear on the radio tonight news from Manitoba that the Premier there had said that they 

were considering the taking off of the embargo, and I certainly hope they take it off pretty quick. 

 

In regard to Item 4 and 5, I need say no more than this: the coming of this disease to Canada was a 

national disaster. In some 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

62 

countries in Europe they have had so much of this disease that they have given up hope of ever getting 

rid of it; and they had adapted their methods to control, rather than eradication, but I do not think there is 

any question about it, that in Canada where this is the first outbreak that the wise thing to do was to take 

steps to try to eradicate it, and that eradication is a drastic medicine. This disaster is not only an extreme 

loss to the farmers, but is a very serious loss to the workmen in the packing plants. In such an instance, 

in an emergency, where a small number of the people of Canada must suffer loss — serious loss — in 

the best interests and for the welfare of the whole of Canada, Canada should do nothing else but 

compensate them generously and well, whether they be farmers, or whether they be unemployed 

workers from a packing house. 

 

I will support the Motion. 

 

Mr. Ross A. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say a few words on this 

Resolution. I attended that meeting we had here a week ago Friday, and was very much interested in 

what went on there and also very happy to think that while there may have been some minor criticisms 

of what was done, that everyone there agreed that all had been done that was possible to be done up until 

that time. I was rather surprised to hear the Minister of Agriculture making some remark somewhat to 

the contrary here tonight. 

 

This thing no doubt is a national calamity. The loss to our farmers in this immediate district is serious, 

but it is very, very small compared with what has happened, and what may happen all over Canada. It 

has a lot of repercussions — just as he mentioned about the eggs and everything else — it goes a long 

way. I think that meeting was absolutely on sound ground when they said this, ―the first thing we should 

do is to tell the people of the world that we are satisfied that it is being controlled‖; and the next thing 

we should do is to try and give out that we are satisfied so that nobody else on the other side of the line, 

or anywhere else can say, ―Well, the people of Saskatchewan themselves do not know whether it is 

controlled or not, so why should they expect us to take their stock?‖ Anything that is done in this House, 

that has a tendency, whether it is intentional or unintentional, to advertise the fact that we are not 

satisfied that this thing is now under control, is doing a disservice to the farmers not only of this 

province, but all of Canada. 

 

Now, there is one item in this thing that rather struck me, and that was this: they talk about the floor 

price here. First, I might say that I think that everyone is in favour of No. 1; I do not think there is any 

argument about it. In my opinion No. 2 is debatable; I think it would be a lot better if it was out, despite 

what the Minister of Natural Resources just said — ―and I very much regret‖ — this regretting and all 

this stuff — I think we should leave this out. Now, when we come to Item No. 3, I was in agreement 

with quite a bit of what the Minister of Natural Resources said that there was some point in that which 

had not yet been spoken of and I feel very strongly about it, and that is this. 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

63 

We are exporting from 300,000 to 350,000 head of cattle every year. I do not think it is possible to set 

up a floor price, take everything that comes to that market and store that stuff. In my opinion one of the 

most important things in this situation was left out, and that is the possibility of getting a market for this 

stuff. You cannot go to work and pay a floor price for stuff and pile it up — we have not the storage 

facilities, for one thing. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Isn‘t that why we need No. 2? 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Just wait until I am through now. I may be wrong on this, but this is the way I see it. 

The fact that you can control the moving of it does not affect it. Eventually we are going to have to find 

an overseas market for this stuff. The people in the United States, as we all know, the farmers down 

there for the last few years have been very unhappy about the fact that our Canadian cattle are going 

over there, and now we have the embargo. The Government over there did not want to put it on on 

account of the consumer, but now they have been obliged to put it on, and in my opinion it will be a long 

day before it comes off. I do not think this is a temporary thing where you are going to put on a floor. I 

do not want to be pessimistic, but in my opinion this is not a temporary thing — it goes further than that. 

We have to take a long-term view of it, and the most important thing today, in my opinion, is to explore 

a market where we can get rid of this surplus beef. Now, that in my opinion, is very important, and I do 

not think it is possible to set a floor price, store that stuff up in this Canada of ours, without you have an 

outlet. That brings you to another phase of it, and that is this. When you get into that overseas market 

you are going to run into competition with Argentina frozen beef and all the rest of it; you are going to 

run into the scarcity of currency in the British Isles to buy our beef, and all these things, and it seems to 

me that is one of the very important factors. If I were making any recommendations to the Dominion 

Government, I would be inclined to recommend this, that they spend every effort to find some outlet for 

our surplus beef, in lieu of the one we have previously had with the United States. I think this should be 

given consideration, too, and with the rest of it, I am quite in agreement. 

 

But I would suggest to the Minister of Agriculture that he drop all this thing that could tend to be 

political — whether it is or not — and let us all get together and support something for the good of the 

farmers of Canada. 

 

Mr. J. Benson (Last Mountain): — Mr. Speaker, I attended the conference that was held in this 

building a few days ago to discuss this question and every one of these items was dealt with during that 

conference and I left that conference feeling pretty good about the situation, and I did not go there 

feeling very good about it. 

 

Now, I think it was agreed by everyone there that everything was being done and would be done to bring 

about a solution to this problem. I know that item No. 1 was discussed at great length and we were 

assured by the Minister of Agriculture that he would do everything he could to persuade the people of 

Manitoba and British Columbia that the disease was getting 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

64 

under control and a proper buffer zone was going to be placed around it and he said, ―When we can 

convince them that we have it under control in its present area I do not think we will have any trouble in 

having the embargoes lifted.‖ And I believe they would have been lifted at the present time had not a 

couple of new cases developed. I am quite sure that these two cases that developed about a week after 

the conference was held would make the people of Manitoba and British Columbia wonder a little bit as 

to whether or not the disease was really controlled. I think that we should remember too that just 

previous to the outbreak of this disease cattle were being shipped into Ontario and British Columbia, and 

beef, from the United States because the prices in Canada were getting higher than they were in the 

United States. 

 

When we are dealing with a question like this, and after having held a conference such as we had in 

Regina dealing with this matter, I really think that we should tone down this preamble, and I think we 

should tone it down in the interests of the livestock industry of this Province. I do not believe that we 

should try to make any capital out of this calamity, and it is a calamity. So I am going to urge the 

Minister of Agriculture to tone down this preamble, because I believe the officials who are concerned 

and the officials of his department are just as concerned as the officials of the Dominion Department. I 

think they are doing everything they can — they know what the situation is and they know how to 

handle it. We are not on the spot as they are on the spot and we cannot know what they are doing as well 

as they know what they are doing. I am going to urge that this preamble be toned down in the interests 

of the livestock industry of this Province. 

 

Mr. John Wellbelove (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, the member for Cannington (Mr. 

McCarthy) objects to the second clause there and yet was wholly in sympathy with the third. I think if 

we are going to insist on the third clause ―the Federal Government assuming the responsibility of putting 

a floor price under beef‖ at least we should insist on the second, ―that they take complete control of the 

movement of the marketing of livestock.‖ I do not want to repeat anything that has been said in this 

discussion both before and after dinner, but in the approach to it before dinner, it was suggested, ―why 

did not the Minister of Agriculture make a greater stand in that meeting with regard to the responsibility 

of the Federal Government?‖ My impression was at that meeting, that the farmers were facing up to a 

complicated situation that existed then, and I think we are quite within our rights in the preamble that is 

here; that the Federal Government were lax in their responsibility if they had the authority. 

 

Now, the Leader of the Opposition says he is not prepared to argue the legal standing as to whether they 

had the authority or not to put on a Federal embargo. But it so happened I came into Montreal at the time 

this story broke and the Montreal papers had their headlines ―Billion Dollar Industry Threatened‖ and I 

was much concerned about it because it mentioned Regina as being the centre of the outbreak. I do not 

think it suggested itself to anybody there in talking about it as laymen informally, that it would resolve 

itself into a provincial responsibility. 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

65 

When the Federal Government had taken over the responsibility there, under the authority they had, to 

control the spread of the disease, I think we all thought they would take on the full Federal responsibility 

with the control of the disease and the movement of cattle; and I, for the life of me, Mr. Speaker, cannot 

see that there is anything remiss with the preamble as the last speaker has mentioned, bringing 

something into it which is controversial. If the Federal Government has that authority — and I think if 

they had exercised that authority whether they have it or not, in time — I do not think it would have 

been seriously challenged. 

 

So far as the controlling of the disease is concerned, all those that have acted in that regard are to be 

commended in that they have controlled the spread of disease and they have inspired confidence, I think, 

in the minds, not only of the consuming public of Canada, but in the minds of the importers in the 

United States. 

 

But as far as clauses 2 and 3 are concerned, I would not want to see No. 2 deleted, because I think they 

are inter-related so far as their import is concerned. 

 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough): — Like many who have spoken in this House this Session I did not 

intend to say anything until I heard somebody else make some remarks and that is true as far as I am 

concerned in this debate. 

 

It was a reference made by the Leader of the Opposition and also by the member who was last talking in 

connection with the conference which was held here under the call of the Provincial Department of 

Agriculture which was chaired by the Provincial Minister of Agriculture. The Leader of the Opposition 

was not the only one who attended that conference and it does appear to me that an analysis of what took 

place at that conference was pretty well decided by where your prejudice lay. If your prejudice lay with 

the Federal Minister of Agriculture and the Liberal Party, you pretty well got the analysis which the 

Leader of the Opposition suggested. If your prejudice lay with the interests of the Agricultural economy 

of Saskatchewan, particularly the Livestock Industry of Canada, your analysis was considerably 

different. 

 

I attended that conference and I was pretty well satisfied in my own mind that it was proven beyond a 

shadow of a doubt that it was the failure of the Federal Government who had the power, so they 

admitted, to take action at the time that the outbreak was indicated and at the time that the outbreak was 

proven to be foot-and-mouth disease. It was their failure at that time to take action to control the 

movement, the marketing and the pricing of our livestock products that forced — I say ―forced‖, Mr. 

Speaker, — forced the Provincial Governments in Canada to place an embargo on our stock. If the 

Federal Government had taken the action at that time to assure all those people engaged in Agriculture 

and all those people who were dependent upon the livestock industry that they would in no way, by 

virtue of this outbreak, of either an economic loss, or if they had economic loss, that the Federal 

Government would assume its responsibility and reimburse them for any economic loss, or if 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

66 

the spread of the disease did extend outside the area in which it was assumed to be at that time, that the 

Federal Government would assume complete responsibility for it. That assurance was never given to any 

Provincial Government and was certainly not given to the livestock industry. With that lack of 

assurance, the Provincial Governments, through an attempt to protect their own agricultural industry 

within the confines of their own boundaries, could very well assume to have been forced to place this 

embargo on. If those people who now assume full responsibility had at that time assumed full 

responsibility and assured that there would be an adequate floor price placed on our agricultural 

products, particularly beef, although it equally applies to hogs as well, you would not have seen the 

decline that has occurred in the livestock prices, particularly beef, in the last two or three weeks, 

following the outbreak of this disease. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the preamble in this Resolution is not only important, but it 

is necessary that we here in the interests of the livestock industry in Saskatchewan, and in Canada, 

should place on record that we realize that it was the failure of the Federal Government to act at the time 

when they should have acted that has created this chaotic condition within the livestock industry. 

 

My hon. friend from Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) referred to the question of marketing and he was 

suggesting that clause 3 in the Resolution which was suggested by the Minister of Agriculture, has some 

relation to the possibilities of outside marketing for our livestock products. He also further suggested 

that he had attended the conference held here in the legislative building. I think that if he will think back 

he will recall that the Federal Minister of Agriculture, the Hon. J.G. Gardiner, stated very clearly that 

within the quarantine area and within the buffer zone, taking them both combined, there were not 

sufficient livestock products to be placed on the market to meet the demand within that quarantine area 

and that further, the potential livestock marketing under an orderly marketing, or even a normal 

marketing in the next six months; there would not be placed upon the market any more than what the 

people of Canada would consume. If that statement is true, and I assume that from his knowledge of the 

agricultural conditions in Canada, and certainly from the facilities that he has available, he should be 

able to make a statement like that as a true fact — and we can assume that that condition will exist in the 

next six months. And if that condition does exist, then there is certainly no reason why the Federal 

Government could not place a floor price under our livestock products for the next six months, at least at 

price levels prevailing during the week ending February 23rd, 1952, because these products will be 

marketed entirely within the Dominion of Canada and it certainly should not, with an orderly marketing 

within Canada, cost the Federal Government one red cent. 

 

And on Item 3 we are not happy that the Federal Government necessarily assumed the cost of 

maintaining a floor price, because I do not think anyone in this House will suggest that the livestock 

market prevailing on February 23, 1952, was above parity or was above what the livestock producers in 

the Dominion of Canada were entitled to receive. 

 

And further, Mr. Speaker, in any of the statements which the Minister of Agriculture, or anyone on this 

side of the House has made, 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

67 

are we in any way suggesting that there was any question in regard to the actions of the Health of 

Animals Branch — the motions which that Health of Animals Branch of the Federal Department of 

Agriculture took within this Province. But what we are severely criticizing is the enunciated and acted 

upon policy of the Federal Government, not only in connection with the control and the measures which 

they took to control the disease within Saskatchewan, but particularly upon their failure to act to protect 

the livestock industry outside the quarantine area and outside the buffer zone which was established in 

connection with the foot-and-mouth disease. 

 

I think it was my hon. friend from Shellbrook (Mr. Larsen) who once stated to me that the effect upon 

the market would be much greater than the disease itself. I think he stated to me once that if this thing 

created the chaos within the agricultural industry which it apparently has created, that he would sooner 

see his livestock have the foot-and-mouth disease than have his enterprise subject to the chaotic 

conditions which presently exist in the livestock industry. And I think that is generally true — a 

statement which can be expressed — a sentiment which can be expressed — by many of us who are 

presently engaged in the livestock industry. I think it is only right that we should point clearly that this is 

the result of the Federal Government‘s failure to act at a time when they had the power to act and when 

they had the opportunity to act. Once again it is a question of too little and too late. 

 

I shall support the Motion. 

 

Mr. V.P. Deshaye (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words on this Resolution as 

well. It was with considerable joy that we heard tonight that the Manitoba Government were considering 

releasing their restrictions on their embargo and permit our cattle to cross over their borders. However, I 

have the feeling — and I regret to say so — that a Resolution such as this, with the debates that we have 

coming in from the Government side of the House, is going to do very much to delay the lifting of such 

embargoes. I think at one time both the Minister of Agriculture and the Federal Minister of Agriculture 

blamed the press somewhat for the publicity which was being given to the foot-and-mouth disease and 

the resultant embargoes that were resulting from that unfavourable publicity. Now, just at the moment 

when we have prospects of having these embargoes lifted, the Government chooses to upset the apple 

cart, shall we say, and bring in a Resolution that will renew the publicity of this most unfortunate disease 

amongst our livestock. And I chastise the Government for bringing in a Resolution such as this at this 

time when they know very well that they do not intend to accomplish anything by it, and at the same 

time they are going to do our livestock marketing a great deal of harm. That is, I am sure, very evident; 

that if the Minister of Agriculture wanted to propose these things to the Federal Government he could 

have done so very well, without renewing all the publicity about the foot-and-mouth disease all across 

Canada again. And I say that I do not agree with these political tactics that are going to cost our farmers 

so much in dollars and cents and I think that this could have been handled very well in another manner. 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

68 

Now there is no need to argue, but that this is strictly a political movement on the part of the 

Government of Saskatchewan and I think that our Government could have done very much more in 

other channels to assist the farmers if they chose. I think that the Provincial Government is lax in some 

ways. The member for Lumsden (Mr. Thair) said that they were trying to determine the disease — 

whether the deer were carrying the disease — from an airplane. Well, if the deer are carrying this 

disease I am sure that it cannot be determined by trying to make a survey from an airplane, and our 

Provincial Government is at least responsible to that extent and I submit that they are not taking care of 

their responsibility in that field. 

 

I think that the member for Last Mountain (Mr. Benson) was very fair — I think he is fair in most of his 

comments — and I think he was very fair when he said that he thought the preamble should be deleted, 

or at least moderated, and I agreed with him very much. I do not think that we should play politics with 

such important Resolutions, or such important items as this. 

 

I also wish to speak for a moment or two on the problem that was spoken of here, on floor prices. I fail 

to see how floor prices can be maintained when we have not the storage spaces — the space for the 

products — that would be brought upon the market as the result of floor prices. I do not think that we are 

fooling the farmers of this Province by making Resolutions such as this. I think the farmers of 

Saskatchewan know and understand the problems that we are having with the foot-and-mouth disease. I 

also think that the farmers of Saskatchewan are appreciating how the Federal Government is handling 

this terrific problem. I sincerely believe that everything that could possibly be done is being done by the 

Federal Government. I know for a fact that when the Federal Minister of Agriculture was in Regina 

during this period he was continually in conference with Dr. Wells and the other veterinarians and they 

were in conference until after midnight each night they were here because I have first hand information 

on that. These men worked terrifically hard to control this disease in Saskatchewan; to do everything 

possible for the people of Saskatchewan, with respect to this disease. I do not think that these 

Resolutions, well as they may be meant, are going to assist very much and I repeat what I said before, 

before I sit down, that I think they are renewing the publicity that is going to spread across Canada and 

into the United States about our disease that the Government of Canada is trying to reduce. That is 

unfavourable publicity and I think that because we are so close to getting the embargo lifted in Manitoba 

— as was announced on the radio tonight — we should prevent such things going out in the press again 

and hope that this thing will remedy itself without the evils that the Hon. Leader of the Opposition stated 

can develop from bucking the legislation in certain provinces and think they are entitled to put on the 

books. 

 

And if Manitoba felt, for their own protection, that they should put on an embargo, I think that we 

should try and satisfy them in a peaceable manner that that legislation should not be there and not try to 

force them in bulldozing methods to take that legislation off, which, I submit, would lead to bad 

publicity and have the legislation stay there longer than it would ordinarily. I think by doing it the way 

the Federal Minister of Agriculture has tried to do is the proper way and I think that what can be done is 

being done. 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

69 

Although we say that we may agree substantially with what is in the Resolution — that is what we 

would like to see done, — I do not think the method that has been adopted has been proper. However, as 

I agree with that in principle, I will support the Resolution. 

 

Hon. Mr. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I may just say a word. When everyone 

seemed to be in general agreement I think it is unfortunate that the last speaker should have accused the 

Government of playing politics in introducing this Resolution and saying it is designed to embarrass the 

Federal Government and to do harm to the livestock industry. 

 

As a matter of fact, a great deal of harm has already been done to the livestock industry. First, by 

irresponsible publicity; and secondly, by the lack of any national leadership to deal with this situation 

with a firm hand. We are not going to aid the situation by all of us getting into a bomb-shelter and trying 

to pretend that this situation does not exist. The fact is, that there is now, and has been, a very 

considerable dislocation in the livestock industry and we would, it seems to me, be remiss in our duty to 

the livestock producers of our provinces, if we did not express our views with reference to this very 

serious problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no desire to embarrass the Federal Government. I want to say that probably no 

government in Canada has done less to embarrass the Federal Government on this matter than the 

Saskatchewan Government. We called a conference to give the farmers an opportunity to hear Mr. 

Gardiner and to listen to the progress which the officials of the Health of Animals Branch were making 

in combating the disease. I think the farmers appreciated that opportunity and I am sure Mr. Gardiner 

welcomed the opportunity, as did his officials, of placing the facts before the farmers rather than leaving 

the farmers to get second-hand information which oftentimes is badly coloured. I want also to say, we 

have at all times, publicly and privately, said to the people of this Province and to organizations 

representing people in this Province, that one thing we must do is to retain public confidence in the 

Dominion Health of Animals Branch. There are those who wanted to argue about the fact that the first 

case of the disease had been reported on the 1st of December and it had not been pronounced foot-and-

mouth disease until 13th of February and whether or not there had been any dereliction of duty. We have 

not felt that those matters were matters of debate or argument at this time. If there had been any failure 

to report or any laxity, those are matters that will be dealt with by those who are supervising that staff. 

The one thing we in Saskatchewan, irrespective of our political view, want to do is to (1) reinforce the 

confidence of the farmers of this Province in the Health of Animals Branch and (2) assure the rest of the 

people of Canada and the people of the United States that this epidemic is now well in hand and is under 

control and that everything that is humanly possible to be done is being done. We have tried to do that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, to express regret in the preamble is no reflection on the Health of Animals Branch, but on the 

matter of a much more important thing, on a higher level of policy. Some time or other I think we have 

to 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

70 

grow up as a nation. I think, some time or other, some government in Canada has to give leadership to 

the people of Canada and come to recognize our nationhood. When a great national emergency faced 

this country — not the little small area of 50 miles each way in which there were some infected cattle — 

but an emergency that could dislocate the entire livestock industry and ruin our trade particularly with 

the United States. When that situation arose it seemed to us that that was the time for the Federal 

Government to say, ―Since we are responsible for contagious diseases, since we are responsible for 

inter-provincial trade and the movement of commodities from one part of Canada to the other, we have 

taken over the entire situation. Maybe for a few days we will stop all movement of livestock altogether, 

then when we have the situation well in hand we will order when livestock may be moved and to where 

it may be moved and in what quantities it may be moved.‖ 

 

That would have been giving leadership. Instead of that when the announcement was made that the 

epidemic had broken out, every province was left to its own devices. It is all very well to say the Federal 

Government was going to proceed by means of negotiation. I am all for negotiation as long as 

negotiation is possible. But while the Government of Manitoba and British Columbia and Quebec has 

the right to safeguard its people against contamination, it has not got the right to prevent commodities 

passing through its territory and to say that livestock cannot be shipped from Saskatoon to Toronto 

because they happen to lie in-between. The member for Melville (Mr. Deshaye) apparently wants us to 

say, ―Well, if they want to act as a bottleneck and stop commodities moving from one part of the 

Dominion to the other, then, of course, we will have to let them.‖ I think it is time we got it cleared up 

once and for all, as to whether or not any province sitting in the centre of Canada, or in any part of 

Canada, can prevent trans-Canadian shipment of commodities from one province that wants to export 

them into another province that wants to import them. I think we are going to have to face up to that and 

I am not so sure that the Federal Government would not have exercised its authority a little more 

aggressively if the circumstances had not been different. I remember when Alberta was going to pass the 

Bank Act and was going to go into the Banking business. I was amazed at how quickly they could step 

into the picture and they said, ―No, you don‘t, you cannot do that.‖ I am quite sure if we decided that 

because Newcastle‘s disease was in poultry in British Columbia, that we were going to stop all poultry 

passing from British Columbia to Ontario and not allow it to even run on the trains through 

Saskatchewan. It would not have been long until we would have been told that we could not stop 

interprovincial trade. I think we would have been told that very quickly. 

 

Mr. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier‘s memory is at fault. I 

think that Banking Legislation went through the courts and was ruled out of order by the Supreme Court 

. . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — No, that legislation was declared ultravires immediately. As a matter of fact, the 

Lieutenant Governor was ordered not to sign it, as I remember correctly. I remember Mr. LaPoint 

making an 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

71 

announcement in the House and giving the reasons why the Federal Government had disallowed the 

legislation. No, that legislation was disallowed. As a matter of fact, our own Farm Security Legislation 

was held up for weeks while we were asked to come down and meet a committee of the Cabinet and 

give reasons why it should not be disallowed. They can act with considerable dispatch if they want to; 

but in this case, of course, they were not going to get into a row with the provinces. As a matter of fact, 

Mr. Speaker, and I speak here not offensively — but I speak with a good deal of sadness — at most of 

the Federal-Provincial Conferences I have attended I have been appalled at the failure of the Federal 

Government to stand up to some of the provincial rightists. A good bit of the fight against the provincial 

rightists has had to be carried at the Federal-Provincial conferences by provincial governments. Well, 

the Federal Government it seems to us, ought to be making a stand for Canada being looked upon as a 

nation, because whatever our faults may be here in Saskatchewan, the one thing we have not been is 

provincial in our outlook. When our friends in Manitoba had a flood a year ago last spring, though it was 

none of our business, we did not sit and look across our provincial boundary. We took in hundreds of 

their patients, old people and school children. We took them into our institutions and into our homes and 

our hospitals to look after them. We sent material down to them in whatever quantities they required. 

The people of this Province went out and subscribed in excess of half a million dollars in cold cash and 

sent it down to help the victims who had been driven out of their homes. The Federal Government put in 

several million dollars (I have forgotten now how many) but a very considerable number of millions of 

dollars to help those people. It was a national emergency. We, in Saskatchewan were one of the first to 

recognize that if these people were afflicted by a national emergency, then all of us as Canadians had 

some responsibility to help them. 

 

I do not take it too kindly that the farmers of this province, facing a national emergency — and not just 

the farmers whose cattle are afflicted with foot-and-mouth disease, but the other farmers of the province 

— were cut off from the markets and that some were required to keep stock that they were going to ship 

with the price going down. Faced with that situation, the contribution they got from a neighbouring 

province is an embargo, not only on cattle going into Manitoba, but cattle going through Manitoba, 

which it must go through to get to the great market in Ontario. I think it is time, as members of this 

Legislature, that we expressed ourselves (1) to say that we think in a case of this sort, now, or if it ever 

happens again, that we believe the Federal Government ought to give some leadership in asserting that 

Canada is a nation and that they will deal with a matter of this sort, rather than allowing it to be dealt 

with piece-meal by various provinces as they see fit, and (2) having failed to deal with it in the first 

instance that now, of course, they will use all the persuasion they can. If persuasion won‘t work, that the 

Federal Government will have to assert its authority and decide once and for all whether Canada is a 

nation or whether it is a collection of 10 little states who are hardly on speaking terms with each other. It 

is just about time we got to that position. 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

72 

Let me say just a word or two about these various clauses. No. 1 is to take immediate action to remove 

the embargo and I repeat what I said, that I think that there should be persuasion where possible, but if 

persuasion does not result in the removal of these embargoes, then I think the Federal Government ought 

to step into the field and say any interference with interprovincial trade, anything in restraint of trade, is 

contrary to the constitution of Canada and that we must insist that the people of Saskatchewan and 

Alberta be given the alienable right to ship their goods to market in other parts of Canada. 

 

With reference to No. 2, nearly all the members opposite have said that they prefer No. 2 be taken out. 

This provides for assuming control of the moving and marketing of all livestock and livestock products. 

Mr. Speaker, I do not know how you are going to have a floor price, especially if it is going to be a floor 

price paid to the farmers, and not just to the packers. I do not know how you are going to have a floor 

price paid to the farmers unless you are going to have some regulation of the flow of livestock to the 

market. The member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) put his finger on it. It will not only be a matter of 

paying a floor price, but it will be a matter of selling that livestock somewhere and surely the Federal 

Government, who is going to be charged with the responsibility of finding markets, will want some 

control so that the livestock will flow onto the market as they are able to dispose of it; and to be able to 

keep it back from the market during the period when they cannot dispose of it. I think control is 

absolutely necessary, both of movement and marketing. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the Premier a question? You are in effect asking the Federal 

Government to put on a floor price. Then, why should it concern us how they control the flow of 

market? You ask them to pay a price and then you are telling them the only way they can pay it is by 

taking control. I would say it would be quite logical to leave it to them whether they want to control it or 

not. What we want is the floor price. Let them deal with the . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — What I am afraid of, Mr. Speaker, is a floor price without control means that you 

would get into the same position you are in with reference to hogs. That is, the floor price will be a floor 

price to the packer. The packer will be guaranteed — the same situation you have now with eggs . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — But we want the floor price. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Ah, but just a moment. It makes a great deal of difference who the floor price is 

guaranteed to. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, it is to the farmer. 

 

Premier Douglas: — But just a moment. Right now, you have got a floor price on eggs. But what is the 

floor price policy? The floor price policy on eggs is that as of August 1st the Federal Government will 

take any eggs which the packers have in storage at — I think it is 34 cents a dozen. If they want to buy 

them in the meantime at 23 cents a dozen there is nothing to stop them. 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

73 

Mr. Loptson: — No, that is not right . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — May I finish the point? I am going to ask, Mr. Speaker, if I may clarify this point. 

The packers we will guarantee a given price for livestock and if they get that livestock and cannot sell it 

then the Federal Government will either make up the difference or we will take it off their hands at the 

end of a given period. That does not say that the packer has to pay that price to the farmer and if, when 

this embargo is lifted, there is a sudden rush of livestock on the Winnipeg and Toronto markets there is 

nothing to prevent the packers saying ―We have got so much cattle here that we will drop the price 8 

cents or 10 cents a pound. If they buy up the livestock and later they cannot sell it, they turn it over to 

the Federal Government on the floor price basis. Who has made the difference? They have, and that is 

exactly what is happening to floor prices today. The floor price on eggs, Mr. Speaker — there is no use 

you gentlemen opposite saying ―tut, tut, tut‖ . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Bunk. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It may be bunk but I will defy my hon. friend to go out into the country and tell 

the farm women it is bunk. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — All I am going to say . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Just a moment. Will the hon. gentleman just sit down? He can talk all he likes 

when I get through if he wants. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Yes, but the Resolution does not ask for that at all. Talk to the Resolution. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I answered a question which my hon. friend asked and now he says it is bunk. I 

want to tell him how much bunk it is. I will bring him 15 or 20 letters that have come to my desk in the 

course of the last few days from farm women . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Keep to the Resolution. 

 

Premier Douglas: — My hon. friend asked a question on floor prices and I am telling him how floor 

prices have worked, if you do not have some control. What is happening with farm wives today is that 

they are bringing in eggs and getting 23 cents and 24 cents and 25 cents a dozen. The floor price of 34 

cents a dozen is not doing them one bit of good, because it is not a floor price to them. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is ungraded eggs. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Oh, but even on graded eggs. I will give my friends lists of the prices that have 

come in. What is happening today is that the floor price is to the packing company. That is the situation. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I understood it was true that if they do not pay floor prices the eggs won‘t be taken off 

their hands when the time comes. That is certainly my understanding, Mr. Speaker. 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

74 

Premier Douglas: — Nonsense. No, Mr. Speaker, I have checked very closely with the marketing 

people; I have been checking it as these letters keep coming in increasing number to me; and my 

information is — as I get it from my officials who contact the Federal Officials on the matter — that 

after a given date, if the company has a large surplus of eggs on hand, they can turn around and the 

Federal Government will take those eggs off their hands at a given price; or if they have to sell them for 

less than that price to get rid of them, they will make up the difference. But that does not guarantee 

anything as to what they will pay the farm women; and we are afraid that exactly the same thing could 

happen with reference to cattle. We fear that if a great rush of cattle floods the market the moment that 

the embargo was lifted, the packers could very easily take advantage of that situation. 

 

With reference to Item 3 ―to maintain the minimum price for livestock‖ — everyone seems to be in 

general agreement with that; but we would take it to mean that that price would be a fixed price to the 

farmer, not just to the packers. And Item 4, ―to provide compensation for slaughtered animals at full 

replacement value, plus additional compensation to farmers affected for loss of income. The leader of 

the Opposition said, ―Well, that which we are asking for is being done.‖ But we are not sure it is being 

done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Legislation was passed and that legislation is very general in character. It gives wider powers than the 

powers that were contained under the old Contagious Diseases Act. The terms are general and not 

specific and while I am subject to correction, the information that I have is that no regulations have yet 

been passed and no order-in-council passed under the Act. Specific terms are not set out and the Board 

of Review are simply feeling their way, pending further instructions. 

 

I think that Mr. Gardiner assured the people when he was here that they would try to give them adequate 

compensation. But the treasury are also in on this because I notice one of the treasury members on the 

board and until the treasury get through with their regulations I am never just sure. I think Agriculture 

will certainly try to see that they get adequate compensation, but in the regulations, I would like to see it 

laid down in specific terms. 

 

Not only must there be adequate compensation for the actual livestock slaughter, but this serious 

question of loss of income must be dealt with. It is particularly serious for dairy farmers who did not 

raise livestock with the idea of marketing it. That livestock is their means of production and if it is to be 

taken away, they are going to be deprived of an income for at least one year. 

 

And certainly something has to be done with reference to that particular group who are virtually 

unemployed insofar as their industry is concerned for a considerable period of time. The same thing is 

true with reference to the packing-house workers. Packing-house workers are in no way responsible for 

the fact that their packing plants have to be closed. They are in exactly the same position, it seems to me, 

as the people of Winnipeg, who were flooded out, or the people in Rimouski, whose homes and places 

of business were burned. I think that the people of 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

75 

Canada will find it a small price to pay in order to wipe out this foul disease if all they had to do was to 

give compensation to the farmers and to the men who are rendered unemployed as a result of this 

epidemic. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that all parts of the House will support this resolution in order that we 

may express, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, our views to the Federal Government with 

reference to the matter now under consideration. 

 

Mr. McCormack (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, would the Minister permit a question? I did not 

want to interrupt him when he was speaking. The Rimouski affair and the flood at Winnipeg were 

national disasters; I think we appreciate that fact, but in both those cases, in addition to the Federal 

Government putting something in, the Provincial Government put something in. I was just wondering if 

there was any idea on the part of the Provincial Government here to make any contribution or assistance, 

along with the Federal Government. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have never been asked to make any contribution. I do not 

know what contribution the Manitoba and Quebec Governments made either to the Rimouski fire or to 

the flood. I know it was nothing like the amount of money which was contributed by the Federal 

Government. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — The Manitoba Government put in a substantial amount. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Yes, but it was nothing like the $7 or $8 million which I think the Federal 

Government put in. We put in a considerable amount from the people of this province. It has never been 

suggested that we should make any contribution because this is a matter which comes directly under 

Federal jurisdiction. But it always rather amazes me, Mr. Speaker, that whenever the Federal 

Government is faced with a problem — a government that has a surplus of $700 million — and this 

thing could cost them anywhere from half a million to a million dollars — the gentlemen opposite 

merely rush to say, ―Well, what is the Provincial Government going to do?‖ Well, the Provincial 

Government will do anything which is necessary to be done and so far the Federal Government has 

never indicated that it is in such a bankrupt condition that it is not able to carry the load. But I am sure if 

they get into a position where they feel they cannot carry the load, we would certainly be glad to step in 

and help them. 

 

Mr. Niles L. Buchanan (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, it seems as though this has got 

away from the foot-and-mouth disease, and as the Attorney General says, it is now more of a ―mouth‖ 

disease. There is one thing though, that I think should be mentioned and stressed, and that is under Item 

4 ―to provide compensation for slaughtered animals at full replacement value, plus additional 

compensation to farmers affected for loss of income.‖ 

 

That has been looked at from the point of view of the affect that this is going to have on the other stock-

growers in the Province. If there is not adequate compensation given to those people who have suffered 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

76 

the loss of their herds, and as a result the loss of their income, people in other parts of the province are 

going to look at this and wonder just what they might get, should the disease spread. 

 

Now, we hope the measures taken are going to prove adequate to contain this disease, and that it will not 

spread, but I represent a constituency that has a large number of stock in it, and the people there are very 

interested in finding out what compensation is going to be paid for the loss of the stock to these people 

around Regina, and what compensation is going to be paid for the loss of income during the time they 

are going to be out of the cattle-raising industry. If they find that these people are not adequately 

compensated, they will worry for fear that, if the disease should spread into their communities, for 

example, that locally it may not be reported, and the individual farmer, fearing loss of income and 

fearing loss of his herd, is going to try to stamp it out himself with inadequate measures. So it is not only 

affecting the person, the immediate person who has suffered the loss, but it could have a widespread 

effect on the stock-growing industry as a whole over the province, if the disease should spread. 

 

(Closing Debate) 

 

Hon. Mr. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, with reference to the question raised 

by the hon. member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. McCormack), who is out of his seat at the moment, I might 

say that the Provincial Government, as I mentioned in the course of my previous remarks, has already 

made available automobiles, bull-dozers, and facilities, and some 17 of our own field staff. We do not 

know if we are going to be reimbursed by the Dominion Government or not. We have not asked that 

question, but we feel that it is a contribution that we should make in co-operation with the Dominion 

authorities. Many of the veterinarians coming in from the outside did not have adequate transportation 

facilities, and they did not have drivers. They were unfamiliar with the country; we allocated those 

vehicles and drivers, and other equipment to assist in the control of this disease. 

 

Mr. Deshaye: — How many bull-dozers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I could not say how many we have; they have acquired some from the 

Conservation and Development Branch; the P.F.R.A. have some; and I have been informed that we have 

been required to give some assistance there too. Also the Department of Highways has supplied 

equipment to open up roads, and has made available the warehouse in Regina here, at some 

inconvenience to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with reference to the points that have been raised that perhaps there is some political bias 

contained in this Resolution, I want to assure the hon. members of the House that as far as I am 

concerned, there is no political bias involved. There is no inconsistency. It has been a matter of being 

consistent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have had these problems brought to our 



 

March 17, 1952 

 

 

77 

attention previously. We have discussed this matter of contagious disease control at provincial ministers‘ 

conference, and we would see the consequence of the continuing trend on the part of some provinces to 

put up their own provincial embargoes, so we were very sensitive to that. I was particularly sensitive to 

it, Mr. Speaker, and realized what might occur in this particular case. We therefore wired the Prime 

Minister, and I have read the wire to the Legislative Assembly — I read it again this afternoon, in order 

to point out the fact that we were alarmed, and indeed I was alarmed. We wired the Prime Minister 

direct, asking him to take complete control over the situation, if necessary; if there was any doubt as to 

constitutional jurisdiction, then, under the provisions of emergency powers, and as I have stated, I have 

not yet had a reply to that wire. 

 

But, once the Provincial Government placed the embargoes on that they did, I quite agreed, — and I 

quite agreed at the conference that it was no time then to try to face the issue — that we could possibly 

accomplish a whole lot more by a negotiation, and by assuring the rest of Canada that we have this 

disease under control. So we had been consistent all the way through, Mr. Speaker, and we certainly 

have not done anything that might be embarrassing to the Dominion Government. 

 

I might add further, Mr. Speaker, that in this particular province — in this particular area — the 

Dominion Government itself has prevented meat from being shipped into the quarantine area and has 

taken full control in that regard, in order to enable us to market the uninfected livestock within the area, 

to be marketed at the Burns Plant here, in Regina. 

 

Now, the Dominion Government acted, — and we feel that that is their jurisdiction completely; and 

within the province, Mr. Speaker, we feel stronger in the matter of interprovincial trade, and that this 

whole question of disease of animals and the control of this disease, does affect interprovincial trade. I 

think I have emphasized that before, Mr. Speaker, and I merely reiterate it now to again inform that we 

have not put the preamble to this Resolution to be diverse-minded, or to be unduly critical in this regard. 

 

I do think it will serve the useful purpose of pointing out to the Dominion Government, and perhaps to 

some of the other provinces, that we have grown up, as the Premier has indicated, as a nation, and it is 

time that we considered those problems, and the constitutional division of responsibility that has always 

been regarded, in this case, to be the Dominion‘s. I hope that when the disease is under control, we can 

have a conference at the first opportunity, to once and for all clarify this particular matter, so that in the 

future in the event of contagious disease breaking out, we will know who the responsible agency is. 

 

Now, I do not therefore feel that we need necessarily to tone down the preamble at all. I must say again 

that I reiterated this same attitude at the conference of farm organizations here in Room 267, when I 

pointed out very firmly, I think, to the Federal Minister that, in my opinion, the Dominion Government 

had complete and full jurisdiction in that regard; and that if the provinces could not be brought together 

by 



 
March 17, 1952 

 

 

78 

arrangement, and by the assurance that there was no further danger, then if this was going to be a 

continuing situation, I still think, Mr. Speaker, that the Dominion Government should take their 

emergency powers and take full control. 

 

Now, that is all I want to say in conclusion; and I would like to express appreciation that all the 

members of the Legislature have indicated support for this Motion. I am sure that that support will be re-

assuring to the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, unanimously. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:00 o‘clock p.m. 


