



















































Hansard: February 26, 1952


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eleventh Legislature 

13th Day 

 

Tuesday, February 26, 1952 

 

The House met at three o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, before the business of the day is 

proceeded with, I would like to read to the House the information we now have from the Department of 

Agriculture at Ottawa regarding the foot and mouth disease. 

 

This has been directed to me by the Deputy Minister of Agriculture in Ottawa: 

 

"The Department of Agriculture announced today that cattle disease recently reported from Regina 

under the name of vesicular stomatitis has been officially diagnosed as foot-and-mouth disease. 

 

"Conclusive evidence in support of this diagnosis was reported by the animal pathology laboratory at 

Hull, Quebec, on Sunday. 

 

"While there was doubt as to the exact nature of the disease, action was taken to prevent its spread. 

This consisted of: 

 

1. Quarantining all premises on which the disease was known, or expected to exist; 

 

2. Establishing a. quarantine area consisting of all municipalities in which the quarantined premises 

are located, and, a number of adjacent municipalities; 

 

3. Prohibiting the outward movement of livestock from stockyards in Saskatchewan and Manitoba, 

which might have reached animals which had been near infected animals or premises. In some cases 

this prohibition included the shipment of meat. 

 

"The purpose of the quarantine order was to prevent the possible spread of the disease to premises 

which were not infected. As a precaution the quarantine applied to a much greater area from that in 

which the known or suspected cases were found. 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

2 

“In addition, all known movements of livestock outward from the area, prior to the issue of the 

quarantine order, were traced and all possible animal contacts were examined for symptoms of the 

disease. 

 

"Special precautions have been taken to examine livestock arriving at stockyards and being 

slaughtered at packing plants, to detect symptoms. So far nothing has been reported to arouse 

suspicion that the disease has been carried to points outside of the Regina area. 

 

"Those precautionary measures will be continued and extended in any way that seems calculated to 

reduce the chances of the disease spreading, and to detect it quickly if it does spread. 

 

"Now that the disease has definitely been identified as foot and mouth, vigorous and immediate action 

is being taken to stamp it out. The action consists of the destruction of all animals known to have had 

the disease, or to have been, in any way, in contact with possible infection. 

 

"All animals destroyed will be cremated or buried deeply, or otherwise disposed of, so as to 

completely eliminate the disease organism. 

 

"All premises known or suspected to have been contaminated will be cleaned up, disinfected, 

quarantined, and kept under close observation for a sufficient length of time to make sure that there is 

no living virus of the disease left. 

 

"All necessary action to exterminate the disease will be taken at the expense of the Government, and 

all owners of livestock will be fully compensated for the value of the animals destroyed. 

 

"Wherever it is necessary to take over premises or equipment to facilitate the work of exterminating 

the disease, the owners of such equipment or facilities will be paid reasonable compensation. 

 

"Since it is impossible to foresee all of the difficulties which may have to be dealt with, it is expected 

that emergency authority will be given to the officers of the Department of Agriculture to take 

whatever action may be needed on the spot. Such authority will be exercised mainly by the veterinary 

director general; but all members of this staff, and other officers of the Department who may be 

assigned to duty with the Health of Animals division will be responsible for carrying out their 

respective parts of the programme; and they may exercise authority where necessary. 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

3 

"Since measures which must be taken to stamp out the disease will, to some extent, interfere with the 

normal commercial movement of livestock and meat, special measures may have to be adopted to 

prevent the accumulation of surplus products in one area, while shortages may prevail in others. 

 

"There may also be problems in connection with prices of livestock, cost of transportation and other 

such matters, which will have to be kept under constant review. No specific announcement can be 

made in this connection at the present. 

 

"The United States Department of Agriculture has been duly informed of developments to date, and 

will be kept informed as time goes on. 

 

"Transport companies, packing companies, livestock marketing organizations and others, whose 

normal activities may be affected, will be kept informed as to what must be done. 

 

"Special efforts will be made to inform farmers and others affected in the quarantine area as to exactly 

what procedures are being adopted, why they are necessary, and what the people should do to facilitate 

extermination of the disease. 

 

"Questions have been asked as to how foot-and-mouth disease could have become established so far 

inland as Regina, with no cases reported or suspected in eastern points, which are much nearer to 

possible sources of contagion. This question cannot be answered at present, although a number of 

possibilities are under investigation. It is worth noting that imports of livestock from Great Britain 

were between July 1951 and the end of January, 1952. Since no importation of susceptible animals is 

allowed from any other country excepting the United States, which is free of the disease, it seems 

unlikely that susceptible animals could have been the carriers. The importance of discovering how the 

disease was carried in is fully recognized and every effort is being made to throw light on this 

question. 

 

"There are three further questions that the Canadian cattle owner and the Canadian citizen may ask. 1. 

Is there danger that humans may contract the infection? According to the best available medical 

advice, the danger is extremely remote. 2. Is the Canadian meat supply imperilled by this outbreak of 

foot and mouth disease? The answer is no, not unless the outbreak were allowed to get completely out 

of hand would the meat supply be noticeably affected. 3. How many head of stock are involved? There 

are fewer than 400 animals now under quarantine, and like to be slaughtered immediately. These 

animals are on 24 different premises, all in the Regina area. 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

4 

What further number may become suspects will depend on the results of the investigation now under 

way." 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just like to add one or two words further. I do not think that people should become 

unduly alarmed about this, as it does not sound the death knoll of the livestock industry in this province, 

or anywhere else. We have been up against many problems in the farming community and this is just 

another problem. I am quite certain that, with the control measures now under way, the disease will be 

held under control. I do not think it is necessary, and I am rather alarmed at the tendency of the press, to 

feature this in a sensational way, and thereby possibly getting our farm people unduly disturbed, as well 

as the general public. I am quite certain that the disease will be under control, and as mentioned 

yesterday, we are co-operating to the fullest extent with the Dominion authorities and will continue to 

assist them by way of personnel, equipment or facilities that may be required. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. Minister of Agriculture has just received the information which 

he has just read to the House from Ottawa, I think there is so much concern about this matter that I was 

wondering if he would not consider reading that statement that he has just given, when the proceedings 

are on the air. I realize that the press will carry the report of his speech; but there is so much concern that 

I think it would be very good to take advantage of the fact that we are on the air, and it would be an 

opportunity to give these facts, in which our whole province is so much interested, to all the people right 

away. 

 

Premier Douglas: — If the House has no objection, the Minister might, later, when we are on the air, 

re-read the statement, if the House would permit. 

 

(Agreed) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — This morning I had a long distance telephone call from a correspondent in Toronto, 

I think, looking more for sensational news than otherwise; and I think the press would be well advised to 

obtain their information direct, either from Dr. N.D. Christie, Health of Animals Division in Regina, or 

better still, from Dr. Wells, who is in charge of the control work here in this area. 

 

FARM IMPLEMENT INQUIRY 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Nollet, seconded by Mr. Brown: 

 

"That a Select Special Committee be appointed to enquire into production costs, selling prices, supply, 

sale, standard of performance, methods and costs of distribution (including the incidence of tariffs and 

freight rates), and utilization of farm implements and parts and repairs therefor produced or marketed 

within the Province of Saskatchewan, and all other questions incident to the buying, selling, pricing, 

supplying and utilization thereof; 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

5 

the said Committee to report to this Assembly, from time to time during the present Session, the 

results of its deliberations with such recommendations as may appear advisable; to have power to send 

for persons, papers and records and examine witnesses under oath, and to engage the services of 

counsel and such other assistants as it may deem necessary; 

 

"That standing Order 46(1) be suspended in order that the said Committee may consist of the 

following members: 

 

"Messieurs: Brown (Chairman), Benson, Bentley, Cameron, Danielson, Dewhurst, Douglas 

(Rosetown), Erb, Heming, Horsman, Howe, Kuziak, Lloyd, Loehr, Loptson, McCormack, 

McDonald, McIntosh, Nollet, Swallow, Thair, Trippe, Tucker, Walker (Gravelbourg), Walker 

(Hanley), Woods. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — In connection with this motion, and speaking to it, Mr. Speaker, I hope that this 

particular motion will have somewhat of a sobering effect an the members of this Legislature, and will 

point up the fact that, after all, our responsibilities to the general public are the important matters facing 

this Legislative Assembly. 

 

I might say that I was very greatly disturbed, and indeed, disappointed, at the low level of the debate, 

yesterday. I do not want to cast any particular reflection; I know, at times, I become exuberant too, Mr. 

Speaker, and revert back to the language of the man on the soil. But, Mr. Speaker, I hope that this 

particular motion will take us out of what has developed into a good deal of strictly partisan political 

debate. I do not mind that, but when it degenerates to maligning individuals and their characters and 

when I am included in that, then I must take some exception, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will the hon. member confine himself to the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I could not help but make this reference. I do not know, Mr. Speaker, if I am out of 

order or not, on this particular motion, in making reference to the conduct of members in this House, but 

I can assure you that I will endeavour to conduct myself in a statesmanlike way. I am sure, too, Mr. 

Speaker, that this motion will receive the support of all members in the Legislature. 

 

The matter of price, sale and distribution of farm implements has been under investigation on many 

occasions previously. Further along in my remarks, I will give a brief review of the investigations that 

have preceded this particular one. 

 

Some may ask — why are we having this enquiry at this particular time? In answer to that question, I 

think that everyone will agree that the mechanization of the agriculture industry has gone through a 

tremendous transformation in the past years — from horse-drawn equipment we are now almost 

completely power-drawn. The increased costs as a result of that 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

6 

transformation from horse-drawn equipment to power-drawn equipment has meant that implements, 

quite naturally, increased in price or in the cost of manufacture. Of course the increasing prices, too, of 

power equipment, in more recent years, have been very pronounced, and I intend, Mr. Speaker, to deal 

with that also. 

 

One of the immediate effects of mechanization has been the economic drive towards larger operational 

farm units, and that, Mr. Speaker, is the one primary factor that our farms are getting larger and that our 

rural areas are less populated. That is the fundamental factor. It cannot be attributed to any particular 

government — particularly any provincial government. That tendency has been going on for quite a 

number of years, Mr. Speaker — and to that extent it has brought problems in its wake — problems that 

have been of constant concern to governments. There is the problem of rural education, communications 

in rural areas. All of those have been pronounced because of this one economic factor. 

 

The tendency towards larger units began at an early date, Mr. Speaker, and, before dealing with it, I 

would like to draw the attention of the House, in connection with the tendency and the economic drive 

towards larger farm units, to the relative cost of equipping a farm in the days of the horse and buggy, 

and in the days of power machinery. I am using, in these figures, the prices existing from 1936 to 1939, 

when a plow, horsedrawn cost $130; a seed drill, $260; a disc harrow, $60; a cultivator, $150; harrows, 

$ 50; binder $280; mower $90; and rake, $40; and then you could impose on that, I suppose, such other 

things as a wagon and a box and wagon gear — harness and horses that would bring the cost of 

equipping a farm, of a quarter to a half-section, back in the 'twenties, to approximately $2,000. 

 

Now, let us compare that to equipping a farm today, in 1951 on the basis of 1951 prices, on a 

mechanized basis. A tractor, Massey Harris (and I want to say I am just picking companies at random -- 

I am not picking them for any particular reason), $2,549; a John Deere discer, $747; a, press drill, $734; 

a one-way disc, $742; a cultivator, $398; a swather, $826; a combine, $3,775; and a grain auger, $380; a 

truck, $2,100; power mower, $265; side delivery rake, $445; pick-up baler, $1,025; wagon, rubber-tired, 

tractor-drawn, $260; manure spreader, $395 — they are the kind that do good, Mr. Speaker, by the way; 

it is restoring back to the land that which taken from the land in order to produce more. 

 

I just added those items up, Mr. Speaker, and they come to $14,841. We could probably delete some of 

them and still get by; but you could hardly mechanize a three-quarter section farm for much less than 

$12,000. 

 

Now that gives the relative comparison. Little wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the smaller farmer cannot 

continue to operate economically and carry the heavy capital investment under those circumstances. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, just at the moment I would ask the hon. member to refrain from 

asking any questions until I am through. I 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

7 

will be only too glad to answer anything at the conclusion of my remarks. I try, Mr. Speaker, to keep 

anything I have to say somewhat in order; the hon. member from Arm River, if he makes a speech, all 

he needs is a whole bunch of newspaper clippings and a few books to read from, and he is away. 

 

Now, to come back to the tendency towards larger farm units. We have been told, for instance, Mr. 

Speaker, that this is a late phenomenon, but that is not true. The greatest impetus towards larger farm 

units took place in the 'twenties, particularly in the period from 1926 to 1930. In that period of time, in 

1926, we had 117,000 farms in Saskatchewan, and the number of farms over 640 acres was 10,072 

farms. In 1931, we had 26,026 farms over 640 acres — more than doubled, Mr. Speaker, in that period 

of time, In that period of time, the farms over 640 acres went up by 16,000. Then in the period from 

1930 to 19363 they stayed about the same, so that in 1936 we still had about 26,000 farms above one 

section. That was largely due to the depression, Mr. Speaker, when production costs and prices were 

entirely out of relation; when farming, on any scale was unremunerative, and the desire to expand 

holdings did not have the same incentive as it did in the previous period. In 1941, the number of farms 

over 640 acres rose to 28,000, and in 1946 the number of farms over a section was 30,479. We do not 

have the figures for 1950, but we know that there has been a tremendous increase in the number of farms 

over a section since 1946. These are Dominion Bureau of Statistics figures, Mr. Speaker, and indicate 

quite clearly the trends towards larger units, and the trends in rural population as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I would like to draw the attention of the usher in the gallery that there is a lady 

in the gallery who is taking notes, which is against the rules. Kindly desist. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, in the 'twenties this problem was not quite as serious. True, our farm 

units were increasing very rapidly, but there was a good deal of undeveloped land remaining, both 

Crown land and privately-owned land, to which our expendable rural population could go. The farmer's 

son still had an opportunity of finding land elsewhere. Today, there are no new large areas of land to 

which our young people can turn to get a start; and I might mention at this point, Mr. Speaker, that one 

of the reasons that we have inaugurated the 33-year lease for cultivation purposes, is to remove some of 

this financial burden from young farmers who are endeavouring to start in agriculture. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a little bit more about price increases on power equipment itself. 

In the last few years, in the period 1946 to 1951, the overall price increase on farm machinery has been 

58 per cent, and I will quote you some figures, Mr. Speaker. For instance, in 1945, a John Deere Model 

"A" tractor cost $1,338; in 1951 that tractor cost $2,450 — an increase of 83.1 per cent. A W-6 I.H.C. 

tractor in 1945 cost $1,820, in 1951, $2,529 — an increase of over 39 per cent. A Case tractor $1,350 in 

1945; $1,950 in 1951, or an increase of 44.4 per cent. Taking a look at combines, a Massey-Harris 12 

foot self-propelled combine in 1945 cost $3,000; in 1931, $5,105, or an increase of 60 per cent. An 

International. Harvester six-foot A & R, $1,240 in 1944 and $2,483 in 1951. Swathers went up 

particularly. A swather in 1946 costing $457, in 1951 cost $695. Here is another swather that went up 

very drastically — $429 in 1945 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

8 

and $803 in 1951. All of this indicates that prices, even though the natural increase in cost of producing 

power equipment would naturally go up, have gone up very materially in the last few years. It is for 

these reasons that we are greatly concerned as to the general effect on our agricultural economy, Mr. 

Speaker. We feel, for this and other reasons, that I will enumerate as I go along,, that it is necessary now 

to have a further inquiry into the price, sale, distribution and utilization of farm equipment in this 

province. 

 

I would like to present a few other figures to indicate the tremendous capital load or financial burden 

that has been imposed on our entire agricultural economy. First of all, the current value of farm 

equipment — implements and machinery on farms in 1926, was $169,530. That went up to 

$313,107,000 in 1950 — over two times as much. And the expenses in connection with tools, 

lubricating oil, grease and repair labour for equipment went up from $7,705,000 in 1926 to $36,225,000 

in 1950. And then, looking at other costs to farmers, of taxes, rent, hired help, interest on mortgages, 

agreements for sale, unsecured debts, feed and seed (including only purchases made through the market 

channels of feed and seed), tractors, trucks, automobiles, farm business, machinery repair parts, shop 

charges, building repairs and miscellaneous, we find such items went up from $110 million in 1938, to 

$241 million in 1950. 

 

Little wonder, Mr. Speaker, that in this House we constantly express concern regarding the prices of 

farm commodities For that reason, I have said, and I think I am on firm ground, Mr. Speaker, that we 

cannot even talk in terms of floor prices, that we have got to talk and think in terms of parity prices for 

all farm commodities. A farmer's living standards and his ability to maintain services and improve the 

amenities of life in rural areas are going, to depend entirely on his net income, and the figures that I have 

quoted to you, Mr. Speaker, indicates that his net income is now in a very precarious situation, since 

agricultural prices are now dropping very rapidly in all categories, including wheat, Mr. Speaker. This 

factor aggravates the problem much more. 

 

I was interested, Mr. Speaker, in looking over some of the reports of former Commissions that had been 

set up to enquire into agricultural problems. I have a report in my hand, Mr. Speaker, of the Agricultural 

Credit Inquiry that reported in 1913. Some of the extracts from that Report are most interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, particularly in the light of what I have just mentioned. Even then, they could see the general 

tendencies of the day, with industry superimposing itself on a weak, disorganized agricultural economy 

and an extractive industrial industry extracting profits from agriculture. I have said, before, Mr. Speaker, 

and I repeat it again, that nothing is more detrimental to the conservation of our soil resources, and to the 

stability of rural life than the one factor that agriculture is feasted on by every industry, and the farmer, 

exploited, is driven to exploit the last bit of fertility from his soil. He just simply cannot carry on sound 

conservation farm practices. Now, this Commission that I had reference to was set up in 1913. The 

personnel on this Commission is somewhat interesting. The then Minister of Municipal Affairs, George 

Langley — I think a man who was highly regarded in this province was appointed; also John Heber 

Haslin, and 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

9 

Charlie Avery Dunning. (Mr. Dunning has left the field of agriculture now, Mr. Speaker; he is with Big 

Business now!); and Edmund Henry Oliver, Professor of history and economics at the University of 

Saskatchewan. This commission submitted a report, the introduction to which is very interesting, Mr. 

Speaker. It almost reads like the Regina Manifesto. I would like to read from this Report. It says — (this 

was away back in 1913): 

 

"We are face to face with a serious situation. In their attempts to grapple with similar problems, 

European countries have profoundly changed their whole rural economy. They frankly recognize that 

under modern complex conditions, organized industries prayed upon the unorganized." (It almost 

sounds like the Premier, doesn't it?) . . . "and the agriculture industry, being unorganized, suffered. All 

Europe has set herself to change this." (Too bad we didn't follow suit). "In the various countries the 

farmers are now becoming organized. Where our farmers worked separately, theirs have begun to 

work together. Even the most cursory observation proves that this has operated to the benefit of the 

rural population no less than to the advantage of the agriculture industry. But the most striking feature 

of all is that whatever the route they have travelled, the goal at which they have arrived is in every 

case the same. In every country in Western Europe, farmers have organized after the same fashion, 

namely the application of a co-operative principle to agricultural production, distribution and finance." 

 

And here, Mr. Speaker, I often hear exception taken to the organization of co-operative farm units and 

the organization of implement co-operatives. What other recourse is there for the small farmer? I wish 

members would face up to these problems realistically, and not introduce so much politics into these 

very serious problems. I think we should approach them objectively. And here is what this Commission 

said — and I think their introduction is good: 

 

"This has, without a single exception, contributed not only to the economic improvement of the farmer 

and the conservation of agricultural resources, but also the educational development of the individual 

and the progress and integration of rural society." 

 

Then they go on: 

 

"Progress and civilization have meant a transition from independence to interdependence, or, on its 

more positive side, from helplessness to helpfulness. This is true of nations. With the growth of world 

markets, nations have become more and more dependent on each other. At the same time they have 

become better enabled to assist one another. It is equally true of communities and individuals. 

Co-operation and combination have, however, hereto made greatest progress where large capital is 

necessary; where there is present a considerable amount of monopoly 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

10 

and special privilege." (We must have had a lot or that in Saskatchewan, because the Co-operative 

movement really expanded in this Province) — But to a large extent, agriculture has, till recent years, 

so far as co-operation is concerned, remained virgin soil. This is perhaps only in keeping with the 

great tragedy of the history of man's relation to the soil; that agriculture, the first industry to be 

learned, has ever been the last to be developed." 

 

I will not quote any more. There are very pertinent sections remaining in this excellent introduction, but 

this will suffice to indicate that the problem was serious even in 1913 and that we still have the problem 

with us today. Surely, Mr. Speaker, we have received many benefits as a result of mechanization of our 

agricultural industry. We have been relieved of the burden of arduous toil; but other problems have 

come to existence. The primary purpose in setting up this Legislative Committee is to enquire as to 

whether is justification for the present high prices of farm implements, to enquire also into the 

distribution thereof. 

 

Another interesting series of statistics that I would like to quote to you, too, Mr. Speaker, indicate the 

numbers of tractors sold each year from 1925 forward. In 1925 there were sold 2,176 tractors in 

Saskatchewan — in that current year. The total number of tractors on Saskatchewan farms in 1926 was 

26,674. In 1951, the total number sold was 8,947 and the total number of tractors on farms is estimated 

to be 99,908. We know that our agriculture is now most completely mechanized, and we know that 

horses have practically disappeared from the picture as far as motive power on the farm is concerned. 

 

Now, I would like to bring to the attention of the House just what this means — again re-emphasizing 

the need for proper price relationships, Mr. Speaker. I have some figures here that are very interesting, 

as far as production costs are concerned, under adverse economic circumstances. For instance, in 1930, 

the cost per acre of plowing land with horse-drawn equipment was $1.52 an acre. In 1931 when the 

depression, started, the cost was 94 cents an acre, or a drop of 38 per cent in cost. Compare that to the 

cost of plowing of an acre of land with a tractor. In 1930 it cost 98 cents an acre and in 1931, 80 cents an 

acre, or a drop of only 18 cents per acre, all of which indicates that in the period when we were farming 

with horses, we could absorb the shock of price recessions a little better than we can now that we are 

wholly mechanized. Production costs are definitely set now, and it is, therefore, necessary that the 

relationship between production cost and the price that the farmer receives also be kept in proper 

relationship. 

 

I see my time is moving along, Mr. Speaker; but I would like to review some of the inquiries into the 

farm implement business in this province that have been made in the past years. The first such 

Commission was in 1914, when a Royal Commission was set up to inquire into the whole matter 

because of the flagrant abuses on the part of the implement companies in the selling and extension of 

credit, to farmers. The findings of the 1914 Commission were, in brief, as follows: Companies operating 

in Saskatchewan at that time had manufacturing centres outside the province and sales were made 

principally by travelling salesmen. Sales on credit were secured by mortgage, with interest as high as 10 

per cent charged on such mortgages 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

11 

as Security held for the purchase price of machinery. The farmers, as a result, quite frequently lost titles 

to their land. Misrepresentation of the ability of the machine to do certain work was common practice in 

those days. Machine companies provided their own contract with warranties relieving them of any 

obligations made by the salesmen. A purchaser had only three days of trial at the end of which the 

company had to be notified by registered mail — only three days of trial. And the cancellation of 

contract even then required forfeiture of 15 per cent of the sale value of the equipment. The contract was 

binding on the purchaser with his signature, while the company was not bound until their signature was 

obtained. The result was the first Farm Implement Act passed, providing for a statutory contract giving 

certain protection to the purchaser. One was a 10 day trial period with an eight-day period for the 

company to make the machine perform. All of the provisions of that legislation gave protection against 

abuses existing at that time. Lien notes, rather than promissory notes, were provided for, thus preventing 

repossession. 

 

The Commission also reported that prices of repair parts were considered excessive, and the 

co-operative manufacture and distribution was suggested — back in 1914. The same recommendation 

came out of the 1939 Provincial inquiry. In 1920, the Act itself was reviewed again, and a further 

amendment made that all blanks in the contract form must be filled to validate the Agreement of Sale. In 

1930, the Act was again amended to tighten the provisions for supplying of repair parts, the vendor 

being required to maintain sufficient repairs for machines sold by him at a stated price. Now we again 

amended the Act, as members know, in 1949, and we provided for licensing of dealers, and we also 

provided for the inspection or of dealers' establishments, for the inspection from the service angle, and 

also inquired into the amount of repair parts that were maintained by the dealer. 

 

We have been making progressive headway in the interests of protecting the farmer on the provincial 

level, and I want to make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that, in addition to inquiring into the important matter of 

price, we are hopeful, too, to inquire into the general sale and distribution of farm equipment in this 

province, because it concerns our own particular field of jurisdiction. Hon. members know, I think, that 

the relationship between companies and dealers have changed very considerably over the years, and it is 

necessary, and I fully welcome this Legislative Committee's inquiry into this field of activity that 

concerns us. There has been a good deal of change taking place, and we would like to do all we can to 

strengthen the legislation and to permit the farmer to make recommendations that will enable farmers to 

purchase machinery more cheaply, to obtain more adequate service, and to also protect the farmer 

against further misrepresentation. 

 

I should have mentioned, Mr. Speaker, that we also did provide in the amended Act of 1949, for an 

engineering committee. The personnel has not been appointed to that committee as yet. We were unable 

to get the type of personnel that we thought we should have for the purpose of appraising machinery as 

to design and structure and workability. Perhaps the members of the Legislature will want to inquire into 

that field very closely, and possibly recommend that much more should be done in the matter of testing 

equipment. It is big business now. I can cite some equipment that has come in to this province, sold at 

very high prices, that was absolutely useless and a complete 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

12 

loss to our farmers. So, anything that we can get from the Legislative Committee that will strengthen 

that legislation that we have, will, I know, be appreciated by the farmers of this Province. 

 

Now, I think, Mr. Speaker, in closing there are three main facts that I would like to re-emphasize that 

have given rise to the need for a further inquiry. They are, primarily; we are now completely 

mechanized; the burden of cost is greater on the farmer than ever before; the matter of price becomes 

very important, since it bears a very great weight on this whole matter of rural population, rural services, 

the horse now having been almost completely replaced by motive power. The other thing that I think we 

should be concerned about, and inquire into carefully, is the unprecedented increase in farm machinery 

in very recant years, to determine whether those increases are justified, to determine the factors that have 

contributed to those increased prices. And then, thirdly, a distribution policy that will serve our farmers 

in the most efficient possible manner, and that will afford the greatest possible economies and the best 

possible service in distribution. 

 

I would, therefore, move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the hon. member for Bengough (Mr. Brown), the 

motion as it appears on the Order Paper. 

 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, with regard to the Report submitted from that Select 

Committee set up on farm implement prices and distribution by the Saskatchewan Legislature in 1939, I 

think that the findings at that time are indeed pertinent and possibly to a large degree apply even today. 

Two of their main findings are, first, that the retail prices of farm implements and repair parts are too 

high, and, secondly, that the industry itself cannot, or will not suggest a remedy. Then they go on to 

point out approximately 12 specific recommendations which the Committee at that time suggested might 

be, or have within them, a solution to some of the problems that faced the farmers at that time relative to 

the implement cost and the implement requirement. 

 

As I suggested a moment ago, some of these recommendations have had some considerable merit and 

the chief recommendations which that Committee made at that time was that there should be set up in 

the Province of Saskatchewan a co-operative organization for the purpose, with the ultimate goal of the 

manufacturing and distribution of farm machinery in the province of Saskatchewan, and in that way 

reduced the enormous cost of distribution which existed at that time, and to a large degree exists at the 

present time. While implementation of some of the recommendations of that Legislative Committee of 

that day may have brought some benefits to our distribution system, particularly through the setting up 

of the C.C.I.L., it did not entirely solve the problem that faced us — that of obtaining farm implements 

at a reasonable price. 

 

In setting up a co-operative organization for the distribution of farm machinery, many difficulties were 

encountered. First of all, as would be supposed, there was a lack of capital among the organized farmers 

to go out and set up an efficient and effective distribution system, particularly if that distribution system 

was going to work back into the manufacturers’ field. 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

13 

And, also, during the organization stages, and setting up of the farmers' organization, there was the 

shortage of material and the inability because of restrictions, to enter into the manufacturing field. In 

addition to that there was the question of obtaining a system of distribution which could, at the same 

time provide services to the farmers themselves, and at the same time provide the savings. 

 

Well, might I suggest these recommendations, made in that Legislative Committee at that time, had 

considerable merit in them, and may have had within them the solution to many problems if they could 

have been fully implemented; and if they could have been fully implemented; and if they could have 

been fully implemented, may to some degree, at least, have alleviated the problem that faced the farmers 

at that time, and not created the serious problems that face the farmers at the present time, particularly 

that of the high cost of farm implements, and the particular problem which faces the farmer at the 

present time — that of the relationship between the things we have to sell and the things we have to buy, 

of which the purchase of farm implements has become more and more a major part. For that reason, that 

question is still causing a great deal of concern not only to those people directly engaged in agriculture; 

also to those who are dependent upon agriculture in an indirect way. Because of the fact that that 

concern is still there, there have been further investigations following those which occurred in 1936-37, 

and in Saskatchewan in 1939. There has been, for another federal commission investigation, held in 

Washington in the year 1948, and in the States they have a continuing committee both of the House of 

Representatives, and the House of Congress to investigate the farm implement industry in the United 

States. 

 

I think it is interesting to note that these investigations have been hold in the United States which is the 

chief source, or at least one of the chief sources, of manufactured implements in the North American 

continent, and Canada has been for a goodly number of years, an importer from that source of 

manufactured articles in the farm implement field. All of these investigations and committees and 

commissions indicate that there is a common problem, with certain features peculiar to certain areas, and 

to certain features of both distribution and manufacture. They all indicate that, in spite of the fact that 

there has been certain legislative action taken, in spite of the action which farmers have taken through 

their own organizations, many of the main problems are still with us, and to it have been added in the 

past year many more factors to some degree to say the least, have aggravated the situation. One of these 

factors which the Minister referred to is the mechanization of the agricultural industry, particularly in 

Canada, and this mechanization has made its impact felt and has in many ways, changed the pattern of 

the agricultural economy of Western Canada. 

 

But with the mechanization of our agriculture, the people within that industry had, as a result, to pay a 

very high price, not only as to the high cost of the implements in terms of dollars and cents, but what is 

possibly more important, as I suggested a few moments ago, in terms of the increased disparity that 

exists between the returns of our agricultural products and the cost of production, of which the cost of 

these implements is a major item. 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

14 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you will note that in the resolution which is before the House at the present time, 

there is some difference as to the terms of reference that exist in this motion and the terms of reference 

of the Implement Committee in 1939. In 1939, the Committee confined itself mainly to investigating the 

cost, sale and distribution of farm implements and repairs, and, as has been indicated, this present 

motion has considerably extended terms of reference to include not only the production cost, selling 

price, but also the supply, sale and standard of performance, and methods and costs of distribution and 

utilization of farm implements. 

 

I would draw your attention to the extension of reference on two particular items. First is the question of 

supply. I doubt that, at the time of investigation in 1939, the factor of supply was necessarily a great 

factor but as we see at the present time, many of those parts which are presently going into farm 

implements, becoming more and more required in defence programmes, the question of supplying the 

need of basic material for farm implements, the question of supply does indeed become an important 

factor. And also, I would draw your attention to the fact that the terms of reference have been extended 

to include the utilization of our farm implements, which as far as relating to the agricultural economy is 

indeed important, and it is also possible that through some suggestion that might be made, it may be 

possible through greater and better utilization of our farm implements, to reduce the necessary 

investment on the farms of western Canada in terms of farm implements. 

 

But to obtain a true picture of the impact of mechanization on our agricultural economy, to obtain a true 

picture of what it is costing the agricultural industry to have this mechanization, and to have a true 

picture of the relationship that the cost of farm implements has had on our agricultural economy, it may 

be necessary to give a few statistics. I realize, Mr. Speaker, that the statistics at their best are very dry, 

and at times speakers in debates use statistics much as a drunken man uses a lamp post — more for 

support than for illumination; but I suggest that such statistics may be necessary to illustrate certain 

specific trends and the manner in which the high cost of farm implements are being felt. While it is true 

that, through the medium of increased mechanization, we have increased the productivity of the 

individual man on the farm, we have not necessarily increased our entire production in our agricultural 

industry. I think a reference to the last 25 years of production will illustrate that this mechanization has 

not necessarily resulted in an increased production to take care of the increased cost of the farm 

implements that we are presently using now, and, as we look back over the past 25 years, we find that 

the lowest physical production in the province of Saskatchewan occurred in the year 1937; that the high 

physical production in the province occurred in the year 1942, and that, in 1950, in spite of the fact that 

we are continually becoming more mechanized, our physical production in the Province of 

Saskatchewan was considerably below that of 1942. 

 

I would also point out that in the year 1939 the physical production in the Province of Saskatchewan was 

greater than it was in 1950. That indicates, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, that we have not necessarily got 

the increased production available to take care of the increased cost due, in part, at least, to 

mechanization as it exists at the present time. I think it 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

15 

is even more clearly illustrated when we relate the returns we get for our agricultural products in terms 

of that which we presently spend upon farm implements in Saskatchewan. Take only the last five or six 

years, in which we have had a rapid mechanization; if we are going to take any period and say that the 

farm implement costs have increased, we can take the last five or six years. Referring, for instance, to 

the year 1945, at that time in the Province of Saskatchewan there was sold at retail level machinery 

valued at $21 millions. This, in terms of percentage of cash income is 7 per cent. That is to say that in 

1945, of our total cash income, we spent 7 per cent on machinery at the retail price. Compare that with 

1950 when we spent approximately $80 millions on farm machinery in Saskatchewan. Relating that to 

our cash income, we find that we spent 22 per cent of our cash income in 1950 for machinery at a retail 

cost price. 

 

This, of necessity meant that we got an increased investment on the prairie farms for farm implements 

and machinery, and this is borne out by a survey which was made during 1950, in which it is indicated 

very clearly that the amount of investment which is required for a farmer to operate has materially and in 

some instances, has increased 200 and 300 per cent over the last 10 years. This has been particularly true 

in the last five or six years, when it has been possible to obtain machinery at a price, in quantities, 

greater than in the years just previous to that time. I do not think there is any question but what the 

necessity of this enormous investment has been one of the major factors in the present trend within our 

agricultural economy. It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that this investment has been done largely on 

the basis of credit, which, I suggest, is the result, first of a faulty agricultural economy and secondly, a 

result of the fact that the cost of farm implements has been too high, not only in relationship, as I 

suggested, to agricultural products, but also has been too high in terms of dollars and cents. 

 

To illustrate the extent it has been necessary to obtain the credit to buy this machinery, we have only to 

look at the report of the Farm Improvement Loan Act for the period 1945-50. This act was put into 

effect in 1945, and made its first general loans in 1946. The point I wish to make, Mr. Speaker, is that in 

1949, they made loans on behalf of machinery for farms of some $15 millions. When you realize that 

loans are only made on 2/3 of the cash price of those farm implements, this means that in 1949 loans 

were obtained on the machinery value of approximately $24 million. In 1950 there were loans made of 

$21 million, or loans obtained on the machinery of approximately $32 millions. Now, in 1949, with 

loans made of $24 millions, the total amount of machinery sold in that year was $72 million, which 

means that loans were made to this source on approximately 33 1/3 per cent of all the machinery sales 

made in that year. In 1950, loans had been made on approximately 40 per cent of all machinery sales 

through the same source, and I suggest that that is indeed a high price to pay for machinery, when 

through one source alone in 1950 we required loans in order to obtain 40 per cent of our machinery sale. 

 

I think it is also significant to note that, not only in the year 1949-50 has there been an increase, but 

every year since the Act has been in operation, there has been an increase in loans required to buy new 

machinery. Then, in addition to this source, which is only through the banks 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

16 

guaranteed by the Farm Improvement Loan Act, there are other sources of credit to which the farmer are 

no doubt turning. For instance, there are Credit Unions, finance organizations, and indeed, depending 

upon the credit, facilities of the agent to provide them with credit. 

 

Now I have suggested, Mr. Speaker, that we have seen the necessity of obtaining these loans, and I 

suggest that there might be some suggestion made from this that the farm implement prices are indeed 

too high. The Minister of Agriculture has illustrated the increases which have occurred on certain 

specific farm implements, and has indicated that in the last five or six years there has been an enormous 

increase in certain of these particular commodities, and I would only refer you to one or two of the basic 

implements which have increased as high as 90 per cent in the last five years. I suggest there is some 

reason for this increase other than the material increase in the cost of production, and I think the returns 

from certain of the farm implement companies must give us some lead as to the reason why there has 

been such an enormous increase in the cost-price of farm implements. We can refer to the report, for 

instance, of the Massey-Harris Company, which in 1945 indicated that it had a net profit after income 

tax, bad debts, and all other contingencies had been met, of $1.5 million. In 1950, that same company 

had a net profit on the same basis of $15 millions, or a 1,000 per cent increase. The Cockshutt Company, 

as another illustration, in 1945 had a profit of $266,000 or approximately one-quarter of a million 

dollars. In 1950, it had a net profit on the same basis of $2 million, or eight times as great as 1945. The 

John Deere, as another major company, had in 1945 a net profit of some $9 million. In 1950, that net 

profit had increased to $37 millions, or a four-fold increase, The International Harvester Company in 

1945 had a net profit of $24 millions; in 1950 the net profit was $66 millions — or an increase of three 

times over its net profit of 1945. 

 

If we look at the net returns of one of these companies as illustration, Mr. Speaker, and let us take the 

Massey-Harris Company. In 1945, the Massey-Harris Company had a return on investment, after paying 

income tax, of 8.5 per cent on its investment; in 1950 that same company had a return of 33.6 percent on 

its investment after paying income tax, on the basis of a net return. Now, if we look at it in terms of net 

profit per dollar a sale, we find that this same company, the Massey-Harris Company, in 1945 had a net 

profit per dollar a sale of 1.37 in 1945, and in 1950 that net profit per dollar a sale increased to 9.14. I 

would suggest that, on the basis of those returns, this would justify an inquiry into the enormous profit 

which these companies have been making out of their farm implement business, of which Saskatchewan 

has become a very important part. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it has been indicated by the Federal Trades Commission that a .5 ratio 

of sales through investment is the breaking point as to profit and loss, and yet we find these machine 

companies operating on a .76 sales ratio to investment, which indicates that they are well above the 

breaking point between profit and loss. I realize there are other factors which enter into the cost of 

production, other than the profits; for instance, labour and materials enter into production cost. But, in 

1945, for example, in relation to the sale price, labour and material costs amounted to 86 per cent; in 

1950, labour and material costs had been reduced to 73 per cent. This would indicate, in my opinion, 

that the increased 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

17 

cost cannot justifiably, in its entirety at least, be laid against the increased cost of labour and materials, 

and these have been offset by a collection and administration expense, which too have gone up, 

particularly in connection with administration expenses. 

 

But I think the greatest increase indicated in the production cost, other than the profits, has been the 

amount retained by the company concerned. In 1945, they retained 97 per cent of the sales; in 1950 they 

retained 3.47 per cent. I would further point out that all of these percentage figures are given on greatly 

increased sales in 1950 as compared with 1945. I would suggest that all of this would indicate that the 

greatly increased sales cost ware not necessarily justified on the basis of true increased cost of 

production; and I suggested a few moments ago, another question which might enter into the picture as 

far as potential increased cost of production is concerned, and will have its effects on the mechanization 

of agriculture, is the question of supply of those parts which enter into the production of machinery and 

implements, particularly that of steel, is being the main material article which enters into the production 

of farm machinery. 

 

While it is true there is no definite means of obtaining the amount of steel that will be allocated to our 

Canadian manufacturing, I do suggest that certain comments which have been made by authoritative 

sources indicate what he may expect in the future, and let us refer to a current review of agricultural 

conditions in Canada put out by the Dominion Department of Agriculture, which suggests that, at the 

present, the farm equipment industry expects to supply farm equipment in 1952 at or near 85 per cent of 

the 1951 level. The "Financial Post" of November 3, 1951, indicates that the production of farm 

machinery in the United States and Canada has already been cut by 25 per cent in the fourth quarter In 

its estimate, and we could go on to illustrate that there is every indication that the supply of material 

(that is, materials for farm implements), will certainly not be as great in 1952 as it was in 1951. On the 

other hand, we have what appears to be a constant and steady demand for the implements. The farm 

implement dealers have indicated that, from their observation, there is just as keen a demand for farm 

implements at the moment as there was a year ago, and this, in my opinion, may very well result in 

either an increased cost to the farmer on the basis that there will be an increased competition the for the 

few machines available, or that on the other hand, the cost of machinery might increase on the basis that 

the implement manufacturing companies are not working at capacity, and, as such, are not working are 

not working as efficiently as if they had all the supplies which they could handle. 

 

I would refer to one other point raised in the terms of reference, Mr. Speaker, namely, in connection 

with the method and cost of distribution. As I suggested at the outset, there has been some improvement 

made in our method of distribution, but I do not think anyone would want to suggest that they are in any 

way the most efficient and the most economical that could possibly be made, and some of these 

improvements which we feel have been improvements, may have placed an undue burden on the 

implement dealers in the Province of Saskatchewan and prevented them from rendering the service 

which we expect them to render. As I suggested, I do not think in our method of distribution that we 

have the most efficient; and that we have put into that 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

18 

distribution the most economy; and on that basis, I believe there is some justification — indeed, a great 

deal of justification — for further inquiry into what existed in 1939. The same is equally true of this 

question of utilization, which I suggest is more important today possibly than it was in 1939. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that the Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) and myself have attempted 

to outline the need and the necessity of an inquiry of this type. We have attempted to illustrate to the 

House the terms of reference that are involved in setting up a Committee, but I would like to suggest to 

the members of the Legislature that if they have, in their opinion, a desire to have the terms of reference 

extended to include some other feature of the farm implement business as it effects our agricultural 

economy, I feel satisfied that such a suggestion will receive the most serious consideration of the 

members of this House. 

 

However, in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I think that all members will realize that the solution to the 

problem of the high cost of farm machinery, and its effect upon our agricultural economy is a challenge 

to the imagination and ingenuity of the members of this Legislature, and particularly to those members 

who are going to be asked to sit on this particular Committee. If this Committee is able to come up with 

a solution to any one of the many problems, or with the implementation of any of the recommendations 

which a Committee of this sort may make, that will place the mechanization of agriculture on a sounder 

economical base — it will indeed have served a useful purpose. 

 

As members of this Committee, we are accepting a responsibility that I hope we will not take lightly, 

and that we will take every avenue at our disposal to make our contribution to a solution to what may be 

construed as one of the major problems facing those who are directly engaged in agriculture as well as 

the economic welfare of those who are directly, or indirectly dependent on it for their welfare. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest that, if this motion is carried, and this Committee is set up, it 

would be possible to set up the organization Committee tomorrow morning, and with that, Mr. Speaker, 

I take great pleasure in seconding the motion introduced by the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of Opposition) — Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to detain the House very 

long in bringing observations in regard to this motion. 

 

I do not think there is any doubt that any of us representing any part of Saskatchewan, whether it be a 

rural seat or a city seat, can have any doubt about the importance of farm implements to our economy, 

and certainly they are just as important now, if not more so, than they have ever been. I think this is 

illustrated by the facts or the figures given by the Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) in regard to 

the increased mechanization of our farms. 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

19 

I do not think there is any doubt but that it is quite clear to anybody who observes the situation in 

Saskatchewan today, that it would be a very bad thing for agriculture in Saskatchewan if it had to carry 

on with the same implements that it used 20 years ago. I think everybody realizes that one of the reasons 

why agriculture is in a much better position today than it would otherwise be is the fact that farming can 

be carried on so much more effectively with the same number of people on the farm. In other words, 

mechanization is permitting farmers to produce much more cheaply than they were able to do 15 or 20 

years ago. Of course, this improvement in the nature of our farm implements has been, therefore, of the 

greatest possible importance to our economy. The extent to which there has been that improvement, and 

the extent to which the implement companies are entitled to credit for it, naturally is something that may 

be examined into when this Committee meets. 

 

Then, of course, on the other hand, there is the question of the cost of farm implements. Ever since this 

Western country has been settled we have had our prices set pretty well on the things we have to sell by 

the prices on world markets, and it has been a very great grievance that for so many of the things we had 

to buy, and particularly the implements of primary production on these western plans, their prices should 

have been made higher by a tariff policy which tended to raise the prices of things we had to buy, and 

which, of course, did not help us at all in regard to the prices of things we had to sell, but on the contrary 

had a further injurious effect in that as the tariff barred out imports, it made it hard at times to sell the 

very products that we had to sell. So, it has been more or less in common agreement on the part of 

nearly everyone in the west, that farm implement prices should not be held up by a tariff policy. 

 

In 1936 this question was coming to the fore very strongly in view of the fact that farm prices had fallen 

to a very low level in the early years of the thirties, and of course, as too often happens, the prices of the 

things that the farmers had to buy had a much greater rigidity than the prices of things they had to sell. 

So the farmer was in a very difficult position as a result of that. 

 

In 1936 a motion was made in the House of Commons that this should be studied by the Committee on 

Agriculture and Colonization. I was very interested, just before coming into the House, to look over that 

debate and to see that one of the first speeches I made in the House of Commons I made in the debate on 

that particular matter. It is very interesting to look back and think of those times. And while we may feel 

that conditions are not exactly as we would like to have them today, they certainly are a great deal better 

than they were at that particular time. 

 

It is very interesting to see that one of the items that we had very much in mind at that time was that we 

still had a tariff on farm implements. One of the matters discussed was the desire, particularly of western 

members, that the tariff on the on the implements of farm production should be eliminated entirely. Of 

course, it is one of the things that I am very pleased about that fight, which was carried on for so long on 

behalf of the producers of western Canada was won, and finally the tariff was eliminated on farm 

implements. I am quite aware of the fact that people who, up to that time, had tried to defend the tariff, 

tried to confuse the issue by saying that because the prices 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

20 

did not come down at once by the amount of the tariff, therefore the tariff did not matter. Of course, we 

know that there was a tendency for the price that was charged in Canada to be pretty well the American 

price across the line, plus the amount of the tariff. It was maintained more or less at that level, because a 

farmer could not go anywhere across the line and buy an implement, and bring it across without it 

costing him practically the same as if he had bought it within Canada. At the time when the tariff was 

taken off, there was a tendency for prices to rise all over the world, including the United States, and so, 

naturally the prices went up here, and went up there. But, what was overlooked was that if the tariff had 

been kept on and the past experience had been the case again, the prices would have gone up even more 

in Canada, so that they would have been higher than the United States prices by the amount of the tariff. 

Well, when the tariff was off that could not be the case. The prices could not be any higher in Canada 

than they were across the line, except to the extent that freight might enter into the picture. 

 

The result has been that on account of tariff being off, farm implement prices in western Canada have 

been no higher, and in some cases lower, than in the United States. I know that there would be no 

thought any longer of trying to put the argument across that the taking off of the tariff has not benefited 

us at all; but I know that argument was raised at the time it was taken off. 

 

The Agricultural and Colonization Committee studied the matter in 1936 in the House of Commons, and 

they recommended that a special Select Committee be set up to continue the investigation in 1937, and 

that was done. That Committee made a very careful examination of the situation, and made several 

recommendations in regard to the matter. One of them, as I have said, attacking, this question of the 

tariff on the implements of farm production in western Canada, which I am glad to say, at least has been 

accomplished. Then another item that was mentioned by the hon. member for Bengough was one of the 

things that was really brought out very strongly: the excessive cost of the way in which implements were 

handled, due to the selling of implements on time. It was brought out that, due to that system and due to 

the losses, due to failing to collect in many cases, the cost of the credit that the farmer got in the 

time-sale was most excessive. It was referred to in this Committee of the House of Commons, and on 

Page 325, it refers to the question of the cost of a binder on time. It points out that there the credit 

extended in such a case actually costs the farmer on a per annum basis 33.8 per cent, and even on the 

best possible basis cost 31.9 per cent. It is pointed out there that the loss of the implement companies on 

that policy ran into millions of dollars, which ultimately had to be paid by the farmer and paid for as he 

purchased machinery. 

 

So one of the things I was particularly interested in was the question of cutting down the cost to the 

farmer of credit in regard to buying his machinery. And for that reason, I was very strongly in support of 

some good system as was ultimately set up by the Farm Improvement Loan Act. 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

21 

I was very interested in those figures. I intended to check them up myself, but I had not done so recently; 

but I think that that has been one of the best results of this report, of this inquiry, because, under the 

Farm Improvement Loan Act, as Your Honour knows, the farmers' borrowings are guaranteed in part by 

the Dominion Government. As a result, it was possible to ask the banks to furnish credit for that purpose 

at simple interest — whether the loan is in arrears or not, it is 5 per cent for all of them, which of course, 

is a tremendous improvement in comparison with the situation which prevailed before that time. These 

are some of the results of the Federal investigation in the House of Commons. 

 

This Legislature in 1939 on motion of the Hon. Mr. Patterson, set up a Committee on prices and 

distribution. They were in a position to examine the report and evidence which had been brought out in 

Ottawa, and more or less bring them up to date, see to what extent the recommendations made were 

actually working, or being lived up to, and make further recommendation in the light of our special 

conditions in Saskatchewan. That committee was set up on the motion of Mr. Patterson, February 3, 

1939. It proposed certain solutions, and it is very interesting to look at them today. They proposed 

certain solutions within Saskatchewan. One — the point was brought forward as a suggestion that there 

be more manufacturing in Western Canada. After looking into that matter, they suggested that that be 

referred to the Industrial Development Board which had just been set up, and that all possible 

consideration should be given to it. This is a matter which, I think, the Committee we are setting up 

should give attention to, because I feel myself that if gas is discovered in this Province in the quantity 

which we think will be discovered, and hope will be discovered, I am quite satisfied that from that gas 

we can not only generate electric power as cheaply as it can be generated from, the average 

hydro-electric development plant, but we would also have the fuel and so on to provide the necessary 

fuel for the processes of starting, of going more into the field of manufacturing. I cannot see why, 

especially with the freight rate problem and the high cost of transporting goods, and if we do make 

discoveries of gas and oil; I can not see why there cannot be some real hope of industrial development 

along that line. I believe from the figures recently seen, Western Canada has been using about 75 per 

cent of all the farm machinery consumed in Canada. If that is the case, and we can develop cheap 

sources of power and fuel, it seems to me that there are great possibilities there, even more than lay 

before the Committee in 1939. 

 

Then, another suggestion made was that there was great waste in the matter of distribution of farm 

implements: too many implement agents and all that sort of thing. That was looked into by the 

Committee, and it was suggested that some sort of a system of licensing and regulation implement 

agencies be embarked on by the Government. The Committee, however, indicated that it thought that 

many things ought to be considered before passing judgment on such a plan, and it said they had not had 

sufficient time nor opportunity to come to their own formal opinion on the matter. This Government 

caused legislation to go through which has provided for this licensing, and it will be interesting to see if 

they feel whether anything much has been accomplished by it, in this investigation. 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

22 

Another suggested plan which, of course, brought up this whole question, was the cost of credit, and it 

was suggested that, perhaps if there was some system of centralized credit, the cost of it could be cut 

down. That was gone into a great deal, but in that regard the Committee recommended further 

consideration. As I stated, I feel that the system that is in force in that regard, of putting the credit of the 

country to a limited extent behind loans to people to buy machinery, has worked out very well indeed. It 

has worked out much better than any of us who were advocating it in the House before it was adopted in 

1945 ever, I think, thought it would work out. It has been a real benefit not only in this field, but in 

regard to other fields where the farmer could borrow money at that low rate of interest, and could also 

get credit more readily because the Government guaranteed the banks against losses up to the extent, (I 

think it was), 10 per cent of the amount loaned. Actually, many people were very nervous about that — 

about the possible great losses and so on; but it was in the nature of introducing the insurance principle 

against loans. As a matter of fact, the farmers have got a very low rate of interest; have got credit they 

otherwise would not have got, in order to mechanize their farm, and be able to produce much cheaper, 

and the cost to the Federal Government has been negligible. 

 

Another suggested plan was brought forward by Mr. Williams, who then, I believe, was the head of the 

C.C.F. party In Saskatchewan. He felt there should be some sort of a Government Board set up which 

would buy the machinery in bulk and get it cheaper, and then he suggested that, if it were done that way, 

and the machinery was handled by the co-operative associations, or if these would not undertake the 

task, through the present dealer outlets, he suggested a saving as much as 40 per cent could be made. He 

said: 

 

"The plan is based on the assumption the Government Board, having control within Saskatchewan or 

all distribution agencies, would have volume of purchasing power, and therefore, ability to control the 

price structure." 

 

The Committee point out 12 different objections to the plan, and I take it, from the fact that the present 

Government has not adopted it, that they must have been impressed by these different objections that 

were raised at that time, and I do not think I will bother taking the time of the House to go into it today; 

but it is something that, I suppose, may come up again, and that was another suggestion made. 

 

Another suggestion that the Committee made and they finally agreed to this — was the co-operative 

plan. That was brought forward to the Committee by the Co-operative Wholesalers, when they gave a 

submission to the committee. Mr. Fowler appeared on their behalf, representing the co-operative group, 

and his submission at that time is very interesting, and it is very interesting to see the reaction of that 

Committee at that time to it. I mention this particularly at this time, Mr. Speaker, because, as you know, 

in 1939, there was a Liberal majority in the Legislature and, it is interesting to read this in the light of 

the attempt made from time to time to make out that the Liberal Party was not favourable to 

co-operatives, and that 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

23 

progress in respect to co-operatives was all brought about by the election of the present Government. 

This Committee, on which there was a Liberal majority, on Page 41 of the report, state as follows: 

 

"The Committee wishes to publicly record its high opinion of the character, experience and soundness 

of judgment evidenced by the representatives of the Co-operative movement in this province on their 

appearance before the Committee. The Committee realized that any such plan must be ably led and 

directed, and is of the opinion that the Co-operative movement in this province is fortunate in that 

regard." 

 

This is the plan which I will deal with now, which was recommended by the Committee as against the 

plan of the Government taking the matter over, as recommended at that time apparently by Mr. 

Williams. The Co-ops made the submission and the main points in the submission are very interesting. 

They are summarized on Page 42 of this Report. They say first of all: 

 

"The main points of the submission may be summarized as follows: 

 

(1) The present price of farm implements to farmers is much too high and can be greatly lowered by 

the adoption and application of cooperative principles on the part of the farmers of this Province. 

 

(2) As an indication of the result of co-operative effort the Consumers Co-operative Refinery is now 

manufacturing and distributing gasoline for less than one-third of the cost suggested by the major oil 

companies. 

 

(3) Large corporations are grossly inefficient and add items of cost without improving utility of 

article being sold. 

 

(4) Co-operatives cannot be set up. They must grow from a consumer demand on the part or the 

people, together with a determination to be loyal to co-operative principles so as to achieve 

worthwhile results." 

 

I think that is very interesting — the suggestion that co-operatives have to grow. They cannot be set up 

by Government action. They, in their submission, point out several cases where Government has 

attempted to set up co-operatives, and where there has been a failure as a result: 

 

(5) Ultimately if given sufficient consumers' support co-operative manufacture and distribution of 

farm implements could save at least 40 per cent at the present retail price of farm implements. 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

24 

(6) The Co-operative Associations are of the opinion on that ultimately a binder costing $130 to 

manufacture in Eastern Canada could be laid down in the farmer's yard in Saskatchewan at not more 

than $177, if co-operative principle of distribution applied. 

 

(7) Co-operative credit advanced to members is the safest of all credit as each member is moved by 

his own interest to take care of his indebtedness to his co-operative association. 

 

(8) Credit Unions should be encouraged to assist in financing the Co-operative Farm Implement 

business and to place the farmer in a position of independence. 

 

(9) The Saskatchewan farmers have shown ability to solve the financial problems of the co-operative 

movement. The members of the Cooperative Refinery have $60,000 on deposit with that association, 

assisting it in financing its needs. 

 

(10) Competition as it is known in large corporate industry is exceedingly costly and wasteful. 

 

(11) Present competition produces goods from the standpoint of maximum profit, and not from that 

of maximum utility. 

 

(12) Factors which enter into the success of cooperative associations are efficient management, 

adequate direction and loyalty of members. 

 

(13) Examples or failure of certain co-operative ventures set up (that is to say, organized from the 

top down). There must be genuine cooperative demand for the products from the people as a 

necessary preliminary to any co-operative development. 

 

(14) Recommendations to the Committee to speed up present programmes of co-operatives in the 

manufacture and of farm implements: 

 

(a) Educational and supervisory assistance to organized co-operatives. 

 

(b) A suggestion (not a request) that the Government make available for wholesale co-operative 

societies a revolving fund of say $50,000 to enable it to develop a little more speedily its farm 

implement business. 

 

(15) Would look with disfavour on any large grant or loan of money to the Co-operative movement 

until the farmers of Saskatchewan indicated support of a co-operative programme on such a scale. 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

25 

(16) If the Co-operative movement made wise use of revolving fund of $50,000, increased assistance 

could be given to enlarge operations. 

 

(17) It might take from 3 to 10 years to build up a substantial co-operative farm implement business 

to the extent that it would be a real factor in the net cost of farm implements. 

 

(18) The Co-operative Associations were of the opinion that no substantial saving could be made by 

Co-operative Associations acting merely as agents of the farm implement companies. 

 

The Committee strongly approves of the Co-operative Plan before outlined. 

 

It is definitely of the opinion that the true and permanent solution to the problem of farm implement 

prices is to be found in co-operative effort. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

"It unreservedly approves of the long-term plan, and definitely recommends to the Government of this 

province that it give to the Co-operative movement the support and assistance suggested. 

 

It recommends in its findings: 

 

(1) That the Government of this province invite the co-operation of the Dominion Government and the 

Governments of the provinces of Manitoba and Alberta in the carrying out of any plan to procure 

substantially lower implement prices. 

 

(2) That, as the provisions of the Combines Investigation Act of the Dominion appear to have been 

violated by the major Companies in the industry, consideration should be given to instituting 

proceedings under the said Act. 

 

(3) That Dominion legislation be urged to remove all tariffs and other trade barriers on farm 

implements, repair parts and cream separators. 

 

(4) That the Dominion Government be urged to restore the Crow's Nest Pass Agreement freight rates 

on farm implements. 

 

(5) The adoption, and support by the farmers of this province, of the co-operative trading movement. 

 

(6) The adoption of the plan submitted to the Committee by representatives of the Co-operative 

Associations on 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

26 

February 24, 1939, and the giving to the said Associations by the Government of this Province, of the 

support and assistance suggested in that plan. 

 

It goes on to suggest quite a few new plans to encourage the University to test the relative quality and 

utility of repair parts being offered for sale in this Province; that the Dominion Experimental Farms, the 

University of Saskatchewan, and Farm Implement Companies be encouraged to continue their 

educational courses in the management, care and operation of farm machinery; that the Dominion 

Experimental Farms and the University of Saskatchewan be encouraged to test the utility of new 

implements, to suggest improvements and, where possible, to encourage standardization of implement 

repair parts .The Minister of Agriculture spoke as if this was something new — the testing of 

implements. Well, the Government has been in office for eight years and here is the recommendation — 

he is on the Legislative Committee — that that should be done. It winds up: 

 

"As a result of its inquiry the above are the recommendations which the Committee sees fit to make." 

 

In regard to most of the matters suggested by the hon. members, they have been covered by this 

Committee report which was made in 1939. The question might be raised: "Why wasn't more done from 

the time that they reported to the period of 1944?" I would point out that this Committee reported and 

the report was adopted by the Legislative Assembly, at the end of March 5, 1939, and war broke out in a 

matter of five months, probably less than that — in September of the same year — and the whole 

country was concerned and absorbed in the war effort right from that time until the period of 1944. If 

some of these things are just now about to be done, that the Minister of Agriculture laid so much stress 

on, one wonders why the great delay. This legislative report was there and available for action. It was 

suggested that great emphasis be put upon the encouragement of the co-operative method of handling 

this problem, and it may be that everything possible was done in that particular regard that could be 

done. One of the reasons for which I welcome this inquiry is to find out to what extent the co-operative 

movement has received the assistance that it should have in building up its ability to help in dealing with 

this matter, and the extent to which some of the things that it laid down as possible have proved to be 

true. 

 

It suggested to the Committee in 1939 that if it once got into operation it might be possible to save as 

much as 40 per cent on the cost of farm implements. I am looking forward to finding out to what extent 

of some of those hopes have been realized. I think, myself, that perhaps the competition of the 

co-operatives in this field may have had a very helpful effect and to that extent, if it has been so, the 

Committee which laid down the plan in 1939 and the co-operatives themselves are entitled to a great 

deal of credit. If they have made a real contribution in this field, it will be a good thing that the facts 

should be brought out so that anything further that can be done to work along these lines can be done. 

My own feeling is that the Committee in 1939 was very wise in turning down the direct intervention of 

the Government in this field, and in suggesting that the better course of action was to encourage the 

entry into the field of the co-operatives. I hope that the investigation will indicate that they feel 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

27 

that they feel that they have been making satisfactory progress in that regard. 

 

I think the Minister is right in thinking that we perhaps should take a look at what has been done under 

this recommendation, to examine into the type of machinery that has been provided for the farmers in 

Western Canada. This Committee certainly envisaged the idea that that should be a matter of continuous 

study and observation. It will be interesting to see to what extent that has been carried out by the present 

Government. 

 

I absolutely agree with the Minister that in these days of quickly changing methods of farming there is 

more help required by people from experts in the field of agriculture and scientists in regard to making 

sure that various new machinery suggested is going to be helpful. They are more in need of help and 

assistance like that at a time like this than in a time when there are not these great changes taking place. I 

think that we should have the benefit of the advice and evidence of some of the people connected with 

the University in regard to that matter, the extent to which they feel we have been well served by the 

people who have done research in the field of farm implement manufacture, and to what extent, in any 

way, that they have not done as good a job as might be expected of them. 

 

Those are some of the things that I think the Committee will be able to do some very valuable work on. 

They will be able to examine the state of affairs in 1939, and the Committee will be able to see how far 

we have progressed in 13 years, and to what extent things should have been done, and things have been 

done that should not have been done. 

 

Now, that brings up the question — the purpose of assistants to this Committee certainly should be one 

of assisting the Legislative Committee to get all the facts. It should be assisted by perhaps a group of 

accountants, as well as somebody who has time (which members of the Legislature have not got) to give 

all their time to the work of the Committee. Those people, it seems to me, should be people who are 

willing to try to bring out all the facts, regardless of whether they always bear favourably on the 

government of the day, or not. I do suggest, Mr. Speaker, that those people should be picked after 

consulting with the various farm organizations in the province who have taken a real interest in this 

matter (for which they are certainly to be commended), and who must have some very definite ideas in 

the matter. They should have the right at least to suggest one counsel who will work with them, and in 

whom they have complete confidence, to assist them in presenting any views that they have to the 

Committee. I feel they would have the right to ask that such counsel should be paid by the Provincial 

Government, and I think it should be somebody who is satisfactory to them, and in whom they have 

confidence. 

 

Whether they nominate through the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, if they are asked to 

nominate somebody, I suppose such a person would represent all the different farm organizations in the 

province. But the Wheat Pools and the Co-operatives, who are very interested in this question, and also 

the Farmers' Union, I presume they would be able to come to an agreement on the matter. But I do 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, the Committee should not be asked to pick as counsel somebody without making 

sure that that person who is going to help the Committee, meets with the approval of the organized 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

28 

farmers of this province, because they are the ones who are trying to serve and help. Thirteen years ago 

we took the attitude that the way to get an improvement in this situation, one of the main ways, was to 

get the help and foster the entry and interest of the co-operative movement in this field. So they are very 

much interested. 

 

In regard to the other matters — the question of tariffs and their effects, the question of freight rates, the 

possibility of manufacturing more of our farm implements in western Canada, the extent to which the 

co-operation of other provinces has been sought in that regard and so on, I hope that, as the member for 

Bengough said, we will be able to get going on this Committee quick enough to be able to have time 

enough to make the study of this matter that its importance warrants, because surely it is a very 

important matter, Mr. Speaker. So far as the Opposition is concerned, we assure the Government of our 

earnest and sincere co-operation in the work of this Committee to make it the best possible in the 

interests of the farmers of this province. 

 

The question being put on the motion, it was agreed to unanimously. 

 

INCOME TAX EXEMPTIONS 

 

Moved by Mr. Howe (Kelvington), seconded by Mr. Gibson (Morse): 

 

That this Assembly urge the Federal Government: 

 

(1) to give consideration to the possibility of raising personal income tax exemptions, to $1,500 for 

single persons and $2,500 for married persons, as well as excluding from taxable income revenues 

up to $800 which are derived from dairy and poultry production where such income is auxiliary to 

the main farm enterprise; 

 

(2) to arrange that amounts spent on clearing and breaking agricultural lands shall be considered as 

operating expanses for income tax purposes. 

 

Mr. P.A. Howe (Kelvington): — Mr. Speaker, the motion that we are about to discuss has found its 

way in here on previous occasions, and you will notice that it is divided into separate parts. I propose to 

deal with them one at a time. 

 

With regard to part (1), I think there are some very good reasons why those exemptions should be raised. 

I note that the present exemptions were fixed in 1949. The exemptions, at that time, were $750 for single 

status; and they were raised to $1,000. The exemptions, at that time, for married status, were $1,500, and 

they were raised to $2,000; but 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

29 

since that time the cost-of-living, for instance, has increased tremendously, and I believe it is correct to 

say that, if the exemptions that were fixed at that time were correct, then certainly there is need for 

increasing those exemptions today. 

 

In 1949, the cost-of-living index stood at 159.6 where as at January 1, 1952, it stood at 191.5, or an 

increase of 31.9 since 1949. Consequently, there ought to be a very good argument as to why these 

exemptions should be increased now. 

 

There in no doubt but that this question of income tax — paying taxes on the basis of your income — is 

fair. I am sure it is accepted as one of the fairest methods of collecting taxes; but the thing that we want 

to remember is, first of all, that it can only be fair to the extent that it is applied equitably at all sections 

of our community; and secondly, that what does matter is not the amount of taxes you pay, but what you 

have left to live on after you have paid your taxes. Thus, it can be readily understood and seen that the 

increased cost-of-living, these last three years, has certainly lent itself to lower the standard of living of 

our people, providing our method of applying the taxes remains the same. So I think it is fair and just 

that we should now ask the Federal Government to increase these exemptions. 

 

During this time something else has happened, Mr. Speaker. In 1951, there was a 10 per cent surcharge 

applied; and in 1952, that was increased to 20 per cent. I understand that is a tax on the tax you pay. 

Then again, at the last session of the House of Commons, the Old-Age Security Act, Bill No. 13, statutes 

of 1951, provides that an additional tax of 2 per cent per annum, or a maximum of $60 shall be charged 

to go into the Old-Age Security Fund. So, not only has the cost-of-living increased and whittled into the 

standard of living of our people since 1949; but these other additional taxes that I mentioned have also 

been applied so that it makes the burden still heavier. So I say again, Mr. Speaker, that I think the 

question of increasing our exemptions is very justified indeed. 

 

Then we came to the other part with regard to excluding revenue derived from dairy and poultry 

production. We have heard a lot said about the family farm in Saskatchewan; but something is 

happening to the rural life in Saskatchewan. I think we all realize that something has happened to it, but 

certainly there are many things that contribute to that situation. I think one of the things that is 

happening, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that, today we go around the country and we see farmers after 

farmers who used to have six or seven milk cows on the farm with none today; we see people that used 

to have two or three hundred chickens on the farm haven't got any chickens today, except a few that are 

running around the yard, and do not need any special care. 

 

We see farmers who pay income tax on $1,000, for an illustration. He sits down and examines his 

income tax returns and he says, "Well now, what has contributed to this taxable income that I now 

have?" Well he will probably find that he has had two or three hundred dollars income from his poultry 

— and probably three or four hundred dollars income from his milking cows and cream and butter. Well 

then he thinks: "We have been staying at home every day during the whole year. We have denied 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

30 

ourselves a holiday. We have never been able to go any place because we have to be at home feeding the 

poultry twice a day; we have to milk the cows twice a day. Why shouldn't we just dispense with these 

things? We can make a lot easier living by putting in a few more acres of wheat, and take a little holiday 

with the rest of the people." They know that we have passed labour laws for two weeks' holiday with 

pay — why shouldn't the farmers have it? 

 

What I am trying to show, Mr. Speaker, is that, while there are many things that I believe contribute to 

the isolation of the farm home today, or what has happened to the family farm today, I do think the 

income tax has contributed tremendously to that situation. I believe that is why people are saying, "We 

are not going to keep cows any more", or "We are not going to keep poultry any more", and I believe we 

will see the time coming, if something is not done about it, when it will be difficult for people in these 

local towns and villages throughout Saskatchewan to be able to buy such a thing as a few dozen of eggs 

or a pound of dairy butter. 

 

So I believe, Mr. Speaker, that if we would permit these farmers who keep a few cows and a few 

chickens as an auxiliary to their main farming operations, and if we would say to them, "We will let you 

have in income of $800 from that source without being taxable", I think it would lend itself to bring a 

few more milk cows to the farms, and a little more poultry on the farms. 

 

You know, I could not give a better illustration of what I mean by a family farm that what I am going to 

give you now. When I heard people talk about a family farm, I sometimes wonder just what they mean 

by a family farm unit. You know, I had a very fine neighbour one time who, every time we went there 

on a Sunday or during the week, the first thing he would do would be to say to me, "Did you see my 

young pigs? I have some wonderful young pigs out in the barn. I just got them a few days ago." In other 

words, he was so interested in everything he had around his little farm that he lived for what he had 

around him at that farm; it meant everything to him. In other words, today there is, of course, a tendency 

that everything is becoming more and more specialized — mass production for the purpose of bringing 

down production costs. It is true we have to face that situation. We have mass production in growing 

wheat; we have mass production in milk and poultry products. But I do think, Mr. Speaker, that we 

should give very special consideration to this question of seeing what we can do to try again to 

re-establish these little family farm units. I do not think there is anything that will stabilize agriculture, 

in any community, as much as these little farm units; and certainly there is nothing that will contribute 

so much to the social activities in a community as that little family farm. So I say, Mr. Speaker, that I do 

believe that we should approve of that suggestion. 

 

I do not think I need to read these figures; but it might be interesting for you to note what has actually 

happened to these industries in the last few years. It is not just imagination. Now, in 1943, there were 11 

million poultry in Saskatchewan; but by 1951 they had been reduced from 11 million to 8 million. Eggs, 

for instance; the egg production in 1943, was 57 million dozen of eggs — but by 1951 they had been 

reduced from 57 million dozen to 30 million dozen; so you see there is something happening 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

31 

to the little farm units in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now there are statistics here with regard to the number of the young hens there are on the farm — I do 

not think I need read that, because I think the picture is clear to everyone of us, and we know what the 

problem is. The same thing applies to the dairy cows and dairy production. 

 

Then we will go to the third part of the resolution: "And further, that amounts expended on clearing and 

breaking agricultural lands should be considered as farm operation expenses for income tax purposes." 

Now, that may not seem very important to many people, particularly people who live on the prairies, 

who do not know what it means to have to clear a piece of land; but again we have said a lot, in this 

House, in regard to establishing young men on the farm; and, certainly, the areas in Saskatchewan that 

are still available to young farmers are in the forested areas, where it is very difficult and expensive to 

bring land under cultivation. 

 

I think we might do something for these younger farmers, who are trying to establish themselves in the 

unbroken areas, by saying to them, "Any money you spend on breaking or clearing land to get it under 

cultivation for the purpose of providing you an income and make you self-supporting, we are not going 

to tax you for that kind of an expenditure; it shall not be considered as capital invested." I think you will 

agree with me that that, too, is a very fair and reasonable request to make. 

 

I do not know, Mr. Speaker, whether there is any need of me labouring this thing at all; but there are one 

or two things I want to draw to the attention of the members of this House. It really has not anything 

directly to do with the terms of the resolution, but it may be well to look at something that I see in here 

in "Liberty of December 30, dealing with what some of us pay in sales tax in Canada, today. 

 

You know when we buy a package of cigarettes, it does not seem like a very large amount, does it? And 

there a lot of people who do not know just what is included in that price of a package of cigarettes. In 

buying these cigarettes, we think, "Well, it is not a big item; even if I smoke a package every day, it is 

not a big item." At the same time, the person who buys a package of cigarettes and pays, say 42 cents for 

it, pays a sales tax of 25 cents, which is included in the price of that package of cigarettes; and to a 

person who buys a package every day in a year, he will spend over $100 a year in cigarettes, and it says 

here that more than $100 million is paid to Ottawa every year in this form of taxation. $100 million! 

Think of what we are paying for this little habit that we have! 

 

There is another thing I want to mention here which is taken from the Toronto "Globe and Mail" of 

August 28, and they call it "That Tempting Surplus." Now, there are a lot of people in Canada, today, 

who feel that this tremendous surplus that Ottawa enjoys today is unnecessary. A lot of people feel that 

we have been taxed a little too hard — harder than we should have been. However, most governments 

feel that a surplus is a nice thing; but I just want to quote here what the Toronto "Globe and Mail" has to 

say about it: 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

32 

"It is tempting, all right, for any government because it opens up such wonderful possibilities. 

Bismarck, after he got his first look at London, exclaimed, "God, what a place to loot." Any politician, 

between the range of pork-barrel, dipper and brain-trustee, would be less than human if he did not cry 

out, "What a campaign fund!" 

 

“That does not mean that the government would consider its many millions surplus as something to be 

divided into ten-spots and passed out to the electors; but you might build a $50 million dam, or pass 

out some wheat money; and it is still a campaign fund just the same." 

 

Now that is what the "Globe and Mail" had to say, and I do not know whether they are right or not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not think I will labour this any longer. I am merely going to say, before I sit down, 

that since we placed this motion on the Order Paper certain things have happened in Saskatchewan that 

probably some mention would have been made of in this resolution had it happened before; but I just 

wanted to say that the member for Lumsden (Mr. Thair) intends to move an amendment to the motion as 

soon as I sit down. 

 

Mr. Maher (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, what would be equitable to the $800 referred to in your 

resolution for the people working on a small salary in the cities and towns? What would you say would 

be equitable? 

 

Mr. Howe: — If I was to interpret it, I would interpret just what it says here — a family farm, with say a 

half-section of land; ordinarily they would keep a few cows and some poultry as an auxiliary to their 

main farming operations. That is what I mean. It would not apply to dairy men who produce milk on a 

large scale, or poultry producers who produce poultry on a large scale; but it is for these smaller farmers 

who have an auxiliary there, as additional income for or their farming operations. 

 

Mr. W.S. Thair (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, as indicated by the Minister of Agriculture, some time 

ago, some 400 animals will have to be destroyed immediately on some 24 farm premises, in the Regina 

area. As a matter of fact, of these 24 herds, five of them happen to be owned by my own neighbours 

within a four or five mile radius of my home farm. 

 

I have been given to understand, Mr. Speaker, for the information of this House, that there has been no 

increase in herds affected in that area during the past two or three weeks according to a phone message 

from my home area today, The outbreak, at the present time, is the first ever recorded in Canada, and I 

believe that the Federal authorities are imposing very strict quarantine in the Regina area. 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

33 

The loss to the farmers is very great even with the compensation they will get. So briefly, I would like to 

list some of the problems of the farmers whose herds are to be slaughtered, or are being slaughtered 

today: 

 

(1) The total loss of complete herds of commercial cattle and cows of all types; 

(2) the loss of purebred cattle herds in the Regina area; 

(3) the heavy loss of dairy herds which are granted compensation only on the basis, unless registered, 

of commercial grades; 

(4) the fact that herds of cattle cannot be re-established, I understand, for some four months, and then 

only a few cattle my be tried out on an experimental basis; 

(5) to most farmers with affected herds it means a great loss of yearly income; 

(6) the almost prohibitive cost of re-establishment of a new herd of cattle. 

 

It is because of this, Mr. Speaker, that I have offered as amendment, seconded by Mr. Buchanan: 

 

That the following clause be added to the motion: 

 

"(3) to so amend the Income Tax Act as to provide for complete tax exemption on compensation 

received for animals destroyed in the current campaign to eradicate foot-and-mouth disease." 

 

The question being put on the proposed amendment, it was agreed to unanimously. 

 

The question being put on the motion as amended, it was agreed to unanimously. 

 

HOUSING 

 

Moved by Mr. Heming (Moose Jaw City), seconded by Mr. Gibbs (Swift Current): 

 

"That this Assembly respectfully urge upon the Federal Government that, in view of the fact that the 

serious lack of housing in the urban centres of this province has resulted in severe hardship to large 

numbers of families and is contributing to broken homes, the undermining of the health and morale of 

our people and the retarding of the development and well-being of the province generally, measures be 

undertaken to provide adequate housing and that, to this end, the restrictive regulations under the 

National Housing Act, particularly with respect to section 35 thereof be immediately removed; and 

further, that building materials be made 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

34 

available in sufficient supply and at a price that will make possible the construction of homes at a 

reasonable and equitable rate." 

 

Mr. D.H.R. Heming (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to present a short, factual 

summary regarding this matter which is considered, these days, as warranting the very careful, serious, 

and altruistic consideration of all governments. As it implies, there are large numbers of our people who 

are living in shelter which is considered, under Canadian standards, inadequate. It appears currently that 

from a population of 11.2 million in 1939, we have not at the present time a population of 14-odd 

million in Canada, of whom possibly 30 per cent are requiring housing. Of this group of about 14 

million, we have what is known as a civilian labour group of 5.5 million and, within this group, we have 

what is known as the industrial wage-earner group of 3,600,000. This group of 3,600,000 are currently 

earning wages of approximately $50 a week working approximately 42 hours a week in comparison 

with $24 per week in 1939 of 44 hours. At the same time, these men currently are under the obligation 

of paying 90 per cent more for their living than they did in 1939, so that their actual purchasing power 

today is approximately the same as it was in 1939. But this labour force of 3.6 million, who are 

responsible for our great production in this country from our mines and forests and factories, men are 

gradually increasing because, each year, in Canada, on an average we have 350,000 births, 125,000 

deaths, 23,000 emigrants — that is, those who leave this country — and, last year, we had 195,000 

immigrants come into this country, leaving last year, 1951, with a net increase in population of 400,000 

people, or the equivalent on the basis of a Canadian family of four, of 100,000 houses. 

 

If you recollect, Mr. Speaker, in the last Session I spoke in this regard and told you of where in 1945, on 

a survey being made at Ottawa, it was estimated we required at that time, 648,000 homes to fill the 

backlog which had occurred throughout the war, and to comply with the anticipated demands of returned 

personnel. The Government at Ottawa made plans whereby, over a five-year period they would 

construct 500,000 homes. However, they did not quite complete this amount, but they did complete 

500,000 homes to the end of 1951, leaving a backlog from their original estimate of 148,000. But, since 

1945, and until 1951, our population, with the addition of 580,000 immigrants, has risen 2.25 million, or 

almost the equivalent on the basis of a family of four, to 600,000 homes, which, added to the 148,000 

homes that were backlogged, leaves us in the neighbourhood of between 700,000 and 750,000 homes 

required in Canada, today, if each family shall have a decent hygienic, sanitary home. 

 

There are several manners, Mr. Speaker, in which this could be accomplished. Great consideration has 

to be taken into every factor, and there is no question but that, if our immigration is to increase 

proportionately in years to come — we should have some immigration providing that there is no 

discrimination against the native born; and if we have this immigration here, then preparation should be 

made whereby adequate shelter shall be available for them. And further, too, Mr. Speaker, if the 

continued movement of the rural man into the urban areas, which has occurred this last six or seven 

years, continues at the same pace in the next six or seven years, there will be need, then, of still more 

homes to cater to farmers who start to farm their farms 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

35 

from urban areas, which I say is a modern tendency on account of mechanization. 

 

If you read a recent publication in "Time" magazine, you will have noticed where they gave great 

publicity to the production of Canada since 1939. They quoted that the Canadian production had 

increased four-fold since 1939, and that our swelling volume of goods emanating from our fields and 

our forests and our mines and our manufacturers was such that Canada occupied a position in the 

productive world secondly only to the United States of America, and to Great Britain. Apparently we 

produce 90 per cent of the world's nickel, 50 per cent of the world's newsprint, and large amounts of 

iron, zinc, coal, cement and other productive materials used in the trade of the world. Too, we are 

opening up, in the eastern part of Canada, one of the greatest iron ore lodes ever known in this world. 

We are building on the west coast of Canada what, when it is completed, will be the largest aluminium 

plant in the world. We are dredging the St. Lawrence Seaway so that we can take ocean-going boats up 

from the eastern coast to the very heart of America. Surely we are progressing economically, Mr. 

Speaker, and the potential developments of the future are staggering to the imagination. We can surely 

agree with Mr. Churchill, when he said at Ottawa, on his recent visit there, that "on the whole surface of 

this globe there is no more splendid or spacious domain than Canada open to the activity and the genius 

of free men." 

 

This is all the more apparent when you consider that, notwithstanding our international obligations, and 

notwithstanding our social security payments, and notwithstanding our partial war effort, last year, the 

Dominion of Canada ended up with a surplus of close to $800 million. And of course, Mr. Speaker, if 

you look possibly, for assistance, because there is money available which has been taken from the 

people to be spent in the production of house-building goods it is necessary that we have money. But 

first we have to have the goods available for building. 

 

I would like to quote, Mr. Speaker, the difference in the production of building materials from 1947 and 

1951. In 1947, we produced 5.5 billion f.b.m. feet of sawn lumber; in 1951, we produced 5 billion f.b.m. 

of cement, we produced 6 million barrels as against 18 million barrels. Building bricks — we produced 

240 million of those against 400 million in 1951. Cast iron goods — 16,000 tons as against 60,000 tons. 

Nails 72,000 tons as against 80,000 tons. Hot air furnaces — 32,000 units as against 80,000 units. 

Domestic boilers — 16,000 units as against 28,000 units. Asphalt shingles — 2 million squares as 

against 3.2 million squares. Steel pipe — 80,000 tons against 106,000 tons. Gypsum lath — 60 million 

square feet as against 200 million square feet. Gypsum plaster — 120,000 tons as against 180,000 tons. 

Bath tubs — 80,000 units against 120,000 units. The composite production of building materials, with 

1939 staying at 100, was 295 in 1951, with a current increase of 13 per cent in 1951 over 1950. 

 

It is apparent that we have power to produce not only in our general wave of production throughout the 

country, but our building, trades have also proportionately increased their production. But it does appear, 

Mr. Speaker, that though we produce, we also export a considerable amount. 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

36 

Of the lumber that we produced last year, 5 billion f.b.m., we exported about half of it to countries that 

had the money to pay for this lumber for the production of houses or other buildings. And, in connection 

with houses, a recent despatch from Vancouver states that the cost of housing in that city has gone up 

285 per cent since 1939. That is, a house that in 1939 cost $3,500 in 1951 cost $9,200. That is a 964 

square-foot, five-room bungalow. At the same time, in "Housing", a publication from Ottawa issued by 

the Government, they state that the cost of housing in 1951 was 16 per cent higher than in 1950, while at 

the same time, the cost of labour went up only 10 per cent during that same period of time. 

 

It is true, Mr. Speaker, that the average wage which the average workman receives in manufacturing is 

$50 a week; but $50 means an average wage, and generally speaking, an average wage means that there 

will be 33 per cent who will earn more than that, about 33 per cent will earn exactly that, and 33 per cent 

will earn less than that, meaning that there are approximately one million of our 3.6 million workers 

who are receiving in the neighbourhood of from $23 to $40 a week. This is the group, Mr. Speaker, that 

is in need of adequate shelter — the group that earns from $23 to $40 a week, living in the urban area, 

probably with one or two or three kids, trying to buy and trying to save and never getting anywhere in 

the way of financial advance. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, this dearth of housing is predominant throughout the whole of Canada. Every 

province has the same picture. Some provinces deal with it one way and some in another. In the 

province of Ontario there have been two agreements under what is known as the Economic Rental Plan. 

The city of Windsor, in agreement with the Province of Ontario and the Federal Government, is 

constructing currently 325 three-bedroom units at a cost of 3.1 million dollars. The city of St. Thomas is 

constructing, also, at the same time, under a similar agreement, 40 units — three bedroom units, at a cost 

of $350,000. Both construction projects cost between $9,000 and $10,000 per unit, and in the case of 

Windsor, they anticipate charging an economic rent of $60 a month and, in the case of St. Thomas they 

anticipate charging an economic rent of $50 a month. 

 

Last year, Mr. Speaker, my own home town, the city of Moose Jaw, knowing the need that existed there, 

made application via the Provincial Government here for assistance under Section 35 of the National 

Housing Act. We made a careful survey in the city of Moose Jaw, somewhat similar to the city of 

Vancouver a couple of years ago, and we found out that, after 910 applicants had applied for housing, 

465 of them wanted to buy and about 430 wanted to rent, and about 15 or so did not have any preference 

one way or the other. But of that group that wanted to rent and to buy, we found out that there were 

very, very few who were actually in a position to participate in either a purchase under the purchase plan 

(if they would let it be that way), or on an economic rent. There were 600 of the group of 910 who could 

make payments of between $25 and $50 a month; 40 could pay between $60 and $80 a month, and the 

balance could only pay $25 a month or less, according to their incomes. Only 10 of the applicants had an 

income of over 3,000; 240 received between $2,500 and the balance, 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

37 

below $1,800 annually. As to the amount of cash for a down-payment, that was available if they had to 

purchase, it was found that 34 had $2,500 or more in cash; 14 had old houses to dispose of as their first 

payment for a house; 3 had $2,100 to $2,500; 34 had $1,600 to $2,000; and the balance had varying 

amounts under $1,300. Less than 100 out of 900 had anything at all approaching a down-payment 

necessary under the Act for home ownership and, on further examination, this was considerably reduced 

when monthly payments were taken into account. 

 

On continued survey, Mr. Speaker, it was found that the greatest need existed where the ability to pay 

was absent. In the main, those who wanted to rent would prefer to pay between $25 and $40 a month, an 

amount considerably less than the recognized economic rental under the conditions existing now. There 

were only 13 of the applicants with an income of $70 to $80 a month that could participate in any 

economic rental scheme with anticipated costs of the scheme. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we export a lot of our building material, and we also import some at the same time, and I 

submit that, if the Government of Canada wishes to see that there shall not be discrimination with regard 

to the availability of building materials, steps could be taken whereby the material which now leaves the 

country could be retained here. It has been customary in the past, ever since our railways started here, 

that there would be some form of subsidy in effect. We subsidize the railways; we have subsidized the 

mines and we have subsidized manufacturers; and, I think, Mr. Speaker, that the man who now is 

earning between $23 and $40 a week, striving and hoping that there shall be some hope in the future 

with regard to housing, and yet hopelessly looks at his pay cheque week after week, and knows for sure 

that he will never be able to have enough money put by to build a house, the costs are too great, will 

never be able to purchase a house; the cost has gone up alarmingly, proportionately to the built houses. 

 

I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that in this great land of ours, with our potential and actual progress that 

we have made; I would submit that the governments, municipal, provincial and federal, should all 

assume responsibility so that those most valuable elements of our nation, that is the men, the women and 

the children, should have consideration in regard to this affair. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I am in sympathy with the Motion, although I have no 

housing problem in my constituency. But I don't think it is drafted in the best way. I have long 

considered that our financial set-up to help people to build their own houses is not right. Now, I was 

wondering if it was not possible to adjourn the debate, and we would get together with the mover of the 

resolution, and see if I could give him some of my ideas to embody in a motion that would be more 

flexible and probably more acceptable to the authorities we have to deal with. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Motion is before the House. 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

38 

Mr. Harry Gibbs (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to be very long speaking on this 

very important motion, because I think my hon. friend from Moose Jaw has covered it pretty well. He 

has made known to the members of this House the details of what is required in regard to this situation. 

 

I was expecting a brief from my home-town of Swift Current, but it has not got here yet so I will just 

have to speak from memory, or what I can think about it. As you know, and also the members of the 

House, we spoke last year on a somewhat similar resolution, and I think this time, Mr. Speaker, that this 

situation is becoming very, very drastic in urban centres. As my friend said, the ordinary working man 

of today, and those in the low-wage brackets — the workers, they cannot afford (it is an impossibility to 

afford) houses that contractors and builders are asking for construction this day and age; ten, twelve and 

fifteen thousand dollars! Why, it is beyond all our dreams of a few years ago. I think we have to admit 

that wages have not gone up pro ratio to what the prices of commodities have today in the building line, 

and these young fellows who came back from overseas two or three years ago are finding that they 

cannot expect to build the houses, at the prices of houses today, on the wages they are earning. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that we all talk of patriotism, and what we do for the boys that came back. That is 

an old, old saying now. It is like an old song — it becomes worn out, because we have gone through it. 

Many a one of us sitting in this House tonight have gone through the same thing; and I do not think it is 

fair and right that they should be promised things when they are away fighting in foreign countries, and 

then when they come back ask them to face conditions like the boys are facing today, in regard to the 

housing situation in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

I think sometimes too, while I am speaking on that matter, we have a great defence programme in the 

Dominion of Canada today which is involving millions of dollars; and yet the boys (some of them were 

crippled in the last war), they have not even a decent home to live in today, and I believe we can 

contract a little on the money spent on defence programme to a certain extent — not it all — in order to 

put some of that money into providing decent houses and living quarters for lads who had been over 

there, and lads who will come back from fighting overseas at the present time. 

 

I am speaking my mind on these matters. I know it probably will not satisfy all members in this House; 

but nevertheless, when you see these actual things taking place before your eyes, it makes you think, 

because, do not forget I was in that predicament once. When I came back from overseas in the First 

Great War, I know what it was then to try and get a cottage together for me and my wife, and start to 

raise a family, and I know the problem that the young people of today are up against, when they cannot 

find adequate housing and decent, comfortable quarters to live in. I think something should be done 

about it. 

 

Speaking of Swift Current, as you all know, it has been quite the talk these last few weeks that the Swift 

Current district has struck oil, and I am going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, office space, warehouse space 

and housing space in the city of Swift Current today is at quite a premium — 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

39 

in that short time, too. So I do not know what it is going to be like when they knock down about 70 or 

100 wells within the next year or so, and I believe it is going to be done. What are we going do about 

housing then, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I wanted to do something, years ago after the Second Great War, when they started to tear down (as the 

hon. Minister of Social Welfare knows) these airforce buildings that we built for the Second Great War. 

It was a crime to see some of those buildings torn down and sold for practically nothing, you might say; 

but it was quite a job to take those buildings down, for an ordinary working man. It was quite a job the 

way they were built. But I could see the tremendous waste that was taking place (and I am not saying it 

was not our fault, I am not blaming any individual as far as that is concerned); but I saw that place up 

there, and I have seen it now — the cement basements. Well, they just came along and brought the 

bulldozers and filled them in and probably tomorrow or some future date, they will be wanting the place 

to erect more building plants at the expense of the people of this country, and I do not like to see that 

sort of waste. 

 

I know for a fact, and I think when I say this that it will probably prevail in other large centres in our 

province — we have people in our city living under some of the most damnable conditions you could 

ever think about; that is, being housed under those conditions. We have people living in old garages that 

have been condemned by both the sanitary and fire inspector, and everything else, but there is no place 

to go. As my friend from Moose Jaw says, "It is life you have to preserve; it is the youth we have to look 

after." Are we going to give these young people a chance? After all is said and done, the youth of today 

is the man of tomorrow, and it is the youth of our kingdom that we have to look at; and if they do not get 

a right start in life, well, how can we ever expect them to come out as men when they grow up to adult 

age? 

 

I say to the members of this House, Mr. Speaker, that this is indeed a serious problem. There is no doubt 

in my mind about it; and something should be done about it. Now last year, as you know, the city 

council tried to get on this scheme of housing, and we were turned down. Absolutely nothing doing! We 

were quite willing to come into this scheme, but no sir! The Federal Government turned us down. Now, 

I do not think it is just right that they should do these things, because when you look at the surpluses, 

and the money spent in this country, and the surpluses of the Federal Government in Ottawa, it runs into 

millions and millions of dollars, and as I said, "Sure, there is a defence programme provided for, but I 

think after all is said and done, Mr. Speaker, that they should give quite a lot of consideration for 

adequate and decent housing throughout the width and breadth of Canada where houses are required. 

 

It reminds me probably this has something to do with why they ignore so many of our appeals, and we 

know appeals even from this House have been rejected, why, I do not know. But I was looking over a 

paper the other day and happened to come across this, and it deals with a person who was a candidate 

back in the year 1894 in the Province of Saskatchewan, who goes on 



 

February 26, 1952 

 

 

40 

to say, Mr. Speaker (I'll give you his name — maybe some of you older chaps over there would know 

him) after giving his reasons for entering his name on the ballot (this is his name, Mr. Guernsey) — he 

went on to say: 

 

"My object in entering public life is to make money without physical exertion, and having no 

conviction and less principle, I will stand in with the majority in the House when I find it will be in my 

pecuniary interests to do so. My first object will be to look out for myself, and after my mercenary 

appetite is satisfied, I will exert myself on behalf of those who support me at the poll. As a successful 

candidate in a contested election is under no obligation to his opponent, I will confer all favours on 

those who vote for me. I will build dams wherever possible, adjacent to every farmer who aids me in 

this election. I will give contracts on dams, bridges and trails to those only who support me, and who 

will stipulate that every man who votes for me shall be employed on those works. I will support a bill 

in favour of prohibition, or one giving greater latitude to hotel keepers, as I find one or the other most 

in my interests. 

 

"I am in favour of all things for my supporters, and everything for myself. My enemies (and they are 

legion) assert that I am a sneak and a cynic, and charge me with having been guilty of cowardly 

speculation and other shady transactions when in the place, of recklessness and of unscrupulousness as 

Clerk of the Municipality. These accusations I will neither repudiate nor deny." 

 

I was just thinking, Mr. Speaker, that, after all is said and done, they give us all these promises and 

nothing ever comes out of them. We have nothing yet — nothing; and as I was saying, Mr. Speaker, (to 

be serious once again), I do think that this House ought to support, and I believe each and every member 

of it will support, this motion on housing, because we all know it is serious, and we all like to live in 

good homes, and own good homes. I am sure that every member of this House will get behind this 

motion, and see whether we cannot get some financial assistance in building decent and adequate homes 

for each and every one of us in this province of ours, and this country of ours. I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:20 o'clock p.m. 


