



















































Hansard: March 26, 1952


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eleventh Legislation 

34th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 26, 1952 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

FIFTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ESTABLISHMENT of the PROVINCE OF 

SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Bill No. 62 — An Act to provide for the Celebration of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Establishment of 

the Province of Saskatchewan 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, as the title suggests, this is an Act to provide for the celebration of 

the fiftieth anniversary of the establishment of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The year 1955 will be the fiftieth anniversary of the Province of Saskatchewan, and the eighty-fifth 

anniversary of the union of the Hudson‟s Bay Company‟s territory with Canada. 

 

We have had, in this province, numerous celebrations of the founding of cities and towns. The city of 

Saskatoon, for example, has laid plans on quite a generous scale to celebrate its seventieth anniversary, 

this year. Members will remember that Regina did likewise, in 1942, when they celebrated their sixtieth 

birthday. We have never had a formal celebration of any anniversary of the development of the whole 

province. For this reason, it seems eminently fitting that special preparations be made well in advance to 

recognize the fiftieth anniversary of the establishment of Saskatchewan. 

 

We are just emerging from the pioneer period in our history, and in our population there are still quite a 

number of people who were among the first settlers of the communities in which they now reside. Some 

indication of this is shown by the fact that only one-third of the members of this Legislature were born 

in Saskatchewan. The rest of us came here as immigrants, either from eastern Canada, from the United 

States, or from the old world. Consequently, the memory of the remarkable progress which has been 

made on these prairies in the last 50 years is still fresh in many of our minds. On the other hand, we may 

fail to appreciate the full significance of the development that has gone on over a period of half a 

century. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, the Government feels that some special notice should be taken of 

the Golden Jubilee of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

What are the broad objectives which we would have in the celebration of this anniversary? In the first 

place, we would be seeking to do honour to the pioneer residents of this province, the men and women 

who suffered untold hardship and who displayed great fortitude in the clearing 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

2 

of the brush and breaking up of the prairie, and in settling this province in which we now reside. That 

would be the first purpose of such an anniversary. 

 

The second purpose would be to give opportunity to the present generation of Saskatchewan‟s citizens 

to discover the rich heritage of experience which is to be found in the history of this province. 

 

The third thing would be to remind all of us of the fact that this Province has been built on a foundation 

of co-operation and tolerance among the people who have come from many lands, bringing with them 

the diverse historical traditions and cultures. 

 

The fourth thing would be to promote projects and activities which will have a continuing value for the 

cultural life of the province in the second half of the century. 

 

There, roughly, Mr. Speaker, would be the things we are seeking to establish by means of giving to the 

fiftieth anniversary of the province very special recognition. Someone may ask, “Well, what do we hope 

to achieve by this fiftieth anniversary?” I would say, first of all, Mr. Speaker, that we hope to achieve a 

sense of pride on the part of our people in their historical background. We are a comparatively young 

province. We have a great future in which we all believe. But we should look at the rock from whence 

we were hewn to appreciate the history of the past, to be fully cognisant of the contribution that has been 

made by the many men and women who have gone before us. Much can be done by pausing on our 

fiftieth anniversary to look back and to pay tribute to those that have made up our history. 

 

It was my privilege, last summer, to attend the meeting of the Canadian Educational Council which met 

in Saskatoon. At that time a pageant was presented, (I think largely at the instigation of the Minister of 

Education and his staff) portraying the history of Saskatchewan. The music, the songs, the commentary 

were all written by Saskatchewan people, Miss Gertrude Murray and Mr. Rj Staples wrote the music and 

the words. The scenery was painted by Miss Nona Mulcaster, an artist in Saskatoon. Some of the Indian 

songs were sung by Indians from several tribes in our province. A group of young Ukrainian people 

sang Ukrainian songs and put on some Ukrainian folk dances. Groups of Saskatchewan young people 

sang some of the prairie folk-songs, and danced some of the old square dances. I was tremendously 

impressed with that pageant. People who were visiting Saskatoon from various points of Canada came to 

me afterwards, loud in their praises of this creative and stimulating pageant, which was prepared, written 

and acted entirely by Saskatchewan people with backgrounds painted entirely by Saskatchewan artists. It 

was certainly a revelation to me, and I think, to most people who were there, how much ability and how 

much culture we have here in our own province, awaiting an opportunity for expression. 

 

We are so close to the pioneer state that I do not think we have fully appreciated the rich heritage we 

have in the history of Saskatchewan. One of the things we could hope to achieve as the result of a well-

planned anniversary, would be that we would have an opportunity of developing 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

3 

in our present generation a new sense of pride in the achievements of the last fifty years. 

 

Such an anniversary celebration would also provide a stimulus to our people who are interested in art, in 

music, in drama, in painting and in handicrafts. Such an anniversary would provide an opportunity for 

our artists. We have some excellent artists in this province. Most of us are familiar with names like 

Henderson and Hurley, Steiger and Kenderdine. There are many others in our province today, who are 

doing some excellent painting. An opportunity would be provided to put on display the words of 

Saskatchewan artists. We would hope that we could interest those who write music to prepare songs — 

Saskatchewan songs, Saskatchewan music — that could be sung by Saskatchewan choirs and played by 

Saskatchewan orchestras. 

 

Drama is coming to the fore in Canada, and I think Canada is destined to play an important part in the 

field of dramatics. Great tribute is due to the CBC for the leadership they have given in this field of art. 

We in Saskatchewan have made our contribution. I would like to see young artists like Frances Hyland, 

who is now doing so well on the London stage, Miss June Kowalchuk, who has made a name for herself 

in the world of music — young Saskatchewan artists like these brought back to the province to take part 

in productions on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary. 

 

There is a great deal being done in the province in ceramics, and in clay modeling. Some of the 

handicraft that is being done in communities all over Saskatchewan is something of which we can truly 

be proud. But because we are a large province and because our people are scattered, these things have 

not been brought together. The fiftieth anniversary would provide an excellent opportunity to bring the 

fruits of our culture and to bring the results of the work of our various artists to a place where the people 

of Saskatchewan could see it and enjoy it, and appreciate it, and in turn stimulate our artists to go on to 

do even finer work in the future. 

 

I would think that equally important would be the lessons in co-operation and tolerance that are to be 

learned by working together. Our province is made up of people of many ethnic origins. The Fiftieth 

Anniversary, we would hope, would provide an opportunity for the people who have come from various 

countries to put on displays of their national music and of their folk dances and of their drama and of 

their poetry. It is only when we come to appreciate the culture of other people and of other nationalities 

that we come to understand each other, to be more tolerant of each other, and to work together better. 

Out of all these various cultures, each of which has something to contribute, there will emerge a 

Canadian culture and Saskatchewan will contribute to that Canadian culture. 

 

We would hope that an anniversary celebration such as we envisage would provide an opportunity for 

Saskatchewan to display its growth and development in the economic field, for not only are we the bread 

basket of Canada, but we have become an important producer of livestock and of dairy and poultry 

products, of lumber, fish and furs. We are confident that, by 1955, we will be a major producer of 

uranium and of oil and natural gas. 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

4 

Strides are being made in the production of clay and clay products and ceramics. We would think that an 

industrial exhibition in connection with this anniversary would give many small manufacturers in this 

province an opportunity to put on display things that are made in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan 

people. In other words, this anniversary could provide a show-window where the people of the rest of 

Canada and of other parts of the world would have an opportunity to see some of the things that are 

produced in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan people from Saskatchewan resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think what I have said is sufficient to indicate that a programme of that magnitude, a 

programme that will enlist the support of groups of people all over our province, it is something that will 

require a great deal of work and a great deal of organization. There has been some criticism from the 

Opposition, earlier in the Session, about the advisability of appointing a Committee to celebrate the 

Fiftieth Anniversary so far in advance. Mr. Speaker, it all depends what we are planning to do. There 

have been celebrations in Canada — for instance, the celebration of Canada‟s Sixtieth Anniversary; and 

most members will remember that at that time I believe the legislation was passed setting up the 

Committee in February. The Committee was not set up until about three months before the actual 

celebration. Many of us who participated in the celebration at that time, will remember that there were 

meetings and patriotic speeches, and children carried banners and had little parades; but there was no 

participation by the people themselves. It was a celebration to be enjoyed by orators and public speakers. 

 

What we had in mind is something that will come from the bottom; that people in their respective 

communities for one or two years beforehand will be preparing choirs, will be preparing pageants, will 

be preparing and organizing programmes; that we will enlist the support of those interested in the tourist 

trade; that we will enlist the support of manufacturers in the province for an industrial exhibit; that the 

whole province of Saskatchewan for a considerable time in advance, will be planning and thinking and 

working in order that every community in the province may have an opportunity of participating. If that 

is to be done, Mr. Speaker, there is a tremendous amount of work that must be done in advance. 

 

I was looking the other day over the report of the State of Minnesota. Minnesota celebrated one of their 

anniversaries in 1949. They set up a committee back in 1947; and I was interested in noticing that the 

Committee, after it had completed its work, submitted a report to the Governor of that State in which 

they said that they would have wished that the Committee had been set up a year earlier. They found two 

years quite inadequate for the kind of programme which they had in mind. 

 

With that in mind, the Government is suggesting, today, that legislation be passed, giving the 

Government authority to set up such a Committee. Such a committee, I would hope, will be set up this 

fall, and that sub-committees will be struck off so that by next winter they could begin to make their 

plans. These plans will have to be made far in advance. We would like to see contests held throughout 

the province, and people who write songs or music of various sorts to submit them. Information should 

go out to various 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

5 

groups and groups of various ethnic origins, letting them know that there will be a place for them and an 

opportunity for them to sing their national songs, and put on their national folk-dances. All of that will 

take a good deal of time, and will need the co-operation of a great many different groups in this 

province. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I feel that no apology is necessary for bringing down this Bill so early. I do not 

think that three years will be any too much time. As a matter of fact, it will not be three years, because 

by the time this Committee is set up and various sub-committees are established, they will have about 

two and a half years in which to lay out the broad programme and to begin to enlist the support of local 

committees in every part of this Province. I am sure that the members of the House will be almost 

unanimous in the support of the idea that Saskatchewan‟s Golden Jubilee should be widely celebrated, 

that it should be participated in by all sections of our community, and that plans for that end should be 

laid as quickly as possible and put into operations as efficiently as possible. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, because I believe that this Golden Jubilee will provide an excellent opportunity 

for paying our debts of the past, and for recognizing our destiny in the future, I would like to move 

second reading of Bill No. 62 — an Act to provide for the Celebration of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the 

Establishment of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has referred to some 

observations made by myself and others in regard to whether it was necessary to introduce this Bill more 

than three years ahead of the time when the celebrations would take place. Now, that the Bill is before 

us, the question of whether it was necessary to give three years towards the organization of this 

celebration or not, is not of great importance. There is no doubt it is better to have more time than 

necessary, than not to have enough time. As far as the Bill itself is concerned to provide for the adequate 

celebration of the golden jubilee of the foundation of this province is concerned, naturally we are very 

favourable to that being arranged for, and arranged to be celebrated in a fitting way considering what it 

does celebrate. 

 

I am glad, in a way that there is this opportunity to make some remarks about this matter. I happen to 

come of pioneer stock. My grandfather came to Canada in a sailing vessel and settled in the very rough 

country as some of it was then — it had to be cleared and broken — in Gray county, well over a hundred 

years ago. Then, my father came to Manitoba and settled in 1889 near Portage la Prairie. One sometimes 

does not realize that that was just four years after the Riel uprising in 1885. I have talked to many of 

these old-timers, I have talked to men who served in Middleton‟s army and there was one old gentleman 

who died not very long ago, who knew Riel personally very well indeed, and he told me of his contacts 

with him. From men like him, and from my own father and mother who have spoken of their pioneering 

experiences, I came to value their work and have often been very resentful of the attitude of people who 

have come to this country from other 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

6 

countries, comparatively recently, and found here quite a splendid civilization, but because it is not quite 

as advanced as the civilizations they have come from in Europe, which are the product of hundreds of 

years of growth, they have been inclined to look upon it disparagingly. I must say that I have felt 

somewhat resentful about the attitude, for I feel that Canadians have every reason to be very proud of 

what has been accomplished in the short time in which we have been building a nation on the northern 

half of this continent. 

 

I have been even more resentful, I must say, when I consider what was accomplished in the first 40 

years of this century here on the western plains at the suggestion made from time, to time, that more has 

been accomplished in the last ten years than has been accomplished in all the previous time. I have 

talked to many of these old-timers, and they have told me what conditions were like, less than fifty years 

ago, in areas of the province that are not thickly settled, and where good schools have been built, fine 

churches have been built, public institutions have been set up, and we have got as fine a civilization, in 

my opinion, as any place in the world. And when they tell me that less than 50 years ago there were no 

roads, except prairie trails running through the country, practically no schools, no churches, no towns, 

and where we have cities today there were only very small groups of people — I believe that, in 1901, 

the population of Saskatoon was only around 400; and when one considers what has been accomplished, 

when one considers the vision of the people who came and laid the foundation for this western country, 

when one considers their courage in being willing to stake their whole future by settling in a country 

which some people said would never support any large number of people, that they put such tremendous 

amounts of work into building homes, establishing farms, and putting everything they had into laying 

the foundation of this province, then I think it cannot help but do us, who come along now ready to take 

the benefit of their work and sacrifice and vision and courage — it cannot do anything but good to us to 

stop for a moment and contemplate what they accomplished in the past fifty years. 

 

As the Premier has pointed out, this country was ceded to the British Crown by the Hudson‟s Bay 

Company in 1870, and at that time there was nothing on these western plains practically but the native 

people, and the fur traders. There was very little in the way of settlement whatever. That, as has been 

stated, is a matter of 82 years ago. Much was accomplished before the formation of the province, but the 

great development took place after 1905. When one considers what has been accomplished since 1905 in 

building roads, setting up school, setting up churches, and generally establishing the basis of the 

splendid civilization we have here in Saskatchewan, one cannot help but feel a spirit of humble 

admiration for those who came here and laid the foundation for this province. 

 

I have sometimes felt, and in fact the thought was expressed this morning in Committee, that perhaps 

lack of the faith in our future that we should have is due to the experiences that we had in the days of the 

„thirties. People who come to us to invest money in the development of our natural resources from other 

places show more confidence in our economic future than some who live in this Province. 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

7 

I think, Mr. Speaker, it is certainly high time that people quit continually looking back to what happened 

in the unfortunate days of the „thirties, due to such an extent to crop failure, and also to world 

conditions; that they have quit having some apprehension and lack of confidence because of those 

experiences, and realize that we were the victims then of the concurrence of two things — not only 

world-wide depression and set-back, but it was made much worse here by unprecedented crop failures. 

And it would be very strange if we were to have to encounter anything like that to the same extent, in the 

days ahead. We should feel that we have in Canada as a whole, and in Western Canada, the possibility 

of developing a prosperous and progressive community, not bettered by any place on the North 

American continent. I am satisfied that we have more in the way of resources in Saskatchewan than 

either of our neighbouring provinces on either side. I am satisfied that we can look forward to a 

development in the years ahead that will proceed with such speed and accomplish advances that will go 

beyond anything that the most optimistic of us can visualize at the present time. 

 

I think that one of the things that may give us the courage, the patience and the determination to go 

ahead and build a fitting edifice upon the great foundations handed over to us by our pioneering 

forefathers in this great province and country of ours, would be to contemplate what they have 

accomplished here in a short fifty years. And this golden jubilee, in bringing to the attention of all our 

people, whether they were born here or whether they have come here in recent times, the great 

accomplishments that have been wrought by those who opened up these plains, I cannot feel that it 

should be otherwise than inspiring to those of us who are here, and should be carrying on and carrying 

forth the work that they have done. 

 

If it is a question of material accomplishments, I do not think that there is any area on the North 

American continent or elsewhere that can feel that, considering what has had to be faced, encountered 

and struggled against in the way of climatic conditions and otherwise; I do not think there is any other 

group of people could feel that as much has been accomplished any other place as has been 

accomplished right here on the plains of Saskatchewan, in the material field. 

 

Then again, there is another field in which I am proud to be a Canadian and I am proud to be a citizen of 

Saskatchewan, and that has been in the way in which we have solved this problem of people of varying 

racial origins and religious creeds getting along with one another. And not only getting along with one 

another, but coming to esteem one another as brother Canadians and, in every way, comrades. 

 

It does not seem so very long ago to me that there were attacks being made upon people who had come 

to us from other lands because they were of different racial origin or something of the sort. At that time 

many people would make pleas for tolerance and goodwill, and it is one of the things that has struck me 

so very forcibly in the last two or three or four years that now you do not hear those pleas for tolerance. 

It has come to be taken for granted that the people who have come to us from other lands are equally 

good Canadians with those who happen to come from the eastern part of Canada, or from the British 

Isles. That has come to be taken for 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

8 

granted, and today there is no need for these pleas for tolerance and goodwill. That tolerance and 

goodwill exists now, Mr. Speaker, and when I think of the way people have mingled here, coming to us 

from all the different parts of Europe; how they live here in complete goodwill and concord, and how it 

has come to the point where in Saskatchewan there is no longer any feeling between people of different 

racial origins or religious creeds; when I read of the unfortunate difficulties that are being experienced in 

other parts of the world as people of different racial origins contest against one another, where there is 

fear of bloodshed and trouble because people of different races have not learned to get along with one 

another, then, Mr. Speaker, I am very thankful that I am privileged to live in a Province where that 

goodwill and concord and amity prevail, and where there is such a spirit of brotherhood as does exist 

between the people of all races and religious creeds who settled in and who are building up, this great 

province of ours. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as we do gather together at the Golden Jubilee of the founding of our great province, 

we can look both forward and backwards, with a great deal of satisfaction, to what we have 

accomplished in the spiritual realm in the way of learning that we are brothers all, no matter what our 

religious background or our racial background. 

 

Then, we can take a great deal of satisfaction out of the great steps forward that have been taken in the 

field of education. Considering that our whole educational plant had to be established, and then staffed, 

and when one considers the high regard in which our educational institutions are held all over this 

country, it does not matter what branch you want to refer to, I think we can take a great deal of pride in 

the attainments in that field which have been accomplished by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

In the spiritual realm I think we owe a great debt of gratitude (and it should be recognized) to the 

missionaries who came out and laid the foundations for the churches which now flourish in our midst. 

Those people who came out and gave their whole life without thought of reward, to lay the foundation 

for the work, the great work, churches in western Canada are now doing. We cannot give too great a 

credit to those great spiritual pioneers, and it is well that we should pause and consider the great 

contribution that the churches have made towards the life and civilization that we are privileged to enjoy 

today in Saskatchewan. 

 

I mentioned the work of education. I never go to Saskatoon without glancing across at the great 

University of Saskatchewan that is probably as beautifully located and as beautiful a pile of buildings, so 

far as universities are concerned, as any university in the whole of Canada; in fact, I do not suppose it is 

surpassed any place on the North American continent. But universities are more than buildings. 

Universities, in regard to what they accomplish, depend upon the type of people attending those 

universities, and the type of people that have undertaken to guide young people that attend that 

university. I never attend a university function, and see the high type of people that we are fortunate in 

having in guiding the affairs of our university, but what I am again proud to belong to the Province of 

Saskatchewan. I never attend any conference of our municipal leaders, any conference of our other 

leaders in other branches of activity, but what it is brought home to me the great intelligence and virility 

and courage of the people living here in Saskatchewan. 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

9 

And as I see that manifesting itself, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that, because we have drawn to us the 

pioneer spirits, the adventuring spirits, from all the great races of the western world, and as we have 

mingled then together, we are building up here, a virile courageous God-fearing race that will lay not 

only the foundation, but go forward in building up here a community and a province which I hope we, or 

the people who come after us, will have reason to be as proud of as we are of the heritage that our 

forefathers have given to us. If, in contemplating the great work of those who have gone ahead of us in 

building up this province and this nation, materially and spiritually; if by contemplating their great work 

based upon sacrifice and based upon willingness to serve; if from that we should, and I think can, take a 

determination to dedicate ourselves to try to carry on the work so that we, in turn may pass on what they 

have done, improved, strengthened, better in a way that will be worthy of a great heritage that we have 

received. And so, Mr. Speaker, I have very great pleasure in seconding this motion. 

 

Mr. F.H. Dundas (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, the Premier and I can agree on one thing 

— that we should celebrate the 50th Anniversary of our province. I might say, Mr. Speaker, that I 

believe I speak with some authority here also, as my father and mother came to Saskatchewan from 

Dundee in 1882, and I was born southeast of Qu‟Appelle in 1885 — 67 years ago today, the 26th of 

March. I am proud that I was born in Saskatchewan and born on a farm. I have in my time, and when I 

was a boy, put up with great hardships that none in this Assembly ever put up with, because I lived on 

rabbits and boiled wheat for years, and I want to say that the pioneers of this province had a great deal of 

hardship, and lived under those conditions for a great many years, and I think that the pioneers of this 

province have a great deal of credit coming to them. Some of the old-timers are here yet. 

 

As I said, I was born at Qu‟Appelle in 1885. At the time when the rebellion was on, I was just a little 

boy. The Indians used to come around our place, pass through the house and through the yard, and my 

mother never feared them at all. My parents were always courageous, and were wonderful pals of all the 

people, as they went up to Batoche to fight the battle. 

 

It was my privilege also, to see a great deal of activity and so on, with the Indian race when I was a 

young boy. When I was about 20 years old, or 21, I could speak the Indian language fluently, and I acted 

as interpreter for courts in the early days — to interpret for the Indians, and I might say that I have a 

great deal of gratitude for the Indians. The Indian is the only real Canadian that we have in our province, 

and I might say also that when my father and her mother came from a big city, like Dundee, to a 

wilderness like Saskatchewan in 1882, on the 20th of April, they had some great courage, and they 

stayed here until both of them died. One was 89, and the other 82. I hope that I will live that long to see 

the 50th Jubilee of the Province of Saskatchewan. 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

10 

I might also say I have the privilege of being called after our great General of the Rebellion, Frederick 

Middleton; my father called me Frederick Middleton Dundas, after General Middleton, our Commander 

in 1885. I might say that the people here now, do not know what the pioneers of this province came 

through, and they do not know what I came through because I have had lots of ups and downs. You 

know, we all have disagreements, family troubles and one thing and another, and my father and I had a 

disagreement when I was 16 years old, and I pulled out. I quit him and went to Indian Head to work, in 

1889, and have been on my own ever since. But nevertheless, I had a great respect for my father and 

mother, especially my mother — she was a real mother; and I am sure it was a sad day for her when I 

told her I was leaving home. I packed up my clothes and walked 12 miles to Indian Head, and since then 

I have been on my own. 

 

However, I think all of us will agree that the 50th Jubilee of our province will be unique, and I am sure 

we will all help everyone that is getting ready for it. If I can be of any assistance to the Government of 

the day when our 50th Anniversary comes around, I will get my Indians to put on a pow-wow, which I 

think will be unique, and I will tell whoever is the government of the day that I will do all I can for the 

50th Anniversary of our province. I agree with all that has been said, and I am sure that, coming from 

the town of Qu‟Appelle, I will get a good deal of assistance from the fact that I was born there. When I 

came into this House in 1934, I think I was the only member who had been born in the seat he 

represented. I think there is some credit in that, and I think that the people of that side of the country 

have a great deal of goodwill for me; being a political man, you know, you get the knocks and the good 

things, but I never got very many knocks; I got all good cheers for everything. 

 

I hope that I will be spared to help with the 50th Anniversary of the Province of Saskatchewan. My 

health is not too robust, just now, but I hope that it will be as good as it is now so that I may give you 

every assistance that I can on that occasion. 

 

Mr. H.J. Maher (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, it is not my intention to prolong the debate on this 

Bill providing for the celebration of the 50th Anniversary of the establishment of the Province of 

Saskatchewan; but I think, as representative of the Battlefords, that I would be remiss if I did not draw to 

the attention of this House the fact that the town of Battleford, resting on the south side of the 

Saskatchewan River, was the original capital of the North-West Territories, and for a great time it 

contributed a lot to the welfare of this Province. 

 

I would just like to reminisce for a moment on history when back in 1881 and previous to that, it was the 

capital and the Lieutenant Governor at that time was David Lloyd. I was just going through the Library 

when I saw the table of the Fathers of Confederation, which at one time was located in the town of 

Battleford, and subsequently moved down here. It is all very interesting to note that some of the chairs 

that we sit in in our Committee Rooms are the same type of chairs that are sitting in the museum in 

Battleford. I just want to suggest to the Government that, when they consider the question of the Jubilee, 

they pay particular attention to the town 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

11 

of Battleford, in view primarily of its historical significance of being originally the capital of the North-

West Territories, previous to the forming of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take just a short time to say a few words about the Bill and 

the possibilities which it suggests. I am sure to begin with, all of us would want to congratulate the 

member for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley on the fact that it is his birthday, and to join with him in his hopes 

that he will be still in Saskatchewan to help celebrate at least the 50th anniversary of the Province of 

Saskatchewan — and perhaps the 60th also. 

 

Now, it is not necessary for me to try to add too much to what has already been said. I was pleased to 

hear the Leader of the Opposition speak as he did about the Bill, to indicate that probably it was 

desirable that we have enough time to organize the activities, and also that perhaps it might be 

acceptable to the Opposition if they were to be done at some public expense. 

 

I am pleased, too, to hear different members refer to the old-timers. As the Leader of the Opposition 

mentioned, many of these men who participated in the making of the original history of the province are 

passing away, and we cannot lose much time in contacting them. We are interested in our Archives 

Division, in getting as many stories about and from those people as possible. I would hope that anyone 

who has stories of that kind would be put into contact with the Archives Division, so that those stories 

could be gathered and reserved. 

 

It seems to me that we do get faith for the future by adding up the accomplishments of the past. I think 

this is an opportunity to take stock in that way. I think it is an opportunity to emphasize our Canadianism 

and of the resources of Canadianism, may I add. Those of you have had the opportunity of reading 

anything of the Massey Report will remember that they emphasized in that report the desirability of 

building up our Canadian resources. 

 

The Premier, in introducing the Bill, has said many of the things that I thought I might have said on this 

occasion. Reference was made to the pageant which my Department was able to arrange on the occasion 

of the meeting of the Canadian Education Association in Saskatchewan this year — the fine response 

that that pageant received. One of the most thrilling parts of it, I think, Mr. Speaker, was the singing of a 

young Indian girl, Grace LaValle, who, without the benefit of very much formal training in singing, 

thrilled her audience, and one who, with a reasonable formal training, could become an outstanding 

Saskatchewan vocalist. If we can discover, and give some inspiration and assistance to, people of that 

type, then we have done well. 

 

One of the most pleasing aspects of that pageant to me, Mr. Speaker, was that I found people from all 

over the province, later on, who felt extremely proud that they came from Saskatchewan. They were 

glad to be of a people and in a province that could portray history and recognize its history in that way. 

It seems worthwhile that we encourage that, and on the occasion of the celebration of our 50th 

anniversary, then we can provide 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

12 

a stimulus to the worthwhile things that have happened in the province; we can develop the proudness 

required in our province. I would hope that something similar to that pageant might be done in many 

communities in the province, with particular regard to the history of that community; that we might do 

something much bigger, perhaps, and better, because we will have more time and opportunity to develop 

it on a provincial-wide scale. 

 

Certainly it is worthwhile to study and record the history of our communities before it is too late. We 

have many communities that have an extremely rich history. The member for the Battlefords has 

mentioned one; we would mention others. Certainly Qu‟Appelle and Fort Qu‟Appelle, the city of 

Regina, the community of Prince Albert — all of these have an extremely rich history, and we should be 

aware of it. 

 

While some of our communities may not have had that same richness, perhaps, of history, all of them do 

have a history. On Saturday night of last week, I had the opportunity of seeing Thornton Wilder‟s play, 

“Our Town”, which tells the story of the happenings in one of the supposedly rather dull little 

communities, but tells it in such a way so as to make all who saw and heard aware of the very 

worthwhile drama that takes place in every community. Sometimes I think there is a danger that we may 

think that Regina and Saskatoon and Moose Jaw are Saskatchewan. I submit that, while Regina and 

Saskatoon and Moose Jaw are undoubtedly a part of Saskatchewan, they are not really Saskatchewan; 

that Saskatchewan is Biggar, Rosetown, Battleford, Swift Current, Touchwood, and places of that size, 

all put together; that it is important that our people realize the goodness of life in those communities, and 

the drama of life in those communities. 

 

Mention has already been made of the opportunity this would give to honour our old-timers before too 

many of them pass away; to honour the various ethnological groups that go to make up the province; to 

recognize the contribution that these groups have made, and to encourage the retention of that 

contribution as a part of our provincial cultural life. 

 

The Premier has already mentioned the desirability of providing a stimulus for our own drama and art 

and music and literature, and handicrafts. We need, I think, to emphasize the relationship of those arts to 

the lives of our community, because real art, after all, does spring from the real soul — the inner soul of 

our community life. We can well afford to spend some time and energy on emphasizing that. 

 

Some of the activities that are stimulated because of this observance, might, it seems to me, carry on 

from year to year. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that there are many members of the Assembly who have had 

the opportunity of visiting some relatively small communities in the United States. For each year, and 

year after year, they do portray the history of that community. The local people do it. They create it out 

of their own resources. It is the story of their fathers and their grandfathers. They do it, and they love it, 

and people come from many miles in order to enjoy it along with them; and in no place in Canada or the 

United States have we any history that is any richer, or scenery that is any more beautiful than that of 

our own lovely Qu‟Appelle Valley, and many other places in the province too. 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

13 

Mention has been made of the fact that we can, I think, stimulate considerable tourist interest as a result 

of such a venture. It will have an economic value; it will have cultural and social values; it will have 

educational values; it will stimulate the growth of Saskatchewan; it will help to enrich the lives of 

Saskatchewan people, and will make people even more proud of Saskatchewan. 

 

I happen to have here a couple of pamphlets which were prepared in preparation of the celebration of a 

similar anniversary of a small community in the United States. I think it might be fitting if I were to read 

the poem, Mr. Speaker, which is the preface to the programme, and which was written by a man who 

prepared the script for the drama which was presented on that occasion, because on an occasion like the 

50th anniversary, we do stand looking backwards to get strength from our history, and we stand looking 

to the future, with a faith that comes from the assurance of a past of which we can be proud. The words 

of the poet, it seems to me, emphasize that aspect well. He says: 

 

“For here once fought 

The man of dreams, 

The sons of hope and pain and wonder, 

Upon their foreheads, truth‟s bright diadem, 

The light of the sun in their countenance, 

And their lips singing a new song — 

A song for ages yet unborn, for us the children 

That came after them. 

 

O new and mighty world to be, they sang; 

O land, majestic, free, unbounded, 

This was the vision, this the fadeless dream, 

Tread softly, softly now these yellow stricken sands, 

This was the grail — the living thing that left, 

Speak gently, gently on these muted tongueless shores. 

 

Now down the trackless hollow years, 

That swallowed them, but not their song, 

We send response, O lusty singer, dreamer, pioneer, 

Lord of the wilderness — the unafraid; 

Painter of darkness, fire and flood, 

Of the soaring spirit winged aloft on the plumes of agony and death; 

Hear us, o hear — the dream still lives; 

It lives, it lives, and shall not die.” 

 

And that, it seems, to me, is the assurance which we ought, on an occasion such as we are talking about 

today, give to the pioneers, when the Leader of the Opposition and others spoke, and we ought also to 

give to the younger people of Saskatchewan, “the dream still lives; it lives, it lives, and shall not die.” 

 

I am very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to associate myself with those who have supported the Motion. 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

14 

Hon. J.H. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, I shall endeavour to be very brief. I 

would not like the people who are listening throughout the province to get the impression that our 50th 

anniversary is going to be made the occasion for oratory and for self-emulation. 

 

The fact is that I have spent 20 years of my life in Saskatchewan in two historic communities — in the 

community of the Qu‟Appelle Valley, at Fort Qu‟Appelle, and in Saskatoon — and I do see in this 

celebration which is being contemplated, an opportunity for these historic communities simultaneously 

to carry on and organize pageants, and celebrations, and games, and a pageantry to illustrate the 

development of the history of those old historic communities. It will take considerable time, Mr. 

Speaker, to organize these pageants — as for example, in the town of Fort Qu‟Appelle, they played polo 

and cricket 70 years ago. Now, if they are going to demonstrate these games, I am sure it will take a 

considerable time for the young lads of today to equal the skill of their grandparents of 70 years ago. 

 

Secondly, I feel that it is an opportunity, as the Minister of Education has pointed out, for the people 

elsewhere in Canada and from the United States to visit, and make friends, understand and possibly copy 

the philosophy of Saskatchewan, be it political or social. These visits will result in the extension of 

friendship and understanding which we are so anxious to promote. It will also provide an opportunity, 

and an incentive for the children, the youth of this province, to participate in the celebration; to 

understand their own province; to take pride in the accomplishments of their parents and their 

grandparents, and indeed, to become indoctrinated with the determination to make Saskatchewan the 

most enlightened, the most secure, and most happy spot in the world. 

 

Now, the Leader of the Opposition has rather deprecated the fact that statements had been made on this 

side of the House that advancements during the past few years had been over-emphasized. His difficulty 

lies in the fact that he is contrasting governments with people. Now, the early people of this province — 

the pioneers, who have now become the aged people of this province, too great praise cannot be heaped 

on these people for the wonderful work they did, the privations which they endured in developing this 

province, and making it what it is today. It is too bad that in those early days they were handicapped, 

possibly, with governments that did not move as quickly as they should to keep pace with these 

pioneers, but that has been corrected since. 

 

I have had the happy experience, Mr. Speaker, that I have yet to hear a person of British origin, or 

Scandinavian origin, or from the Middle European countries deprecate or disparage the culture that they 

have found in Canada, or in the Province of Saskatchewan. They should not, as far as Saskatchewan is 

concerned, because here we are, developing a cosmopolitan type of culture that is, in part, a culture of 

the various countries whose racial origins have contributed to the population of this province. 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

15 

Mr. J.E. McCormack (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to take up very much time of 

the House. I think I should draw to the attention of the House, however, that the member for Wolseley-

Qu‟Appelle today will have to share some of the glory, this being his birthday, with the member from 

Humboldt. Mr. Loehr, although he was not born in this province, is an immigrant to the province, and 

one of the pioneers who has done so much in building up this province to its greatness, today also 

celebrates his birthday. I would not like to say which one of these two young-looking gentlemen is the 

older, but I think we will have to give the credit to the member from Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley. 

 

I would like to associate myself very much with the remarks made by the Premier and by the Leader of 

the Opposition with respect to this Bill. The late Paul Prince and I, on many occasions, spoke about the 

unfortunate position we were getting into in this province, in that the stories of some of the early 

pioneers who had such tales of historical interest to tell were not being documented. I was very pleased 

to hear the Minister of Education speak on that subject, because I do think that there are so many 

interesting stories in history of this province that go back many years, that should be recorded in some 

manner, so that future generations, and people such as myself, can have the benefit of them. In the 

celebration of this 50th anniversary of the province, if an effort could be made to record such things and 

collect these old pictures and documents, and bills and things like that it would be a great step towards 

getting a good history of the province — not just from a military or political point of view, but from the 

viewpoint of the average ordinary person in the various towns and villages. 

 

I will not comment on what the Minister of Social Welfare said. I do not think, today, we should get into 

any sort of a political debate. I find myself in agreement with some of his remarks for once, but I would 

like to point out that the first time that politics was even mentioned was when the Minister got up on his 

feet, this afternoon. I will support the Bill. 

 

Mr. V.P. Deshaye (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say a few words on Bill No. 62. I 

wish to assure the Premier and this Assembly that this Bill will have the support of all the people of the 

Melville constituency. We, in that part of the province, are pioneers in the progress of Saskatchewan, 

and we certainly feel that we will want to all take a part in this celebration. 

 

The only thing I wanted to suggest was that possibly the Committee selected will form a basis upon 

which there can be a travelling display of the progress of Saskatchewan, in the 50 years, and I had in 

mind that this travelling display could be shown at the various fair days and sports days throughout the 

province. It may be necessary to have two or three such displays; but I think in that way it would give an 

opportunity for all the people of the province to see what progress has been made in this Saskatchewan 

of ours. Then it comes to my mind, that for this reason it will be most difficult for some people to get to 

the larger centres where these things will be 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

16 

displayed much more abundantly; but if there can be some miniature reproduction of the larger displays 

that will be held in the cities, I think a lot of country people who could not otherwise have the 

opportunity of viewing the progress of our province, will that way be able to get some insight into what 

has transpired in this wonderful province of ours in the last 50 years. 

 

I also think that possibly, and there no doubt will be, films which will be shown throughout that year to 

indicate the progress that has been made, and I think that all our theatres throughout the province will be 

glad to depict that progress. I think the idea is a good one in that it will advertise Saskatchewan to a 

large extent, and the production of this province. There are many small industries which the people of 

even Saskatchewan are not aware that exist right here, and I think that the idea will depict that to the 

people of Canada and the United States. I certainly approve Bill No. 62. 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — Mr. Speaker, there are so many members that will be wanting the air; some of us 

are going to probably “get the air” before we want it! I would just like to say that the good people of 

Moose Jaw support this, and will co-operative in every way. Perhaps this Jubilee Celebration will give 

us an opportunity of telling the real story of how the “Friendly City” got its name. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — Perhaps as one of the members who was born in the Province of Saskatchewan, 

I should say a few words. I can recall, back to that time when Regina was chosen as the capital, having 

overheard my father make the remark that he thought Saskatoon would have been a better place. (I knew 

I would get some support from a seat back there, although I do not agree with him at all, now). But I 

want to congratulate the member for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley for having reached his 67th birthday, and 

wish him many more happy years. I think when he told us of his past life, he forgot one of the most 

important milestones, and that was the occasion that he was made an Indian Chief — quite a number of 

years ago. In fact, the first time I ever saw him was out at the reserve south of Sintaluta on that occasion 

when the Premier was elevated to that position. 

 

I notice Section 3 of the Bill — if I might get technical for just a moment, it might bear repeating. It 

says, “The objects of the corporation shall be to make and carry out the necessary arrangements, either 

alone or in co-operation with other bodies, with similar purposes for a suitable and effective celebration 

of the 50th Anniversary of the establishment of the Province of Saskatchewan”, and I am just going to 

suggest now, and at this early date, that the people who will be called upon to initiate and proceed with 

this Committee and make the necessary arrangements; I am just going to suggest that I know the people 

of Saskatchewan well enough realize that they will fall right in line and do everything they can possibly 

do to make it a success. 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

17 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — Mr. Speaker, just a word or two. Unlike my hon. friend from Qu‟Appelle-

Wolseley, I will not have been in the province long enough in the year 1955 to gain free admission to 

any celebrations that might take place on that occasion. But I would like to join with my friend in 

agreeing that he does come from one of the pioneer parts or sections of the province of Saskatchewan, 

and undoubtedly, some of my relatives arrived in the Qu‟Appelle district prior to the time the hon. 

member‟s parents arrived there. I have heard a great deal of the history of the Qu‟Appelle Valley — the 

history of the pioneers, that settled there in 1882, and onward. So I moved from the town of my (should 

I say) birth to a city of my adoption, and again I have found myself in one of the pioneer districts of the 

Province of Saskatchewan, a district that was settled as far back or had settlers there, as far back as 

1876. I am confident that Qu‟Appelle will do its part in celebrating a very suspicious occasion. I am also 

confident that the city of my adoption will do its part in paying tribute to the 50th anniversary of the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I shall be most delighted to support the Bill that is now before the House. 

 

Mr. A.G. Kuziak (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, I believe that I probably represent the most cosmopolitan 

constituency of the province of Saskatchewan, and I want to assure you that the people of the Canora 

constituency are completely in agreement with this Bill, and will do everything possible to make it one 

of the greatest holidays within this province. I will support the Bill. 

 

Mr. R.A. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I will just take a minute. I have listened with a 

great deal of interest, and I want to compliment the member for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley, and also the 

member for Humboldt, and wish them many more happy birthdays. I do not know how many in this 

Chamber were in the city of Regina on that September day, 1905, when the Province was inaugurated, 

but I happened to have that pleasure. I was at the time 14. We were living at Francis at that time, and my 

father brought myself and my brother up here, and I saw that ceremony, and I still have very vivid 

recollections of it. I remember a lot of things that happened that day much better than I remember things 

that have happened since. The constituency which I represent is one very historic part — a very old part 

of Saskatchewan; I refer to the old place called Cannington Manor, which has a wealth of historic 

background. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The mover may now exercise his privilege of closing the debate. Anyone wishing to 

speak must do so now. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I was not going to say anything in closing the debate, but I notice we 

are off the radio now, and, therefore, it will not hurt to take a few minutes. I would say, first of all, to the 

Opposition that “The best laid plans of mice and men, gang aft agley.” We 



 
March 26, 1952 

 

 

18 

were expecting to let the member for Wilkie (Mr. Horsman) on with his motion, in order to help the 

Opposition to make up their time, because they are behind on radio time; but the Leader of the 

Opposition is agreeable, and I am sure we are, to have him take the time tomorrow or Friday, whichever 

seems to fit in best. We still see that he gets on the air, because he has been sort of ridden to the rails by 

the loquaciousness of members on all sides of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not take any time in closing the debate, but since we are off the air, I would like to 

take this opportunity of thanking the members on all parts of the House for their spontaneous support of 

this Bill, and to say that whatever government is in office when this celebration comes along, and 

whatever government is responsible for carrying out and laying the plans for that celebration, I think it is 

apparent that that government will have the support of all sections of the people of Saskatchewan to 

make that the most outstanding celebration that this province has ever had. I was hoping that the 

member for Athabaska (Mr. Marion) would get on to his feet in the course of the debate. I noticed 

everybody talking about Fort Qu‟Appelle and North Battleford and various spots; but I could not help 

recalling, reading over again Marjorie Campbell Wilson‟s book, “The Saskatchewan”, that the whole of 

Saskatchewan, of course, was based on 150 or 200 years ago, on the trappers and the missionaries who 

came down the Churchill to Cumberland House and to Ile a la Crosse. You will remember that, Mr. 

Speaker, as you, in 1946 (wasn‟t it?) went to Ile a la Crosse to the celebration there of the 100th 

anniversary of the opening of the Mission of the Oblate Fathers. The Missions that were opened there 

first by the Catholic Church and later by the Anglican Church at Cumberland House, were really the first 

history of Saskatchewan, when the trappers and the voyageurs came from eastern Canada to open up the 

great northland in Saskatchewan. 

 

We have a great and varied history, and when this Committee starts with the help of all the different 

people of the province, to put that history together, I am convinced that it will be a stimulating and an 

interesting story. There is no doubt about the fact that people can only face the future with confidence as 

they have a full appreciation of the history and tradition of their own country. I am sure the expressions 

of approval and support that have come from all parts of the House indicates that when the 50th 

anniversary is held, it will be a memorable occasion for all of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I wish to say a word in regard to this. I remember what a deuce of a job it was to get 

them to let us be a province. I can remember a year or so before the province was formed, how we had 

to organize and how we had to do some lobbying, and some really pressing down; they did not think that 

Saskatchewan, as it is now — the old Assiniboia, was worth the status of a province. We had quite a job 

to get recognized and I was here before then. 

 

The question being put for second reading of the Bill, it was agreed to unanimously, and the Bill referred 

to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly adjourned, without question put, at 6 o‟clock p.m. 


