



















































Hansard: February 25, 1952


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eleventh Legislature 

12th Day 

 

Monday, February 25, 1952 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

OUTBREAK OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I assume that all members of the House 

have been reading the papers, this morning, and listening to the radio and now know that the outbreak of 

animal disease in the Regina area has been diagnosed as foot-and-mouth disease. There has been a 

temporary quarantine placed on the nine municipalities where there are infected animals, and some 18 

herds in that area have infected animals. We have some measure of hope that it is not a particularly 

virulent type of foot-and-mouth disease; but nevertheless, that is what it is, and it certainly will be a 

blow to the livestock industry not only in Saskatchewan but perhaps other parts of the west will also be 

affected. 

 

I have not, as yet, received a detailed announcement as to the controls and measures that will be taken, 

but the Department of Agriculture here has extended its full co-operation to the Dominion Health of 

Animals Branch in assisting in any control measures that may be decided upon. 

 

It might be opportune, too, for me to say, Mr. Speaker, that we hope that all farmers, particularly in the 

area affected, and everyone in the area, will do all they can not to come into contact with the herds; and 

that all farmers will keep their cattle just as carefully isolated as they can, in all parts of the Province. 

We are hopeful that we can keep this contagion in the restricted area, and if we can do that, then there is 

a possibility the disease will not spread any further. The animals in the area affected will be destroyed 

and buried — that means the live animals in all herds affected. 

 

I thought, Mr. Speaker, that I should bring this to the attention of the members in the House, and we will 

be getting further information by airmail. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

2 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed, from Friday, February 22, 1952, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of 

Mr. Erb for the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. W.S. Thair (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to associate myself with those members who 

have preceded me, in congratulating the hon. member from Milestone (Mr. Erb) and the hon. member 

for Gravelbourg (Mr. E.H. Walker) who so ably moved and seconded the Address-in-Reply to the 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

I just want to make a short statement in regard to the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease as it is 

practically all within my constituency. The Minister of Agriculture has made a statement in this House 

and also over the air and everyone is well acquainted with the seriousness of the condition, so there is 

not much that I can add. 

 

Some of this outbreak is very close to my own farm — three or four miles away — in the valley; and it 

is confined mostly to some three municipalities. I am sure that the Department of Agriculture, with the 

help of the Animal Health Branch, in co-operation with the Provincial Government and the 

municipalities concerned, will take every precaution, and there will be active co-operation on the part of 

every farmer in an effort to wipe out this dreadful disease. The Minister just mentioned to me now that 

compensation will be made for animals that have to be destroyed. I cannot tell you on what basis, but I 

believe a carcass basis is the usual custom. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to the fact that, almost one year ago, in a debate on the Speech 

from the Throne, I drew the attention of this Assembly to the plight of Saskatchewan wheat farmers 

because of frost damage to what was really a record-breaking crop. Today, one year later, I regret that I 

have to state again that a possible record-breaking crop has been greatly reduced in yield, grade and 

value because of weather conditions which are acknowledged to have been the worst, and the most 

adverse weather for harvest, in the past 50 years. 

 

I am sure farmers will look on with mixed emotions that, although a big crop has been produced, it was 

like drawing teeth to get it safely harvested, and much of it will be threshed this coming spring. The 

Saskatchewan wheat crop for 1951 is estimated to be about 329 million bushels — a record-breaker. In 

1942, it was 305 million; in 1928, 321 million; but, unfortunately, as I said before, because of very wet, 

dull weather, harvesting was not completed, and a large portion of this crop at the present time lies 

un-threshed in the fields, either in the form of stooks, or in most fields, swathed. A very high percentage 

of this threshed wheat is damp. There are millions of bushels yet in the hands of 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

3 

the farmers. A most recent estimate, Mr. Speaker, made by a survey of the Dominion Bureau of 

Statistics, is to the effect that, on February 1, 1952, some 28 per cent of the prairie wheat is still under 

snow, or about 150 million bushels. Saskatchewan, of that amount, has approximately 91 million 

bushels un-threshed at the present time. 

 

At the present time, one of the greatest problems facing the farmers of Saskatchewan, as well as both the 

country and terminal elevators, is that of damp wheat. Under the Wheat Board Act, Mr. Speaker, the 

Federal Government is actually, wholly and solely responsible for the selling of all grain available in the 

west, regardless of its condition; and they are making an attempt only now to handle it. Had a transport 

controller been appointed last summer, as was urged by the Saskatchewan Government, the Farmers‟ 

Union and other farm organizations, and had box cars been made available in time to take care of the 

1952 crop, a good deal of the wheat in the province might have been taken to the elevators long ago. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, after months of delay, a statement was made by Mr. John Vallance, a member of 

the Board of Grain Commissioners, at Regina on Saturday, and I quote from the Leader-Post: 

 

“We are hopeful that there would be little, if any, damp grain still in western Canada when the warm 

weather returns in the spring.” 

 

He also stated his opinion on the continued operation of drying facilities at the Lakehead and in Duluth, 

and on farms in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is estimated, according to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, that between 6 and 10 million 

bushels of damp wheat may be shipped in bond or dried at Duluth and stored there until navigation 

opens on the Great Lakes. I also understand that the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool have made arrangements 

to dry some 10,000 bushels per day of damp grain at Altona, in Manitoba. The Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool are also installing a new large capacity drying plant at No. 7 terminal at the head of the lakes. 

 

The Provincial Government, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the Farmers‟ union are urging that grain 

driers be shipped into Saskatchewan, duty free, from the United States. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel that I should make a further statement with regard to damp grain. I believe the 

original proposal made by the Saskatchewan Government to make advances to farmers on un-threshed 

or stored grain through the Wheat Board is a good system and the farmers could have their advance 

recorded in their Permit Book. I believe that the Wheat Pool, the Farmers‟ union, and even Opposition 

members in this House have supported this plan. 

 

I understand, a brief presented to the Government recently by the Farmers‟ Union states they are having 

a number of complaints coming to their office from farmers with un-threshed or un-delivered grain, who 

have been refused cash advances by the banks to carry them over until Spring. Then they further state: 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

4 

“We consider the original proposal made by the Saskatchewan Government to be superior to, and 

more helpful to the farmers, than the plan finally adopted by the Federal Government, incorporated in 

the Prairie Grain Producers Interim Financing Act.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, outside of the problem of damp grain and the spring harvest (which will be rather 

unusual) the farmers today are vitally concerned with future prices of farm products and particularly 

wheat, and farm costs, more concerned than they are with any other problem connected with farming. It 

is not correct, Mr. Speaker, to say that the farmers are all prosperous today. I think there is a great deal 

of evidence to prove otherwise. Because of the poor harvesting seasons and the greatly increased cost of 

production, the low grades of grain and the low prices for almost all farm products which are below 

parity, farmers are not prosperous. The prices of farm machinery and repairs, Mr. Speaker, have 

sky-rocketed the last four years beyond all reason and most western farmers, who had been getting 

ahead of the game some years ago, have been forced into debt again by machinery expenses. Just 

mentioning one item, Mr. Speaker. In 1950, according to a report that was tabled in the House of 

Commons by the Hon. Douglas C. Abbott, the Minister of Finance, loans for the purchase of farm 

equipment and trucks during 1950 were fifty per cent of all tractors, 64 per cent of all combines, 60 per 

cent of all trucks purchased in Canada — all financed under the Farm Improvements Loan Act. The 

highest percentage of these purchases were by Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just another short statement with regard to this matter. The net income of farmers from 

farm operations in 1950 was about $274 million. The total expenditures on farm equipment, materials 

and repair parts, at retail prices, was $86 million. Thus, nearly one dollar out of every three dollars net 

income which is received by the Saskatchewan farmers in 1950 was spent on farm machinery and 

equipment — and that includes the loans and credits and farmers‟ cash. One third of every three dollars 

of his net income was spent on farm machinery and equipment in 1950. 

 

During recent months, according to some of the farm papers, the only suggestion for some of our farm 

problems offered by the Federal Minister of Agriculture was that the farmers should go back to using 

horses again, because of crop conditions and other relative problems. And horse machinery, I presume. 

Well, you can find a lot of it in the fence corners today, and possibly it could be bought cheap. 

 

Now, with regard to farm prices and price supports, I would like to say a few words, Mr. Speaker. I 

believe it is the opinion among Saskatchewan farmers that the Agricultural Prices Support Act has been 

used very little since this policy was announced by the Hon. J.G. Gardiner back in 1946. The Canadian 

Federation of Agriculture, the Western Wheat pools, the Western Agricultural Conference, Alberta and 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pools, the Western Agricultural Conference, Alberta and Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pools, as well as the C.C.F. Party both at Ottawa and in Regina have urged that greater use be made of 

the Agricultural Prices Support Act; have urged higher floor prices for farm products. At the last 

convention in Saskatoon, the Farmers‟ Union and the C.C.F. Conventions had passed Resolutions to that 

effect, asking that the present Agricultural Prices Support Act be immediately 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

5 

widened to include all cereal grains, wheat, oats, etc., ant that floor prices be provided by the 

Government, similar to other agricultural commodities, by an increase in the present guarantee funds 

provided for in the operation of the Agricultural Prices Support Act. However, up to the present time, 

the price support of farm products since 1946 has cost the Canadian people about three quarters of a 

dollar, or exactly some 73 cents per capita over a five-year period — just covered by a report released by 

the Prices Support Board at Ottawa. I repeat that 73 cents per capita, over a five-year period, is the cost 

of Agricultural Prices Support to farm products in Canada. That is not a very large amount. Nearly all 

price supports for farm products, Mr. Speaker, are regarded by many people, particularly in Eastern 

Canada and the urban dwellers, as outright subsidies. Mr. Speaker, the farm organizations and I myself 

maintain that if the wheat farmer cannot obtain a fair and just parity for so-called subsidies or any other 

method of obtaining a parity price for his products. 

 

About one year ago a motion was introduced into this House urging the Federal Government to make a 

payment of about $48 million to the wheat growers of Western Canada for 160 million bushels of wheat 

supplied to the millers of Canada from 1945 to 1947 at 30 cents a bushel below the Anglo-Canadian 

Wheat Agreement. The above amount was considered a subsidy by the wheat producers to Canadian 

consumers and should have been paid by all the people of Canada and not by the Western wheat 

farmers. Mr. Speaker, this is not the only occasion when subsidies were handed out by the Federal 

Government at Ottawa. Dr. A.J. Hannam, President of the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, has listed 

some Government payments. In the year 1949-50, subsidies were paid to Canadian Gold Mines of $14 

million — in 1951, supposed to be about $20 million; the movement of coal, $4 million‟ subsidies to 

steel and iron, $5 million; unemployment insurance, some $45 million; subsidy on feed grain to Eastern 

farmers, $18 million; subsidy for 114 judges‟ pensions in Canada, $500,000; special depreciation 

granted Big Business during World War 11, $520 million. The Canadian tariff also operates in the 

nature of a bonus or a subsidy to manufacturers and Big Business. When, in 1930, the late Mr. Norman 

Rogers, who was a Minister in the MacKenzie King Government, prepared a paper showing that tariff 

cost to the three prairie provinces in 1930 was $60 million per year. In 1951 it will probably by $150 

million per year. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, in 1930, the same paper revealed that the provinces of 

Ontario and Quebec had an annual gain from the tariff of $83 million, which, at today‟s prices, might be 

as much as $200 million per year of a benefit or assistance from tariffs in the two provinces, Quebec and 

Ontario, while it cost the Western provinces up to $150 million a year. So I believe it is correct to say, 

that the prairies have long been the “milk cow” for the East concerning high freight rates, increase in 

prices of farm machinery, consumer goods, income tax, etc. For a long time the farming people in 

Western Canada, in most cases, have had a lower standard of living forced upon them in order to swell 

the profits of Big Business in Eastern Canada. 

 

As proof of these great profits made by corporations and industries in Eastern Canada, I would just like 

to list these: 626 corporations piled up more than one billion dollars of profits in 1950, $845 million 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

6 

in 1949. It is believed that, in this past year of 1951, the profits will reach over two billion dollars. The 

“Globe and Mail” made the statement lately that dividend payments of $536 million were paid during 

1951, according to figures compiled from a brokerage firm during the previous year, 1950, coupon 

clippers garnered 475 million. The biggest dividend payment of all was from International Nickel which 

distributed over $40 million and mine companies distributed $140 million of profits. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the Anglo-Canadian Wheat Pool payment, in Western Canada there 

was some disappointment in respect to the final payment of $65 million. Elsewhere in Canada, 

particularly in urban circles in Eastern Canada, payment by Federal Government gave rise to a good deal 

of criticism. Some papers in Ontario looked upon it as an unjustified raid on the Treasury for the benefit 

of one particular section of Canadian economy, the farmers of Western Canada. Another paper called it 

a “big steal.” But the farmers are not forgetting the 50-cent wheat netted in the years 1941 to 1943. 

 

I would like to sum up here some statements of the farm organizations and Wheat Pools over the past 

two or three years. Number one is that in eight years commencing with 1941, the Government of 

Saskatchewan paid in subsidies over $100 million dollars to give consumers in Canada cheap bread. 

Number two, when the price of wheat started to advance in 1943, the Government closed the market, 

expropriated all wheat in commercial position at $1.25 a bushel, which assured itself some cheap wheat 

for Mutual Aid purposes. The domestic price for wheat was fixed and continued at that level for a period 

of four years. Now that is imposing upon the Western wheat producer the burden of providing 

Canadians with cheap food. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not in the least blaming the British Government with regard to the Anglo-Canadian 

Wheat Agreement settlement. It was, and still is, I believe, the responsibility of the Liberal Government 

at Ottawa. Speaking of the low price of wheat, the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, at a recent 

convention in Montreal, decided by resolution to urge a higher price for Canadian wheat, not to mention 

other farm products. And Mr. Wesson indicated in his remarks at that meeting that the price of wheat at 

the present time was too low. He proposed an increase in the domestic price and, speaking in support of 

farm organizations, he proposed the domestic price of wheat should be cast loose from the International 

Wheat Agreement and should be adjusted in accordance with the price of farm production and living 

costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note today that, considering its use and food value, bread is one of the 

cheapest commodities which make up the food requirements of all people. It has been figured out that an 

increase of 52½ cents per bushel in the price of wheat adds only one cent to the cost of a loaf of bread. 

Or, to put it another way, the farmer only gets 2 2/3 cents out of a 16-cent loaf of bread. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to turn to the record of this Government during the past 8 years. The Leader of the 

Opposition has recently wishfully adopted the practice of referring to the Liberal Party as the party of 

progress and overall expansion. Sure, Mr. Speaker, there is one way of foretelling what to expect of a 

person or a political party in the future, 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

7 

and that is by their record of past performance: “By their fruits ye shall know them.” And so I would 

like, Mr. Speaker, to list a few of the present benefits enjoyed by the people of Saskatchewan. These 

benefits, some of which were non-existent during the 34 years of Liberal administration, were opposed 

by all Opposition members, whether Liberal or Conservative, in this Legislature. 

 

I would like to mention the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, more and more recognized as a model 

for all Canada. It is doubtful, Mr. Speaker, if there is anywhere in the world a hospitalization plan so 

generous, so efficiently and economically administered. The Hospital Services Plan continues to be one 

of the finest and the most popular health insurance schemes in the world. When the plan was proposed it 

was opposed, I believe, by nearly every Liberal member in the House. Today it is recognized by 90 per 

cent of Saskatchewan citizens, regardless of their political views, as the most complete hospital service 

anywhere and at the lowest cost per person. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker. I would say that that statement is 

untrue. 

 

Mr. Thair: — I have just three more minutes to go on the subject. Today, it is recognized by 90 per cent 

of Saskatchewan citizens, regardless of political views, as the most complete hospitalization service 

anywhere and since the inauguration of the Hospital Services Plan nearly one million people have had 

their hospital bills paid in Saskatchewan. In Saskatchewan, 97 to 98 per cent of the fees have been 

collected. In B.C. over 100,000 people to date are evading hospital fees. The administration costs have 

been reduced from 7.9 to 4.6 per cent in 1951, while in B.C., they are 8.5 per cent or more. 

 

Saskatchewan Air Ambulance has just completed its sixth year of service, covering one and one half 

million miles. Over 4,300 individual flights have been made, and it has provided emergency 

transportation for an area of approximately a quarter of a million square miles — a remarkable 

humanitarian service to our fellow men, particularly in the long winter season of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Automobile Insurance Plan is another notable achievement of the C.C.F. Government in 

Saskatchewan. No similar plan exists anywhere in the world. It was introduced in 1946 and was, I 

believe, opposed by every Liberal member of the Legislature. And the Liberal Party, if they were ever 

returned to power, no doubt will throw this out of the window. To the present time the Automobile 

Insurance has paid nearly $6 million in benefits and damages and claims of all kinds, and nearly 40,000 

persons have received benefits under the plan. It has, because of the competitive Saskatchewan 

automobile insurance rates, caused all private line insurance companies to lower their rates so that they 

are lower in Saskatchewan than anywhere else in Canada or the United States. 

 

The Purchasing Agency, from a business standpoint, has more than justified itself since it was set up in 

1946. Approximately 85 per cent of all Government purchasing has been done through the wholesale or 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

8 

or manufacturing channels, and has resulted in tremendous savings. Since 1946 the Purchasing Agency 

has issued 192,000 orders, has purchased goods to a value of over $57 million, and the earned savings 

today amount to more than three million dollars. 

 

The importance of the co-operative movement was recognized in 1944 by this C.C.F. Government and 

never was recognized to any extent by the former Government, so far as actions go. The Department of 

Co-operation was set up in 1944, and Saskatchewan is now known as the banner co-operative province 

of Canada. In Saskatchewan, 1948-1949, according to a recent report, Saskatchewan Co-operatives 

transacted some 26 per cent of the total business done by marketing and purchasing co-operatives in the 

whole of Canada. Alberta did 17 per cent, Ontario 15 per cent, Quebec 12 per cent, Manitoba 12 per 

cent and Saskatchewan 26 per cent. Their growth has been phenomenal in recent years. In 1950-51, 

there were 1,100 co-operatives with a member ship of nearly half a million. The purchases made by this 

present Government ran into hundreds of thousands of dollars since 1944. I might add that in 1951 the 

Government purchases of tires from the Co-ops is approximately $40,000, and oil and gas over 

$200,000. Those are just two items. But I can recall back in 1943, because of an oversight by the Liberal 

Party, the “Western Producer” did have a bill sent over by Saskatchewan University for printing of 

$60.00. And the only other purchase made by the Liberal Government that time was from a Co-op 

Refinery for gas and oil of some $72 — less than $150 all told. In the past year purchases made by this 

Government from the Co-operatives amount to half a million dollars at least. 

 

Rapid progress has been made in the extension and development of electric power in Saskatchewan in 

the past seven years as compared with so-called Liberal progress — or stagnation — of the previous 34 

years. When the C.C.F. came into power in 1944, actually only 135 farmers had electric power and of 

these only 26 had been added in the six years previous to 1944. In 1951, over 2,500 farmers received 

power and at the present time some 8,000 farms have been electrified, in comparison with 135 farms in 

1944. And we hope that some 4,000 farm homes may be electrified this year, if materials are available. 

 

Power rates have been reduced some four times. They were never reduced, as I recall, under the former 

Government, from 1938 to 1940. The farmers using power paid from $10 to $11 for about 70 kilowatts 

— I think that was the charge that I was paying at that time. At the present time you can get 325 kilowatt 

hours for the same amount of money. Some $35 million has been expended in power since 1944, and the 

power generated has more than doubled in that time. The Liberal Government spent, in 1944, $300,000 

while this present Government this past year has spent $7 million, or twenty times as much. So today, 

sixty times as many farms have been electrified, four times as much power generated in Power 

Corporation plants, and three times as many miles of power lines have been built. The voters can choose 

whether you would call that progress or stagnation. The C.C.F. has turned a deficit of $200,000 in 

1943-44 into an accumulated surplus of over $2 million this past year; and, as I stated before, some $35 

million has been expended on power since this Government took office. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

9 

I might say in closing, Mr. Speaker, that this C.C.F. Government in Saskatchewan has put into effect 

much useful legislation, which, I believe, has the approval of the majority of the people. It has expanded 

greatly in the field of agriculture, health, social welfare, highways, mineral, oil and gas development, 

and many other services which were almost entirely unknown during the 34 years the Liberal 

Government was in office. So in closing I would say that it will be for the people of this Province to 

judge at some future time whether the past eight years have been years of stagnation or of progress and 

expansion and deep interest in the welfare of the people, uncontrolled by monopolies or Big Business of 

Eastern Canada. Mr. Speaker, I shall support the Motion. 

 

Mr. M.J. Willis (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I would first like to congratulate the member for Milestone, 

the mover of the Motion, and the member for Gravelbourg, the seconder of the Motion. I must disagree 

with the Opposition that there was no material to make a good case; and, following that up, I am glad to 

congratulate the member for Athabasca, who has seen fit to sit on this side of the House. 

 

I am quite certain the year 1951 was a unique and red-letter year in the constituency of Elrose. The long 

cherished dream of those pioneers who crossed by boat the South Saskatchewan River has been fulfilled 

with the building of the south Saskatchewan bridge. For over 30 years the Federal Government promised 

and pussyfooted about a bridge there, and even the Liberal Party in this province at provincial elections 

kept saying, “Wait until we get in again.” They go in — nothing was done. Finally, when the C.C.F. 

Government came in, they took the initiative with the co-operation of those people in that district who 

went out and sold bonds to the amount of over $300,000, and I may say that those people in that area, 

had they been left alone, would have sold many more thousand dollars worth had the Leader of the 

Opposition not gone down and made a trip through that area. It is strange how the sales campaign 

dwindled after we had a visit through that area. However, in June of last year the bridge was opened up. 

There were over 10,000 people there to attest to the accomplishment of the co-operation given to this 

Government, and the initiative of this Government, in the building of that bridge, and I am sure if the 

weather had been favourable (it had rained in the morning) there would have been 20,000 people down 

there. 

 

The second thing that has been unique here is that we have found gas in the Elrose constituency. Four 

gas wells have already been found at Brock, and the startling thing of all is that they have all come in at 

a depth of 2,400 feet, approximately, and each of those wells has been drilled about one mile apart. At 

the present time there is no indication of the size of the field, but we are quite hopeful that it is quite a 

large gas field. Besides the Brock field, gas was found at Elrose at a depth slightly less than 2,900 feet, 

but as oil was seen in the core there, drilling is continuing, and when I was home last weekend, I noticed 

the drill working as we passed in the bus. So I say it is a unique year. We have completed the building of 

the Saskatchewan bridge; we have found gas (on which I will have something further to say a little later 

on), and south of the Elrose constituency, of course, in the constituency of Swift current, we have found 

oil. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

10 

I would like to take this opportunity of congratulating the members here in the selection of the member 

for Kindersley-Kerrobert (Mr. Wellbelove) as our representative at the Parliamentary Committee 

meetings at Colombo. The hon. member is my co-worker and fellow citizen in the town of Eston. He has 

worked his whole life in the service of farm movements and the betterment of the areas around Eston 

district. He was one of the guiding lights around that district in the doctor and hospitalization scheme in 

the early years, and Mr. Wellbelove has spent his whole lifetime in service to his fellowmen. When he 

returns this week, there is a certain tinge of sadness awaiting him, as one of the pioneers of the Eston 

district who was caring for his dwelling, and living in it, suddenly passed away in his sleep — Mr. 

Wood. This afternoon, I send to Mr. Wood‟s relatives of the Eston district my sincerest sympathy. 

 

Since I represent a rural area I want briefly to touch upon some of the problems that the farmers in that 

area are very worried about at the present time. First and foremost, they suffered like all other farmers in 

this province in regard to the harvest; a very promising crop. Much of it was harvested under adverse 

conditions, and consequently there is a large amount of damp grain in that area. Secondly, there is a 

great amount of harvesting to do, but during the summer months, on certain railroad lines it was almost 

impossible to get boxcars, and particularly was that true on the branches of the C.P.R. On the branch line 

from Gunnworth to McMorran only three cars were received during the whole of the summer. I was in 

that area, and there the elevator men were waiting and hoping that some cars would come, as the 

previous crop had the elevators plugged to the doors. Now I am quite hopeful that the report that we 

have seen will bear some fruit, and that cars will be made available to handle the damp grain, or 

otherwise a large amount of it will spoil. 

 

The second thing that worries the farmers in my area is the high cost of the implements of production 

and the high cost of living. We have seen that the high cost of living has now reached the index, 

according to the last one that I say, 191.5 points, the highest in the history of Canada. This affects 

everyone, not only the farmer, but the small salaried person, and yet nothing is being done about it. We 

are told, of course, the thing to do about it is that the Dominion Government is looking after it well. I 

read a statement in the press, the other night, that the best plan to stop this inflation and cost was to take 

away the extra income of people. On December 31st of this past year, the Federal Government had a 

surplus of $700 million. 

 

Now, let me look at the figures of farm income tax based on 1949. I agree that income tax is a fair 

method of taxation; but I say it should apply all across Canada, and from the figures that I have from an 

issue of “Saturday night”, I find that, in 1949, 23 employees of the Income Tax Department collected an 

average of $255 from the farmers in the Province of Quebec, and according to the 1941 census there 

were 134,000 farmers and stock-raisers. In Saskatchewan, there were 74 employees; the average was 

$331 per farm of 20,000 farmers; the census of 1941 showed that there were 115,000 farmers in 

Saskatchewan. In Ontario, there were 92 employees who collected an average of $242 per farm, and 

8,010 farms; the census showed there were 161,600 farmers. Or put it another way. The Income Tax 

Assessors and field Investigators had a per capita yield of $2,200 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

11 

in the Province of Quebec; in Ontario, $22,000; in Saskatchewan, $90,000. Or, in other words, one out 

of every 20 in Ontario paid income tax, and one out of 670 paid income tax in the Province of Quebec. 

Now, I know that in finding averages there must be some latitude, but our farmers in Saskatchewan feel 

that surely the farmers and stock-raisers in the Provinces of Ontario and Quebec must be in the income 

tax brackets too. They think that the income tax is not equitably collected, and that has even been 

brought up in the House of Commons. Now, I might surmise, of course, that the Federal Government are 

not very interested in the farmers in the Province of Saskatchewan, as their main strength comes from 

Ontario and Quebec; but nevertheless, when we travel through our rural constituencies, the farmers do 

not begrudge paying income tax, but they feel they are not getting a fair deal on it. 

 

Now, coming back close home — for almost two weeks during this debate we have had the Opposition 

changing their tune. It reminds me that as a boy in the Province of Manitoba, we used to have house 

parties, and the music that was supplied was usually what we called fiddlers — they are called violinists 

now. We usually had two, and sometimes we had an old-timer, and he could always play every tune, and 

then there would be someone helping him out, and the first thing we knew the old-timer would say, 

“What tune can you play?” So the second fiddler would have to name his tune and the older and more 

experienced one then would play the tune that the second fiddler was able to play. In this Province, I 

was reminded, as I have been listening here for two weeks now, how the Opposition has changed its 

tune. They are in the category of the second fiddler, and so for several years they have been telling the 

people there will be no gas found; there will be no oil found, as long as you have that C.C.F. 

Government in. Moreover, I am of the opinion that the Opposition in this Province would far rather see 

no capital come in to develop our natural resources, for political expediency, than to see this province 

progress. 

 

Now the tune has changed. We have found gas. We have found oil. What do they say? “Let‟s get in 

now; we must develop it for you. Forget about that we told you it would never be found.” It has been 

found, but now the tune has changed. And, then let us look at the record of the oil that has been found in 

this province: up to 1944, 400 barrels of oil. Not bad, when you take the number of years — just about 

10 - 12½ barrels per year. Last year, over one million barrels were brought in. Now the Opposition say, 

“Why, we would have discovered it two or three years sooner if we had been in.” Let them snicker — 

they were only in office for 35 years. Now, if they had been in two or three years they would have found 

it. Do you think the people of this Province are going to accept those facts of the Opposition? Now, of 

course the Liberal Party in this Province may claim: “Why, we have a new motor in the old machine,” 

but I am afraid that the people will not be fooled with a coat of paint on the old machine. 

 

Let us look at power development. You really have to smile about power development. How many 

farms were electrified? The hon. member from Lumsden has stated some 135; I think it is 137. I do not 

want to take two away, because the percentage would come down very greatly. On an average, under the 

Liberals in 1934-44, 13.7 farms per year; now that may possible, Mr. Speaker, account for the limited oil 

development — 400 barrels, and 137 farms. There is close correlation there between the two. I am not 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

12 

sure about that, but those are the facts. 

 

Now every Session we are taken away to the Province to the east of us, Manitoba — what they are doing 

there and what has been done. Well, I have looked through a Winnipeg paper and see now that the 

Provincial Government of Manitoba is giving a plebiscite to the people to take over the offices of the 

Winnipeg electric Company. Why? Because I remember living in the Province of Manitoba when there 

was quite a row in the Legislature of Manitoba when the Winnipeg Electric got the power site on the 

English River. Now they are going to buy it back. Manitoba needs power too. But we have gone over to 

Alberta with respect to oil development. Why doesn‟t the Leader of the Opposition be consistent and tell 

the people of this province, “Look at the Province of Alberta — the rural electrification plan they have 

out there.” No, he goes to Alberta on the one hand, and to Manitoba on the other. He will be going to 

Timbuktu next. 

 

How many farms have been electrified under any kind of a scheme in the province of Alberta? He does 

not tell that, but what have we accomplished? 8,000 farms in this Province since 1944 have obtained 

electricity, and if materials are available there will be added to that next year another 4,000. Compare 

those figures — 8,000 to 137. These are some of the facts, and I hope they tell them when they go out to 

the constituency of Elrose, where there was not a farm electrified prior to this Government coming into 

office. the only place that had power when this Government came into office was the line across the 

river from Abbey to the town of Eston. What have we today? We have a line that connects Dinsmore to 

Eston from the east, and all the intermediate villages and towns along the way. We have a branch from 

that high power line to the area to the south, connecting Tynar, White Bear, Lacadena, Kyle, Sanctuary; 

we have a line built from Riverhurst connecting Demaine, Beechy and Lucky Lake besides several rural 

crossings connecting the farmers in those immediate districts. 

 

Now, when the Opposition goes to Elrose to tell them about rural electrification, it will be the biggest 

joke that has been know to the electors in that area. I heard one speaker in the Opposition say, “Oh, the 

highways are no better than they were under the Liberals.” I hope they tell that to the people of Elrose, 

because before 1944, there was no highway on No. 44, only the sign posts; and a lot of those posts had 

been knocked down by cattle rubbing on them. That highway has been completed from Dinsmore to 

Eston, a distance of 75 miles. Over 30 miles have been re-built and gravelled on No. 4; 18 miles has 

been built and gravelled on No. 42. During the Liberal regime nothing was done. We saw, just at 

election time, contractors come in, and three days after the election pull out; and we were told in the 

Elrose constituency that because you voted C.C.F. you will not get any highways. I heard in 1938, at a 

public meeting in the town of Eston, where the question was asked: “Why is not something done?” One 

of the former members of the Liberal Government said, “When you vote Liberal, you will get some 

roads” . . . and I will tell you who that man was. It was Mr. Haggerty from Lucky Lake who was 

speaking with the ten Premier of this Province in the town of Eston. That is what we were handed out in 

that area during that time. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

13 

Grants have been made to municipalities to help those municipalities that are not so fortunate to be on 

the highway system, and, at the present time, we have a municipal gravelled road from the town of 

Beechy all the way to Macrorie on the east side. Those grants have helped those municipalities, and I 

say equalization grants are a fair means of distribution of funds to help the poor municipalities. I hope 

that when the time comes that the Opposition will tell the people of Elrose constituency that the roads 

are no better than they were in 1944. 

 

Now we come to the field of education. We have been told that if the Liberals had two more years to 

find some oil; but in the larger unit administration, they had their two years. The Larger Unit Act was 

passed in 1942; we did not come into office until 1944. How many larger units were established? Oh, 

well, we should not ask that question. You know the answer. There was not one. I suppose if you had 

had more time! But do you see, the elapse of two years does not fulfil the fondest expectation of the 

Opposition. Today in this Province, due to the initiative of this Government and the Minister of Ed we 

have 40 larger units established out of a total of 60 areas. So we have made progress in the field of 

education today, and I am proud to be a member of this Government. Last year, we spent $121,000 to 

help students — 183 university students received loans from our education fund to the amount of 

$56,000; $60,000 was loaned to students going to Normal Schools. In all, 435 students received loans or 

awards. I am proud of that record. 

 

I am also proud to see, when I read the Speech from the Throne, that consideration is being given to 

teacher tenure in this province. I think it is one of the things that is long overdue. I am also proud to see 

that certain changes are to be made in The Teachers‟ Superannuation Act; but I want to say that the 

service pension for teachers was $13 in 1944. Already the Government has raised that to $25 per year 

for service pensions — almost doubled already; and it will come up for further increase later on this 

year. 

 

Now, I have listened here since 1944 for the member for Melfort (Mr. Egnatoff) and the member for 

Redberry (Mr. Korchinski) to take a stand on the larger unit. Not one word has been said. I have listened 

attentively. I have looked over the record — why? Because they were listening. I do not say that a larger 

unit is the whole answer for education, but it is a step forward in the right direction. Those members 

over there know, too, that it is a forward step. Why do they not stand up and say they are in favour of it? 

Oh, no, nothing has been said. I listened and thought surely at this Session something would be said; but 

oh, no! 

 

Now, I am proud to be a member of this Government because of the progressive steps that have been 

inaugurated in the field of health. With regard to the air ambulance, we know that that brings a certain 

measure of security to people in isolated districts. Our hospitalization scheme (I know the member for 

Arm River interrupted the member for Lumsden in saying, “The Liberals did not vote against it”), but 

when that Act was brought into this House they endeavoured by every means of obstruction that was 

within 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

14 

their power, to obstruct the passage of it. I am proud of what we have done to help alleviate the 

condition of our elderly citizens in this province; hospitalization and medical care for the pioneers of this 

province; for the blind-pensioners — the hospitalization for them; for the mothers‟ allowance cases — 

the hospitalization and medical care for them. I say to the people of Saskatchewan that this Government 

deserves your support for the advancement we have made in the short time of eight years in the field of 

health; our power development; our highway development; the field of education and social welfare; and 

in the field of automobile insurance; and to those people, I am sure, when the opportunity comes there 

will be no question as to what is the outcome. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the Motion. 

 

Mr. N.L. Buchanan (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, after last Wednesday night, I do not 

know whether anything I have to say is going to be duly and truly appreciated in this House. I had 

expected to adjourn the debate that evening, and hon. members will recall that even some of my own 

supporters voted not to have me adjourn for the next day in order to give way to my hon. friend, the 

member for maple Creek (Mr. Cameron). 

 

So now, I believe — and the Minister of Agriculture has just assured me that, as far as the C.C.F. cause 

is concerned, possible the member for Maple Creek did more good than I might have done. If there is 

any truth in what the member from Canora (Mr. Kuziak) has to say (and I usually find him sticking 

pretty close to the truth) that the best solicitors for campaign funds that we have on this side of the 

House is the Opposition. So after that speech that we heard last Thursday, I would imagine that if we 

went down to the C.C.F. central office we would find money rolling in from people out in the country to 

make sure that the member is not returned to that seat and that the opposition are never at any time 

sitting on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have been here now some eight years, sitting across from the smiling member from Arm River and 

enjoying his quips and remarks. I have been sitting here for eight years, Mr. Speaker, trying during those 

years to gain something of value from opposition speakers‟ remarks. To date I want to say that I have 

not got anything. I have not received anything that I can really get my teeth into and understand that 

would be of benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. They come forward each election year and during 

each session of the Legislature with all kinds of proposals. We heard the Leader of the Opposition in his 

initial address in this House, a couple of weeks ago, promise everything to everybody. He was going to 

increase services in every field of Government enterprise and Government expenditures. And then, on 

the other side of the picture, he was going to reduce taxation. The member for Elrose has just referred to 

the stand of the Opposition on the larger administration unit. Mr. Speaker, I have never heard any one of 

them get up and make a definite statement as to whether they were in favour of, or opposed to, the larger 

unit of administration. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

15 

we have a name for people like that down home, Mr. Speaker. It was invented by a friend of mine there. 

We call them mugwumps; they sit with their mug on one side of the fence and their wump on the other 

side of the fence, and so whichever way the wind blows that is the way they want to be able to fall. I 

want to say that wherever the Opposition finds a community which pays a high assessment in which 

taxes have been raised as a result of the larger administrative unit over and above what they would have 

been raised had they just had a local district, then they are opposed to the unit. Then, in districts such as 

the district in which I have been living during the last number of years, where our mill rate was some 32 

mills and now it has been reduced to 19 mills, they are in favour of the larger administrative unit. They 

are one group of people, Mr. Speaker, that can very gracefully keep their pie and still eat it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was interested, the other day, in listening to the member for Melville (Mr. Deshaye). I 

might say that I have a deep personal regard for the member for Melville; he is a friendly chap, very 

interesting to talk to and a nice fellow to visit with, but he came into this House and said, “Everybody 

knows we had free cancer treatment in Saskatchewan before the C.C.F. came in; why,” he says, 

“everybody knew we had an air ambulance service before the C.C.F. came; why,” he says, “everybody 

knew this; everybody knew we had a hospitalization scheme before the C.C.F. came in.” Well, perhaps 

we did, but I am here to say, Mr. Speaker, that everybody did not know this. You go into my district, or 

into any other community in the province of Saskatchewan and try to tell them that everybody knew we 

had a hospitalization scheme during the 1930s. I know time after time of people going into the hospital, 

Mr. Speaker, right from my own community, and before they could be admitted (and it was not the fault 

of the hospitals); but before they could be committed to hospital care in Rockglen, Willowbunch, 

Assiniboia, Kincaid, Mankota, Val Marie, all of those places, the head nurse, or whoever was in charge 

of the finances of that hospital, had to refer back to the municipality from whence they came to see 

whether their bill was going to be O.K.‟d or not. Hospitalization was a terrific burden of responsibility in 

the hands of the local municipal authorities. Today that burden, through co-operative efforts made 

possible by legislation that this Government has passed — legislation which is not difficult, legislation 

which the Opposition could have passed when they were sitting in these benches, Mr. Speaker; but 

people today, through that legislation in a co-operative way are sharing the burden of their hospital bills. 

Today a loved one gets sick in any family, those at home — the breadwinner — or whoever may be 

responsible for the economic conditions of that family need not worry about being saddled with a great 

hospital bill. If someone is stricken ill with cancer today, Mr. Speaker, the entire care, the financial 

burden of that care, is taken off the shoulders of the family that that individual comes from, and placed 

where it belongs on the shoulders of all the people of this province through legislation passed by this 

Government. And so another worry has been taken away. 

 

You know, I have noticed time after time the Opposition do not hesitate to take political advantage of 

any situation that they may find regardless of whether they might be doing damage or not to the people 

concerned. That is true of education; that is true of hospitalization; it is true of anything that this 

Government has done. I have here a paper which explains that much better than I can. It is the „Prairie 

Messenger” and a 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

16 

brief description of the papers says “a Catholic family paper, edited by the Benedictine Fathers of St. 

Peter‟s Abbey and published Thursday by St. Peter‟s Press at Muenster, Saskatchewan.” And on the 

editorial page this paper says: 

 

“Perhaps few people realize how much untruth has been spread, for example, about hospitalization in 

this province, and, consequently, how much it has done to obstruct a noble effort to help the sick. 

People familiar with conditions in Saskatchewan will be astonished to hear of what a professional man 

of this province wrote, last year, to a person residing in the United States. He criticized the 

Saskatchewan Ho Services Plan for the following reasons: 

 

(1) The Provincial Government is Communistic and considers all hospitals should be under State 
control. 

 

(2) It pays sisters operating hospitals only enough to cover bare cost of operation, and it makes no 
allowance for depreciation. As a result of this Sisters cannot enlarge hospitals. This is enough to 

make them so disgusted that they are willing to sell their hospitals to the Government cheaply 

and then leave the province. 

 

“Those reasons (the editorial goes on to say) for criticism are packed with untruth, and the resident of 

this province will ask „why lie about our hospitalization? He will then go to find the answer for 

himself, and he will say that if an opponent of any plan has to tell lies about it, one can assume that 

there is too much good in it to be told; for if it is told the public will want to keep the plan. In other 

words, telling lies about a plan in order to get rid of it is really speaking in favour of the plan for those 

who do their own thinking. 

 

“The writer did something, however, that may bring serious harm to the reputation of Catholic Sisters 

operating hospitals in this province. To those outside of the province he represents Sisters as being so 

disgusted with the hospitalization plan as to be willing to sell out and leave. This is not only untrue, 

but also unfair. Hospital Sisters are going right ahead with their good work. They even are enlarging 

hospitals. To their everlasting credit, it can be said that their official mouthpiece, the Catholic Hospital 

Conference of Saskatchewan did not oppose the hospitalization plan when it was introduced, but 

offered its wholehearted co-operation.” 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

17 

Time after time we pick up papers that have no political axe to grind, and we read things of this nature in 

them, not only about our hospitalization plan but about the larger unit, the air ambulance and so on. 

Only a year ago or so, we had quite an enquiry over the air ambulance and when it was all boiled down 

it was found that the air ambulance was operating efficiently and well. I want to say that the air 

ambulance scheme, since its inauguration by this Government, has carried some 2,500 patients to 

hospitals. 

 

I did not intend, Mr. Speaker, to take a great deal of time in the preliminaries of my talk. What I did 

want to do for just a moment was to take a couple of trips through the Province of Saskatchewan. After 

all, it is what the people of Saskatchewan can see with their own eyes, that is of importance to them. I 

did considerable travelling in this province during the number of years that I have lived in it. During the 

1930s I travelled from the North to the south and from the South to the North several times, and into the 

northwest of the province. Last summer, I also took several comparatively extensive trips through the 

province. I would just like for a moment to compare those two trips. I remember back in the 1930s one 

trip I took in an old jalopy. Leaving Prince Albert and heading south I met wagon after wagon covered 

over with hoops and binder canvass and people living in there, trekking north, going north in the hopes 

that they would find a place where they could once again re-establish themselves; people in whom 

almost all hope had gone; broken-down transportation, old horses and cows, children under-nourished, 

ill-fed and ill-clothed, father and mother practically ready to give up, hope practically gone; going north 

where it would rain; going north — what for? To raise wheat for 20 cents a bushel; to raise cows that 

would produce butter for 10 cents a pound; to produce steers, as my Father did, for $3.50 apiece; to go 

into the woods and cut cordwood for 75 cents a cord? That is what they were going up there for, Mr. 

Speaker, and we did not have a C.C.F. Government on this side of the House in those days. We had a 

Liberal Government and it is that same Liberal Opposition today that talks about stagnation. If we want 

to talk about stagnation we had it then, and we had it with a vengeance. 

 

Well, as I travelled further south, what did I find on No. 2 Highway? I found prairie trails with a marker 

alongside of them, ruts, sand, holes that you could hardly drive through. I passed through the city of 

Moose Jaw, one day, on a trip during those years and, as I stand here, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that 

there was not one single automobile moving or standing still in the entire main street of moose Jaw at 

that particular time — not one. I went down south and I saw the grasshoppers; I saw the hopelessness of 

drought conditions down there, and the hon. member sitting across the way remembers those times very, 

very well. 

 

He remembers when the relief inspector used to go out and get in a fight with the municipal secretary or 

the municipal reeve. I heard a very interesting little story just the other day. The relief inspector was a 

pretty powerful chap and so was the municipal reeve in a municipality not so far south of Moose Jaw, 

and they got to arguing about things and so the relief inspector says, “I‟ll knock your block off if you 

talk like that 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

18 

any more.” “Well,” the reeve says, “we don‟t want to bust up the office so come on outside.” So they 

went on outside and instead of the reeve getting his block knocked off the relief inspector got his 

knocked off. But when he came in the secretary says, “Gosh, you tackled a pretty husky fellow. I was 

afraid you were going to get the worst of it.” He says, “I was afraid I was going to get the worst of it, 

too; but I just happened to get in a lucky punch.” 

 

I went up to Alsask during those years — I taught school in that district. I drove over No. 1 Highway 

where the blacktop had broken away and where you had to watch or you would fall into a hole about 

three feet deep and break the axle of your car. I went through Swift Current, over the ferry at 

Saskatchewan Landing that was attended by an old man who barely received enough wages to keep 

body and soul together. We crossed the river and went over No. 4 for miles, which was just a prairie trail 

with No. 4 Highway signs on it. And I conducted classrooms for the children that came there, came in 

very poor clothes. They did not own a pair of shoes to wear all summer long. During the winter months 

they picked up something and managed to get by. And so, enough of those years. I do not need to 

remind very many people about them. But if we want to know what the word stagnation means, all we 

have to do is to recall those years, Mr. Speaker, and we have got the real definition of stagnation; the 

years of the hey-day of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last summer I again took a rather extensive trip over the province — and what a difference! 

As I was leaving Rockglen on No. 2 Highway I met a big trailer truck, and what was it doing? It was 

hauling logs to Rockglen from northern Saskatchewan, logs which were going to carry the wires to bring 

rural electrification to the people of that community. I passed a road construction outfit, finishing up the 

last portion of No. 2 Highway between Assiniboia and Rockglen. I went through Moose Jaw, and I 

wanted to have a lunch in Moose Jaw, and I had to go three blocks away from the place when I intended 

to eat in order to find a parking space. Just 10 years previously there was not an automobile on that 

entire street. That was 1937. I can give you the date, too. I went on blacktop and first-class gravel roads 

all the way to Lac la Ronge. I saw the air ambulance flying overhead, I met the Saskatchewan 

Government bus — the Government bus which today serves some 5,000 route miles in the province of 

Saskatchewan, the bus which brings transportation and the conveniences of quick and modern 

transportation to remote communities all over this province; the bus company which, if hon. members 

opposite were on this side of the House, they would throw out the window and make provision, possibly 

for Greyhound to be there to catch it; the bus company which is doing this and which at the same time is 

showing a profit. I am not one who believes that the measure of success of our public utilities should be 

as to whether they show a profit or not. I believe, particularly, that the Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company is of sufficient importance to the people of Saskatchewan that it should be continually 

extended in operation whether it shows a profit or not, and I have advocated that time after time. If it 

shows a profit, all to the good. However, that is not the true measure of its success. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also stopped into the woollen mill. It does not show a profit, and hon. members across the 

way are bemoaning that fact 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

19 

over and over again. But there I saw Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan men and women, working, 

busily working, producing cloth and blankets. Its total payroll, each year, is over $177,000. Well, now, I 

suppose if they came in that would be tossed out of the window, and so would the people who work 

there; and so they would contribute to the dwindling population of Saskatchewan in that manner, Mr. 

Speaker. And so on down the list. I saw the box factory in Prince Albert — a new one, which is 

producing grain doors to be distributed over the prairies here to help to carry our wheat to market, which 

is providing employment to the people of Prince Albert, which is giving a service to the settlers around 

Prince Albert and which is showing a profit. 

 

As I went westward I went to Alsask again to visit the old community in which I was during the 1930s 

and I went over No. 1 Highway. No ruts any more, Mr. Speaker, on No. 1. I went over the Swift Current 

bridge — the people call it “‟arry‟s bridge”; a beautiful bridge; a bridge made in such a way that, when a 

C.C.F. Government is elected to Ottawa and builds the dam across the Saskatchewan, we will be able to 

raise that bridge. We will not need to worry about raising it until we do elect a C.C.F. Government at 

Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. That has been one of “Jimmy” Gardiner‟s election promises for I do not know 

how long; and I also have some recollection of the Hon. Leader of the Opposition doing a little bit of 

promising in that regard, too. 

 

However, as I went on through Kyle, Rosetown, over No. 4 Highway again, I went over first-class 

gravelled roads. I went into Alberta. I was going to say I hit Alberta, but rather, Mr. Speaker, Alberta hit 

me. As soon as I passed over the boundary between Saskatchewan and Alberta — and this is the truth — 

I passed from good roads onto poor ones. The gravel there was larger than a person‟s fist. It had not 

been screened; it had not been crushed. The ditches were full of weeds and rocks; the highways were not 

maintained. I visited an uncle of mine there. He is a rancher at Cereal, Alberta. I found that he was 

paying 25 cents an acre tax for land which we in Saskatchewan pay 7.4 cents an acre for. Now, to say it 

that way does not give the true picture. In Saskatchewan the taxes are over and above the rental. In 

Alberta, the taxes are contained in the rental. Half of the rental is taken to pay taxes on Alberta 

leaseland. And so the comparative figures in that case would be 12 ½ cents for land whose carrying 

capacity was form 32 to 49 acres per head of stock. Going on to land that required 50 acres per head of 

stock, the comparative figure in Alberta is 8 ½ cents an acre, while in Saskatchewan it is 4.6 cents. And 

from 24 to 31 acres per head of stock, 19 cents is the Alberta comparative figure; Saskatchewan‟s 

comparative figure is 11.2 cents. So I found that a lot of this talk about conditions in Alberta, the 

wonderful progress that they are making there, is not simmering down to the people that need it. Their 

roads are not any better than ours; they are paying higher taxes than we are; their educational standards 

are no better than ours, and though they have found oil there, it does not seem to have done the people, 

the working men and women, the farmers of Alberta, any great deal of good. I can assure you, Mr. 

Speaker, and people on both sides of the House, that when oil becomes an important part of the 

economy of Saskatchewan, so long as we have a C.C.F. Government on this side of the House, the 

people of Saskatchewan are going to benefit from that oil. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

20 

Over last weekend, Mr. Speaker, I was down home and I was listening to a C.C.F. speaker over the 

radio. He came in clear and concise even though there was a howling blizzard outside. We have a bit of 

a blizzard across the way at the present moment. However, I want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, that when 

a person is speaking the things that are true, a thing such as that does not bother a person one bit. So this 

blizzard at home did not bother this speaker coming over the radio. 

 

I want also to say that a week ago Sunday, we had as heavy a blizzard as has been experienced at any 

time in the south-western portion of Saskatchewan. It lasted until Tuesday. Roads were completely 

blocked; no possibility of moving it. And yet, on Wednesday, 24 hours later, every road was open in that 

whole area. On Wednesday morning, Mr. Speaker, there were four big push plows in the town of 

Assiniboia, and there was a rotary on its way. Previous to 1944, we never knew what a snow-removal 

programme was. If we got sick, if for some reason we had to move over our roads, the only possible way 

was by a snowplane, an airplane or a team of horses. The first snowplow was seen in Rockglen in the 

winter of 1944. There have been many seen there since. There is one stationed there now all the time. 

 

I did not intend to go into great detail on the highway programme of this Government. I had planned to 

do that later on. But I believe Opposition members, Mr. Speaker, will agree with me when I say that I 

am going to support the Address. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, in taking part in this debate on the motion, I can 

assure you that it is impossible to go into all the statements and all the stories that were told by the 

members opposite. I could not follow their ramblings and their dreams to any extent anyhow. I just want 

to point out one or two things that have been said this afternoon, before I go into what I have to say. 

 

I have every respect for the member from Lumsden. He is a farmer like myself, and I surely like him and 

I count him as a friend; but he made one mistake when he spoke about the 1942 wheat crop price. That 

crop brought us $1.01¼ at Fort William when the final payment was made. 

 

Many things have been said in regard to the Power Corporation. The Power Corporation has done good 

work the last two years. But why did it not do good work before the last two years? 

 

Mr. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — This Government has been in power now for eight years, and I am going to tell you 

why it did not do good work, Mr. Speaker, and I am going to use the statement of the Minister himself. I 

do not mean that the administration of the Power Commission was neglected, but I mean as far as new 

construction and extension of service was concerned. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

21 

The Minister, from his seat there, two years ago this Session, said quite frankly (and I admire the hon. 

gentleman from Watrous because he is pretty sincere and honest in anything he says) that it was only the 

last year or maybe two that we have been able to get any material to do anything in the way of new 

construction. That was true, Mr. Speaker. You know how true it was. And I imagine that even today 

they have difficulty in securing the necessary supplies along certain lines. So there is no use for these 

gentlemen over there to stay here and blather about what they have done and tell all that they have done. 

In the first place, Mr. Speaker, they went out and took the credit of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and with the abundance of revenue that started to come into the coffers of this 

Government when the people of Saskatchewan got into the position where they got some prices for their 

products and good crops to sell which brought them some income, they went out and bought a number 

of companies that were operating in this province, and they added, as far as customers were concerned, a 

considerable number of customers. Why shouldn‟t they? They go out and buy the Dominion Electric 

which probably had 1,200 or 1,500 customers in the province of Saskatchewan and was rendering 

excellent service. I know that because they were in my home town. Then why should that be classified 

as some great accomplishment by this Government? These people had a good service, and it is only the 

last couple or three years that this go had done anything in the way of extending the service in any 

appreciable amount. Now that is the situation, and the members sitting on that side of the House ought to 

know it, Mr. Speaker. Look yourself in the face and look at what you have done and what you are doing 

this Session, and you should be ashamed of yourself. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, some of the members over there are the most cheerful liars I have ever 

seen. 

 

Hon. Members (Government): — Withdraw! Withdraw! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! The hon. member must withdraw. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Sir, I will withdraw. But when the Premier held up the microphone to his face there 

today, and told the people of the province of Saskatchewan that all that was said in this House in regard 

to natural resources was a tissue of lies, he did not have to withdraw that. 

 

Mr. Gibson: — I was in the House . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! The hon. member will kindly take his seat unless he is rising on a point 

of privilege. 

 

Mr. Gibson: — I am. I was in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, when the Hon. Premier made that statement 

and he did not pull the microphone towards him and he made it audibly, clearly. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, he leaned over like this and talked into the microphone and I sat here 

and watched him. I do not think 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

22 

the Premier needs any apologies made on his behalf by the member for Morse. He generally used to be 

able to take care of himself. 

 

Well, now, Mr. Speaker, the member for Kelvington, I think it was, had something to say about the 

Liberal Party; that someone came to him and told him, or somebody else told somebody else that he 

could not get so and so, and nothing was done unless he voted Liberal. Well, you know I have heard that 

fairy story so many times that I do not take any notice of it. It was only in 1946, Mr. Speaker, that the 

members, not only the members, but one of the Ministers on the other side of the House, stood right on 

this floor and told Mr. Patterson, Mr. Procter and myself and two others, Mr. Marion and Mr. Hooge — 

that was the Opposition, that was the tremendous opposition which they were so hampered by in that 

day — that nobody could write insurance for this Government without they were socially minded. I can 

bring supplements to this House and show it to you. More than that, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Agriculture at that time also made the statement that in handing out grazing leases in this province they 

were looking to see if the person who wanted the grass lease was a socially-minded person or not. I 

heard it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — On a point of privilege. I never at any time made any such statement, and that has 

never been adopted as a matter of policy or anything else, and the hon. member for Arm River knows it. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Take about liars! 

 

Hon. Members (Government): — Withdraw, withdraw! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I will withdraw this thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You had better. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — But, Mr. Speaker, I will tell you what I am going to do some time this week. I am 

going to bring in a copy of the budget address by Mr. Patterson when he acted as the critic and show that 

he made that statement and he never had to retract it. I have not got it with me, but I will be glad to do 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are a few things that I would like to draw to the attention of the House, and I am not going to let 

them slip. If I can‟t get through today, I‟ll speak tomorrow. Yes, sir, If I don‟t get through today, I can 

tell the Premier I am going to speak tomorrow. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You don‟t have to tell me. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The member for Bengough stood in his place, the other day, and made the statement. 

Here is what he said: 

 

“The Liberals have said we would throw back to the municipalities the burden of hospitalization.” 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

23 

Now, I call that a tissue of lies. Either he lied, or somebody told him a lie. That is what I do right here, 

and I throw it back in his teeth. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I hope his teeth are not as false as this statement. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He made that statement the other day on the floor of the House here and he will deny 

it. He said: 

 

“I have been chasing rats in the last two elections.” 

 

I think the people of Saskatchewan will be glad to know that any one these thousands and thousands 

who went and supported the Premier are classified as a bunch of rats. 

 

I have something here, but I will leave that till a little later on. I will leave that for the Minister of 

Natural Resources. 

 

Many things have been said, Mr. Speaker, about the Gravelbourg by-election. You know I was down 

there for a couple of trips, and I did no level best to make true statements. I am one of these, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe this, that if one thing is worth doing at all, it is worth doing well; so I didn‟t hold 

back, I did my best. But it was not quite good enough. But how in the world, these C.C.F.‟ers over here 

can take any comfort out of that by-election, is beyond me, because, after all, all they succeeded in doing 

in three years, from 1948 to 1951, with all the portion they could hunt up in the province of 

Saskatchewan (they even brought them in from Ontario) and all the characters back of them, and all the 

hangers-on and all the civil servants, at the public expense for three months in that seat, and they could 

only raise 46 votes more than their candidate got in 1948 when he was defeated by 410 votes by Mr. 

Culliton. All the increase in their votes down there last year, Mr. Speaker, was 46 votes. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — How in the world we should have any jubilation or any celebration over a figure like 

that, well I don‟t know. When I listened to the Premier on that memorable evening when he talked to the 

people of the province, and he took all the comfort that he could possibly develop out of this thing — he 

is an artist you know when it comes to that — but he said, “I could just say in moderation, but,” he says, 

“after all the majority is small.” I could say it — and that is about all the hula-hula he said all afternoon. 

That is about all he ever said. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I did not cry and say I was wronged, like the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, if you can get any fund out of this, I can sure give it to you. I had a lot of fun 

out of it myself. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

24 

Now, I shall continue, Mr. Speaker. In 1950 the Canadian Institute of Public Opinion tried to popularize 

the vote in the reverse in the Dominion of Canada. That means they did not do it in the usual way, but 

they just reversed the whole thing. They asked for the popularity of the different political parties in the 

Dominion of Canada, and all Canadians from Newfoundland to British Columbia were asked this 

question: “Of the three major political parties in Canada, Liberals, Progressive-Conservative, C.C.F., 

which party would you be least likely to vote for?” And in one big slice the C.C.F. leads the vote. This 

was the standing of the parties: C.C.F. 53 per cent, Progressive-Conservative, 17 per cent; Liberal 9 per 

cent; and undecided 21 per cent. That makes 100 per cent. You have got three over the 50 per cent, more 

than the others added together. 

 

Then the election in Ontario the last two months has indicated that that poll is correct. It also indicates 

another thing, Mr. Speaker, and it is that the C.C.F. Party is losing the support of organized labour, 

because there can be no other explanation of what is taking place all over the world practically: in New 

Zealand, in Australia, in Ontario and in Great Britain. They are losing the support of organized labour, 

because, how do you account for the defeat of Mr. Jollet, Mr. Millard and many others in purely labour 

seats of the province of Ontario? It cannot be explained any other way. There was only one class of 

people that could put them out of office and that was the labour vote. 

 

Something was said about the mineral tax, the other day, by the Minister of Natural Resources, and, of 

course, he tried here for about an hour and fifteen minutes to cover up the radio time, and tried to answer 

the statement that had been made by the member for Maple Creek and he was at a horrible loss to find 

something to say. He did everything except answer a single thing that the member asked him. He did 

everything except that. And he went back 44 years to quote the Clifford Sifton days. He talked about 

everything that he possibly cold, and I imagine that he probably was not born when he talked about 

some of the things that he said were very interesting at the present time. But he started to talk about the 

mineral tax. Well, the mineral tax was brought into this House, and long before that time, Mr. Speaker, 

when the same C.C.F. sat in the Opposition and you were one of them. You know the former Minister 

— the Hon. Mr. Phelps who was Minister of Natural Resources; while he was in Opposition he 

advocated all the time that this thing should be taken away from these “Big Shots” these big 

corporations they spoke of, and vested in the Crown by straight out confiscation. There was not any 

beating about the bush at all. It was straightforward. And when he came into the House as Minister of 

Natural Resources he came into this building and I remember on the second reading of that Bill, what 

did he say? He said: 

 

“First of all, we though about confiscation, but we finally decided to do it this way because it will 

amount to the same thing. Nobody will pay these taxes and the Crown will get the mineral rights.” 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

25 

Now that is the situation. That was said right on the floor of this House. One thing about the hon. 

gentleman, who is now in other occupation, he is an honest fellow; he speaks his mind; whether you 

agree with him or not, that is his opinion. I will say that for him. But, when the Bill was brought into the 

House, Mr. Speaker, it was not 3 cents an acre, it was 5 cents an acre in that Bill. And I remember the 

time; I came into this House just a few minutes past 2 o‟clock, I think it was, and here were three or four 

of these big limousine cars coming up with these Big Shots (as you call them), these “plutocrats”, these 

“robber barons”, as the Premier calls them — C.P.R., Hudson‟s Bay, C.N.R., and probably somebody 

else. But they all got out of their cars and walked into the House and Mr. Phelps and I watched them. 

And Mr. Phelps comes out on the floor of the House and when we got to this section, he immediately 

got up and made an amendment and cut that 5 cents to 3 cents. Well, I just wondered what the reason for 

it was. It could not be possible that these plutocrats, these robber barons were the cause of that thing, 

was it, Mr. Speaker? Do you think so? I cannot understand how all these fellows who were going to do 

away with the capitalists and throw these fellows out the window, could agree to it. There was not a man 

of them that said a word. 

 

Now, that is the history of that; but after all, that mineral tax had done a lot of harm to the farmers of this 

province. We heard the Minister who belaboured this point to some extent by asking us how we could 

return these mineral rights to the farmers without giving the whole caboodle back to these Big Shots 

also. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is simple as A.B.C. How has the farmer — the average farmer in the 

province of Saskatchewan — got this mineral right? Well, I know how he got them. I know farmers up 

there who have three or four sections of land. They have had the mineral rights of a quarter here and a 

half-section there, and some of them haven‟t got them at all. How have they got them? Well, just 

supposing they happened to buy a piece of land from the Hudson‟s Bay Company: it might be a half, it 

might be a quarter and so on. And you can safely say to any farmer in the province of Saskatchewan, 

“we will do this”: We will return to you the mineral rights up to a section or a half a section, whatever 

the Legislature will decide, and no farmer is going to be hurt, and then you can get the mineral rights 

from the Big Shots in the same way, because you can say, “Here, you can pick out two sections out of 

your holdings and the rest goes to the Crown.” And there is no farmer going to get hurt, because there is 

no farmer in the province of Saskatchewan who has a block of land, or 2 or 3 sections, or anything like 

that, who has the mineral rights in all that land. Many of them have not got one acre in mineral rights. 

Many of them have, as I said before, acquired an extra quarter or half-section from somebody else, 

possibly Hudson‟s Bay, C.N.R. or C.P.R. land, and that is the reason he has any mineral right, because it 

does not come into the picture at all. 

 

The Minister of Natural Resources, Mr. Speaker, spent about half an hour, I think, on my radio 

broadcast that I made here some time ago, and that radio broadcast was just in answer to one that was 

made by Dr. Carlyle King, the President of the C.C.F. organization in the province of Saskatchewan. I 

happened to sit and listen to that radio broadcast one night; merely accidentally I happened to listen to it. 

Yes, it just so 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

26 

happened I turned the button, and there he was. As a rule I do not listen to very many radio broadcasts, 

and I just thought I would sit down and I got a pencil and I made a few notes on it. He was bemoaning 

the fact that the faithful in the province of Saskatchewan were not digging down in their pockets and 

coming up with enough money. And he said, “You should have the horrible example of Ontario before 

you.” Ontario only had $25,000, Mr. Speaker, to win that election. Then he tells the people of 

Saskatchewan or his friends, the C.C.F. (because he does not speak to anybody else) that if they do not 

come through with more money this horrible thing that happened to Ontario is going to happen here. 

And I think this and I said this, that this may be beneficial to Ontario but Dr. King says it is horrible for 

the C.C.F. That is my reply to that. And I think it is good, it is all to the good. 

 

But why should Dr. King be so solicitous about the money? Why should he worry his head off so far as 

getting money for the C.C.F. is concerned, when these C.C.F. friends have made so much money? This 

$25,000 they had in Ontario is just chicken feed to some of the C.C.F. friends in the province of 

Saskatchewan. $25,000 was just about the amount that some of their friends got out of one oil deal, just 

about that — and a thousand shares on top of that. So there is where Dr. Carlyle King should go and get 

his money, because that is easy money. It is oil money, Mr. Speaker. It is slippery money; yes, slippery 

money. And if he wants something else he might get that 2 per cent. 

 

I have been asked time and time again, Mr. Speaker — the press was full of rumours and statements, 

straightforward, substantiated, and it has been printed all over. As a matter of fact, I had a letter from a 

gentleman in Ontario enclosing a clipping from a paper down there. And he also mentioned that Premier 

Douglas may have wanted this to send down there to tell the Ontario people how to vote. Gee, I am 

sorry! I have not got it written to read it to you. But he mentioned some of these things and it is 

scandalous how this Government how the true champions of socialism, these sworn enemies of private 

property and private capital, have deserted the banner, or deserted the cause which they devoted their 

life to, because we find now, according to press reports that have never been contradicted (as a matter of 

fact they have been confirmed by some of the Ministers sitting across here looking at me now) that they 

have invested in private enterprise to the extent of $60,000 together with their friends. I came in here 

one afternoon, last summer, and it was very warm, just before harvest, and I ran across a gentleman 

down in a central hotel, and he said, “My wife is away on a vacation. Let us go in and have a glass of 

beer.” Oh, yes, I like a glass of beer; but one bottle is my limit; I am a very mild drinker in all things. 

We went in to sit down and have a bottle beer apiece. Then I said, “You come out and have dinner with 

me.” So he did. And he says, “I got my car here, let‟s go out for a drive.” So we drove around here and 

we came up here and drove around and looked at all these nice flowers in these well-kept grounds — 

and I give them credit for that. Then he took me out on No. 1 Highway. And then I happened to see what 

they called “The Theatre Under the Stars” and I said “Is this what they call the Theatre Under the 

Stars?” There were two of them; then he pointed it out and said, “Yes, but that is not what 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

27 

they call it in Regina.” So I said, “What do they call it in Regina?” “Oh,” he said, “P.P.P.” Well, I did 

not know, I was at a loss, Mr. Speaker, and I said, “What do you mean?” “Well,” he said, “That is what 

they call the „Premier‟s Passion Pit‟. That is what they call it in Regina.” So I think that every C.C.F.‟er, 

every true C.C.F.‟er, they should have kicked him out through the window and then picked some other 

leader who was still true to the concept which they swore to destroy and eradicate the capitalists. That is 

what they should do. 

 

I was also interested in the Premier juggling the figures over here in industrial development. I hope you 

will bear with me, Mr. Speaker, because the member from Lumsden read 95½ per cent of his speech, 

and I am going to read about 10 per cent of mine. There were a lot of figures in it, and I did not call him 

to order because he had the figures, too, and I was interested in them. And I am going to say to him that 

I agree with many things he said. I do not see any reason in the world why we farmers of western 

Canada should supply the Dominion of Canada with cheap bread. As a farmer I have been against it all 

the time, and I have said so several times on the floor of this House. And there are many other things he 

said with which I agree 100 per cent. 

 

Now I want to go back to what I was going to say. Premier Douglas in a recent broadcast, discussing the 

decline in population and industrial development in Saskatchewan, said: 

 

“A recent census shows that, since 1941 there has been a drop of about 67,000 in the population of 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

Mr. Douglas says this is caused by the use of machinery on the farms, but what he did not say was that 

in the provinces of Manitoba and Alberta, which are also largely agriculture, they have had increases 

rather than decreases in population. While Saskatchewan‟s population decreased 67,000 in the past 10 

years, Manitoba‟s increased 42,000 and Alberta‟s 140,000. And in that address the Premier said: 

 

“The reason that Saskatchewan has suffered a loss in population as compared with other provinces is 

due to the fact that there have not been the industries here to which the people could go and 

consequently many of those who left our farms went to the larger industrial centres of Canada and the 

United States in search of work.” 

 

I can say „amen‟ to that, Mr. Speaker, because it is true. I agree with that statement because it is just 

what we have been saying for years. From the Saskatchewan Socialist Government we have not 

experienced any of the industrial development that have been enjoyed by the other provinces. Then he 

goes to work and shows that there has been something done insurance. He mentioned the plywood 

factory, the woollen mill and I say this, in reply to that. In any province or in place in the Dominion of 

Canada, or any other country, there will be some little bit of industry starting up, probably a very small 

one, and you cannot hardly prevent that. But the Dominion 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

28 

Bureau of Statistics recently issued a publication entitled “The Manufacturing Industries of Canada by 

Provinces.” It covers the period up to and including 1949. I am going to give you a few figures for 1944, 

the year the C.C.F. Government was elected, and for 1949, the last year reported. In 1944, Government 

was elected, and for 1949, the last year reported. In 1944, there were 1,054 manufacturing 

establishments in Saskatchewan — 1,054. In 1949 there were 962, a reduction of 92. Get these figures. 

Saskatchewan is the only province in the Dominion which experienced during that period a reduction in 

manufacturing establishments. All other provinces had increases. Manitoba and Alberta have a condition 

similar to our own, except they do not have a Socialist Government; they are not blessed, or cursed, with 

that, whichever way you look at it. In the period referred to, 1944 to 1949, manufacturing establishments 

in Manitoba increased by 230. In Alberta they increased by 520. In Saskatchewan they decreased — just 

a moment, I will get it for you. Don‟t think you are going to rattle me because I have been here to long 

for that. During this period Manitoba gained 230 manufacturing industries, Alberta gained 520, and 

Saskatchewan lost 92. That is the record and that is something that nobody across the other side of the 

House can call a tissue of lies, Mr. Speaker, because it is the truth. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — They have been calling the truth a tissue of lies, because the Premier has been doing 

that . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, I am not going to go any farther with this thing, except there is just one thing I 

want to point out, which he made a great fuss of, and that was when I said in my radio broadcast in 

regard to public health and hospitalization. It is here, I can read it to you: 

 

“If it had not been for this Government coming into office the hospitalization plan would have started 

in 1946 and maybe sooner.” 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, I am going to deal with that too, before I leave here — you can smile — you won‟t 

laugh so much then. I say this, Mr. Speaker, because we passed The Health Commission Act. We put 

$10,000 in the estimate in 1944-45 to set up a Commission that started the work that he never started 

until a year or two afterwards, when he got that gentleman from the United States in here to condemn 

everything we had done, and he did not do it. They expected him to do it. Now, then, we would have set 

up that commission immediately after election . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — When did we set it up? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You brought it in here in 1945 in the winter; you amended the Act. And you 

remember the time when I asked you about a certain section of the Act and you spit back at me and you 

said, “The hon. gentleman ought to know, you passed the Act.” 

 

Premier Douglas: — That is right, and you never did anything about it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You don‟t deny that, do you? Well, anyhow, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — When did you bring in the Larger Unit Act? 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

29 

Mr. Danielson; ‒ We did not need to, we had one. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That is right, just the Act and no unit. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — But we gave the people the right to say whether they wanted it or not. That is all the 

difference. The Premier told me when I brought that to his attention that his Party did not believe in 

counting noses — that was his expression. They did not believe in people having anything to say about 

what they should do or shouldn‟t do. That is the attitude. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That statement is not true. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — But you did anyway. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I certainly could bring it down and read it to you. I read it to you three or four times, 

last year. You never said it wasn‟t true. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That will be as true as the statement that you did not vote against the kids getting 

the right to vote at 18. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There is no good pulling that radio up to your mouth now. Well, Mr. Speaker, we put 

in $10,000 in the estimates for that year in order to set up a Commission. That was for organizational 

expenses. Then we would have gone to work; the foundation had already been laid in this province, and 

we would have extended this health insurance scheme on the basis and in co-operation with the 

municipalities, and that would have increased just as it is now. You know, these gentlemen over there, 

Mr. Speaker, talk about Sweden. The first year they were here they lived in New Zealand; then they 

went to Russia. They sent arguments out there, and then they lived in Russia for a few years. Then they 

got to Australia and finally they found a haven in Sweden. Now everything they say they try to justify 

and point to Sweden. Well, I will tell you what they did. Some time ago they sent one of their young 

budding squirts over to Sweden and he takes certain advice, this young C.C.F.‟er. They sent him over to 

Sweden and he came back two months ago and he put an article in the “Commonwealth”, of all papers 

. . . 

 

Government Member: — The best in the west. I don‟t blame you for reading it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And you know, he spent several months over there, and he was well received over 

there; and he writes this article and I wish I had brought it; but you have no doubt seen it — it is a whole 

page in the “Commonwealth.” You know, Mr. Speaker, it is the most remarkable thing I ever saw. There 

is not one word in that article of the system of how they do things in Sweden. There is not even one 

word about the health services; there is not one word about their municipal services, or anything at all; 

there is nothing about their taxation system and how they pay it, or how it works. It is true that what the 

Swedish health system is built on is a municipal level entirely, and also the medical services, Mr. 

Speaker; but they cannot tell you that now because they have been telling everybody in the province of 

Saskatchewan that it is a state-controlled and state-operated system. It is built on the municipal level. 

Their taxing power 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

30 

belongs to the municipalities; the Federal Government there allots them a certain amount of money for 

grants for their health system, and that is based on certain principles which I have not got the facts of. I 

cannot tell you about that because I have not got it; it is very complicated, but that is what it is. And this 

young man that spent money over there, paid by the C.C.F. (maybe there was some oil money in it, I do 

not know) has come back after all these months, but he has not one solitary word to tell the people of 

Saskatchewan about how they do things over there. I still repeat, Mr. Speaker, that if the Liberal 

Government had been re-elected in 1944, the Health Service Plan would have come into operation in 

1946. I say so seriously, and I mean it. 

 

I am sorry the Premier went out of the House, because I just wanted to call to his attention that, last year, 

he laboured bravely in this House to put over an indirect sales tax on the people of this province. He 

brought in a Bill and, of course, he did not want it; but he said somebody else wanted it, and he was 

going to help them out — you know, he is very accommodating. But the member for Swift Current (Mr. 

Gibbs) got up on his feet and he let the cat out of the bag entirely. He said, “We want this money to pay 

for hospitalization and old-age pensions.” That is what he said. But what I wanted to call your attention 

to is this: I pointed out some of the inequities of an indirect sales tax; any tax is bad. I do not suppose 

anybody likes to pay tax; I don‟t, I know, Mr. Speaker, but I pay it because I have to. But an indirect 

sales tax, everybody knows, if they know anything is a tax on the tax — he pays a tax on tax when he 

pays an indirect tax to anything. I do not care who employs it, or who uses it, or anything like that; but 

that is the fact. That is the principle here of this indirect taxation. I pointed that out to the Premier and 

the rest of the House that evening, and then I had to go out of the House. I find that when I left the 

House the Premier got up and said: “The member from Arm River‟s mathematics were very faulty — 

they were very, very bad.” I have an enormous amount of material to back me up, by technicians, 

chartered accountants, by presidents of banks; I have here the President of the Royal Bank of Canada‟s 

annual address to the meeting here a few weeks ago, and he said this: 

 

“This system is very inefficient. It takes out of the consumer‟s picket much more than it gives to the 

Government in revenue. But, worse still, the purchaser sees the whole increase in price not as a tax, 

but as a rise in the cost of living and a reason for demanding higher wages for his work or a higher 

price for his product. A further aggravation is that provincial and municipal sales taxes, levied on the 

retail price, obviously become in part a tax on taxes.” 

 

Then he goes on at some length and completely substantiates the things that I said on the floor of this 

House, last year; and, of course, the Premier, in this House and out of it, works on one principle, Mr. 

Speaker — anything you can get away with. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The member for Gravelbourg (Mr. E.H. Walker), of course, makes a pretty good 

speech. I have no fault to find with him. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

31 

He made a better speech than mine, I have no doubt. My speech the first time in his House, Mr. Speaker, 

was only 12 minutes, and I am sure you wish I did not speak any longer than that now! I want to say to 

the member for Gravelbourg that no doubt, he is a new member and he does not know much about what 

is going on in the House, except I suppose he does read the “Commonwealth” — and you know what 

effect that would have on anybody that swallows all the stuff that is in there. He talks about the old-age 

pensions and social services, but particularly about the old-age pension which I am dealing with now. 

He shows what a tremendous benefactor this Socialist or C.C.F. Government has been to the old-age 

pensioners of this province. I say, Mr. Speaker, I want to pay tribute to this Government for having put 

in this free hospitalization scheme for old-age pensioners. I said so before. I give them credit for that; 

but I do not like any party or any government, I do not care who it is, to brag and try to make political 

capital out of a social services that are extended to the needy people of our province. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is the only thing I have against them; but the principle they accepted when they 

put through that service, I commend them for it. But I want to say to the member for Gravelbourg that in 

1922 to 1927, when the Old-Age Pension Act first came into effect, Saskatchewan was one of the first 

provinces to take advantage of that legislation. The part of the pension paid by the Saskatchewan 

Government at that time was 50 per cent of the pension — that was $10 per month; and the Dominion 

paid $10 a month. In the last two years, that is all your Government insurance has paid out of the $40 a 

month pension — just the same as the Liberal Government paid in 1927 and 1928. That is all you paid 

— the Dominion paid the other $30. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Canada have come through the years, to realize that it is the duty of the State 

to look after social services of the needy people who cannot look after themselves. There is no Liberal 

Government, no C.C.F. Government, nor any party, or anybody else on the part of the people as a whole 

that takes exception. There is general acceptance of their duty to look after the needy people in our 

midst. And it is not Socialism. Socialism and social service has nothing to do with government — 

absolutely nothing. Every province in the Dominion of Canada has social services that we have, and 

some of them have more, yet none of these provinces has a Socialist government, for that is the last 

thing they want. They are throwing them out the window just as quickly as they get in there. 

 

Now then, that is one thing; but when it comes to the administration of old-age pensions in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, what have they done? During the last eight years I would say, without any hesitation, that 

the record of this Government is nothing to be proud of. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There is no government in the Dominion of Canada that has done anything more 

than pay the basic pension, that has paid less than these gentlemen over there. In one year they took 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

32 

$760,000 of money paid by the Government of the Dominion of Canada into the coffers of this 

Government, and put it in their own pocket to offset the $2.50 a month that they had to pay from May 

1st up to September 1st. That was the old-age pensioners‟ money; and I say to you again, it has been 

proven on the floor of this House, this Government enforced a means test under the $2.50 a month 

supplementary pension; and they stood on the floor of this House and voted twice in the last Session, 

that that was their responsibility and that is the way they wanted to do it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Did the Liberals have a means test on their supplementary bonus? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Did you have one for the first six or seven months you were in? I will tell you what 

you did. On October 4, 1944, you stood right where you are now and said this, “If we extend the 

supplementary pension to old-age pensioners, it will be $5.00 a month,” and when he comes through 

with it, it was $3.50. I will repeat again, Mr. Speaker, there is no government in Canada that has done 

anything towards supplementing the Dominion‟s basic pension in the Dominion of Canada, that has 

done less than this Government has done here. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That is the worst nonsense I have heard today and that is going a long way. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I will tell you, Mr. Premier. I said this: there is no provincial government in Canada 

that has done anything towards extending supplementary pensions — there are two provinces that have 

extended no supplementary pension — but I repeat, there is no government that has done anything along 

that line of extending supplementary pensions that has done less than this government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — May I ask the hon. member a question please? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Sure, but don‟t make a speech now, because I have not the time. 

 

Hon. Member: — You have till tomorrow. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — How many provinces in the Dominion of Canada give supplementary allowances, 

and how many do not? There are three who give, including Saskatchewan, and there are seven that do 

not give; and those are Liberal governments too. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The hon. Minister is going back in history; the other fellow was 44 years back today, 

and he is going back too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — No, I am dealing with today. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You are going back in history now. That has been threshed over on the floor of this 

House time and time again. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Will the member tell us what Manitoba pays as a supplementary? What does 

Nova Scotia pay? New Brunswick; Prince Edward Island? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — One of the provinces does not pay anything . . . 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

33 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I am not bothering with him any more. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Mr. Speaker, the information that is being given by the hon. member is entirely 

false and . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Member: — Make him withdraw, 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Have I your permission to . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! You were dealing with the Minister‟s Department . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I was dealing with the pension . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I am ruling that, as a Minister of that Department, he has the right, on a point of 

privilege, to correct the statement. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, he has already done that. Now, he is going to make a speech. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I merely wish to point out, Mr. Speaker, those governments of Canada which do 

not pay a supplementary allowance . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Order! Order! On a question of privilege, Mr. Speaker, and a privilege of all of us: it is 

surely accepted by this Legislative Assembly that members of the Government sitting in this Legislative 

Assembly have no more rights than any private member. Now you have just enunciated a most amazing 

doctrine. You said a Minister of the Crown has more rights here than we have . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I did not . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — . . . And if you lay that down, Mr. Speaker, I must . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I did not . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — May I continue, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Premier Douglas: — No, not when the speaker is on his feet. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well I am certainly entitled to make my point, Mr. Speaker. I am surely not entitled to 

be interrupted by you, Mr. Speaker. I am not out of order. I am dealing with an important question of 

privilege, and your have enunciated a most amazing doctrine — that because a man is a 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

34 

Minister of the Crown, he has a right to get up and interrupt another member‟s speech. I put it to you, 

Mr. Speaker, that we are all equal on the floor of this House, that no man has a special privilege here 

because he is a Minister of the Crown. That is the very basis of our parliamentary government; and if 

you lay the doctrine down, Mr. Speaker, that because the Minister of Social Welfare is a Minister of the 

Government, he has a right, a special right to get up and interfere with the member who is speaking, I 

must appeal from that ruling, and I would ask all the members to uphold me in it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition is absolutely misconstruing what I said, and I still 

hold that it is a privilege of a Minister of a Department, when a misstatement is made by a member 

speaking, that he has the privilege of correcting him; and I will hold that that is a good ruling. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege, I point out to you that because he is a Minister 

it does not give him any special right to the floor of this Legislature. 

 

Premier Douglas: — No one said he has any special right. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well he just said, because he is a Minister he has got a right. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, I did not . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — That is what he said, and I object to that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, let me clarify this and then you can hand down your ruling. I said this, 

“that no provincial government in Canada, who paid any supplementary pension, has paid less than this 

Government has.” That is the statement I made, and if they want to draw any outside question into this, 

well then, I am not going to take it. I will have nothing to do with it. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I said this, “of any government that is paying supplementary allowance” . . . 

 

Hon. Member: — Weasel words! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I told you there were governments that did not pay any supplementary pension . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Weasel words! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I told you a little while ago. I suppose that makes you happy . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I have to congratulate, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I understood, when the Minister rose on a point of 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

35 

privilege, it was to correct a statement relative to his Department. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There was nothing to correct. They brought this other question into it. I did not do it. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He got on his feet and brought this matter up. Now, who has put into effect in the 

Dominion of Canada and in Saskatchewan the social services that we have in the Dominion of Canada 

today? How much has this socialistic Government, this “humanity first” Government ever done in 

regard to instituting and enforcing social services in the Dominion and in the provinces of Canada? 

Well, I have it here, Mr. Speaker. There has been placed on the statutes in the Dominion House, and in 

all the provincial Legislatures, 34 such Acts in effect. The Liberals have put into operation 24 of them; 

the Conservatives, 5; the Union Nationale, 2; the United Farmers, 1; the Social Credit, 1; and the C.C.F., 

none. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — They extended this medical services to the old-age pensioner . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Who compiled this list? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — . . . and I will give them credit for it again, if it is any comfort to my friends over 

there. 

 

Premier Douglas: — May I ask my hon. friend who compiled this list? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It is from the records of the Hansard of the House of Commons. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Who put it on Hansard? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The Minister, I think, of Public Health. He thinks that anybody is not any more 

reliable than he is; that is why he will not believe anybody. He judges everybody by himself. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You still have not answered the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You will have the chance to answer this thing. Who pays for the social services in 

this province? 82 per cent, the last two years, has come from the Dominion Government. As a matter of 

fact, if you take off the administration costs, the Dominion Government pays for all social services in 

this province — every penny of it, and there is money left. 

 

Hon. Member: — Prove it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, I can prove it, and I might do it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You might, yes. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

36 

Mr. Tucker: — We can do it if we take time, tonight. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It has been proven on the floor of this House before. As a matter of fact, Mr. 

Speaker, what the Premier says is so sure does not make it so. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — He thinks it does though! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am not gong to make any statements here that I cannot prove. I am saying this more 

for the benefit of the member from Gravelbourg than anybody else . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Even he is not that naïve! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — . . . because there is no hope for him. He is so smitten with this double talk and these 

weasel words, that he uses the C.C.F. dictionary. I have it here but I will not take time to read it. What 

did you just revise this thing for? But, after all, Mr. Speaker, that is one thing this Government has done. 

They have set up such a tremendous machine in the social service Department, which is election brigade 

in this province. They have it now running all over the province of Saskatchewan. They have it now 

running all over the province of Saskatchewan. They have had, for 3 years, easily 85 full-time inspectors 

running around the country in this province, in social services, at a time when the wealth of this province 

and the economic condition of the people are better than it has ever been. That might be something for 

the people to think about. That is the situation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — You should be able to think up something more. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I have a few minutes before 6 o‟clock, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to talk about 

education for a while. I see the Minister of Education (Hon. Mr. Lloyd) coming in, and I want him here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — You go right ahead. I can sit here all night. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You know, I have a letter here that I got from one of the most sincere C.C.F.‟ers in 

my district, but he does not act like a C.C.F.‟er any more. They closed the school and stole the barn 

away from the school, and the Minister of Education writes and says he cannot do anything about it: “I 

am sorry but I cannot do anything about it.” I am not going to read it because I will leave the reading of 

letters to the Provincial Treasurer. He was very successful at that last year. When the Minister of 

Education was speaking, Mr. Speaker, he did just like the Minister of Natural Resources, and many of 

the other fellows — he went back to 1934, to the Speech from the Throne. He said that Speech was 

remarkable because it did not promise anything to anybody. Well, I think that is probably true; but then 

that was being honest anyhow. The Speech from the Throne, this time, Mr. Speaker, does not promise 

anything to anybody; it just hints at something. It just makes you believe that something important might 

happen. But he went on talking about the old days and the old Liberals and all this; but the one thing I 

noticed this time, Mr. Speaker, was that he was very moderate in his speech. He only called me an “old 

crock.” You will remember the first year, he called us “political charlatans”, “political scoundrels”, and 

all that sort of thing. I have the quotation here — I keep these mementoes, so I can refer to them 

sometime. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

37 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, would the hon. member care to read the quotations? Let‟s see this 

“political scoundrel.” 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, here is what he said one time: “political charlatan of the Nth degree” — that 

was Mr. Patterson — “scoundrels that oppose the necessary administration changes.” I have many more 

here; many, many more of them. Well, I don‟t know, I may be an old crock . . . 

 

Hon. Member: — We know you are. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — . . . but I am sure that the Minister of Education can hold more than I can yet, 

because he is a healthy young crock, you know, and I think he likes to take a little . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — I must inform the hon. member I assured him I was not calling him an old crock. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — But he just put in the reverse — that is in the C.C.F. dictionary. Everything is said in 

reverse. I thank him for the compliment in any case. But he did not tell you anything. He tried to tell you 

how well the people were off because they had so many supervisors — how many was it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — 558. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — 500 — you did not have very many more than that last year — only about a dozen or 

two: 546; and he was trying to make the people believe that they were reducing the number and getting 

better off, as far as education is concerned. I can say to him that the rural school system in the province 

of Saskatchewan, in the part of the province where I live, is practically ruined; and I mean every word of 

it. In the district where I am how many schools have you got open? Less than half of what was open in 

1944-45. What has happened to them? That is the situation. 

 

And another thing, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Will the hon. member permit a question? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Will he suggest why the schools are closed? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You closed them. I know schools closed today that should have been opened last 

fall, but they are closed; and the excuse was because they could not get a teacher. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Will the hon. member tell the House how I closed them/ 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Because that is under your control, and you can ask your officer up there why he 

closed it. 

 

People who lived next to the school had to move their 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

38 

children to town. Half a dozen families came into the town of Davidson this fall, because they had to get 

their children to school. I came down on the train, the other day, with a man, and both of his sons had to 

move to town — one came in last year, and the other fellow this year. Why? You can go from Elbow 

clear down to Craik and there are only two schools open; and they will be closed, next year, if the 

gentleman who sits over there can get his agent up there or somebody to do it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — You still have not answered my question, but it does not matter. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I was kind of expecting the Minister, when he was talking about how 

well off his Department is and what good work they were doing, how the schools are progressing more 

and more; I was thinking, perhaps, he might have gone back and told something more; I was thinking, 

perhaps, he might have gone back and told something of the history of his own Department. I think he 

should have done that. It would have been the fair thing to do, Mr. Speaker. He should have told the 

people of Saskatchewan some of the things that have happened in his Department since he became the 

Minister of Education in this province. He should have done that, because I am sure that the people 

would be very much interested to be reminded of some of the things that have been done by his 

Department and by those he has shipped in to this province to do this work for him. Who doesn‟t 

remember Mr. Watson Thompson, “Nosey” Parker, Hilda Buckley, and all these fellows who come here 

to cram down the throats of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, through the Adult Education 

Department, the communistic ideologies of this Government. Who doesn‟t remember the radio 

broadcasts? Who doesn‟t remember Mr. Thompson‟s summing up when he talked about the ghettoes 

and the slums of Europe and compared them with these nice, clean nurseries of Leningrad and Moscow? 

Who doesn‟t remember that? They paid him a good many thousands of dollars, and then they shipped 

his furniture to Vancouver for him, to get rid of him, and he has been back once since. That „Nosey” 

Parker was here for a long time, carrying on his work. Finally you had to get rid of him too. We called 

him “Red Nosey” Parker. Then you had a fellow by the name of Henderson; we had Dyson Carter, but 

that was up on a different angle. Who doesn‟t remember Dyson Carter and “The Atomic Future”, which 

was a textbook in the schools? Why don‟t you keep it there now? Did you get weak? Did your mind get 

weak, or did you get scared? The Premier told the Leader of the Opposition he gets scared sometimes; I 

have never seen him, but maybe. I think that is what was wrong with the Minister of Education, Mr. 

Speaker; he got scared of the result. 

 

What became of the accumulative record? There was a dossier on every child in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You are just rambling over your old speeches. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I don‟t mind a considerable amount of 

inaccuracy coming from the hon. member from Arm River, but when he makes a statement that there 

was a “dossier” on every child in this province, then I insist that it is a false statement. It is made 

knowing that it is false, and it must be withdrawn. It has been withdrawn before. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

39 

Mr. Danielson: — I think I made one mistake. It was “the World of Today” that was the textbook. 

 

(Interruptions) 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If the hon. member had listened when the Minister of Education got up on a point of 

privilege, he would know what he was asked to withdraw. He was asked to withdraw the statement that 

there was a complete dossier kept on every child in the province. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I have seen that accumulative record and seen that they started it and 

filled it out and kept it up. I don‟t know what in the world you would call it; but if there is any objection 

to using the word “dossier”, I will say “record.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, on a . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I will call it the record. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — That is very different, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The record. Well if that satisfies you, I am pleased to have satisfied in some respect 

anyhow. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. the hon. Minister of Education said my colleague 

here made a statement that was false and he knew it was false. Now, if there is one man that I resent that 

being said of in this Legislature, my friend here made a . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! A point of privilege is on something that appertains to yourself. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I am raising the point of privilege, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member, in effect, said 

that the hon. member was saying something that was untrue deliberately. In other words, he was lying 

and I am asking that you . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You have no point of privilege. The hon. member who was speaking has a point of 

privilege. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I am asking that you ask the member to withdraw, that is what I am asking. I want that 

withdrawn, Mr. Speaker. Do you rule that he can say that and get away with it in this Legislature? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I am not ruling at all, I am ruling that you have no point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well on that point I appeal from your ruling then; I have a point of privilege. When a 

member of this Legislature calls another, in effect, a liar, I have a right to call it to your attention and ask 

that it be withdrawn. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You have no point of privilege. The hon. member is appealing from my ruling? 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

40 

Mr. Tucker: — Yes, I certainly am. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, let us get this point clear. The Leader of the Opposition knows the 

rules of the House, although you would not know it from watching him at work today. A member can 

only raise a point of privilege on something which affects himself. Now if the member for Arm River 

raises the question of privilege, then it may be a question of privilege; but certainly the Leader of the 

Opposition all day has been saying that nobody has special privileges in this. He not only wants to rise 

on questions of privilege for himself, but on questions of privilege for every other member. the member 

for Arm River can get up on his own. He is certainly capable of talking; he has been doing it for quite a 

while. If he has a question of privilege, let him raise it. One member cannot raise points of privilege for 

another member who is present in the House and on his feet. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, you rose on a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well I raise it on a point of order. The hon. member cannot call another person . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Let‟s get this out of the way first. You are appealing against my ruling what 

you had no point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I appealed against your ruling that you ruled that a member here could call another, in 

effect, a liar. That is what I am appealing against. And I pointed out again, Mr. Speaker, that if the one 

hon. member, in effect, calls another a liar any member can call it to Your Honour‟s attention and, 

having called it to your attention, we are entitled to have a ruling on it. I asked you — did you rule that 

the Minister of Education is in order? And you said you did; and I appealed from that ruling. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, I did not say he was in order. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — All right. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition rose on a point of privilege, and my ruling was that 

he had no point of privilege, and you appealed from my ruling. If you wish to withdraw that appeal and 

then start something else that is all right; but you did rise on a point of privilege and my ruling was 

given on that point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — And my objection, Mr. Speaker, was to your ruling that the Minister of Education is in 

order. I appeal from that ruling. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I did not rule that the Minister of Education was in order. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He gave no such ruling. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I should be very glad to try to clear the matter up. Perhaps I should 

not have said that the hon. member knew better, but he should, Mr. Speaker, may I say he should, Mr. 

Speaker; may I say he should have 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

41 

known better, because he has withdrawn the same statement several times before. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, that statement is not correct. He told you that I was uttering deliberate 

falsehoods and I ask you to have him withdraw that. I made my explanation, and I am going to explain it 

more. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If the hon. member accused you of making a deliberate falsehood, then the hon. 

member must withdraw it, but I certainly did not hear him. If the Hon. Leader of the Opposition would 

keep his voice down a little I might hear some of these remarks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — If I made the statement, Mr. Speaker, I withdraw, and say that the hon. member 

should have known better. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There is nothing very important involved in this . . . 

 

(Interruptions) 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The minister tried to save his own face. I said that an accumulative record is a 

dossier and he takes exception to the word “dossier”. Well, if he has any objection I will say it is a 

record, which, if it is completed and continually added to, is a complete record. I am going to take that 

word “dossier” out, and that is all that he is objecting to. So there we are now, the whole thing is settled. 

If the Minister has withdrawn, I change the word “dossier” to “record.” There we are, we can go on from 

there. 

 

But anyhow, I have a little more to say about this history and this C.C.F. control of the Education 

Department in this province. We had Watson Thompson, we had Edward (Red) Nosey Parker, we had 

R.B. Henderson, G.G. Caulfield, Bill Harding, Irene Leeman, and Hilda Buckley. These were the storm 

brigade — these were the storm troopers for communism in this province. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a question of privilege. I have listened to a good deal of 

nonsense this afternoon, but when any man comes in here and lists a series of people who have no 

opportunity to defend themselves, some of them who are — who have rendered service in this province 

— and some of whom are still rendering service in this province, and refers to them as “storm troopers” 

of communism, I say that that type of thing is lowering this Legislature to the level in which the member 

for Arm River is most at home, and I think that it ought not to be permitted. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member is just giving his opinion; he is not accusing anybody in the House. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, just a few days ago a man on that side of the House called us a bunch 

of Nazis. I did not raise any objection because I considered from whence it came. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

42 

Premier Douglas: — Who called you Nazis; who did? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Look up the record and read it yourself. 

 

Premier Douglas: — On a question of privilege, Mr. Speaker, the hon. gentleman cannot just drop 

phrases and then wander off. He accuses someone on this side of the House of having called them 

“Nazis”. Now he must either produce the record or withdraw that statement. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I certainly have it here, Mr. Speaker, but I am not going to take time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Maybe my recollection will clear that point up if it is of recent origin. One member on 

this side was referring to what someone said at a public meeting, where they accused the C.C.F. of being 

Nazis. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He applied it to us. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, I assure the hon. member that it was not applied to any of the Opposition, at least 

not in my hearing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — On the point that the Premier spoke on, Mr. Speaker, I think I was the only 

one who used the term “Nazi” during this Session, and the way I used it was that a former Liberal 

Minister had called me and another C.C.F. member “Nazis” at a public meeting. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I will accept that explanation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I might point out to the member it is now three minutes to six and if there is any point 

in his address where he would like to cease I will call it six o‟clock. 

 

The House resumed at eight o‟clock p.m. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, when you called six o‟clock, I was dealing with some of the things in 

connection with the Adult Education Plan as it was operated in this province a few years ago, and I was 

particularly trying to show what the object and attitude and purpose of the activities of Dr. Watson 

Thompson and his colleagues was in connection with that activity. There are many things that he has 

written, many things that we can read today, which clearly indicate what the purpose of this thing was, 

and I have one here. 

 

You will remember, Mr. Speaker, when this “Radio College” — this short term on the radio — was 

over, the Commander-in-Chief, Mr. Thompson, had come up to the radio to sort of sign-off and then he 

delivered his judgment, or his comment, on what had been said and what had been done during the 

previous radio time. One time he said this: 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

43 

“In short, the world has outgrown the property basis for society, both economically and 

psychologically. We are maturing beyond the childish stage when, fear-stricken because there may not 

be enough for all, we clutch our little toys and cry out, „This is mine.‟ The best thing, even the best 

machines, are too big to be treated that way; they affect the lives of too many other people for one 

man, or even any few to have those exclusive property rights over them. The one country in the world 

where none of these big things can be privately owned is, of course, the Soviet Union. Nothing seems 

to have lessened their success or their happiness. Indeed, Stephenson, the great American writer, 

wrote, just after his visit to Soviet Russia: „I have seen the future, and it works. I do not know of any 

sociologist who doubts that sooner or later we will pass from the property society to the functional 

society of public ownership of all the instruments of prod, both man and machines.‟” 

 

I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that the teachings of this gentleman and his colleagues were approved by the 

Department of Education. He was hired to carry on a programme of that type. But I want to point out to 

you what he said, when he spoke about his particular work that was before him. Mr. Thompson‟s 

programme was to be “dynamic;” it would deal mainly with controversial political issues, and here is 

what he said — and that is within quotation marks: 

 

“Rather than the old-style subjects,” he said, “We will choose issues of the activist intention, and the 

activist intention will be maintained. Too much of our adult education work has led upwards to 

abstract academic subjects. Our work here is going to lead downwards to logical conclusions. We are 

not only going to encourage a study, but we are going to show the people how to use it, how to get 

action.” 

 

All that fits in exactly and very clearly indicates what his whole campaign was and what his purpose and 

what his references, so to speak, were in this work. He was here to do a certain job, as he understood it, 

and he must have understood it very clearly, because he had no hesitation in wading into his work like 

he was going to do business — and he did business for a little while. He said, another time, describing 

the possible reactions of the Russian soldiers when they came into Western Europe and saw the — 

 

“bombed-out cities, which were also the ghettoes even before they were blitzed; country roads strewn 

with dead and dying, small towns depleted of life, substance and water. What may have impressed 

Red soldiers as beautiful in terms of buildings or city services could all have been found in the great 

cities of Leningrad, Kiev and Odessa. What may have 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

44 

impressed them as ugly — the disease, the unsanitary living condition of the millions, the 

crematoriums and enforced slavery. Many were undoubtedly grateful that „home was never like this.‟” 

 

He now is referring to the Russian soldiers when they got into France and Germany: 

 

“Their peasants are peasants. The standard of living on a co-operative farm in the Soviet Union is 

higher than that on any feudal farm in any of the countries which Red Army men saw.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is really laying it on the line, and that was the purpose, that was the object of 

him coming here. This man was hired by this Government. He worked for this Government for 15 and a 

half months. He was paid $6,354 and he was sent away and we have not seen much of him since. We 

have heard of him at times, but not very frequently; I think he has been in the city of Regina about once 

since that time. Now then, it is idle for anyone to deny that the Department of Education‟s programme 

and the policy of it was, under this Government, to introduce and to foster and promote socialism 

through the public school system of this province. There is no doubt about that. We have the Provincial 

Treasurer going up to Alberta to address one of the C.C.F. Conventions in Alberta; it was reported in the 

press he made a speech there. Then it has been printed in the daily newspapers of this province, and he 

said this. He was asked from the audience about the possibility of extending socialist doctrines among 

the youth. Then he replied that at least 95 per cent of Saskatchewan‟s teachers are supporters of the 

Government, and it made our problem easier. Easier for what? To teach socialism in the public schools 

of the province of Saskatchewan; that is what it was. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people have not forgotten 

these things. They are still vividly before us as it was only five or six years ago when some of this took 

place. And I would say to you that the intention is still there in the policy of this Government. They had 

to let up; they had to ease up in order to avoid the wrath of the people of the Saskatchewan, parents of 

the children of Saskatchewan; but it is there; it will be put into operation. 

 

I want to say another thing. I said something in regard to rural schools a few moments before recess, Mr. 

Speaker, and the Minister of Education took strong exception to it. I am going to say again that the 

steady progress that has been made during the last eight years to eliminate entirely the rural school 

system is still in effect, and if this Government should have power in this province in the next ten years 

there will not be any rural schools in this province. That is not the policy. Their policy is to get 

everything in to the centres of this province, to the towns and villages; put up dormitories, with certain 

supervisors or matrons to look after the children and get them away from their homes and the control 

and influence of their parents. That is the pattern, Mr. Speaker, that has been followed in every one of 

these states across the ocean where the Marxist rules today. It has started already in this province. It is 

advocated by my friend over here — you won‟t laugh so much, because the people realize these things. I 

said that there is no rural school system 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

45 

in part of the province today. I can mention road after road, township after township. Between one town 

in my district and the town of Liberty, 24 miles, there is only one rural school in operation. Now that is 

the situation. And I am sure that the policy preached by Watson Thompson and his colleagues is still the 

policy of the Education Department in the province of Saskatchewan insofar as adult education is 

concerned. 

 

Now, adult education, Mr. Speaker, of course, can have a very wide interpretation, and we find that our 

friend, the Minister of Agriculture, is stepping into the picture and trying to give the Minister of 

Education a little lift once in a while, so far as his work is concerned. He has distributed throughout the 

length and breadth of this province, a book called “The Road to Survival.” It is sent out with the 

compliments of the Hon. I.C. Nollet, Minister of Agriculture. As a matter of fact, I got two books and I 

stuck them under a little side-table in my house; I never looked at them, and there were other books in 

there. My wife asked me one day, “Where did you get these books?” I said, “I don‟t remember seeing 

them. I took them out of the package and stuck them in there. I never looked at the inside of the book 

and I haven‟t looked at it until tonight.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — You don‟t need to tell us that. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, that is all right; thanks for the compliment. If that applies to me it certainly 

applies to the Minister of Social Welfare. But, Mr. Speaker, some one came into the house and they 

picked that. They exchanged a book some time and they got hold of this book; and that is when my wife 

came in and said to me, “Where did you get this book?” — because someone else had read it and made 

some very pointed remarks at the contents of this book. So there we have it. I am going to read you just 

a short part of this book: 

 

“To the extent that our aid increases the European population, to that extent do we increase Europe‟s 

difficulties and our own danger. Our food and financing and medical care, unless they are a gross 

failure, will reduce death rates. 

 

“Birth rates are falling, but not fast enough to be much help. Vital statisticians solemnly tell us that if 

we wait long enough population curves will level off and birth rates be adjusted “naturally” to death 

rates. What may happen to the world meanwhile they seem to regard as one of those bothersome 

realities which seep into academic cloisters like the essence of leaking drains. Politeness demands that 

we ignore the stench, if possible. Unfortunately, however, it is rising. 

 

“Anything we do to fortify the stench — to increase the population — is a disservice both to Europe 

and ourselves. Stabilization and eventual reduction in population in Europe would be one of the 

longest steps that could be made toward world peace and well-being. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

46 

A United States of Europe, with one-half or one-third its present population, could probably maintain 

a standard of living that would equal or exceed that of the United States.” 

 

“We are in a position to bargain. Any aid we give should be made contingent on national programmes 

leading toward population stabilization through voluntary action of the people. We should insist on 

freedom of contraception as we insist on freedom of the press; it is just as important. And as we pour 

in hundreds of millions of the American taxpayers‟ dollars we should make certain that substantial 

proportions make available educational and functional contraceptive material. Quite as important as 

the four Freedoms, which we have made a shibboleth, is a Fifth Freedom — from excessive numbers 

of children. Far more than much of the world realizes, even the partial achievement of the first four is 

dependent upon this last.” 

 

Well, this I would classify as adult education, Mr. Speaker, Watson Thompson should have had that. 

That is supposed to be the Government‟s policy, or else they would not spend public money. They can‟t 

laugh this away, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to know what the hon. gentleman is trying to prove by 

the quotation from his book. Is he trying to prove, for instance, that those are our opinions? In the 

Foreword to that book — and he did not read it — we set out specifically that we did not agree entirely 

with the author; but there is such a thing as academic freedom, Mr. Speaker. Other people can have 

opinions . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t need any instructions from . . . 

 

(Interruptions) 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You can‟t, Mr. Speaker, take public taxpayers‟ money and buy this tripe that is in 

this book . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — It is not tripe. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — . . . and distribute it among the taxpayers of Saskatchewan without being responsible 

for what you are doing. And we know that what is in this book is contrary to many religious beliefs in 

this province. It is contrary to the morals of many people in this province. Oh, you can laugh; it is very 

flattering. The proof is here. That is the document that was sent out to the people, into their homes, 

where children can read it, where anybody can read it. I think it is something that is beyond anything 

that should be attempted by even a government like this one. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

47 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am not going to say any more about this particular education. I want to point out to 

you that I have stayed within about five or six years. The Minister of Education, when he discussed his 

Department, went back to 1934, so I am a little better than he was anyhow, in regard to that. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am going to say a few words in regard to public health, because that Department 

has been touched on and everything has been gone over, the last two weeks, to try to prove to the people 

of the province that there was nothing here, there was nobody doing anything until the C.C.F. and this 

socialistic Government came in. Well, when they came into the province of Saskatchewan, we had an 

expenditure on health, in 1942, Mr. Speaker, not in 1944, which was the second highest per capita of 

any province in the Dominion of Canada, and I would like to have anybody contradict that statement. 

We had a better public health system in the province of Saskatchewan than any other province in 

Western Canada. There is no question about that. We had a highly developed municipal health system. 

Over a hundred municipalities, towns and villages had not only free hospitalization but they had also 

free medical services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I come from a municipality where we took care of our problem in that way, and the cost was very 

reasonable. I come from a Union Hospital district, Mr. Speaker, that built the first union hospital, I 

think, in the province of Saskatchewan. We did not have a Union Hospital Act in 1912, but we 

incorporated by a special Bill going through this House. I am still on that Board since 1922, and I know 

whereof I speak. All this has been done, and, between 1935 and 1942, through all these bad years, there 

was $3,101,000 distributed in the province of Saskatchewan in special grants to hospitals and doctors. I 

know what happened. In the whole dried-out area, which I think comprised 157 rural municipalities (I 

am maybe out one or two there, I am not sure, but not any more) we had not only the fifty cents per 

capita basic grant but we got as much as 80 cents per day special grant for our patients in that hospital 

for years, during the bad „thirties, and so did all other rural hospitals inside the drought area. the grant 

varied a little bit, but in our case it varied all the way from 40 to 80 cents per day. That is the special 

grant in addition to the 50 cents per day grant. And, I am interested to see here, on March 3, 1945, 

speaking in this House, the hon. Premier said this: 

 

“At present, all hospitals which were bona fide hospitals received the grant of 50 cents per day per 

patient. That grant is one of the highest paid in Canada, it speaks well for the previous administration 

of this province and for the people in taking such an interest in health matters.” 

 

That is the Premier of this province talking about the Liberals. You wouldn‟t believe that, would you? 

You ask him. Maybe he will say he was misquoted. He won‟t believe that. He would change it today if 

he could. 

 

Now then, Mr. Speaker, when this Government came into power, the first thing that they did was to get 

somebody in here to discredit the whole health set-up that we had in the Saskatchewan. They 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

48 

couldn‟t find anybody inside of Canada, so they went down to the United States and picked up a 

gentleman by the name of Sigerist, and, for some reason or another (I never saw the gentleman, I don‟t 

know) he was not willing to do what he was supposed to do here. He disagreed that we did not have 

anything in the province of Saskatchewan in connection with public health, and he said so quite frankly. 

He said this — he was speaking at a banquet in the city of Regina and here is what Dr. Sigerist said — 

and, by the way, this is September 27, 1944: 

 

“The Saskatchewan survey was one of the most pleasant he had ever undertaken in his career. He had 

had many similar assignments, but this in Saskatchewan differed from those in south Africa and the 

Balkans as it was one in which health services did not have to start from scratch.” 

 

In Saskatchewan, Dr. Sigerist said, it was a case of bringing the existing facilities into more service for 

more people; to extend and improve, which has always been the part of progress, and I think the policy 

of every government, no matter whether they are Tories or Grits or what they are. 

 

Dr. Anderson — let us give him credit for starting the Cancer Clinic in this province; that was a great 

thing to do by that Government and they deserve credit for it. But every government in this day and age 

is progressive, and anything that this Government has done which I think is a new thing that they started, 

I gave them credit for in the past and I am going to give them credit for now. But where they built on 

what we had already started, we should give credit to the people of the province who had supplied the 

means and the money and the dollars to pay for it. What they have done they have done in a very 

extravagant manner, Mr. Speaker, but nevertheless, the people have had some benefit from it. 

 

Now then, that is what I want to point out; and I want to point out that there is nothing here, today, that 

was not here when this Government came into office except the one particular thing they did — 

extending the hospital and medical services to the old-age pensioners, free, as far as it can be called free, 

because everybody pays for everything. 

 

We have heard — I do not think I have been in this House one day since we started, Mr. Speaker, 

without somebody has been up talking about the Cancer Clinic, Cancer Commission and the cancer 

treatment in this province. I want to point out — and I am sorry the Minister of Natural Resources (Hon. 

Mr. Brockelbank), who handed me that compliment, has gone out — but I want to tell him that he 

should read, because by the way he talks I am sure he never read anything in connection with this 

Cancer Clinic. I said that the Cancer Clinic was started by the Anderson Government. It was carried on 

by the Liberal Government, and there was a nominal fee charged for services in that clinic. Any person 

who was sent there by his medical doctor — nobody else could go through — could go through that 

clinic. It took a few days. I have gone through there myself and I know all about it, from my experience 

going through there. It took about three or four days to go through that clinic, and the nominal fee was 

$10, 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

49 

Mr. Speaker. That is all it cost. That did not pay for one-tenth of the expense in connection with it; the 

rest was paid by the Government. I say that the Anderson Government started it; we carried it on up to 

1944. At the Session in 1944, I remember Dr. Uhrich waited and prayed for the day that the finances 

would permit him to put a Bill through the House that would establish free cancer treatment in this 

Province. I think one of the greatest men, so far as public health services is concerned, was the late Dr. 

Uhrich. He was known over Canada as a whole. He was an efficient and a very conscientious servant of 

the people in that respect. His whole life was devoted to that service, and he should have some credit for 

it. 

 

Now then, during the Session of 1944, we passed a Bill establishing a free Cancer Clinic. All of the 

Ministers have the proof of this thing, and there is nothing in the world, or in the province of 

Saskatchewan, that has been more misrepresented, more what the Premier calls a “tissue of lies” spread 

about this service of free cancer treatment. I have Mr. Patterson‟s Budget Speech here of Tuesday, 

February 29, 1944, and I am going to come back to what I said this afternoon, when my friend over here 

laughed so heartily over what I said. He said this, it is on page 8 of the Budget Speech of Mr. Patterson, 

February 29, 1944: 

 

“Public health increases (that is the increases in the estimate) cover the cost of providing medical and 

hospital treatment to patients suffering from cancer as announced in the Speech from the Throne. It 

also provides an amount to cover the cost of work preparatory to establishing a Health Insurance Plan 

in the province.” 

 

Now then, what was in the budget that year, Mr. Speaker, and I am going to take the first item — for 

Cancer. Well, Mr. Speaker, the amount included in the budget for cancer — new cancer treatment — 

was . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Five dollars and thirty cents. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is just your size. Peanuts would even suit you better. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker — these fellows do not bother me. I have seen so many of these funny fellows before 

that it doesn‟t excite me at all. But we voted, in 1943-44, before the Cancer clinic, Mr. Speaker, when 

we only charged $10.00 per head, and that is all. The rest of it had to be paid for by the Government, and 

we voted $76,760. In the new budget which I just quoted, we voted $215,000 — an increase of $138,240 

for cancer treatment. 

 

(Interruption) 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, that is your size too. When a man speaks like that, he is full of something and 

it comes out. That is exactly the way the C.C.F. puts it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley (Minister of Public Health): — Would you repeat those figures please. I would like to 

write them down. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

50 

Mr. Danielson: — An amount of $215,000, or an increase of $138,240. Look up the documents of the 

House, they are all in it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — We will check them. We just want to check them and see that you tell the truth all 

the time. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I have the documents here; I‟ll give them to you. I think the Minister of Public 

Health will look it up and see that I am right. I want him to do that. 

 

Now then, there was $10,000 in that budget, also, for setting up the Health Insurance Commission — 

not $5,000 as the Premier said in his Speech from the Throne, in the fall of 1944. It was $10,000. And 

when I said in my radio broadcast, which I partly read to you this afternoon . . . 

 

(Interruption) 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Oh yes, you do it yourself many times! You use a word that is not placed in the right 

place and you change it; but I generally am able to correct myself; that is more than you can do. 

Anybody who knows his weaknesses is all right, but a fellow who does not have brains enough to 

realize his weaknesses is no good; he is a weakling somewhere. As for me, I have all kinds of 

weaknesses, of course, and this is not my work the year round. I come down here into this House just for 

a few weeks, and I am trying to pick up this stuff and do the best I can, and that is good enough. I have 

not had any complaints from that other side. I think these young gentlemen are getting just about all they 

can stand over there. I have no objection. I might give them a little more if they want it. 

 

But anyhow, to get back to this statement that I just made. I said we increased the amount voted, in the 

budget, by $138,240. 

 

Now then, let us see what the present Provincial Treasurer says about this thing. In his Budget Speech 

(and this is not Patterson, or any Liberal speaking — this is the Hon. Mr. Fines speaking) he says, in 

1945, when he delivered his Budget Speech, that you had socialized health services, and here is what 

you found: “The estimate for the Physical fitness programme has been increased from $20,000 to 

$55,000. Already a programme has been worked out which is recognized as one of the best in the 

Dominion.” (Of course, if he had been a Russian he would have said the first in the Dominion; but he 

wasn‟t). “It is also proposed to extend the Public Health Nursing and Sanitation programme at an 

additional cost of $25,000.” then he comes down and says this: “Patients suffering from cancer will now 

receive complete medical, surgical, hospital and nursing treatment. This will be provided at an 

additional cost of some $78,000 over last year‟s estimates.” 

 

Now then, that is a great credit to the ability of Mr. Patterson under the Liberal Government. We, for the 

first year, put $138,000 in there, and there is no supplementary to prove or uncover any shortage, Mr. 

Speaker, in the Supplementary Estimates. They are right here; I have them, and I invite any C.C.F. 

member to come and search them. That shows the amount of money we put in the first year, $138,000, 

was approximately or barely enough to cover the cost for that year, because the next year 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

51 

the costs were rising. With gradually rising costs all the time, and in some respects, I imagine, rapidly 

rising costs, like nursing services and things like that, he was only required to put in $78,000 more for 

1945-46 than what we put in for 1944-45. Now these are on the record. How then can these C.C.F.‟ers 

go over the province of Saskatchewan and repeat and repeat these falsehoods that there was no cancer 

treatment in this province prior to their coming into office? 

 

Now then, what about on February 20, 1945, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier, in his speech on the 

Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne, said: 

 

“May I now say a word about the Department of Public Health re medical care and hospitalization? 

Free drugs are now provided to 25,000 persons — old-age pensioners, blind pensioners, and those in 

receipt of mothers‟ allowances. We are now giving free care and treatment for cancer cases, not only 

diagnostic and x-ray treatment, but also surgery. 

 

“I remember the hon. member from Moosomin (Mr. Procter) insisted, at the last Session, that money 

had been voted for an estimate for surgery in cancer treatment. Well now, (he says) no one in his 

Department can find it. It is true that $5,000 was provided, but that was used to set up the clinical 

doctor.” 

 

It was $10,000, Mr. Speaker — not $5,000; but it looks good for him to be half-price sometimes. 

“$5,000 would never begin to pay for surgical treatment for cancer.” What do you think about a 

statement like that, Mr. Speaker? What do you think about such nonsense as that? I think it is silly! 

“That amount would never begin to pay for surgical treatment, which even my hon. friend most admit. 

Now, however, anyone that comes in with a recommendation for free treatment from a doctor, he will 

receive that free treatment from the day he comes in until the day he leaves.” Now then, I asked him a 

question: 

 

“Mr. Danielson: Are you directly paying for surgery now?” 

 

That was not my question at all, but it is in this book. My question was simply, when he started paying 

for cancer treatment — that is what I asked him. 

 

“Premier Douglas: Yes, we are paying the bills that are sent in to us. We are circularizing the doctors 

in the province, telling them that we are paying for cancer surgery. Mind you, that is for those cases 

which go through the Cancer Clinic.” 

 

And so he goes on. Well now, Mr. Speaker, this was on February 20, 1945, but we had a Special Session 

in the fall of 1944, and I mentioned, when I started to speak after lunch, about this gentleman he 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

52 

brought in from the United States — this Dr. Sigerist. He came in here and did his work, he wrote his 

report and handed it to the Premier. He spoke to one of the service clubs in the city of Regina and gave 

the health condition and the health situation in this province a very, very nice recommendation. But he 

handed this report to the Government a day or two before, because, if I remember correctly, that was the 

and opening day of the Special Session. Now I stand corrected on that, Mr. Speaker, but I am not out 

very far on that — it would be only a day or two if I am wrong. Now then, reading this report which had 

just come into the hands of the Government, and which was handed to every member of the House, we 

see here what Dr. Sigerist says: 

 

“Cancer Commission Act of 1944 provides that any person suspected to be afflicted with cancer shall 

be entitled to care and treatment at the expense of the Province. The intention of the Act is to 

encourage people and to make it as easy as possible for them to seek treatment, and the most expert 

medical service. The two Cancer Clinics in Regina and Saskatoon have already rendered invaluable 

service, and the number of patients that have received treatment has increased from year to year. In 

formulating policy for the future, this point should be considered, and here is where I want to draw the 

picture of health: 

 

“(1) The present examination — radiological treatment and hospitalization are provided without 

charge. Cancer patients still have to pay for the cost of operation, but this is going against the intention 

of the Act, and the cost of operation should be paid by the Province.” 

 

This Government took office on the 10th of July, and that was on October 4th, Saskatchewan. Now then 

— I am not blaming the Government; I know what has happened when we started this thing. I had a case 

in my own municipality where a man came to me and said: “I thought you provided for this thing.” I 

said, “Yes.” “Well,” he said, “my wife is down there now, and the hospital is all right, but the surgery 

bill will not be paid.” I took the train and came right to the city of Regina because I wanted to get at the 

bottom of this thing. I walked into Dr. Uhrich‟s office and I told him the story, and here is what he said, 

(and I know, Mr. Speaker, that he told the truth): 

 

“We have been trying our best to get an agreement with the medical men of this province to get this 

thing started. So far we have not been able to do so. They say, „many of our best men — our best 

medical men — are at the war and we do not feel we should tie ourselves up to any hard and fast 

agreement without knowing what they think about it when they come back‟, and for that reason we 

have not been able to step forward and pay these bills for surgery.” 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

53 

And evidently, according to the written word of Dr. Sigerist, of that date, October 4th, that situation 

existed exactly the same then. I am not blaming the Government. They were up against the same 

difficulties, Mr. Speaker, as we were; but why in the name of commonsense were a group of men, who 

are supposed to have every intelligence, going out on the highways and byways of this province and 

trying to minimize any peddle such untruths in order to discredit the Party in the province of 

Saskatchewan that put this operation into effect? 

 

Now that is the situation with all these men sitting over here. I would not do that under any 

circumstances, Mr. Speaker. I have said on the floor of this House, and I said it more than once this 

afternoon, that I am willing to give them credit for anything they have done; and I have done that. At the 

same time I believe that credit should be given where credit is due. Even if they did not say anything 

about it that would not be so bad; but they go out today, eight years after they come into office, and 

peddle that story. That is just like the reduction of the Public Debt — that finally died; it had to die. This 

eventually will die too, when the people of the province know the circumstances, and know the facts. 

 

Now then, I will go on to Item No. 2 which Dr. Sigerist has set out here in his report: 

 

“Travelling expenses of patients referred to one of the clinics by a physician now weigh heavily on the 

individual‟s budget, living in the district. The compensation of travelling expenses from provincial 

funds may there be considered.” 

 

That is a recommendation by Dr. Sigerist which I think is very worthy, and which, so far as I know, has 

never been implemented by this Government. And here is the most important and interesting part of it: 

 

“Well, if it is true that a larger percentage of all patients examined by the clinic are found to be 

suffering from other diseases than cancer, yet it would not be sound to make a charge in the case of 

negative diagnosis. This would act as a deterrent. Accurate diagnosis in all cases where the suspicion 

of cancer prevails represents available public services. The increasing load of work upon the clinic 

must be met with an increasing number of persons.” 

 

Well now, that is commonsense and that was the policy in effect at that time. This Government has done 

this: They have put this charge on the person who is presented to the Clinic by his medical doctor and is 

found not to have cancer. He has to pay the cost himself, and I think that is wrong. Dr. Sigerist points 

out clearly that this is a deterrent; he says it will keep people form going there and finding out what is 

actually wrong with them. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

54 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask a question? Did I understand you to say they pay the 

whole cost themselves? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I did not say so; but we know that the Government of this province has done away 

with the full payment of the patient‟s fee where the patient is found not to have a cancer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows the exact answer — he should give it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the hon. Minister of Public Health that if he knows it, he 

give it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I will give it. You go ahead and make your speech. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I would suggest then, Mr. Speaker, that he has no business to interrupt when he sits 

there and knows it and he won‟t give it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I have asked the hon. member to answer a question and he has not answered it. I 

will answer it myself. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I thought of it last year, and the Premier over here says, “Well, it is not a question of 

money”, and there is something to that, Mr. Speaker. I know that expenses run up higher, but I think that 

what Dr. Sigerist says is on solid ground when he says this method of putting the charge on the patient 

who has no cancer is probably a hardship on many people, and, as Dr. Sigerist says, a deterrent. 

 

Well now, there has been so much talk, Mr. Speaker, about the discussion on cancer. We put the Cancer 

Bill on the Statute Books; we voted the money to put it into operation and it is here today. This province 

has carried on the work of Dr. Uhrich and the Liberal Government — and what has been done? I give 

them credit for bringing in expanded and more modern, up-to-date methods of treatment. I think we can 

say that we in Saskatchewan should be applauded that we have the most up-to-date cancer treatment, 

probably, in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

There is another thing, and this particularly distressed my friend from Gravelbourg (Mr. E.H. Walker), 

and that is farm security — and he was supplemented by the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Why, he did not 

have anything else to speak about, but he covered the whole thing. Of course he does it in such a fast 

way and in such a rambling fashion that he told them that he had to give 8,000 pounds of grass seed to 

the farmers, and when I was home, a week ago Sunday, Mr. Speaker, a gentleman called me up and said: 

“I listened to the radio, the other day. Were you in the House when the Premier spoke?” I said “Yes.” 

“Well”, he said,” you tell him from me that he better send me that money back for the grass seed, 

because I paid for mine.” So he does not get away with these “weasel” words all the time. 

 

Now I am going to go into this a little further. I am going to start out by saying, Mr. Speaker, that every 

bit of farm protection in the province today was started by the Liberal Government — every particle 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

55 

of it, and they were: The Moratorium Act of 1943, the Land Contracts (Actions) Act of 1943, the 

Provincial Mediation Board Act of 1943, and the Limitation of Civil Rights Act. These are the Acts of 

today to protect the farmers on their farms here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I have here a pamphlet — this is all your publication. I suppose this is some of the — information 

writers‟ work (it is probably their work to write these pamphlets) and it goes back to 1945, and do you 

know where I got it? I got it from the big guys down in the Mediation office. There‟s nothing wrong 

with it at all, only it is honest, and that is an exception for the C.C.F. When he handed me this pamphlet, 

I said so, and I meant it, Mr. Speaker. He said: “Take that with you.” I said, “What is this?” And he said, 

“You see what is in it. It is all yours. You put it all in there except just two small paragraphs.” That is 

why I say it is honest — he was honest about it, anyway. They took all this legislation, Mr. Speaker — 

every word of it — lifted it word for word, and put it into their Farm Security Act. I hope that my young 

friend — he probably think s that I do not know anything, and I do not mind that at all, because if he 

knows my estimation of some of the men sitting over there, well, he would not feel good at all; but I say 

this to him: We had a man sitting here who, I think, knows as much law as anybody, or as much as any 

legal man in the province of Saskatchewan, and that was Mr. Procter. He checked this legislation, as did 

Mr. Hooge, and I want to say this — Mr. Hooge, while he was not a bombastic sort of gentleman, did 

know law. You between he did — he did know law. He took this Bill — every Bill that came on this list, 

he took down, that was his work. He took them down to his room in the hotel and went over them word 

for word; and he typed the copies, explaining every section that was changed or amended, or added to, 

or anything like that. There were four other members on this side of the House, there were only five of 

us, and that was his work. When we were here at that time, Mr. Speaker, we had to divide up the work, 

and in spite of the fact that there were only five of us on this side of the House, I think there were very 

few things that slipped by here without being checked up. As a matter of fact, I think we even had some 

compliments on that account from the Premier of this province at that time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one crop failure clause provision, and it simply means that if the return from a 

crop-acre of land is less than $6.00 per acre — no, I was going to tell just the way that really works out. 

They have an ingenious way about them; they can get around this thing. They said an amount equal to 

the interest shall be cancelled and cut off the principal. That was the way they got around it; and Mr. 

Speaker, that is, of course, a provision which I think has been contested, and it is still in doubt as to 

whether that can be done or not. As a matter of fact, so far as I know, in my constituency — and I have 

talked to a lot of people outside my constituency — I never knew one farmer in my seat who ever had 

any benefit out of that clause; not one. Maybe the Government has applied it in their own business under 

the Farm Loans to some of these men who, perhaps, have some balance to pay under the old Farm Loan 

Board Act, or something like that; but so far as having been taken advantage of, or put into operation, 

for the protection of the general farming public in this province, in their business of dealing with loan 

companies of their creditors or contract holders, there has been nothing done. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

56 

I spoke to a farmer about this thing one time, and he said, “I wouldn‟t ask for it. The man that I bought 

that farm from and the company were so good to me during the years when I could not pay them 

anything, and after the cancellation we got form them, I am ashamed to ask for it. If I get a crop like I 

did in 1941 that didn‟t even bring $3.00 to me, it might be all right; but wouldn‟t it be just as fair if they 

came back to me in 1942 when I got 38 bushels to the acre, and said to me, „Well now I think you 

should pay a little more than what the contract calls for?‟” It is only a matter of right and wrong, and 

fairness and fair play on both sides. 

 

What it has done, of course, is simply this: It has tended to bring about in the province of Saskatchewan 

a situation whereby anyone that has not the amount of money that is necessary to pay full cash for his 

farm, whether it is a half-section, quarter-section or a full section, is absolutely prohibited by the 

atmosphere and by the feeling that has been created, when it comes to securing a farm with the idea of 

starting up farming. That is the condition all over the province of Saskatchewan. It is no wonder that the 

big farms are getting bigger and bigger. Who is it, Mr. Speaker, today, that is able to step out and buy a 

quarter-section, half-section or whole section of land, when death removes some old couple from the 

farm? This fellow that has probably three or four sections and maybe more, can buy the farm. I can 

mention many farmers here — eight or ten of them that I know personally — who have increased their 

holding, in the last two years, from a section and a half to as much as five or seven sections, just on that 

basis. That is the situation, and that is one of the things that this legislation, by the C.C.F. has created. 

 

There is another section in here which says this: “A person shall not be dispossessed out of his home” — 

that means the quarter-section or the area on which the buildings are situated. Well, that is a pippin, 

because, after all, that certainly is a warning and a signal to any person who owns a piece of property, 

because when he sees that that is the law of the land then he knows that someone can go on there and 

say to him, “Well I have a section here, you can take the three-quarters, but I am sitting on this quarter 

where the buildings are.” That man he sells to in the first place might be a reliable man but he does not 

know how long that man is going to be in operation. Death removes people at all ages in this life, and 

something may happen that puts him out of business. The property passes to someone else, and maybe 

that individual is not so straightforward, so honest or reliable as the original party was; and, therefore, 

we find that every person, today, who has property, that is farms and farm dwellings in this province, the 

only way he will dispose of that is for a cash consideration, and we know it; and the young people in the 

province of Saskatchewan haven‟t got that cash; and, therefore, we find that the farm population is 

gradually moving into the cities and towns, into the mines, into the forests, lumber camps and into 

offices and places like that. They are drained off the farm; and that is one of the things your farm 

legislation has done. What protection the farmer has is through the legislation that was passed by the 

Liberal Government in this province. 

 

Now the Premier, and some other speakers over there, have mentioned something about farm 

foreclosures. Well, you know these things are easy because they are all on record. You can go to the 

proper place and get a record of all these transactions. Therefore, there is no doubt 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

57 

about where we are in this case; we have it all before us; there is no doubt or any misrepresentation 

about it. But that was one of the things, Mr. Speaker, which the C.C.F. Party, previous to 1944, really 

went to town on — foreclosure on farms. And they were so enthusiastic, Mr. Speaker. the foreclosures, 

for seven years during the Liberal Government, were 6,740; and if you take the number of municipalities 

in the province of Saskatchewan, and divide it up, you will find it amounts to about three foreclosures in 

each rural municipality each year. but, that is nothing to what the C.C.F. said, during the 1944 election. 

We will probably have something like that this time. I have here a full-page ad — “The C.C.F. Land 

Policy for 1944”; and, by the way, curiously enough, they do not speak any more of it. They didn‟t say 

anything more about this wonderful blessing that they were going to confer on the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, particularly the farmers. What interests me, Mr. Speaker, is this — 12,292 

foreclosures and evictions in six years! that comes from the birthplace of the C.C.F.‟er from Canora (Mr. 

Kuziak). I think that is some of the stories he cooks up, up there. 

 

Mr. Kuziak (Canora): — They are true. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, what you would call true — that is C.C.F. true! 

 

Now then, Mr. Speaker, as a matter of fact what I told you was this: that there were 6,740 (in great big 

black letters here it says 12,292 in six years, not in seven years) and that is the stuff that this group 

peddled all over the province of Saskatchewan; paying good money for a full page ad, and they more 

than doubled the figure. Well, we do not deny the foreclosures that were made. I can assure you of this, 

Mr. Speaker. Having been reeve of my municipality during those years, I know that it was the hardest 

thing there was to get anybody, loan company or anybody else, to foreclose and take possession of a 

piece of land. I will tell you why. If they did, that the municipality would say, “All right, come on and 

pay up the taxes, or we will take the land.” And the loan company couldn‟t pay the taxes. They wouldn‟t 

take possession. 

 

Some Hon. Member: — That was under the Liberal rule. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, it will be the same under your rule if you ever go through the times that we 

went through; and peculiarly enough it seems to be running back into your regime, too. I am going to 

deal with that in a few moments. But that is the situation. But I said, here is this hollering attitude of 

these people over there; they go out and double the figure, and they have access to all that information. 

It was brought out in this House, and there were 10 C.C.F.‟ers sitting on this side of the House at that 

time; but they go out and spend the people‟s money and double the figure. That is all the faith you can 

put into anything they say. It is the same thing today. 

 

Now then, let us see what has happened. In spite of the fact that the Premier gave his solemn promise, 

when he was elected and his Government came to power in the province of Saskatchewan, that if one 

farmer lost his land through foreclosure, he was going to resign his place . . . 

 

Some Hon. Member: — Hear! Hear! 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

58 

Mr. Danielson: — Well you had better tell him “hear, hear,” because he would have gone out of here 

7½ years ago. But that was just another C.C.F. promise and you see how much faith there was in it. He 

is still here. 

 

Hon. Member: — He will be here this time next year, too. 

 

Mr. Dundas: — That will be the day. There won‟t be an election then. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — We will provide a room for him at the Old Folks‟ home at Melfort. 

 

Government Member: — We are here to stay. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, that is what keeps you going — just that distant hope; hope that you will be 

able to hang on. I can tell you right now, you are hoping for something that will never happen. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — We‟ll show you. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Member: — Hope springs eternal. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am going to be absolutely sure, Mr. Speaker, that I give the right figures — and 

they are your figures. 

 

Hon. Member: — You had better read them out. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You will get it. The foreclosures, Mr. Speaker, from August 1 to December 31, 

1944, were 273 — that was the beginning of the C.C.F. golden rule in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Cancellation of agreements for sale, 41 — a total of 314 from August 1 to December 31. Then we go 

into the next year, 1945. January 1 to December 31, 1945, foreclosures on mortgages, 609 — they are 

just about as bas as the Liberals — what is wrong with you fellows over there? 

 

Mr. Gibson: — Can I ask the hon. member a question? Will you tell us how many of those foreclosures 

were by agreement? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I will tell you something else, before I get through, that you won‟t like. 609, Mr. 

Speaker, the next year; and cancellation of agreements during that year, 1945, was 139; and the 

foreclosures and cancellations of agreements both were 748. By the C.C.F. over here. Why, I believe the 

Premier has resigned. He isn‟t in the House any more. 

 

Now then, evictions. My friends know what evictions are. In 1944 there were 6; in 1945, 54 evictions, a 

total of 60. Evictions by sheriff, 28; by physical expulsions, 22 — that is C.C.F., Mr. Speaker, and they 

are on the records of this House. If you go back you can find them and check over the reports tabled. 

This was tabled at the Session of 1947; and I have another one here tabled at the Session in 1946, both 

bearing out every word that I say. And these are the fellows that rumble over there and wave their arms 

in the air and talk about “those terrible 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

59 

Liberals.” I am not, Mr. Speaker, denying that there have to be foreclosures or evictions in the province 

of Saskatchewan. Any person that hasn‟t got any more sense than to say there does not need to be, does 

not know anything; and I am not going to accuse some of these fellows over there of knowing anything 

— for a simple reason. Now what would you do, Mr. Speaker. You go out and settle up an estate over 

here — perhaps the only way to settle that estate and get it cleaned up will probably be by a foreclosure. 

 

And by the way, while I am speaking here tonight. I had a rather unique experience in my own seat, in 

1946. I had just got back from this House. It was a Sunday morning in the spring, and I just got through 

breakfast, walked out and here came two men driving into my yard in a nice big car, and who jumps out 

of the car but the very gentleman that ran against me as C.C.F. candidate in 1948, Mr. Speaker; and I 

know his circumstances. 

 

Hon. Member: — He is a nice boy. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Sure he is a nice boy. If you had left him alone he would have been a gentleman. He 

came out of the car — the other fellow stayed in the car — and he represented the mortgage company in 

the city of Regina, and his farm had two mortgages on it; one mortgage was held in the United States, 

and the other one was held by this particular mortgage company; and there was so much money and so 

many taxes against that farm that the poor boy never had a chance in the world of every liquidating that 

debt. He spoke to me about this thing and I told him I did not like to give him advice because maybe I 

was all wrong; but I said that before I could say anything he would have to tell me just what the position 

was. He told me honestly what it was and I said this, and I do not mind saying it here tonight. I said, “if 

every farmer was sitting in the position you are, they have the greatest opportunity in the world to get 

debt adjustment.” He asked me what I meant, and I said, “For one thing, that mortgage company in 

Regina does not want your farm; it is the last thing they want to take. You go to them and get them to 

foreclose on your farm and then sell it back to you.” “Well, what will the other fellow do?” “Well,” I 

said, “if he wants the second mortgage he will have to pay up the first one.” Isn‟t that the way it goes? I 

am not a lawyer but I have been in public life for 40 years, Mr. Speaker, and you cannot be in public life 

and deal with the problems of municipalities, hospitals and your own business in the province of 

Saskatchewan, without learning something; and I have been able to absorb some of this knowledge, and 

I know this is so. Then I said, “Do not forget, my friend, that there will be just one more foreclosure that 

they will throw into our faces when we get down to Regina at the next Session.” But he did that, and I 

am glad he did. Not only did he clean up the second mortgage, but the first mortgage was reduced so 

considerably that that man who paid his debt on that farm years and years ago, is a wealthy man today; 

and good luck to him. I wish him well. He did not have to go the C.C.F. to get debt adjustment either. 

 

But the reason I mentioned this, Mr. Speaker, is this. In any nation or any place in the world where there 

is business going on where farms are bought and sold, where men are dying and settlement of 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

60 

estates have to take place, and all that sort of thing, there must be a legal process of foreclosure, if you 

are ever going to do business. If these fellows would be honest enough to admit these things and put a 

proper perspective on things, then we would have no complaint; but to go out with pure vilification and 

falsehoods and tell us all these things over the length and breadth of this province and take full page ads 

in the newspaper, not only do they misconstrue the actual facts, but they take and double them and a 

little more; and then they peddle their propaganda over the province: 12,000, Mr. Speaker — 12,292 

foreclosures. 

 

Now that was in 1944; that is what brought you into this House, Mr. Speaker — a bunch of tissue of lies 

and falsehoods brought them in here, and they have been trying to hold their position with those same 

tactics ever since; and they are harder at it than ever, today. 

 

I could spend an hour dealing with these things; but I just want to answer these fellows who talk about 

these things when they do not know anything about them. What my friend, the Minister of Education, 

knows about this thing would not hurt anybody; that is a cinch. He may know something about 

education, and I think he does; I think he has a fair knowledge; but his policy is not suited to the 

province of Saskatchewan, and he will never bring any benefit to the people of this province. The 

biggest benefit he could do to the people of the province would be to open the Regina Normal School 

and get some school teachers to teach the young of this province, regardless of what it cost. The people 

of the province would pay the price if he would do that, and forget about his Watson “Thompson and his 

socialistic friends. 

 

Now what about cancellation of debts? They have been throwing these words on the floor of this House, 

this Session, and there is not a bit of sense to anything they say, Mr. Speaker. No sense to it at all. The 

thing is not true. And they say that we never did anything to cancel debts. Well, Mr. Speaker, some of 

the men who are sitting here today — of course, you cannot blame them because, after all, there was a 

time when a lot of these debts were created and they had to be taken care of. I am just going to say to 

you, today, and here are authentic figures — I have not got time to go into them and I am not going to 

bore the House with them; but by the acts of 1936 and 1937, Mr. Speaker, of this Legislature, which was 

a number of Bills, $110,446,000 was cancelled by the Board of Review which is a Federal agency for 

adjustments of debts in this province, by the voluntary adjustment taking place between persons and 

persons; and by the Local Government Board of Saskatchewan. During these years, from 1935 to 1944, 

there was $243 million dollars written off from the shoulders of the farmers and the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Member: — Mortgage companies. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is not his fault, Mr. Speaker; here is just one instance. Machinery debt from 

December 1, 1936, there was $28 million of machinery debts owing by the farmers of the province of 

Saskatchewan. Most of that, Mr. Speaker, was old debts, because during the depression and 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

61 

the drought periods in 1929 and 1930 there was very, very little new machinery bought. So they were 

old debts, and much of it was interest. There was principal, of course, included in that $28 million, but 

anyhow it was the combined machinery debt owed by the farmers to the machinery companies at 

December 31, 1936 — $28 million. On December 31, 1943, that debt had been reduced to $1,448,493, 

and that was by reduction through debt adjustment. That is one story. 

 

I am not going to do like the Premier says — so and so that was $390 million worth of debt that was 

owed by the farmers to the mortgage companies, and then with one sweep of his arm, he says, “Look, 

under our administration, it has been reduced to so and so — $92 million.” Well, of course, if you do not 

happen to think, he might get away with it; but any person who listens to him and knows anything about 

business, knows that there is not anything in that statement, because he did not pay off one penny of it. 

The farmers paid it off by their own labour and by their own efforts. 

 

Now those are some of the things, Mr. Speaker, that I wanted to tell this House, and to see to it that this 

wild statement, this untrue statement, this tissue of lies, is not going to go outside of this House 

unchallenged by us here who know the facts. 

 

I notice the Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) has left the House; I am sorry he has left. 

Someone told him, the other day, that he had forsaken the principles of the “Regina Manifesto” —had 

thrown them out the window. I am not so sure, Mr. Speaker, that that is true insofar as the Minister of 

Agriculture is concerned. I am satisfied it is true of most of the other fellows, these fellows who handled 

the oil and uranium and that sort of thing; they have chucked it out . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Just for the time being. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Just for the time being, of course, because they reserve the right to change it and 

bring it back in at any time. In Saskatchewan, today, there is a crying need, Mr. Speaker, for places for 

farm land; for an opportunity for the young people of our farms to go and settle on a farm of their own. 

That is true; and I am not the only one who thinks so, Mr. Speaker, because only last year, on May 3, 

1951, the Deputy Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Hartnett — I know him and think he was a gentleman and 

a very well qualified man — made a statement. He spoke, I think, at the annual meeting of Agricultural 

Institute of Canada, North Saskatchewan branch, at Saskatoon; and here is what he said: 

 

“20,000 Saskatchewan farmers are in desperate need of more land. There were 40,000 more asking for 

additional land. It was true that 1 ½ million more acres might become available for agricultural 

purposes in northern Saskatchewan, but these acres would be developed at high cost for clearing and 

draining.” 

 

And I commend the Minister of Agriculture for what he has done in trying to make more land available 

in the northern part of the province, by clearing 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

62 

and making it possible to be used for agricultural purposes. That is all to the good, Mr. Speaker. I think 

he is doing good work there; but the minister of Co-operatives (or whatever his title is, I do not know) 

told us, a short time ago, that he does not want any more men on the land. He said this, when he 

addressed the Dairy Council in Saskatoon, last week — this is March, 1951: “If Saskatchewan needs 

more population, it doesn‟t want them on the farms.” He is reported to have added that with increased 

mechanization, we need fewer people on the land. 

 

Well he must have had some sort of recipe that he is putting into effect, which is very effective, because 

they are surely going off. 

 

Hon. Member: — Who said that? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Douglas, The Minister of Co-operatives in the province of Saskatchewan. Now 

that is what he said. I would say to my friend, the Minister of Agriculture, and to this Government, that 

there is a crying need, and the problem that is facing us today is to get more places for farmers to settle; 

and while the Minister of Agriculture is doing what he can in northern Saskatchewan, he cannot solve 

the problem with the limited space he has in the northern part of the province. There should be 

something done right here on the prairies, Mr. Speaker, to try and break up some of these big farms, and 

at least try and prevent them from getting bigger; and the young people — the young men and women 

who want to start out farming — should be permitted to settle here, on a farm, if that is what they want 

to do. There is no question about that. Why should they be driven up into the northern part of the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

This Farm Security Act, as I said, is one of the problems in carrying that plan out. Insofar as the 

Government settlement scheme in the northern part of the province is concerned, it could be accelerated; 

it could be taken more advantage of, if the policies that this Government has been putting into effect, 

and is still persisting in keeping in effect, of preventing anyone from purchasing a piece of land and 

paying for it and getting a title and calling it his own, would be done away with. We know that now, that 

it has been the policy and the practice of this Government, and in that respect the “Regina Manifesto” 

has fully operated by never letting them purchase that land. Thirty-three year leases! And I know the 

present Minister of Agriculture is very strongly convinced that that is the proper system and the proper 

way of coping with this problem. I know, because in 1948 he and I had a debate on it in the House here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, could I ask the hon. member a question? Would the hon. member tell 

us what positive action might be taken to prevent farm units from getting larger? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I have tried to tell them that all afternoon. I have tried to do that. I 

have tried to say and I have persisted in this, that, through the farm legislation, which does not protect 

anybody, that was put on the statute books by this Government under those two clauses: (1) in regard to 

the $6 per acre, and, (2) full protection for the home quarter, whereby you can take the rest of the land 

away from him but you could not take the home quarter away — he has prevented anyone who has 

apiece of property on the farm or in the rural part 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

63 

of this province, to sell that land for anything except a spot cash price down. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has not answered by question at all. I would like to 

tell the hon. member that they have the same situation in North Dakota, and they do not have this Farm 

Security legislation. Now what would you do to stop farms from getting larger? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, I pointed that thing out. From my own experience . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Let us get something positive for once on this. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I have had my own experience in this thing because I was looking after a section and 

a half of farm for a man that lived in the United States, and I was looking after two places in another part 

of the constituency owned by two sisters of this gentleman, and the two farms have been sold now. I had 

a returned man renting the farm, at Davidson three years ago. He came there, and I don‟t mind telling 

you that I helped him myself to get a combine. He paid the money all back to me; he does not owe me 

anything today. He was a returned man. His father was doing all he could to help him, more than he 

could to help him, and this land was for sale. He put a price on it. He went to Regina to the 

Saskatchewan Hotel. He went up and had a conference with the Income Tax Collector. He wrote me a 

letter from the city of Regina and he said, “You know, when I left so-and-so the day before yesterday, 

we agreed on (I won‟t mention names) consulted a legal man in Regina and he advises me not to sell my 

property except all cash in the province of Saskatchewan, and therefore the price was so much.” Well, as 

a matter of fact, it prevented this young man, that I would very much like to have seen have that farm, 

from buying it. As a matter of fact, two other men who had a farm of 4-section of land, just outside the 

boundaries of my constituency, and who had some brothers living west of Davidson, one man and one 

brother in the University of Saskatchewan — they dug up all the cash, the four of them, and paid the 

money down for that section and a half, spot cash; and there were half a dozen fellows after that that 

have more land than they should have, much more land. And that is the practice all over this province. If 

you prevent the person, take the security away from them . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — What security is taken away, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I would just go to work and read the two sections that the Government put in the 

Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You would make them pay because . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, no you don‟t. If a man has six or eight or ten thousand dollars worth of 

improvements on a quarter section of land, that quarter-section, with these improvements, is probably 

worth more than all the rest of the section of land together. You get a man in on that land, and, under 

certain circumstances, you cannot get him off, can you? You know that is a fact. There is no use 

defending this, Mr. Speaker, because they are all in black and white, and that is the situation. And this 

Government persists in that. They are persisting in a theory that is wrong in principle. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

64 

It is discouraging to the people who want to make a home on some property and have some place they 

can call their own in this world. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — There is a Royal Commission . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It is discouraging to these people. It has driven hundreds of them, thousands of them, 

in the province off the farm into the lumber camps, into the stores, offices, garages and so on, and into 

the mines in other provinces. That is what the Premier complains about. And today, as I see it, there are 

less people on the land, bigger and bigger farms, because the man who can pick up a farm for sale now 

is the man who has got the cash — not the man who starts out and would probably be able to pay 

$1,500, $2,000 or $3,000 down on a section or half-section of land; but the man who can plant down 

$12,000, $15,000, $22,000, or $30,000. He is the man who gets it, and there is nobody knows this better 

than the Minister. Now, I think that policy is wrong. I think it is a detriment to the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan, and I think it should be done away with. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Woods: 

 

“That this Assembly regrets that the policy of Your Honour‟s advisers in regard to the settlement of 

vacant Crown land suitable for agricultural purposes is that all such land will be allocated on a 33-year 

lease basis with no provision for the settler ever having the right to obtain title to any such land settled 

on by him.” 

 

(Mr. Speaker, ruled that the proposed amendment was out of order in that it did not add words to the 

motion for the Address). 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, before you make a ruling I would like to say a word about it. There is a 

motion here that an Address be presented to his Honour thanking him for the speech and this is a 

substantive amendment, an amendment to that, regretting that a certain policy is followed in regard to 

agriculture. Now then, as I remember it, this matter was not even mentioned in the discussion on the first 

amendment of lack of confidence. It was not mentioned at all, and there is no reason in the rules, unless 

you are going to sort of make new rules, Mr. Speaker; there is nothing in the rules that indicates that 

such an amendment as this cannot, be moved to the Address. Just because I moved an amendment does 

not exclude any other member from moving one. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, with all deference, when you 

rule out an amendment like this on the Speech from the Throne that they are moved in Ottawa right 

along. Once the main amendment is disposed of, I have seen more than one amendment moved by 

different groups, once they are back on the main motion; and I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that you cannot 

produce a single ruling that upholds you in making this ruling. In other words, Mr. Speaker, you are just 

making a ruling that is not based upon rules whatever. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that, as you say yourself, 

in your ruling here, you cannot find any basis for moving this out of order. Now then, if we are not gong 

to go according to established parliamentary rules, as laid down for years and years, I don‟t know where 

we are going to get to, Mr. Speaker. I realize that you can rule this out of order and if the majority in this 

are ready to 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

65 

sustain your ruling, then, of course, it just means that you are establishing and following a rule that is not 

in accordance with the established rules of parliamentary procedure. It is unfortunate, Your Honour, if 

we are going to have a ruling that has no foundation in parliamentary rules whatever. And I do submit 

that, Your Honour, it has no basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Let me remind the hon. member that every ruling that has been made, somebody made 

it first. As a matter of fact, I think we can find lots of reasons why this is not a proper amendment. This 

amendment had nothing at all to do with the Speech from the Throne. You have already regretted in a 

previous amendment, and this is not in a proper form as an amendment and I rule it out of order. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, in all deference, I appeal from your ruling. 

 

(The question being put by Mr. Speaker: Shall the ruling of the Chair be sustained? — It was agreed to 

on the following division: 27 to 19.) 

 

Mr. J.G. Egnatoff (Melfort): — In rising to speak at this time on the main motion, I wish to draw to 

your attention that last week was celebrated as a “Brotherhood Week.” During the past week many 

people throughout the world have been giving additional thought to this idea of brotherhood. I have 

noticed that the hon. Premier has either already spoken on this subject, or will be doing so. I cannot help 

but feel, especially in view of the attitude of ridicule that was in evidence on the part of the members 

sitting on your right, this afternoon, that it would be an excellent idea if those of us who are elected to 

this chamber to represent people of this province would display a little more of this idea of brotherhood 

right on the floor of this chamber. Time and time again we have heard hon. members ridiculing possibly 

the accent or the odd slip made by members sitting opposite them, I cannot help but feel that this 

brotherhood must start at home, and I would have urged the Premier, were he in his seat tonight, 

especially after the demonstration that he put on here this afternoon and on previous occasions during 

the debate thus far; I would have urged him, tonight, to use his high office as Premier of this province, 

which is indeed one of the highest offices attainable for any man in this province, to set an example for 

the rest of the hon. members here in conduct that would be a little more in keeping with the idea of 

brotherhood, rather than using his high office at times to play the role of a circus clown. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — There‟s a nice brotherly statement! 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — It may be so, in your opinion; but one who has been accustomed to . . . I am very 

happy to note, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Agriculture gets that expression, gets that assurance, 

that as far as he is concerned there is a bit of so-called brotherly love. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

66 

One problem which has not, in my opinion, been adequately dealt with at this Session, is the problem of 

opening up new land to help accommodate some of the 20,000 farmers who need land, and there are 

even a greater number who need additional land to establish economic units. It is very interesting to 

observe, Mr. Speaker, that the original idea of the use-lease had its beginning in this province during the 

early historical days of the C.C.F. Party. It was their intention, at the very inception of their political 

movement, to make province-wide use of this idea of a use-lease. Later on, you will recall, sir, that it 

was necessary, it was politically expedient, for them to withdraw somewhat from that original policy if 

they were to have any hope at all in attracting some of the farmer votes. Although in the original Regina 

Manifesto of 1933, while they had pledged themselves to move towards the socialization of the means 

of production and distribution of wealth, they were prepared to socialize everyone and every industry 

except the farming industry. Naturally, it was necessary to soft-pedal Socialism as it would apply to 

agriculture if they were to have any hope of securing that farm support. And so, in 1944, what were the 

agricultural policies on which the C.C.F. sought election I have in my hand an issue of the 

“Saskatchewan Commonwealth”, dated May 31, 1941, and right on the front page it has something to 

say about saving the family farm, and I quote: 

 

“The C.C.F. Government will guarantee that every honest and industrious farmer is enabled to keep 

the title to his farm and to pass it on unencumbered to his children.” 

 

Here they pledged themselves definitely to guarantee that every honest and industrious farmer is enabled 

to keep the title to the farm and to pass that title on to his children. I am very happy to note that the hon. 

members opposite, at least some of them, agree with that policy. In view of that agreement if becomes 

all the more surprising how they can possibly tolerate their most recent policy with regard to the 

allocation of Crown Land only on a straight 33-year lease basis. 

 

Further in that same issue of the “Commonwealth” under the heading of “The Truth about the C.C.F.” 

they have this to say — and this is in answer to the criticism of the C.C.F. Party, that if the C.C.F. were 

elected to power you will not be able to own private property. This is the answer, and I quote: 

 

“The C.C.F. believes that there are two kinds of property, namely, public and private property. Public 

property includes such things as railways, banks, communication systems, mines, power 

developments, timber tracts and heavy industry. To prevent exploitation these should be socially 

owned and operated by a people‟s government. Private property includes such things as farms (note, 

Mr. Speaker, farms), homes, cars, radios, furniture and all things that go to make up the abundant life. 

The C.C.F. believes that the people should own more of these things and will make this possible by 

providing 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

67 

full employment through social ownership, just wages and parity prices.” 

 

Now, first of all, with regard to this idea, that the C.C.F. would do everything in their power to see that 

the people did not lose their farm homes, I have here a quotation from a broadcast by Mr. J.W. Corman, 

who is now the Attorney-General of this province, as reported in the “Moose Jaw Times” of June 9, 

1944. And this is what Mr. Corman is reported as having said: 

 

“I expect to have some small influence with the new Douglas Government and I give you this pledge, 

and my word in public affairs has been found good. I believe that if a C.C.F. Government does 

anything to disturb a farmer in the full ownership and enjoyment of his farm and the right to dispose of 

it, I will resign.” 

 

Opposition Member: — That is something he did not do. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — Then it is high time that the Attorney-General, if he is an honourable man, if he 

wishes to maintain his good record in public affairs, did indeed resign. 

 

I say then, Mr. Speaker, that in 1944, to gain support from the farming population, the C.C.F. speakers 

throughout the breadth and depth of this province promised the farmers that farmers would be able to 

have title to their homes, to their farm lands . . . 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Might I draw the attention to the hon. member from Canora that he should not speak 

when he is not in his seat. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — He should not speak when he is in it either. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — Forgive him, Mr. Speaker, for he knows not what he does. 

 

Government Member: — He‟s speaking from experience. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — Now it appears that since the election, and particularly since the 1948 election, the 

C.C.F. Government has found it necessary to satisfy some of its extreme leftists who actually believed 

that agriculture, along with other industries, ought to be socialized, and there must be some honest 

socialists on your right who believe in socialization of everything. So, to satisfy this extreme leftist 

element in its government and in its party, the Provincial Department of Agriculture announced its 

policy of allocating Crown Lands. So, for the records of this House, I wish to quote from a policy 

statement issued by the Department of Agriculture on June 12, 1950. There are some portions of this 

policy on which land is to be allocated with which I am in agreement. For the benefit of some hon. 

members opposite, it might be well to just review 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

68 

the basis on which that will be allocated and I am now quoting: 

 

A realistic and firm allocation policy for the allocation of new lands has now been established. At the 

outset all new areas will be utilized as far as possible to meet the needs of farmers now living on 

sub-marginal land or on uneconomic units. In this way the utilization of new land will constitute a 

positive step towards greater farm security, and a factor contributing to the stabilization of the 

Saskatchewan economy. The following general policy of eligibility will be applied when dealing with 

applications for new lands: 

 

1. In the fringe areas of settlement local eligible farmers will necessarily enjoy a preference, after 
which preference will be given to other eligible persons with basic agricultural background who 

are resident in the vicinity of available lands and whose need for agricultural establishment is 

evident. In view of equipment costs special consideration will be given to applicants interested in 

operating on a co-operative basis.” 

 

Now, with practically everything I have read so far I can agree, with the exception of this latter part 

“that special consideration will be given to applicants interested in operating on a co-operative basis” I 

think it is up to the farmers themselves, Mr. Speaker, to decide whether they are going to farm on a 

co-operative basis or whether they would like to operate on an individual basis, and I do not think a 

government should give special consideration to those who are interested in farming on a straight 

co-operative basis. The next, No. 2, quoting again; 

 

2. “A continuous connection with farming will naturally carry a preference as against an 
intermittent farm background. 

 

3. In all cases where eligible applicants are dealt with and all other things being equal, veterans will 
receive a preference.” 

 

Certainly we can endorse that part whole-heartedly. 

 

“But after the land in an area has been inspected for disposition it will be advertised, applications 

will be invited, and eligible applicants dealt with, as far as possible on an area basis. 

 

“The final allocation will be decided by a Land Allocation Committee which will, whenever 

practicable, hold local sittings to make these dispositions.” 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

69 

Now, it is the next part of the Government policy with which I cannot agree, and with which I find an 

increasing number of people disagreeing, particularly around the areas which may be opened up, which 

can be opened up, and which should be opened up, in the northern part of the province. All land will be 

leased. Now where are some of my hon. friends on the other side who, a few moments ago said, “Hear! 

Hear!” when I quoted as part of their C.C.F. platform of 1944, a pledge to defend this idea of private 

ownership of land? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — Dealing further: 

 

“All land will be allocated on a 33-year lease basis. The primary purpose of this lease is the well-being 

and security of the leasee. It permits the efficient development and utilization of Crown land 

resources. The need for initial heavy land-purchase commitments is removed, allowing the financial 

resources of the lessee to be fully available for development. Equitable rental rates will be established 

on the basis of the soil rating and productivity of the land, and will vary from 1/6 to 1/10 of the crop. 

The 33-year lease includes a clause whereby the lessee is not required to pay rentals in a crop failure 

year.” 

 

I want to say again, Mr. Speaker, that the portion of this land policy with which I take issue is this idea 

that from June 1950 and on, as long as the socialistic Government is in office, Crown lands in this 

province will be only available on a 33-year lease basis. So I want to ask some of my hon. friends 

opposite who are farmers themselves, who have had the thrill of owning their own land, who have 

experienced the thrill of possessing a title to that land: how can you justify, how can you reconcile that 

action of your s with the policies that are in force by your Government at the present? If you are 

prepared, if my hon. friends are prepared to socialize all the Crown lands of this province by allocating 

them only a 33-year lease basis, Mr. Speaker, then they should be sufficiently imbued with Socialism to 

allow their own land to revert back to the Crown and to be allocated on a 33-year lease basis, because 

that is, after all, the acid test of socialism. If Socialism is good for the other fellow, then Socialism, Mr. 

Speaker, ought to be good for the Minister of Agriculture; and I venture to say that the Minister of 

Agriculture of this province would be one of the last men of this province who would give up the title to 

the land that he holds in the north-western part of the province, even though a lot of that land in his 

constituency is so thickly infested with weeds that he maintains that people will be moving away from it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member suggests that socializing land would be good for 

me. All I have to say to him is that I have about 2,500 or 3,000 acres that I would be glad to turn over to 

the Provincial Government, because I could operate that much cheaper. 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

70 

Mr. Egnatoff: — Mr. Speaker, actions always speak louder than words. You have had eight years in 

which to turn it over to the Crown — why have you not done it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — If you cannot pay for a dog, you could not pay for my land. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — You see, Mr. Speaker, the trouble with the Socialist Government is this: now they are 

Socialist, now they are pretending they are not Socialists. Wherever it seems to be expedient to pull in 

the Socialistic tentacles a bit, they do so; but whenever the opportunity presents itself, out spread those 

tentacles as is indicated by their land-lease policy which I snow in effect in this province. And what does 

it really mean? What does it mean but a reversion to the old idea of feudalism. It is not my intention to 

go into the entire history of feudalism. It think it should be sufficient to say that many people who 

settled in this province of Saskatchewan, many of the people to whom we own so much for having 

opened up this land for us, came to this country because they saw in this land an opportunity to acquire a 

home of their own — a piece of land which they could call their own, a piece of land to which they 

could possess the title. 

 

Now in the north-eastern part of the province, there is an area concerning which I have spoken in this 

House, a year ago, known as the Carrot River triangle. The Minister of Agriculture is well acquainted 

with the needs for developing that area. There have also been recent announcements that there may be a 

fair acreage of arable land in the Big River country. Those of us who reside in the north-eastern part of 

the province are grateful for some of the survey work that is being done. Some of the survey work 

should have been done immediately after the war. Unfortunately, we have found that some of the land 

was even cleared and settled before the survey work was even completed. We find fairly large acreages 

of land which had been cleared before proper drainage projects had been carried out. I am sure the 

Minister of Natural Resources, who ought to be familiar with that pat of the country, will agree with me 

that the people on some of those Co-op farms that are really the „baby‟ of the Minister of Social 

Welfare; the people on some of those Co-op farms will suffer because the Government was so hasty, so 

anxious to get people settled on some of the collective farms, some of the Co-op farms, that they even 

neglected to carry out proper drainage programmes, as a result of which there will be fairly substantial 

losses in that area. 

 

Judging by the annual report of the Department of Agriculture, some work is being done in that part of 

the country, but not nearly enough; and I want to take this opportunity of urging the Government of 

Saskatchewan to even launch forth during this election year and undertake a little more serious activity 

there, because the Department‟s own report has this to say about the land: 

 

“There is in north-eastern Saskatchewan a large area usually referred to as the Carrot River triangle. 

Part of this area is settled. Much is completely underdeveloped, but almost all of the entire area can be 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

71 

rated as one of great potential agricultural wealth. Drainage is the key to the development of this area.” 

 

I want to urge the Government to carry out as rapidly as possible the necessary drainage programme and 

the necessary survey in that part of the province. 

 

I know that the Minister of Social Welfare is very strongly in favour of collectivized farming; he is very 

strongly in favour of co-operative farms. You will recall that, on previous occasions in this House, the 

Minister of Social Welfare stated that the day would come when those who advocated collective and 

co-operative forms of farming would be very highly praised and would, in effect, have left monuments 

to them, and that those who would be opposed to that form of farming would be held in scorn — I 

presume that is why he has already had a farm in that part of the province named after him known as the 

Sturdy Co-op Farm. 

 

I want to urge the hon. members on the Government side to bear two things in mind. First, I would like 

them to bear in mind that the allocation of land on a use-lease basis is the very antithesis of the principle 

of land ownership which has served as such a major inducement to convert new land for agricultural 

purposes in this province and in this country in the past. I mentioned, a few moments ago, one of the 

reasons why many people came to this land was because they sought here an opportunity to own their 

own land. One of the major reasons why many of the hon. members opposite came out in the earlier 

days of this province was because they saw here an opportunity to acquire a piece of land which they 

could call their own. You know that, Mr. Speaker; you yourself have been motivated by that same 

impelling force. 

 

The second thing that I would like the hon. members opposite to remember is that, if you are anxious to 

apply socialism to others, the real test of whether or not you are socialist lies in your willingness or 

unwillingness to apply Socialism to your self. Therefore, I would urge the private members on the other 

side of the House to use whatever influence they have behind their closed doors upon the Government to 

change this policy of allocating Crown lands only a 33-year lease basis, for in doing so they will be 

rendering a real service to many of our young men who are anxious to settle on these Crown lands, who 

are anxious to build their homes, who would like, as the hon. member for Lumsden (Mr. Thair) to own 

their own lands, rather than just be tenants of the state. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to take this opportunity of drawing these sentiments to the attention of the 

members on the other side of the House, because I feel that there are so many younger farmers who are 

anxious to get settled on Crown Lands, who are anxious to have the opportunity of not being tenants of 

the state, but owners of their own land. I think it is rather interesting to note that in the “Progress 

Report”, where agriculture is discussed under the heading “Lands Branch”: for goodness sake, why, 

when the Government puts out propaganda at public expense, why cannot it be honest and include right 

here that the only way you can get Crown lands from the Socialistic C.C.F. Government is on a 33-year 

lease basis? 



 

February 25, 1952 

 

 

72 

Mr. Kuziak: — Son-of-a-gun! 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — I ask you, Mr. Speaker, is that in keeping with the dignity of British Parliamentary 

procedure to use such language? If not, I would suggest the member for Canora deserves at least a slight 

reprimand. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Maybe he has this foot-and-mouth disease — mostly mouth! 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — It could be that he just has this foot-and-mouth disease, that is quite true. 

 

Now, with those few remarks, I am sure you will gather, Mr. Speaker, that it is not my intention to 

support the Motion. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — On a point of privilege. I noticed an article, Mr. Speaker, on the “Leader-Post” editorial 

page which reads as follows — I draw it to your attention, Mr. Speaker, because it is the first time I have 

noticed it. It says: 

 

“It developed that Mr. Tucker made the suggestion verbally that in acting upon it to protect members 

who have claims against the Government Insurance Office the Government also include the 

amendment on oil and mineral leases.” 

 

I want to say that I at no time made any suggestion that the Legislative Assembly Act should be 

amended, either verbally or in writing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The question being put on Mr. Erb‟s motion for the Address, it was agreed to by 27 votes against 19. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:40 o‟clock p.m. 


