



















































Hansard: April 03, 1952


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eleventh Legislature 

40th Day 
 

Thursday, April 3, 1952 

 

The House met at three o‘clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

Hon. J.H. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are 

proceeded with, I would like to correct a statement contained in this morning‘s ―Leader-Post‖ under the 

caption, ―1,000 House Plan Mooted by Assembly.‖ It occurs in the third paragraph, and should read: 

 

―Mr. Sturdy included in the city of Regina share . . .‖ 

 

It reads now: 

 

―Mr. Sturdy said the city of Regina‘s share of responsibility would be the provision of local 

improvements . . .‖ 

 

What I said, or intended to say, was: ―included in the city of Regina‘s share of responsibility would be 

the provision of local improvements.‖ Under the amended Act, a municipality is required to put up 10 

per cent of the capital cost of any project, under Section 35, but the city may include in an agreed price 

on its improvements and any land assembly in the 10 per cent. 

 

AGRICULTURAL PARITY PRICES 

 

The House resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough): 

 

―That, in view of the fact that the International Wheat Agreement does not sufficiently protect the 

Canadian Wheat grower against variations in the international exchange and economic situation, this 

Assembly request the Federal Government 

 

(1) to adopt a policy designed to maintain the price of wheat to the Canadian farmer at parity level, and 

 

(2) apply the principle of orderly marketing and parity price to all agricultural products. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

2 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, the Resolution on the Order Paper is one with wide scope 

for discussion on the matter of marketing our basic commodity, and I had intended to give you a resume 

of what has been done for some time past, with respect to marketing and obtaining an orderly system of 

marketing. But in view of the lateness of the season, and the desire to get through with the Session, I am 

proposing to cut it short and give a brief resume of what actually has been done, and what I think should 

be done in the future, with respect to obtaining what I think is a fair return to our producer for their 

grain. 

 

Much has been said about marketing our wheat, particularly during the last thirty years. There was a 

great deal of controversy many years before that. As a matter of fact, you will remember, Mr. Speaker, 

the trouble that grain growers had with marketing their wheat back in the early days, at about the turn of 

the century when farmers were entirely in the grip of the grain trade. They either had to take what they 

were offered in the way of price, and also by way of grade, or take their grain home. I remember as a 

boy, several times when it did not make much difference whether you had No. 1 hard, or whether you 

had No. 1 feed, or whatever they called it, the price was practically the same. So it was quite evident, in 

those days, that if the farmers did not do something to help themselves, they were going to be at the 

mercy of a combine. And there is where the farmers stepped in themselves; and around the turn of the 

century the Grain Growers‘ Association was established — I believe it was organized here in 

Saskatchewan in the territorial days. Probably the hon. member from Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. 

Dundas) will remember the movement that was made around Indian Head. 

 

Well, that was the start of the fight for the farmer‘s right to get some justice in the way of justifiable 

return for his grain. That Grain Growers‘ Association fought, not only the grain trade, but they fought 

the Railway Company as well. They fought for the loading platform, and they fought for the right to 

load their grain on cars if they were not satisfied with the price at the elevators. That did not seem to 

satisfy the desire of the farmers. They still had to market it through the trade, even if it was sent in 

carloads by their Association, or individual farmers. So they decided then that they should have a 

handling agency of their own; and in about 1906, they organized what they called the ―Grain Growers‘ 

Grain Company‖ which later became the ―United Grain Growers‘ Company‖. That company was 

established by farmers entirely; and I believe that they tried a system of marketing outside of the trade, 

which was not very successful, and it almost crippled them. They found it necessary, then, to join in 

with the regular channels of trade, and they found it profitable to do that, because it was better to sell in 

that way than to sell it outside, through agencies of their own. 

 

Then, around 1910, a group of farmers thought that this Grain Company was not serving the purpose; 

and the Grain Growers‘ Association prevailed upon the Government of the day, which was a Liberal 

Government in Saskatchewan, to assist them to set up another elevator system in opposition to the Grain 

Growers‘ Grain Company; and the Liberal Government at that time advanced 85 per cent of the cost of 

the creation of the Co-operative 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

3 

Elevator System, and I think it is fair for me to say that the Co-operative Elevator System operated very 

successfully and satisfactorily as far as the producer was concerned. They closed the spread in the grain 

— that is the price that was paid between the different grades. They also closed up the spread between 

the farmer‘s load and the carload lots; and I think that Company has always been considered as being 

one of the most successful farm organizations up to the present time. 

 

Then, in 1917 — I may say, up to that time, there was never any mention about Government 

interference or about Government assistance to the grain trade, or grain selling system, but in 1917, 

which was during the first World War, the Government of the day chose to put a grain board into 

operation and take over the grain, at least the wheat. That was the first, as far as I remember, of any 

government interference with the marketing of our wheat. 

 

Now, I do not think for one minute, nor will anyone else ever think, that that Board was put there to 

protect the producer from getting too little for his wheat. I think it was set up to stop the wheat from 

going any higher than it was at that time. But in any event it functioned fairly satisfactorily to 

everybody, and it continued to operate until I think, the close of the grain year of 1920; and grain at that 

time had climbed to quite a satisfactory price. 

 

Then they suddenly dropped it. They dropped the Board, and grain went back on the open market, with 

the result that the price started sliding. Many farmers were under the impression that, had the Board 

continued, they would have saved that break in the price. There are a great many conflicting opinions on 

that, however, and I believe, from information that we can gather, that it is very questionable whether 

the Board would have saved the price of grain at that time, for the real reason for it going down was that 

there was a large crop being grown in the European countries that were importing our grain. About 

1923, I think, the price got down to $1.04 per bushel from around $2.70 or $3.00. 

 

As a result of that, many farmers got very, very dissatisfied. They got vindictive about the government 

not carrying on the Wheat Board, and so they put quite a lot of pressure on the government to reinstate 

the Board, through the Grain Growers‘ Association and through the Co-operative Elevators. I remember 

both co-operative companies did make representations to the government to try to get the Board re-

instated. However, it was not done, so there was a group of men who were in the Grain Growers‘ 

Association that were more radically-minded than most of the organization, and they broke away from 

them, and started an organization by themselves. And that is when the Farmers‘ Union started. I think it 

was around the year 1921 when that organization was started, and I am accused, of course, of calling 

some of them ―Reds‖, and I believe, fundamentally, that they were Reds — they were radicals. While 

there were many good sound men in the organization, still they were dominated by those who wanted 

action; and they meant well, I think. Well, then, the next problem was that since they could not get the 

government to take care of the marketing of the wheat, they should put up an organization whereby they 

could market it themselves; and then the pooling idea was created. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

4 

The Farmers‘ Union in Saskatchewan were not the only ones that were working in that direction. They 

were doing it, also in Alberta; and I think I am right in saying that the Alberta farmers‘ organization 

went faster than the Farmers‘ Union in Saskatchewan did. One reason for that is, I believe, that the 

United Grain Growers took hold of the organization in Alberta, and they not only helped them 

financially, but they helped with their personnel, to organize the Pool in Alberta, with the result that they 

got started operating in 1923. In Saskatchewan, they were not quite so successful, and the reason for that 

was that thee were so many farmers reluctant about following the radical movement of the Farmers‘ 

Union in Saskatchewan; and if it had not been for the Liberal Government in Saskatchewan taking hold 

of the organization, by loaning them $45,000 which created confidence in the movement, it is doubtful 

whether the Saskatchewan Pool would have gone over otherwise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — What did ―Charlie‖ Dunning do? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Charlie Dunning was the one that advanced the money . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — What did he say? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — The pooling principle was sound, and it is as sound today as it was then. The idea was 

to keep the bulk of the wheat off the market when the heavy deliveries were made in the fall, that the 

Pool would take in the bulk of the wheat — 50 per cent was what they were expected to get — and I 

believe that they had enough contract signers to deliver about 50 per cent of the wheat; and the idea was 

that the Pool would market so much every day, and at the end of the year, the producers would get the 

average daily price prevailing throughout the year. 

 

In 1924, the Saskatchewan Pool had been formed, and they started operating. The Manitoba Pool started 

at the same time. The Pools formed a central selling agency, and it was responsible for selling the wheat 

to the buyers before the end of the crop year. 

 

Well, the Pool was not very successful. The selling agency apparently was not successful in getting the 

average price for the producers. I happened to be a member of the Pool, and I was not a large producer 

at the time, but we never did receive what we thought was an average price; and I think it is fair to say 

that the selling agency came to that conclusion themselves, that they were not satisfied with the price 

that they were receiving. What system they adopted I am not prepared to say. Some say that they 

handled it outside the Grain Trade; some say that they sold some of it on the Grain Exchange, but they 

did not sell it at the right time; but whatever the factors were, the proof of the pudding is the one that we 

go by; and it is quite evident that the pools were not satisfied. So, in 1928 — and I think again in 1929 

— when the international wheat conferences were being held (I believe it was 1928) when they first 

tried to establish an International Wheat Agreement, our delegates endeavoured to influence the other 

exporting nations to co-operate with them to set a price on the exportable surplus of wheat. That, Mr. 

Speaker, is when our trouble started. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

5 

Apparently as a result of that action, the importing countries got a little anxious about the possibility of 

being held-up on the price of wheat, and they went home and encouraged the home production of wheat 

so that they would not be quite so dependent on the exporting nations, with the result that Germany, 

Italy, France, and I think to some extent Belgium, did increase their production of wheat to a great 

extent. They had vineyards plowed up, and they had pastures plowed up; but the main difficulty started 

in 1929. In the year 1929 we had a small crop here in Canada, and I do not think that any hon. member 

who knows anything about what went on in 1929 will deny the fact that the Pool, or the selling agency, 

decided that they should get $2 a bushel for their wheat that year. And they did not only let it be know 

overseas, in some instances, but they broadcast it over the air on several occasions in Western Canada, 

as the price of wheat was sliding down during the harvest, in 1929, that there was no justification for the 

drop, and consequently they were not going to sell wheat for less than $2.00 a bushel. 

 

Well, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that if we are going to continue in the grain business, we as farmers 

have to be prepared for any competition, and I think that that is very well acceptable now; but the result 

of the holding policy of 1929 meant that we lost our market in Europe. We lost our market to the extent 

that the Pool‘s name in Great Britain was looked upon as something that was holding them up, and when 

the end of the crop year came, I remember the President, Mr. McPhail stating, in Yorkton, at a meeting 

that the Pool had offered wheat for as low as 25 cents below the market price (I do not know what 

market he was quoting), and he said, ―We could get no takers.‖ 

 

Now, I want to say that both the United Grain Growers and the Co-operative Elevator Company advised 

against the selling policy of the Pool. They advised against it when the system was adopted; and in spite 

of that, they continued their socialistic system of marketing. 

 

I will give you a personal experience that I had, in August, 1929. I happened to be in partnership with 

another man in a wheat crop, which we threshed that month, as we had a fairly early harvest, and 

delivered to the United Grain Growers in our town. He took a cash ticket for his wheat, and he got $1.44 

per bushel. I took my 80 cents (it was No. 1 Northern Wheat) which was the initial payment for mine. 

Yet, at the end of the crop year, which was then 1930, I get a bill for 16 cents over-payment, and he was 

never asked to return any of his. Well now, I say, Mr. Speaker, that here we had two co-operative 

organizations. We had the Grain Growers on one hand, adopting one system of selling; the central Pool 

selling agency on the other hand, using some other system of selling, and the difference in the price paid 

to the producer between the two was in the neighbourhood of about 80 cents a bushel — and the Pool 

went broke, and the other one was solvent. That is what made me wonder why we should be supporting 

the system that went broke, and broke the farmers, instead of the system that was successful. 

 

I want to say to hon. gentlemen that I have a good reason to take issue with this new system of selling 

our grain. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

6 

Now then, following this catastrophe of 1929, the Pool went bankrupt. They had lost their reserves; they 

owed the banks, and the Government had to come to their assistance to the tune of some $23 million. 

They could not sell any wheat on the world market, so the Government of the day — the Federal 

Government which was a Conservative Government — set up a Board in 1930, I think, and took over 

the wheat. They allowed the Pool to function in the ordinary way, and they also allowed, I believe, the 

open market to function. In spite of that, as far as I know there was very little wheat that was marketed 

during the years 1930-31-32. I believe that the Board — Mr. McFarland was the head of it — attempted 

to put a floor under the wheat both to the consumer and to the producer, but it was not until 1935, when 

the Liberals got into power, that any real effort to get rid of the wheat was made. (I know my hon. friend 

shakes his head). Following that, Mr. Speaker, there was a real attempt to sell the wheat at whatever they 

could get for it. 

 

The Board functioned from then until 1943, along with the open market. In 1943, the open market had 

risen — I do not know whether it was responsible for it or not; but the price of wheat had gone from a 

very low figure up to $1.25. When it reached $1.25, I presume the government of the day thought this 

was a fair return to the farmers. They took all the wheat over, and they have been marketing it ever 

since, and I do not need to tell you the story of what has happened from then until the present day. 

 

Now, what we are interested in is what is going to happen in the future. We know now, from past 

experience, that by the effort of holding wheat off the market in order to get a higher price, it landed us 

in a disastrous position. We lost the market as a result of it. We will, therefore, have to make up our 

minds to sell wheat where there is wheat to be sold. 

 

There has been a great deal of criticism and controversy over the method of selling wheat since the 

Government took it over in 1943. Under the long-term contract with the United Kingdom at $1.55 for 

320 million bushels, and $2.00 a bushel for some 240 million bushels, many people think that they were 

not well paid. I do not think we were well paid, myself. However, the long-term contract may not be all 

bad, and I am not going to condemn it entirely; but as long as we have a central selling agency that 

handles all our product, it may be necessary to dispose of a certain large bulk of it by a long-term 

contract. 

 

There are two things, Mr. Speaker, that the farmers must be satisfied with on a long-term contract; 

firstly, that they at least have a guaranteed market for whatever the contract calls for; secondly, they are 

going to get the lowest price that will prevail during the life of that contract. No government in Great 

Britain is going to contract for future delivery of a large volume of wheat, unless it is sure that it is going 

to save money by doing so, and I think it is fair to say that the British Food Minister has said, on more 

than one occasion, that if it had not been for the long-term contract that they made for wheat, bread 

would have cost the country a good deal more money. Well, if they saved a lot of money on the bulk 

purchase of wheat from Canada, then the producer must have contributed that much to the consumer in 

Great Britain. I think it is quite well known by everybody that that 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

7 

was actually the case; and I venture to say that, in future, if we continue that policy we are going to have 

to be satisfied in doing so. The only redeeming feature of it is that, by losing on that contract, we may 

gain a certain prestige on the balance of the wheat that we sell on the open market. 

 

I am not criticizing the long-term contract, but I do want all I can get for my wheat just the same as 

everybody else does. Consequently, I would not want to go into a long-term contract unless we get a fair 

price on it; but there is one thing that we must keep in mind, as producers of wheat, and that is that our 

price must not go beyond the level of where it pays the importer to raise his own wheat. We have to be 

satisfied to accept the price that we can produce it for, in order that the importing countries will buy our 

wheat in preference to raising it themselves. 

 

Now, what is the solution? What shall we do in order to keep in the business of raising wheat and export 

it? I believe it is up to us here in Western Canada, and if, instead of raising so much talk about higher 

prices, we put more effort in cutting the cost of the production of wheat in order to meet competition in 

the world market, we would be doing ourselves a service and our country a service. We can do that in 

two ways, at least. We can do it by practical mechanization of our operations. We can do it by bringing a 

little scientific system in, to increase our yields per acre. We can also do it by improving our grades. But 

we can never stay in the business if we are going to insist on a price for our wheat that the world 

consumer will not pay. 

 

I am not going to speak much longer on this particular Resolution. This is what I wanted to say. I had a 

two-hour speech on this question, but I am just giving you the highlights in order to cut it short, and I 

did not want to bring any political controversy into this thing. The Resolution says that in the 

international exchange we re not getting a good enough price, and I think I have answered that by saying 

that if we make a contract then we will have to stay by it. If we made a mistake then, I say, ―Do not 

squeal about it.‖ If we are not satisfied with the price we can get on a contract basis, then let us get back 

into the pooling system, which I think is our next best step. I question very much that, if the 

governments of foreign countries cease purchasing wheat in bulk, the wheat Board will do any better 

than the selling agency did. I think they will find themselves in a very similar position of having that 

wheat in the show-window, just as a farmer would find himself with a herd of cattle in the month of 

January, and running out of feed, and wanting to sell them to the cattle buyer. The cattle buyer would be 

sitting on the fence waiting until the farmer ran out of feed, and then he would buy the herd at his own 

price. If the Wheat Board has two or three hundred million bushels of wheat for sale all in one lump, 

they would probably find themselves in the same position; that buyers across the water would be waiting 

until they would find themselves in the position that they would have to throw it on the market. 

Consequently, it is my own opinion that the more you diversify the show-window so the buyer does not 

know who is going to sell tomorrow, or whether he is going to sell tomorrow or not; and in that way I 

believe you can get a better price. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

8 

Now, I have said enough, but I am going to say this in conclusion, and I want to direct this to my hon. 

friend, about parity price. Much has been said about parity prices, but no one has ever said what parity 

price is. A parity price may be something that means you are going to raise the price of wheat and take 

the money out of the Treasury to make up the difference between the price you can sell it for, and what 

you think the producer should get for it. I assume that is the idea of it. 

 

Now, if that is going to be the request of the farmers of Western Canada, what is going to be the result? 

The result would naturally be that the production of wheat is going to be lowered to the amount that can 

be sold on the open market at the highest price, and it is very questionable whether the farmers of 

Western Canada would be any better with $2.00 a bushel confined to, say 10 bushels to the acre, or 

whether he would be better taking $1.00 a bushel and be allowed to grow 30 bushels to the acre — I am 

assuming that holding the acreage down to what would produce the number of bushels would be the 

system followed. I think that is what you would find. 

 

There is no public treasury that can pay western producers what the northern producers of wheat can 

make money at, and let the prairie farmer around Regina grow it wild (as he can do) and flood the 

market. We can produce grain here in volume that will almost wreck the Dominion Treasury if they are 

going to subsidize to any great extent per bushel. So it is quite evident that, if we are going to ask the 

Federal Government to subsidize wheat growers, they are going to have to cut down the bushelage that 

they would pay on, and probably the production would have to be cut down in a similar way. 

 

So I say again, Mr. Speaker that the sooner we get down to earth and realize that we are going to have to 

meet the competition of the world with our wheat (and we must prepare ourselves for that, because it 

may not be very far off) and better it will be for us; and we must get busy and work out a system 

whereby we can produce that wheat and make money at a competitive price. 

 

Hon. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I did not really believe that, in this day 

and age, I would be subjected to another one of my hon. friend‘s speeches — precisely the kind that he 

made back in the dark ages of 1930 and 1931 at the schoolhouses and halls where I went to allay his 

opposition to the method of marketing grain, as he has exposed here today. 

 

He gave a short review of the events leading up to the present time; and I want to point out one of his 

earlier errors not so much because the error itself is important but to indicate that his knowledge of the 

history is somewhat at fault, and therefore, his reasoning could also be considered somewhat at fault. 

 

He gave a review of the history of the development of the Territorial Grain Growers‘ Association 

leading up to the formation of the Saskatchewan Grain Growers‘ Association, and from there to the 

Grain Growers‘ 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

9 

Company, and eventually into the United Grain Growers‘ Association, which lead eventually to the 

marketing of grain on a commission basis, as an ordinary company did on the Grain Exchange, and 

operated an elevator company — true, supported by farmer capital in the form of share capital, but not 

on anything like a co-operative basis, based on any of the ideas of co-operative enterprise as we know 

them, today, but it was the best they knew at that time. I am not criticizing those. 

 

His review went on to say that it was not until World War 1, and I think he gave the year (if I remember 

correctly) of 1917 as the year when the first Canadian Wheat Board was established. Well, that was his 

first major error. If he will read history he will find that actually what happened was that the gyrations of 

the grain trade at that time so disturbed the Government of Canada of that day, which was engaged in a 

war effort, that they themselves set up, in the first instance what was called ―Board of Grain 

Supervisors‖, who bought the grain at a fixed price. If I remember correctly it was $2.22 or $2.24 a 

bushel as the fixed price at that time . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I had all that in my speech, but I cut it out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Well, I think we had better keep the history as reasonably straight as we can, Mr. 

Speaker, so I mention it. It was not until the year 1919 that the actual Canada Wheat Board first started 

to operate, for that crop year; and it only lasted until late in August of the following year, when, in spite 

of the requests of a great number of farmers of that day, through their more or less loose-knit 

organizations, the governments, both Provincial and Federal, failed to get together and agree that it 

would be better to continue the operations of the Canada Wheat Board, which was based differently than 

the Board of Supervisors in its operations. 

 

The Board of Supervisors paid a specific price, and then their job was to sell that grain on behalf of 

Canada, delivering, principally, to Canada‘s allies in the war effort. The Canada Wheat Board which 

succeeded that was very similar to what followed, in the way of the Wheat Pool, in that they operated on 

an initial payment, with certain interim payments as the grain was sold, and a final payment, to those 

who had delivered grain to it. 

 

Now, as I say, at the end of the operation of the Canada Wheat Board and the failure to get the 

Governments to continue it, or a similar institution, there was brought into being in this province what 

was called the Farmers‘ Union of that day, which preceded the United Farmers of Canada 

(Saskatchewan Section) and the various other provincial sectional United Farmers. At that point again, I 

want to mention what I think is an error of history, when my hon. friend said that these were dominated 

by ―Reds‖. Of course, if you go back two or three hundred years in English history, you will find that 

those who demanded parliamentary representation were called ―Reds‖ too; it is a name that has been 

used by a great many people for a great many centuries to describe somebody who believes you can 

improve the established order of things. Anybody can call anybody else a ―Red‖ to point out that he 

disagrees with the established order of things, and wants to change it. Now on that basis, I suppose it I 

justified to call some of the original promoters, who eventually turned out to be some of the chief 

executives of the first Farmers‘ Union, as ―Reds‖. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

10 

They were described then as something undesirable, which was the implication in his tone (although he 

did not say the exact words), and I think it is very unfair. These men were farmers who were intensely 

interested in the economic life of farmers, and these students of history were fearful of what would 

happen after World War I if there was not some orderly marketing kept in existence. And so, when they 

were unable to convince Governments that the continuation of the Canada Wheat Board would be a 

good thing, these people decided, ―Well, if we cannot get the Government to do it, let us do it 

ourselves.‖ And so we saw the Alberta farmers, we saw the Saskatchewan farmers, and we saw the 

Manitoba farmers all organizing themselves with this end in view; and not exactly simultaneously but 

nearly so. Within a year or so, of each other they had all established a farmer-owned institution which 

operated in the same way as the Canada Wheat Board; that was by paying an initial payment, having the 

grain delivered to its pool, and then selling that in an orderly way through whatever channels offered 

themselves throughout the year, so that they would not have those low prices for grain when there was a 

heavy delivery of grain on the market, and corresponding rises when the grain was out of the most of the 

farmer‘s hands and in the hands of some of the other owners who were able to take advantage of the 

improvement in price. 

 

That was the setting up of the Wheat Pool. A person could spend a long time, Mr. Speaker, going 

through all the history of the early Wheat Pools from the time they started in 1923-24 until the time they 

got into the elevator business in an extensive way in 1926 and on to 1929 or 1930, when the difficulties 

that they encountered gave them some opportunity to study the experience of those years and to look 

forward to correcting those difficulties. 

 

The Hon. member for Saltcoats leads us up to the year 1929, at the time when he described his personal 

experience, as compared with his partner in business, where he himself had delivered to the Wheat Pool, 

and taken his $1.00 initial payment (which would be about 80 cents at delivery as he pointed out, and I 

expect that is the right figure there), and the amount that his partner got by selling his on the open 

market. He forgot to mention that the very fact that the western Wheat Pools were, at that time handling 

about 50 per cent of the western crop in the Pool — not through Pool elevators because they did not 

have enough, but in their Wheat Pool, and holding the great bulk of it off the speculative market and 

marketing it in an orderly way, a great deal of it directly to agencies set up in England and France and 

Germany and Spain and Belgium, and sub-agents in some of the other European countries; but that grain 

was not finding it way on to the speculative market in Winnipeg which is called the Winnipeg Grain 

Exchange, thereby relieving it of the carrying of that load under speculative channels. 

 

The member for Saltcoats must know that. Every member who has been interested and taken an active 

interest and wants to know about the history of grain trading, does know that these things are facts; and 

they were established by much of the evidence that was given before some succeeding Commissions 

that investigated the grain trade. For instance, we found in one of the Turgeon Commission reports, 

when they were examining the grain trade business, 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

11 

they were examining some of the banks, and the banks were asked a question — now I am not a lawyer 

so I will not put it in the way a cross-examiner would do in court, but everybody will know how it would 

be there, when I say it in my plain old way — ―Do you finance the Elevator Companies — that is, the 

companies that buy grain from the farmers?‖ And they said, ―Yes.‖ ―On what basis do you finance 

them?‖ The answer was, ―On the understanding that whatever they buy, today at the market price, they 

put on the market tomorrow morning.‖ There was no speculation. The banks themselves would not 

allow speculation, but they did admit that as long as there were a few other farmers, blacksmiths, 

stenographers, millionaires, every type of creature in the world who like to do a bit of gambling or 

speculating, and were willing to go into that Grain Exchange and buy futures, and by the virtue of 

buying those futures, were able to establish what they called ‗a level of trading grain‘ according to the 

number of speculators in the field at any one time, that would be their basis for lending money; but the 

grain companies they lent the money to must not speculate in grain. Every night every elevator agent in 

the country had to wire his company of his purchases of all kinds of grain on that particular day, and in 

the morning that was assembled at the elevator company‘s head office and offered on the market at the 

opening price. Everybody knows those things. 

 

Now, when you take half that grain off, and take that half and dispose of it in an orderly marketing 

system, Mr. Speaker, then obviously you relieve the futures market of the necessity of carrying that 

through the speculative channels. The result is less grain is offered, more people buying, because there 

are more buyers than there are sellers as a rule in the speculative game of grain trade in those days, and 

the result was that the price went up, and so it was not unnatural that his partner got $1.47 for his wheat, 

whereas he took his initial payment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the fall of 1929, everybody knows what happened at that time. Everybody knows 

that in that year there was a world-wide depression. Those of us that are called Socialists, of course, by 

my friend, have blamed the advent of that depression on the operations of capitalism, and I still believe 

it. However, there may be another belief which is just as honest as mine is, and I will give him credit for 

that belief; but the fact remains that it took place all over — the stock markets as well as grain markets 

went down. Everything went to pieces as a result, and there were not any little people — thousands of 

them across the country — with a few dollars to speculate. They had lost their jobs, they had lost their 

little businesses, they were on the breadline, they had no surpluses, so there was no money to speculate 

in grain. The result was that even his $1.47 in the fall of 1929, went away down. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I would like to ask you a question. I had that all out. Can you account for Germany 

having $2.40? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Yes, I am going to account for that in a moment. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — And France $2.00? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I am not going to overlook that part of it. That happened a few years previous to 

this, and I will come back to it in a minute or two. I am taking us now, through the Canada grain trade 

up to that particular time. If you like, we will go back now to the point the member has just raised. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

12 

He talks about the price of wheat in France, which, if I remember correctly, was up around, under a 

government subsidy, of something over $2.40 a bushel. Initially, I believe, it was over $3.00. In 

Germany, I think, if I remember the figures right, and I am speaking from memory now, it was in the 

neighbourhood of $2.89. That started to take place around about 1924 and 1925, when because of the 

depredations of World War I in those countries, an attempt was being made by those countries, because 

of their experiences during the war, to make themselves self-sufficient in food supplies so that if war 

broke out again they would not be caught in a jam, and have to depend on outside countries for their 

supplies of wheat particularly, and other types of food. So those governments heavily subsidized for the 

production of wheat during those years, which in itself, added to what was called a surplus, in those 

times. 

 

Again let me remind my hon. friend in this House that in those days over 20 years ago, people regarded 

as surplus something that was undesirable. I can remember myself, in the early ‗thirties, when a 

Secretary of Agriculture, in the United States . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Will you let me ask you one other question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Well, don‘t ask too many. I will answer a few. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Can you tell me why Great Britain would not buy a bushel of wheat from Canada, and 

went over to Russia and bought it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Yes, I will tell you about that too . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Where she had never bought any wheat before? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I will touch on many of these things, Mr. Speaker, as I go along. I do not want to 

break the thread of it to be interrupted with questions like that. In the first place it is not correct that they 

would not buy a bushel of wheat; they bought a lot of Canadian wheat even at that time. His statement is 

incorrect there. When we come back to why they did not buy some wheat we can go into that. 

 

I was saying why the European countries subsidized the raising of wheat in their countries during the 

years 1924 to 1929. It was because they were afraid of what might happen if another world war broke 

out; and just the same then as it is today, nobody was sure that the armistice which had been signed on 

November 11, 1918 was going to last, or that the peace treaties were actually going to last. We had 

heard one German emperor say that treaties were a ―scrap of paper‖ and nobody was sure that somebody 

else would not say the same thing at some later date when it suited them to tear one up. So we had these 

countries doing this job for that purpose — not because they were afraid of the price of Canadian wheat, 

not because they were disturbed because the farmers of Western Canada organized for a decent price for 

their wheat, but because they were afraid any nation who produced wheat might, some day in the future, 

be at war with them and they would not have food supplies as there would be a blockade of their country 

again which would have been the case if we had been at war with them again, and rightly so. That was 

the reason why they subsidized the production of wheat. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

13 

We come now to the year 1929 when the depression happened. The speculative market then collapsed as 

well as all other markets, because people were not buying. An attempt at that time, was made to get the 

wheat-producing countries of the world together with the wheat-importing countries of the world in 

some kind of an international wheat agreement. You will remember there was a world secretariat set up, 

and Andrew Cairns was the secretary of it; and there was some kind of agreement made, but Argentina 

refused to come into it. Now Argentina, at that time, produced a wheat called Rosafe which was about 

equal in milling value (or nearly so) to what was called at that time, ―Manitoba 3 Northern Wheat‖, and 

Argentine wheat was owned and produced not by independent farmers such as we know them here in 

Saskatchewan, working on half or three-quarter sections of land, but owned by great big landlords who 

did not care what conditions of labour their peons or serfs worked under their farms, but they gathered 

their wheat together and they put it aboard ships and sent it to the markets, and they had to take (once 

they put it on board ship and started it across the Atlantic Ocean) whatever price was given for that 

when it landed at the importing ports of Europe. They continued to do this because they got plenty from 

it, even though it reduced their particular farm labourers to a very low standard of living, and Argentina 

was offering wheat very much cheaper, and Britain, at that time, the same as anybody else, my friend or 

I, would buy if we could get the quality in the cheapest market. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — What about Russia? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Russia at no time, from the time there is any record of the grain trade (my friend 

from Redberry, remember this!) has constituted more than 2 per cent of the export grain market of the 

world. These are statements of fact I am giving you. At no time did Russia constitute larger than 2 per 

cent of the grain market of the world. The few million bushels that Russia may have sold did not disturb 

the market — that is, it did not disturb the actual market though it may have disturbed a few people who 

were in the market for speculative prices. It may have disturbed the London Corn Exchange. It may have 

disturbed the Baltic Exchange. It may have given the owners of Continental Grain some reason for 

saying that they were going to force down the price and ‗bear‘ the market. It might have had that effect, 

Mr. Speaker, but it had no effect on the actual quantity of grain. 

 

The very fact that it should have had no effect on the actual quantity of grain, or the need for grain, was 

the reason why the organized farmers of this country decided that they should make a further effort to 

have government interference in the marketing of grain. Now why? and this is a very important 

question. No matter how well you voluntarily organize to market any quantity that has to go outside the 

borders of Canada, you must run into the regulations and the various arrangements in the trade treaties, 

tariffs and other things that are set up by the Federal Government of Canada. (I am not complaining 

about that; that is the Government that should set those up). But knowing that that is there, and knowing 

that all marketing is done through the Department of Trade and Commerce, the people of this country 

who organized the farmers‘ movement realized that, unless the same agency that made overseas 

agreements and other things, arranged for the sale of our surplus quantities of 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

14 

then no local organization, no matter how large the locality might be, was possibly going to be able to 

have the effect that it should have had in stabilizing the market for the western farmer. 

 

Let us now go into 1930 and see what some of the history was there. After my friend got his initial 

payment, which he eventually found out was even too high, and he got a bill for $16 over-payment, he 

says that ―then the Pools went broke‖ and he says that the Grain Trade continued to flourish. My hon. 

friend must know that, at that time, a great many private grain companies went out of existence and were 

swallowed up by the bigger ones. There was no bigger pool organizations to swallow ours up — our 

Western Canadian pools. They did face a financial crisis — $20 million in the three provinces; nearly 

$14 million in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — The Grain Growers did not go broke and they were a co-operative organization. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — The Grain Growers, Mr. Speaker, were never a co-operative organization in the 

sense that we call others that. They did not pay back any dividends until recently, under the income war 

tax regulations of the Federal Government in the last few years. They paid interest on share capital, as 

the old Co-op Elevator did. They paid good interest, too. I am not complaining, as they were a good 

outfit in their day, but they were not progressive. They could not march with the times. They were a 

share capital company, Mr. Speaker, with dividends paid on the basis of the amount of money invested 

— not on the deliveries to the institution. 

 

Now then we come to 1930. These things were recognized, so the western farmers again went back (as 

they had in the early ‗twenties) to the Federal Government, and they said, ―We still believe in orderly 

marketing, but we believe (on the basis that I have just argued a few minutes ago) that it is the 

responsibility of the Federal Government. There will be times when we have big crops on these prairies; 

there will be other times when we will have crops that are not so big; there will be other times when we 

will have crops that are not so big; there will be other times when we will have crops that are poor. Now 

we believe that there should be some kind of insurance against the years when we have poor crops. 

There should be price insurance, marketing insurance, so that there will be an orderly system of 

marketing our grain throughout the years, based on the trade and commerce policies of the Government 

of Canada, and we ask you again.‖ 

 

At that time the then Prime Minister, Mr. Bennett, made a statement when he was requested in that day 

by the United Farmers of Canada, which had come into being by an amalgamation of the first Farmers‘ 

Union and the Grain Growers‘ Grain Company, and at a convention of theirs when they asked for a floor 

price, as the first way for the Government to interfere, of 70 cents a bushel — a very modest price they 

asked for at that time — that Prime Minister said that as long as he was Prime Minister of Canada there 

would be no interference in the private grain trade. His belief was reiterated by his Liberal counterparts, 

and neither of them believed — Mr. Gardiner did not believe, Mr. Bennett did not believe, and none of 

the people who surrounded them in their various political parties believed, at that time, that there should 

be any government 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

15 

interference in the private marketing of grain, that is the grain trade should continue to flourish. 

 

These are matters of history. However, the farmers of Western Canada were not satisfied with that reply, 

Mr. Speaker, and they continued to press for some form of orderly marketing. Now what happened? Mr. 

Bennett eventually said, ―All right, we will try and do something.‖ Why? Because by the fall of 1932 

things had got so bad that, in that year, early in December, the price of wheat had reached the lowest 

point it had ever reached in 400 years of grain trade. My friend can remember that . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Sure, I know the reason why, too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — That was on the speculative market. The Pools had ceased to operate as pools. 

They carried on a voluntary pool for a year or two, but in the main their elevators were then operating as 

they do now, just the same as any other elevator company. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — That is when Great Britain was getting wheat from Russia. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Great Britain was getting very little wheat from Russia at that time. As I pointed 

out, Russia only, at any time, constituted 2 per cent of the grain market — and that for a very short time. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — 90 million bushels. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — That was 2 per cent of the international grain market. It did not amount to very 

much. It did not amount to enough to cause the price of grain to go down. The reason the price of grain 

went down, Mr. Speaker — and these gentlemen opposite, if they were not so imbued with the idea of 

the profit system and were more imbued with the idea of a full stomach, would know the reason that the 

price of grain went down was not because Russia came into the grain market, but because hordes of 

people in this country and in the country to the south of us, as well as the countries of Europe and Asia, 

had nothing in their pockets, and ―no effective demand‖ was the expression used for grain. There was a 

―belly‖ demand, but no ―effective‖ demand backed by a pocketbook. That is why the price of grain went 

down. Now some of them over there shake their heads. My young friend from Estevan (Mr. 

McCormack) does that; but he is too young to remember about it; and I expect likely he had a good 

father and mother, and his stomach was full, but he did not know anything about it . . . 

 

Mr. McCormack: — My head was not empty though! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — My friend from Saltcoats knows this story well, whether he agrees with the way I 

am relating it or not. He knows that the reason why the price of grain went down was because people did 

not have money enough to buy it. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I have that all here. I was going to give it but . . . 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

16 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Yes, I know, but you did not want to give those parts that did not suit the purpose 

you wanted them to, and that is to get back to the open market system. 

 

Now then, Mr. Speaker, during that period, the Western Wheat Pools as well as other farm 

organizations, were pressing the Federal Government for some relief from the terrible conditions which 

were existing at that time. Finally the Federal Government said, ―What we will do instead of giving you 

a floor price or instead of setting up the marketing board that you want, we will establish an agency in 

Winnipeg which will go into the open market on the Grain Exchange, and on the days when the 

quotations are so low because there are heavy offerings of grain, then this agency of the Government 

bill, backed by taxpayers‘ money — the funds of Canada — take the place of the absent speculator who 

is broke and cannot speculate any more, and we will buy up the futures of the grain that is offered on the 

market each morning, till we stabilize that price at a figure that is not quite as low as it was in 

December.‖ 

 

That was the institution of the stabilization operations. Now my friend across here, in the course of his 

talk, cast some doubts on the ethics of the Central Selling Agency and blamed all our trouble on the fact 

that the three Pools had got together and used a central selling agency for their orderly marketing 

system. Mr. Bennett considered it wise enough, Mr. Speaker, to use that central selling agency as a 

stabilizer of the open market system from 1932 on . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — It failed with him, too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Just a minute, Mr. Speaker, it did not fail completely; it helped to stabilize the 

market. I gave assurance that the things the farmers of Western Canada were asking for had validity 

behind them. It showed that some government interference or assistance whichever name you want to 

give it — I call it assistance, the grain trade probably call it interference; that some government 

assistance or help in that thing was worthwhile from the farmers‘ point of view, and so they renewed 

their efforts for a Canada Wheat Board. Mr. Bennett resisted. He did not want to interfere with private 

trading, but he did continue his stabilization operations with the result that there was a slight 

improvement in the price of grain, coming up, I believe, in 1933 and 1934, to as high as 67, 73 and I 

believe at one point it reached about 81 cents, if I remember correctly. It was somewhere around that 

figure by 1934. But still the pressure was on for orderly marketing under government control. 

 

Then again my friend said that the Liberal Government was the first one to introduce the present orderly 

system. That is completely erroneous as far as history is concerned. Mr. Bennett brought in the first 

Wheat Board Act through the then Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I did not say that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — That is the way I understood you. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

17 

Mr. Loptson: — When the Liberal Government came into power in 1935 they made a real honest effort 

to get rid of the surplus . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I will accept the correction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Then it stabilized it . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — He has had his point of privilege; I will accept his correction. 

 

He said then (if I have him right, this time) that when the Liberal Government was elected in November 

of 1935 that Liberal Government then made the first honest effort to make some use of the Wheat Board 

in the interests of the farmer. Is that it? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — To get rid of the surplus that was piling up all the time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I will come to surpluses, too, in a little while. Anyway, what he meant is evident 

to everybody here. I want to point out that, in the early session of Parliament of 1935, the Tory 

Government brought in the Wheat Board Act. It was debated, and some very important features were 

eliminated by virtue of Liberal opposition, which I disagree with yet, and many people in this western 

country disagree with it. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I do not doubt it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I know my friend agrees with it. He would have eliminated the Act if he had had 

his way. I agree that he would have done that. I do not like what he would have done, but I will give him 

credit for having an honest conviction if he thought that was the right thing to do. He would still like to 

do it, Mr. Speaker, and some of his friends around him would like to see it done also, I believe. However 

. . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend has no right to make suggestions like that. There has been 

nothing in my record in parliament at any time that would indicate that I have been against the Wheat 

Board or the marketing system . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member knows he was not referred to. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, he said, ―some of is friends around him are in favour of that.‖ He has no right to 

make that implication. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, there were a couple of interjections from the member for Redberry 

(Mr. Korchinski) and one or two others that I felt indicated that they were supporting the hon. member 

for Saltcoats. It was them I referred to. If they do not believe that, I will accept their word that they do 

not believe what I have said; if they say they do not believe what he was trying to promote, I will take 

their word for it. I never mentioned the Leader of the Opposition, and I have no intention, I assure you, 

because I know your record on this. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

18 

When that Wheat Board was brought in and finally debated, and some very important sections were 

removed from it, it was finally put into being. Now then, here is an important part of history that this 

House should remember, and I am going to remind you of it. The Conservative Government of Canada 

at that time, under Mr. Bennett had acceded to the request of the western farmers that a Wheat Board be 

brought in, and that the Wheat Board would be accompanied by an advisory committee of seven 

members, four of whom would be representatives of farmer organizations — a very important feature of 

that Wheat Board; and I want that to be remembered, because I want to mention that again when I go on 

to the next part of the story I am telling. 

 

That Government was defeated — pardon me, we will go back again. The Act was passed; it came into 

being, and the 1935 crop was being marketed through the Wheat Board. The next question was the 

question of price. Now the farmers of Western Canada at that time were very modest. They asked 

through their advisers on the Advisory Committee for a price of 95 cents a bushel, basis 1 Northern, Fort 

William — very modest even for the prices of those days. Other people were mentioning all kinds of 

prices. Now people were blaming this one for saying it could be done for 40 cents a bushel — I believe 

that Mr. Richardson, who was in the grain business then, did have a farm, and I believe he did mention 

that he could produce wheat for 40 cents a bushel on his farm. Others said one thing and another, and I 

am not going to blame anybody as to who was to blame for promoting the low price; but undoubtedly 

those who represented the grain traders on the Advisory Board were more interested in a low price than 

a high price, and they were promoting the idea of 60 cents a bushel, basis 1 Northern, as the initial 

payment for the Wheat Board. A compromise was finally struck after quite a struggle, and the payment 

was established at 87½ cents a bushel, 7½ cents lower than the western farmers‘ organizations had 

requested through their various channels of making requests. 

 

Mr. John I. McFarland, recognized as an authority in the grain trade, who had, in the early ‗thirties, been 

placed as Manager of the Central Selling Agency of the three Wheat Pools in Winnipeg, and who was 

the actual head of the stabilization operations operated by the Bennett Government of that day, in the 

early ‗thirties, that I referred to a while ago, was made Chairman of the new Wheat Board, early in 1935 

after the Act was passed; and under him the operation started. 

 

In November of that year the Conservative Government was defeated and a Liberal Government took its 

place, almost immediately McFarland was fired and Jim Murray was put in his place — a known 

opponent of all systems of orderly marketing, who had never gone on record at any time in his life as 

believing in anything but the open speculative market. That is how anxious the Liberal Government was 

to make the Wheat Board operate. And also, the Advisory Committee of seven was disbanded. I wish I 

had the record here, but I gave, I believe, last year, a list of the people who were on the new Committee 

they set up. But that was not until later, even. The Advisory Committee was disbanded by the Liberal 

Government, and they had what they called a Wheat Committee of the Cabinet, composed of Mr. Euler, 

Mr. Crerar, (who is now Senator Crerar) — I have just forgotten who the others were, but at any rate 

they were all members of the Cabinet. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

19 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what kind of an advisory committee would that be in the interests of the farmers? 

How difficult it is for anyone from Western Canada to go down and find one Cabinet Minister down 

there in a busy time, let alone four of them together, to present his case, to argue the case for the western 

wheat growers. That is why the Advisory Committee was needed, so they could be in constant touch 

with the farm organizations as well as those that represented the trade, to be in constant touch with their 

organizations, and a merging of the ideas and the eventual compromise struck would be somewhere near 

the agreement between the two. But here was that committee disbanded by the Liberal Government 

under their first axe, and they put Mr. Murray in as chairman of the Wheat Board. And a committee 

from the Cabinet was set up, who had no close relationship or any close touch with any of our farm 

organizations — and then he says, ―They succeeded in getting rid of the surpluses.‖ Mr. Speaker, one of 

the things we never wanted in this country was to get rid of surpluses. That is why we want orderly 

marketing. You can get rid of surpluses like Brazil got rid of coffee. You can get rid of surpluses like 

some parts of Newfoundland get rid of fish, when there are too many of them. You can get rid of them 

like some countries get rid of hogs. You can get rid of anything you want to dump in the ocean or blow 

up, Mr. Speaker. But the bulk of the farmers of these farm organizations want to grow wheat and the 

other farm products, and they want to think that, having gone to the trouble of growing it, they get paid 

enough to live on, and that somebody somewhere else is going to get their stomachs filled by virtue of 

that food. 

 

It was not a question of getting rid of wheat, it was a question of seeing that it got into the right hands, 

and that a decent price was paid to the fellow who produced it; and they were pretty modest in their 

request as far as price was concerned. That is the story up to that point, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, let us go on a little bit further. During 1936 and up until the fall of 1937, we had some so-called 

surpluses of wheat. They were hanging over our heads and everybody was scared because nobody knew 

how to find the way to get it into empty stomachs. The result is that our Liberal speakers and the 

proponents of the private trade were saying that the orderly marketing system could not get rid of it, and 

the Liberal Government said, ―We will do it under the Wheat Board.‖ And they did. They established a 

floor price. They established a floor price under the Wheat Board, and the open market stayed above that 

— they were still operating at that time. Then the Wheat Board did not accept any deliveries, but the 

floor price was not a protection for the farmers. The result was that the open market stayed a couple of 

cents higher most of the time throughout that period, and they were saying, ―Get rid of this wheat at any 

old price! Get rid of it as soon as we can so we will have empty bins!‖ and that was their story: ―The 

sooner we have empty bins in this country the sooner we will get a good price for wheat.‖ 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, nature took care of that in 1937. Nature took care of it by not providing a crop; 36 

million bushels in 1937 went on the market. That is all we marketed in that year — between 35 and 36 

million bushels of grain. So the bins were empty. Every farmer had to sweep his bins 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

20 

and every elevator company had to sweep their bins to get it down to what market there was existing at 

that time, and the surplus had disappeared, and they were right in their prediction, Mr. Speaker, 

absolutely right. No provision was made by either the Provincial Liberal Government, or the Federal 

Liberal Government to withhold any supplies for seed or feed in the event of this thing happening. So 

we went into 1937 with our bins swept clean, no wheat hardly anywhere in the country, and in the 

following year when farmers needed it for seed, the price had gone up to $1.45 per bushel, which meant 

that the municipalities had to borrow with Provincial and Federal Government guarantees, in order to 

supply seed for their people, and it was shipped in from other countries to get seed wheat to put in the 

crop of 1938. Their prediction came true — ―Sweep the bins and the price will go up‖ — and it did ! But 

who got the disadvantage of the increased price? The farmer who had to buy it back for seed in the 

spring of 1938. 

 

What was the cry then? We heard the same old cry then. What this country needs is a good crop. We 

suffered from drought. We had had some bad years, but 1937 was the drought; so now the story goes. 

―Now we do not want empty bins, we want full bins. Let us get a crop again. When we get a crop and 

have some wheat in our bins, we will be prosperous again.‖ Well, nature came to our rescue in the fall of 

1938 and we produced a pretty fair crop — not a big one, but a fair crop. What was the holler then? The 

price had been reduced by the Wheat Board by that time from 87½ to 80 cents a bushel, and they said 80 

cents a bushel was too high a price to be paid to the farmers for the wheat for that year; and the 

following spring, a few months before war broke out, we heard the cry coming from Ottawa, spread by 

the present Minister of Agriculture, who was then the Minister of Agriculture, telling the farmers of 

Western Canada that the country could no longer stand a subsidized price of 80 cents a bushel, and the 

initial payment through the Wheat Board should be reduced to 60 cents a bushel. Again, a storm of 

protest went up from the farmers of Western Canada, and again there were meetings with the Federal 

Government and the farm organizations, and a compromise was struck and the price was not reduced to 

60 cents, but was reduced to 70 cents a bushel, through the Wheat Board, and it stayed that way until a 

delegation went down to Ottawa and finally got it raised to 90 cents a bushel when they asked for $1.00 

in 1942. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is just a brief history of some of the things, and I could, as I say, spend a lot of time. 

However, the hon. member criticizes the orderly market, because he says it has done more harm than 

good. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely untrue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — All right, go ahead! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I made the distinct point that I believed in the orderly marketing. Now there is no use 

in trying to make capital out of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, if I remember correctly, the hon. member said that we should not 

have a central selling agency and that the operations of the central selling agency, and probably the 

Wheat Board, did more harm than good, but he would believe in getting back to the provincial pools, 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

21 

is that right? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — That is right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Which, Mr. Speaker, is not an orderly marketing system. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — It certainly is, each centre that had a pool would handle their grain in an orderly 

marketing way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, anybody who thinks at all in the interests of the farmers of this 

country knows very well that no province in the wheat-producing business can possibly organize and 

work through . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, might I draw your attention to the Co-ops in the United States that are 

operating in that way, very successfully. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — With a very hearty subsidization on the part of the Federal Government, and they 

have had it for years. I say, Mr. Speaker, that he is against orderly marketing as I understand it, because 

orderly marketing, as far as Canada is concerned, has got to be the marketing of Canada‘s surplus wheat 

crop that goes outside the borders . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — That is what you understand. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Not the little attempt that a provincial organization, no matter how earnest and 

energetic it might work, because it could not have the results. It has no influence whatsoever on the trade 

policies of the Government of Canada. Therefore, it could not introduce an orderly marketing system for 

the benefit of all wheat producers. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, that is your opinion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — If we were like the United States and consumed something over 80 per cent of 

our wheat at home, there might be some validity to his argument; but as we export about 80 per cent of 

our wheat, or somewhere in that neighbourhood, in many years and sometimes I believe it is a higher 

percentage, then it is obvious to anybody that it is utterly impossible to have an orderly marketing 

system based on the operations of one provincial pool. So even though he might not think that I quoted 

him correctly, I still say, Mr. Speaker, that there is all the truth in the world in my statement that he does 

not believe in what I call ‗orderly marketing‘. 

 

Now then, he also mentioned parity prices, and he went on to give his reasons why he believed parity 

prices are difficult to establish, if at all. I want to say this; I worked among farmers, lived among them, 

for a long time. I do not believe I ever heard a farmer in Saskatchewan who did not agree with free 

marketing, fundamental, in principle. The reasons that gave rise to all these things, Mr. Speaker, were 

because, since the time history began in these western provinces, we have been subjected to tariffs, of 

one kind or another and, for many years, in the face of that, were compelled to sell our products on an 

open market with no protection whatsoever. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

22 

If the Government of Canada would drop every single tariff barrier and allow every single thing raised 

in another country to come in here of its own free well and find its price level on the basis of its quality 

and usefulness to the people here, then I do not believe we would have any holler from the farmers of 

Western Canada about orderly marketing. They would take their chances in the competitive world. But 

the cards were stacked against them, and the only answer they had was to ask the same Government that 

put the obstacles against their getting outside goods at a competitive price, to give them protection, when 

shipping their goods out, against the competition of an outside market. And as long as it remains the 

policy of Canada to build up tariff barriers, no matter what the argument for their justification might be 

— and they may be good ones, I expect likely fellows could bring forward some very potent and what 

would appear to be valid arguments for continuing tariff protection though I do not agree with any I 

have heard yet, but that does not say that I have not got an open mind, but it would take quite a bit to 

penetrate it along those lines . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — It sure would! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Nevertheless, as long as we have those things, as long as we have those barriers 

against our right to buy outside on free markets and bring things in, then I say we have to have some 

protection. 

 

Now then, parity means just this: a price for grain that will pay the cost of producing that grain, and 

something left over for the fellow that raises the grain to live on and keep his family, and the same 

measure of comfort and security as any other member of society can enjoy. It does not mean that you 

have to take the least economic unit in the country and use that as your criterion. It does not mean that 

you have to take the most efficient and biggest farm operation in the country, and use that as your 

criterion. But it can be established, and has been established on more than one occasion by people like 

Professor E.C. Hope, away back in the ‗twenties, what the cost of producing grain is. It can be 

established by people like Mr. Denike at the Experimental farm. It can be established by other farm 

economists what it costs to produce a bushel of grain under average conditions. The price of grain 

should be what that costs, plus a decent salary or wage or income or whatever name you want to give it, 

for the man who operates the farm so that he can carry on his living operation the same as any other 

person. 

 

That can be done, Mr. Speaker. That can be done by a government that wants to have it done. But it 

cannot be done, Mr. Speaker, if any group of people at all are going to be dominated, or even impressed 

or influenced, by the type of argument and the somewhat misrepresentation of history of the grain trade 

in this country, that the hon. member from Saltcoats gave this afternoon. I might say I was a bit 

surprised. I thought that after 20 years since I have first known the hon. gentleman (I do not dislike him, 

he is a nice guy;) but he does not believe what I believe. I think I am right, and events, I think, have 

proven that I am right. And I think his exposition of the history, and the inference that he drew from that 

exposition trying to infer that the methods that were operated in the past did more harm than good; I do 

not think they were calculated to do the interests of Western Canada and the interests of the western 

wheat grower a great deal of good. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

23 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that the purpose of this Resolution is a good one. It says; ―That, in view of the fact 

that the International Wheat Agreement does not sufficiently protect the Canadian wheat grower against 

variations in the international exchange, and economic situation, this Assembly request the Federal 

Government 

 

(1) to adopt a policy designed to maintain the price of wheat to the Canadian farmer at a parity level, 

and 

 

(2) apply the principle of orderly marketing and parity price to all agricultural products. 

 

Now, I do not think many people here will oppose a Wheat Board, and if we are going to have a Wheat 

Board, it must be a national Wheat Board, so, therefore, we have to request the Federal Government to 

adopt a policy designed to maintain the price of wheat to the Canadian farmer at a parity level (and I 

have described what I believe they believe is a parity level), and apply the principle of orderly marketing 

and parity price to all agricultural products which, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is as important as wheat; for 

while our wheat industry is probably the greatest single economic base under the tax structure of this 

province, it therefore probably could be called by some people more important; the wheat producer 

himself is no more important than the milk producer or the egg producer. They are human beings, Mr. 

Speaker, and whether their particular industry is large or small those people have a right to the same 

kind of consideration that we are asking for the wheat producers, and we are asking, I believe, what is 

fair and just for all concerned. So I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Resolution introduced by my hon. 

friend from Bengough (Mr. Brown) is a good resolution, and probably you have gathered, Mr. Speaker, 

I propose to support it. 

 

Mr. Korchinski (Redberry): — Will the hon. Minister permit a question? It may be a rather personal 

question. Were you a member of the old Farmers‘ Union previous to 1927? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — For a short time, yes. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Were you at the amalgamation meeting of that Union and the United Farmers, in 

Moose Jaw, in 1927? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — No. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — You were not at that convention? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — No, what does that prove, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I was going to say, Mr. Speaker, that there was some mention made that this Union 

was sponsored and led by the Communists, and I think that is true . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I am ready to speak to this motion. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

24 

Mr. Speaker: — Oh, you were not. You took your seat and I recognized the hon. member for Lumsden 

(Mr. Thair). The hon. member for Lumsden has the floor. I recognized him. 

 

Mr. W.S. Thair (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I have listened with a good deal of interest to the two 

former speakers, one supporting apparently one policy and the other the Canadian Wheat Board, and the 

present marketing system. I would like to say that I am a grower of wheat. I am not going to take much 

of your time, I want to get back to the farm because half of my big crop is still in the swath, like possibly 

some other members‘ in the House. So I will not keep you long. 

 

I would like to say, in speaking on the Resolution: ―That in view of the fact that the International Wheat 

Agreement‖ (and I am reading the Resolution) ―does not sufficiently protect the Canadian Wheat 

Grower against variations in the international exchange and economic situation, this Assembly request 

the Federal Government: 

 

(1) to adopt a policy designed to maintain the price of wheat to the Canadian farmer at a parity level,‖ 

 

and I would also like to include in that clause a domestic price for wheat; and in dealing with this clause, 

I am going to quote from the Year Book, November 1951, of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Clause 6: 

 

―Establishing a domestic price which would be subject to adjustments from time to time in accordance 

with change in the domestic economy as evidenced by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics indices 

covering commodities and services used by farmers, and also farm living costs.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that if price controls had been put into effect two or three years ago they could 

have played a most important part in controlling the cost of producing wheat in Saskatchewan as well as 

the other two western provinces. However, Ottawa did not see fit to set up such controls over the cost of 

production of a bushel of wheat in Western Canada, and that being the case we have only a choice of 

two courses of action, in my opinion, and one of them is, if possible, an increase in the maximum and 

minimum prices be set under the terms of the new Wheat Agreement (the present one, I believe, will 

expire in July 31, 1953) which is now coming up for consideration. I believe Mr. Wesson and Mr. 

George Robertson are leaving on Saturday to go to London to sit in at these negotiations, and we are 

hopeful, as wheat farmers, for a revision of prices upwards before the first of July of this year, which 

will not take effect, as I said for another year. 

 

I believe a price also should be established for the domestic price of wheat in Canada, which would be 

subject to adjustment from time to time in accordance with the changes in domestic economy as 

evidenced by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics, which covers commodities and services used by 

farmers and wheat growers. I have them here, but I am not going to read them. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

25 

A number of statements have been made during the past two months by the Farmers‘ Unions of the three 

western provinces, by the Canadian Federation of Agriculture and by the Wheat Pools of the three 

Western provinces. I have them here, but I am not going to read them; but I would like to quote short 

extracts from The Leader-Post of recent days from an address delivered by Mr. Wesson of the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool at a luncheon meeting of the Regina Kiwanis Club. He made this statement: 

 

―We want an International Wheat Agreement which will give us stability. Under such an agreement, 

we will never enjoy the peak prices but we will not be in the cellar either; we will not see the prices 

drop as they did in 1932 to 38 cents.‖ 

 

And I well recall that, because I was growing lots of wheat in those days: 

 

―. . . to 38 cents per bushel for the best wheat in the world.‖ 

 

And he went on to say: 

 

―The Federation of Agriculture, at its annual meeting last January, accepted a resolution which 

supported the principle of the International Wheat Agreement and recommended its renewal.‖ 

 

I am in favour of that, but he goes on to say: 

 

―The resolution recommended provision be made to adjust prices in relation to changing farm 

production and living costs, and that present floor and ceiling prices should be substantially increased. 

In any case, we believe that the whole basis of price ranges should be higher than that agreed upon in 

1949.‖ 

 

Mr. Wesson continued: 

 

―Exporting countries must guard against the prices getting too high, so high that it will encourage 

greater wheat production in importing countries which have in the past found it more economical to 

import wheat.‖ 

 

I think that point has been brought out by both the former speakers, if I am correct. And he continued: 

 

―The present demand for wheat would probably continue until the end of the current calendar year due 

to the poor crops in Argentine and Australia.‖ 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

26 

So I would just wonder as a farmer or wheat grower, what should be a fair price for wheat under this 

International Wheat Agreement, and perhaps, a domestic price for wheat. I have a few figures here I 

would like to give you regarding the prices of wheat in relationship to the costs of production. 

 

Since the first signing of the International Wheat Agreement, the farmer has been placed in rather an 

unsatisfactory position, because the Agreement did not take into account the possibility of disparities 

occurring between the farmer‘s cost of production and his price under International Wheat Agreement. 

The farm costs rose by 25 per cent from the beginning of the Agreement to August, 1951. At the same 

time, the price the farmer received for his wheat under the Agreement actually went down due to the 

change in relationship between the Canadian and the American dollar, the currency situation. 

―Economic Analysts‖ of the summer of 1951 said this, and I quote: 

 

―It points out that the average price the farmer is receiving for his field products has gone down 15 per 

cent during the period since the beginning of the Agreement.‖ 

 

Now, with regard to domestic wheat price — no, to continue with regard to the Agreement: 

 

―The present world trade situation would suggest‖ (this from the ‗Economic Analysts‘) ―That the 

exporting countries would be in a better position to bargain during the re-negotiation of the Agreement 

than they were in 1949. This new Agreement should provide for the possibility of maintaining the 

price of wheat in the exporting countries at a level that bears a fair relationship to the producer‘s cost 

of production.‖ 

 

Now this table from the ―Economic Analyst‖ says, in 1946 the actual price of farm wheat was put at 

$1.62 and the parity price $1.62. In 1951 the actual price on the farm of wheat was $1.79, but the parity 

price at that time, because of the increased costs, had risen to $2.44. Therefore, while the cost increased 

50 per cent during 1946 to 1951, the average price of wheat to the Saskatchewan farmer only increased 

by 17 cents per bushel or 10 per cent. The cost had increased some 50 per cent and the price of wheat 

only some 10 per cent. If the price of wheat had kept pace with the increase in the price of goods, the 

farmer must buy, the price would have been $2.44 a bushel in 1951. 

 

Now, just to sum up, I would say that the International Wheat Agreement should provide a higher 

maximum price than under the old Agreement. So many prices have been stated by the Wheat Pool, by 

the Farmers‘ Union, and other farm organizations, I myself would not hold out for the highest price at 

all, but I think that we should have an adjustment upwards in prices. Saskatchewan Farmers‘ Union have 

asked as high as a maximum of $2.35 to $2.45 maybe, with a minimum of about $1.60 to $1.85. And 

domestic wheat sales, I believe, should be made on the basis of a parity price. In the light of the 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

27 

figures that I have given you just a minute ago, this price should be $2.44 a bushel; we will say from 

$2.30 to $2.44. The Wheat Pool believe that these two prices, that is the price of the International Wheat 

Agreement and the domestic price, should be separated from each other. But the other day, Mr. Phelps 

met Mr. Howe, I am given to understand from The Leader-Post, and Mr. Howe at that time stated that 

nothing could be done about it. That is a very definite answer, but even the people of Saskatchewan and 

of Western Canada are convinced that we should have the two prices for wheat, a domestic price; we 

have no right to be subsidizing the consumer of bread in Canada — I mean, speaking of the farmer 

subsidizing — and I am sure the Opposition would agree with that. 

 

In fact, I have a statement here again by Mr. Wesson last fall: 

 

―That the growers thought that domestic sales should not be tied to the International Wheat Agreement 

but should be allowed to fluctuate with the domestic living costs.‖ 

 

He estimated that at the present rate domestic wheat should bring at least $2.25 a bushel, and as I stated 

before the Farmers‘ Union are asking $2.45 or in that neighbourhood. He went on to say: 

 

―This price,‖ he commented, ―would not affect the bread prices, since it is estimated that the price of 

wheat could rise 52½ cents per bushel, and a loaf of bread would only need to go up one cent.‖ 

 

I am very much in favour, then, of a domestic price for wheat. 

 

Now, in conclusion, I have placed these two figures before you in the hope that I will not be 

misunderstood. I do not think we should go off the deep end and ask for extremely high prices under the 

International Wheat Agreement; but I believe there should be readjustment of price according to the cost 

of production. I will support this Motion. 

 

Mr. B.L. Korchinski (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, when the hon. Minister of Health was giving his 

address, he mentioned that the member from Redberry was against the Wheat Board. I just want to get 

up and say that that is not so. But when I asked the question, ―What about Russia?‖ I had in mind that in 

1930 and those years, Russia dumped wheat on the British market while at the same time they were 

taking wheat away from their own people in the Ukraine, and it is quite a well-known historical fact now 

that 6 million Ukrainians died of starvation while the Socialists of Russia were trying to break the 

capitalist market, underselling all the other countries. But the Minister took that as an occasion to say — 

just because I asked, ―What about Russia‖? — that I was against the Wheat Board. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

28 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker, let us correct this record. I mentioned that 

some of the hon. friends around the member for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) apparently agreed with him in 

opposing this. The Leader of the Opposition felt that I had referred to him. I distinctly did not because I 

know better than to refer to him in that way. But I did say that an interjection that I had heard from the 

member from Redberry and one or two others led me to believe they were supporting the philosophy of 

the member for Saltcoats. I did not mention Russia in that particular case. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Well, I want to say that, knowing the way the C.C.F. can twist things, I want to 

make the statement that I always have been, and I am today, in support of the Wheat Board, and I want 

to say that it is not an historical fact, as the Minister says, that the capitalists were to blame for the 

repression in 1930, because, as he said himself, Germany and Italy were starting to grow wheat because 

they wanted to be self-sufficient, and the same thing applied to Russia. Those countries, Germany was 

under control, later on, of a Socialist party, the Nazi party — they were Socialists; and the same thing 

applies to Italy, they were socialists. I think the Socialists of the world should also take their share of the 

blame. National Socialists of Germany and National Socialists of Canada, perhaps, too – there is not 

very much difference. It is quite a known fact, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, that Russia did not break 

the market at that time, although the Minister said that there was only 2 per cent of the world market 

surplus wheat. I do not know where he got those figures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker, what I said was that at no time in the 

international trading of wheat did Russian wheat comprise more than 2 per cent of that trading. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Where did you get those figures? That is what I wanted to know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — They are matters of history. You can get them yourself if you will read a little bit 

and stop dreaming. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — They may be C.C.F. history. It is very peculiar to me that the hon. members on the 

other side have nothing but praise for Russia; there is never a criticism. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, I made no praise of Russia. I gave an expose of the international 

wheat situation, and I want this record kept straight. 

 

Some Hon. Member (Opposition): — He will straighten you up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — He could not straighten anybody up and neither could you, nor people that talk 

like that. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — I have been here for four years and I have not heard yet a single word of criticism 

of Russia by any of the members opposite; there is nothing but praise. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

29 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, when this Resolution was introduced, I was under the 

impression that the idea of it was that we were favourable in this Legislature to the farmer getting a fair 

deal as compared with the other branches of the population, and also that we were favourable to the 

principle of orderly marketing and prices set to give the farmer a fair deal. I had thought, in the light of 

the fact that there seemed to be quite a bit of work still to be done on the Order Paper, and the fact that 

there was some thought that we wanted to get through this Session before Easter, that we would not 

have a long debate on something on which we are pretty well all in agreement. So I was rather surprised 

that the Minister of Public Health thought fit to stand up and make a long speech and go away back over 

20 years and try to rake up old controversies and old animosities. 

 

I take it from that that this Government, for reasons best known to itself, has no desire to bring this 

Session to an end before Easter, and as far as I am concerned, that suits me quite all right, because 

surely, if they had any desire we would not have had the provocative speech from the Minister of Public 

Health. I am tempted as a matter of fact to enter into a review of the situation, going back also to 1921, 

except that I do not see any real purpose to be served by it. We have arrived at a certain stage in our 

attitude towards marketing problems and I do not see what is to be gained by going back and quarrelling 

about what happened 30 years ago, and the position taken by different people 30 years ago, and so on. I 

really do not feel that that is the most important thing before this Legislature today, so I think what I will 

do, as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, is indicate where our Party stands on this matter and hope that, so 

far as this Resolution is concerned, it will not be the occasion for everybody trying to throw doubts on 

the Canadian farmer and the western Farmer, as so many C.C.F. speakers persist in doing. I do not think 

they are impressing the farmers of this province at all by that sort of pose; I feel that it is not necessary at 

this stage, to do otherwise than restate our position, Mr. Speaker. And that is about all that I think I will 

do this afternoon. 

 

I think that the position of the Liberal Party is pretty well set out in the Agricultural Prices Support Act, 

which was passed in the 1944-1945 Session, Chapter 29 of the Statutes of that Session. That Act was 

passed for the period of transition from war to peace, but it was later made part of the permanent law of 

the country in the Statutes of 1948. 

 

Now there are different definitions of ―parity‖ and the definition of parity which is given in the house is 

a different definition of parity from what used to be accepted. The definition of parity used to be to 

compare it with a period that was taken as a satisfactory base period and to say that we should try to 

have prices rise in accordance with the rise of farmers‘ costs of production and costs of living as 

compared with the base period. The period taken for sometime was the period between 1927 and 1929, 

and for many, many years the attitude was taken that we should keep the farmer on a basis where he 

would be as well off compared to his cost of production and cost of living as he was in 1927-29. Later 

the time came, following the second war, when farmers‘ prices had risen above that parity level and that 

ceased to be taken as a proper definition of parity. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

30 

Now there was a definition of parity given here today which I think is a sounder one, and I think that it 

is the only sound one, namely, that the farmer should get his fair share of the national income, and that is 

the basis on which I think everybody should be able to agree. It may not be easy always to bring that 

about and to agree on what that would actually result in; but it is sensible and a policy which it seems to 

me everybody should be willing to agree on; that each group of the population should get its fair share 

of the national production. I was one who very strongly supported the Agricultural Prices Support Act, 

which embodies that idea, from the time I was first elected to Parliament, and was very glad when this 

was written into law — and it is still the law of the country. 

 

I would like to read Section 9, subsection 2 of this Act. I am quite aware of the fact that it does not cover 

wheat — it covers all agricultural products but wheat; but the idea expressed at the time this Act was 

passed was that the Wheat Board would look after wheat and that the same principle would be observed 

in regard to the price of wheat as was laid down in the Agricultural Prices Support Act, and this is a 

principle with which it seems to me all fair-minded people of all branches of activity should be willing 

to agree. I will read it, Mr. Speaker: 

 

―In prescribing prices under paragraphs (a) and (c), subsection 1 of this section, the Board shall 

endeavour to ensure adequate and stable returns for agriculture by promoting orderly adjustment from 

war to peace conditions and shall endeavour to secure a fair relationship between the returns from 

agriculture and those from other occupations.‖ 

 

That is a principle which I think is fair to agriculture, and I do not think it would be quarrelled with by 

any other occupational group in the country; that there should be an endeavour made to keep the price of 

farm products at a level where the farmer shall have an income which bears a fair relationship to the 

incomes of those engaged in other occupations. Now, that is the basic law of the country today, and I 

think that is the basis for a sound parity price for anything! That everybody, in payment for what they 

produce, shall get what bears a fair relationship to what everybody else gets, although I say that is not 

always easy to bring about. I think that is the sound basis of operation for all branches of society, and it 

is part of our Statute Law. And, as I understand this Resolution, that is what is meant by it. I do not think 

it means that we want to go back to having a parity price based upon the 1927-1929 level of prices, 

because we are in a better position than the farmer was in 1927 to 1929. I think what the mover and 

seconder had in mind, and what I would have in mind when I support this Resolution, is that we should 

ask that everything possible be done to see to it that the farmer, in the prices he gets, shall be put in a 

position where his income bears a fair relationship to the income of other people, having in mind the 

time he puts in, his money invested, and all other circumstances. I think that if society could be 

organized that way, then you would have good deal less in the way of dissatisfaction as between one 

group and another. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

31 

And so, as I understand it, Mr. Speaker, what this Resolution, I believe, wishes is to carry out what is 

already the basic law of the country, and they wish the price of wheat to be set at a level; that there 

should be a basic price of wheat, and it should not be permitted to go below a level which would prevent 

the farmer getting his fair share of the national income. I think that is the basic idea of applying the 

principle of orderly marketing to all agricultural products, because I think it is felt that it would be much 

easier to make sure that the farmer does get a fair share of the national income if you have orderly 

marketing, for in that event, you will not have prices rising drastically in periods of perhaps scarcity, and 

you will not have them dropping drastically in periods when there is plentiful production. And there will 

be an attempt made to keep prices upon a more or less stable level. 

 

So far as I am concerned, I feel that, with the understanding of the Resolution, we can support it. In 

taking that attitude, I am not speaking only for myself, I am speaking for our Party in the province. So 

that there may be no misunderstanding about it, I will read from our platform, which represents what our 

platform was for many years; but I have a copy of the platform as ratified at our convention in 1950, and 

here are the relevant sections of the platform: 

 

―A permanent policy of adequate floor prices for agricultural products. 

 

―Full co-operation with the Federal Government in securing for farm products the widest market and 

the best possible prices. 

 

―Continuation of the Canadian Wheat Board as the best method of marketing grain and extension of 

the power of the Board to include full control over the marketing of all grains, with adequate 

representation of producers on this and other such boards. 

 

There is the fixed policy of the Liberal Party on this matter. There is no question about where we stand 

on it, and I do not see anything to be gained by members opposite trying to confuse the matter and 

pretend that we are standing in a different position from what we are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the hon. member would be willing to table that document? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Oh yes, except that I have many notations on it which I am sure would not meet with 

the approval of the Provincial Treasurer. For example, here I have, as the Minister of Public Health 

would say, an expose of these false claims of Crown Corporation profits, indicating that for the year 

1950 there were no profits. Perhaps I should table it too. But if the Minister is sincere, I am quite willing 

to table it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — I would like to have a copy of it. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

32 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, I will get a nice clean copy and table it so that there will be no doubt about where 

we stand on this matter. I am glad that the Minister of Public Health did not seek in any way to suggest 

that, in all the time that I have been in public life, I have taken any other stand than one of complete 

support of the Wheat Board and of its extension to handling the grains of the western farmers. At the 

time when its powers were extended to handling oats and barley, it was known to everybody in the 

House of Commons that that was a very difficult struggle to get that done, and I think it is recognized 

that I took quite a part in getting it put through the House at that time. I think I prevented a suggestion, 

made by the C.C.F. (which I do not think that they expected would result in that) in regard to splitting 

that Bill, I think that I pointed out to them where their move was going to lead them in perhaps 

destroying this applying to oats and barley, so that after I spoke, they indicated that they were not going 

to press the amendment that they had in mind. I felt at that time that I had some part in seeing to it that 

this Wheat Board Power was extended to oats and barley. We almost got it extended to flax and rye, but 

we just fell short of it; the real appeal was to have it apply to oats and barley and that was accomplished 

at that time. 

 

So far as our Party in this province is concerned, they are favourable to all grain being handled by the 

Wheat Board. We are favourable to the idea of a basic price, a floor price being set that will ensure the 

farmer getting a fair share of the national income. I have said (and I feel that it is right) that the farmer is 

just as much entitled to a floor on his prices that will ensure him a minimum reasonable income, as the 

working man is entitled to a minimum wage. And in that I agree whole-heartedly too. It is a matter of 

living and letting live and being fair with one another in these matters, Mr. Speaker, and that is the 

position that our Party takes in this province on this matter. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I do not want the House to think that I was opposing 

the Motion when I was talking. I did not want to give that impression . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is not a point of order. It is my duty to inform the House that the mover of the 

Resolution is entitled to exercise his privilege to close the debate, and anyone wishing to speak must do 

so now. 

 

Mr. Brown (closing): — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, when he arose to take part in this 

debate, suggested that the Government must have some motive in mind in attempting to prolong this 

discussion by having the Minister of Health participate in this debate. I was just referring, Mr. Speaker, 

to the fact that our friend from Saltcoats spoke for some 36 minutes on this Resolution and placed before 

the House his views in regard to the marketing particularly of wheat, which it was his right and his 

privilege to do. I am glad to see that he did place that view before us in this House, for I feel that that 

was a view which is held by a considerable number of people in the Province of Saskatchewan, and 

certainly in the Dominion of Canada, or we would not have the Winnipeg Grain Exchange operating to 

the extent which it is operating. He has a perfect right to place his views 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

33 

before the House in the manner in which he did. But I do point out, Mr. Speaker, that he did take some 

36 minute and he did suggest certain remarks which had to be replied to. And I think that the Minister of 

Public Health felt . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I never mentioned the Winnipeg Grain Exchange at 

any time. I never mentioned it. 

 

Mr. Brown: — I never suggested that you did mention the Winnipeg Grain Exchange, but I do suggest 

that it is the philosophy which you expressed in your remarks, which must be concurred in by other 

people in Saskatchewan, and certainly in other parts of Canada, which makes it possible for the 

Winnipeg Grain Exchange to maintain the status in our economic life which it does maintain. If it were 

not for that philosophy which you expressed, then I am satisfied that the Winnipeg Grain Exchange 

would have been eliminated a goodly number of years ago. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — How about the Chicago Exchange? 

 

Mr. Brown: — But the remarks which the member for Saltcoats made did necessitate the remarks being 

made by the Minister of Public Health, because the Minister of Public Health placed on the record 

something that had to be placed on the record following the remarks made by the member for Saltcoats. 

I would point out that the Minister for Public Health was able to place that view on the record in some 

47 minutes, and, during that same 47 minutes there were several interruptions and several questions 

asked of him, and no doubt if they had not been asked and the interruptions had not been made, he 

maybe could have done it in the same length of time that was taken by the member for Saltcoats. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to compliment the Minister of Public Health on his remarks, for I feel that 

this afternoon he said something that he was required to say; and, while he may have been saying 

something that has been said in the past, he said something that needs to be repeated and continually 

repeated so that we do not make the same mistake in the future that we made in the past by not realizing 

the implications of the factors involved. The clear-cut statement that he placed before this House and the 

people of Saskatchewan is indeed to his credit. 

 

In reference directly to the remarks made by the Leader of the Opposition in connection with this 

Motion, which is before the House. He suggested that the position of the Liberal Party is enunciated in 

the Agricultural Prices Support Act and you will recall, Mr. Speaker, that in my opening remarks I 

quoted from the Agricultural Prices Support Act as indicating a means by which parity could be 

obtained. But you will also recall, Mr. Speaker, that this Act was passed, I believe, in 1946, and since 

that time there has been no machinery set up by which the principles enunciated in the part which he 

read could be put into effect and . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is wrong on that. The Board provided for in this Act has 

been set up and exists today. 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

34 

Mr. Brown: — If the hon. Leader of the Opposition had only allowed me to finish my sentence I think 

he would have realized more clearly what I meant. I stated that the Federal Government, since 1946, has 

set up no machinery by which it could put into operation the principle enunciated in the section which he 

read, which suggested that the Agricultural Prices Support Act would be a means by which there could 

be maintained a fair relationship for the producer in the agricultural industry as compared with that of 

other occupational groups. And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there has been no machinery set up by 

which that could be put into effect. It is true that the Board has been established under the Agricultural 

Prices Support Act, and that it has put certain floor prices under agricultural products; but if you will 

recall the price that was placed under eggs and suggest that the poultry producers, through the medium 

of the price set by the Board, could expect to have a fair relationship from his production as compared 

with other occupational groups, I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, and you will agree, that that is far from 

the case and far from possible. The same is equally true in connection with hogs. The floor price under 

hogs will certainly not bring forth that which is enunciated in the Agricultural Prices Support Act. 

 

And he also, Mr. Speaker, quoted from the Liberal platform. He suggested that he was quoting from the 

1950 platform, which was endorsed in the year 1950. I think, Mr. Speaker, if you will recall back to 

about 1920, those same words were very nicely in the Liberal platform of 1920. It always, apparently, 

appears that the leader of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan has got to continue to be the champion of 

the farmers within the Liberal Party. I think, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberal Party has been in power in 

Canada continually since 1935, and if it had any idea of putting into effect the policies enunciated by my 

friend the Leader of the Opposition that some 16 years would be sufficient time for them to begin to 

make a start to reach that stage of orderly marketing to which he referred. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — They are doing a pretty good job of it. 

 

Mr. Brown: — I would further suggest that the six years since the Agricultural Prices Support Act is 

sufficient time to begin to inaugurate that principle. 

 

In connection with the remarks made by the member for Saltcoats, I think they were adequately 

answered, and answered in a much better manner than I could, by the Minister of Public Health, but 

there is just one point to which I wish to refer. Throughout his entire remarks he came up with only two 

concrete suggestions. One of them was replied to by the Minister of Public Health that it was not, in his 

thinking and certainly not in my thinking, that an orderly marketing in any way produces a marketing of 

a commodity such as wheat by individual provincial pools. The other suggestion that he came up with is 

that we must lower our cost of production to meet world competition. It is true that we can lower our 

cost of production of agricultural products and we can lower the cost of production of wheat, but at 

whose expense are we going to lower the cost of production of wheat? We are going to lower it in the 

standard of living of those people who are actually producing the wheat. We produced wheat in the 

‗thirties cheaper than we are producing it today; but what was the standard of living that we enjoyed 

when we were 



 
April 3, 1952 

 

 

35 

producing wheat at the price at which we were producing it during the ‗thirties? That is his answer to 

this question of orderly marketing at a parity price for agricultural products. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, that is my hon. friend‘s answer to it; that is not my answer. 

 

Mr. Brown: — Mr. Speaker, the member for Saltcoats did suggest that we must lower our cost of 

production to meet world-wide competition. If the agricultural industry is going to have to bear the brunt 

of being required to lower our costs of production while other industries within the same country are 

being protected, as they are being protected, by tariffs, as illustrated by the Minister of Public Health, 

and as other industries are being subsidized, as they are being subsidized in Canada, then to suggest that 

we must lower our cost of production to meet world-wide competition indicates to me a bankruptcy of 

ideas as far as beating those problems which face the agricultural industry of today, and particularly face 

those people engaged in agriculture or depending upon agriculture for their livelihood. 

 

The question being put, the motion was agreed to unanimously. 

 

After some time spent in Committee on certain Bills, the assembly adjourned at 11 o‘clock p.m. without 

question put. 


