



















































Hansard: February 11, 1952


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eleventh Legislature 

3rd Day 
 

Monday, February 11, 1952 
 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, there is a matter which I would like to draw to the 

attention of the House for just a moment with reference to next Friday, which is the day of the King‟s 

funeral, and which has been declared by the Federal Government as a national day of mourning. 

 

There has been some confusion in the public mind and statement is going out to the Press and to the 

Radio Stations. It might be in order if I made some statement here. 

 

As hon. members know, the Government of Canada has declared Friday, February 15, to be a national 

day of mourning and has proclaimed it as a holiday insofar as it affected their jurisdiction, that is insofar 

as it covered Federal employees and banks, etc. Subsequent to that the Government of the United 

Kingdom expressed the wish that February 15 ought not to be a holiday, but rather that there be merely 

two minutes silence observed. 

 

I have been in touch with the Prime Minister of Canada to see whether or not that would make any 

difference to the decision of the Canadian Government, and the Prime Minister informs me that they do 

not intend to rescind their proclamation, and that the national day of mourning will still be February 15. 

That applies, however, only to the Federal jurisdiction; and I might say that the Government here has 

decided to also proclaim February 15 as a day of mourning in order to give the people of the Province 

the opportunity of attending divine service in their respective churches and communities, and of holding 

memorial services wherever they are arranged. 

 

I should also make it clear that this proclamation will also only affect those people over whom the 

Provincial Government has jurisdiction; that is, it will affect Provincial employees, Provincial offices, 

Courthouses, schools, but we have no power under the proclamation, to close stores or places of 

business in the community. That would have to be done by either a proclamation on the part of the City, 

or in some cities they have a by-law by which the proclamation of the provincial holiday automatically 

becomes a civic holiday; so that it will be up to the respective cities who have not got a by-law making a 

provincial holiday automatically a civic holiday, to also pass a proclamation if they wish to have the 

stores and places of business close on that day. The Lieutenant-Governor will be issuing, today, a 

proclamation making February 15 a day of mourning, insofar as the Province is concerned, and insofar 

as those people affected by provincial jurisdiction are concerned. The Lieutenant-Governor will be 

expressing the hope in that proclamation that the people of this Province will use that day in which to 

attend divine service and to pay their respects to the memory of our late beloved Monarch. 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

2 

 

I believe it has also suggested between the Whips, on both sides of the House, that in order that some of 

the members may get back to their own communities to take part in any such services, that the 

Legislature adjourn on Thursday evening at 6 o‟clock, rather than sitting Thursday evening. 

 

If that is the understanding then I would take it, Mr. Speaker, that we would adjourn Thursday at 6 

o‟clock, and not meet again until Monday at 3 o‟clock. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 

Motion for Address-in-Reply 
 

Mr. J. Walter Erb (Milestone): — It is indeed a great honour to be accorded the privilege to sponsor a 

motion for the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. The Hon. Premier, in according me this 

privilege, has also honoured the good people of Milestone whom I represent, and on whose behalf I 

gratefully acknowledge this singular recognition. 

 

At this time I should like to welcome to his first regular session the young, honourable member from 

Gravelbourg (Mr. E.H. Walker) with whom I have the pleasure of being associated this afternoon. We, 

on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, are especially delighted to have him in our midst, and the good 

people of Gravelbourg should be congratulated upon their excellent choice for their representative in this 

Legislature. I am confident, too that he will discharge his duties in accordance with the high ideals that 

attracted him to the C.C.F. movement. 

 

The Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, was perhaps the most gratifying this Legislature has ever 

heard. The positive and dynamic programs outlined, embracing virtually all departments of the 

Government, is synonymous with the outstanding social and economic achievements of the C.C.F. 

Government. And I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that on the basis of past performance of this 

Government, the people of Saskatchewan will again heartily endorse the Speech from the Throne. 

 

The year that has just passed was one filled with great promise in the unfolding of the vast wealth 

potential of our gas, mineral and oil resources; on the other hand, a keen disappointment for a great 

majority of our farmers of the West. While the development of our natural resources in Saskatchewan 

have attracted great attention, one must never lose sight of the fact that agriculture has been and will 

continue to be, the prime industry of Saskatchewan. No single or combined development of our natural 

resources will ever displace agriculture as the main economy of Saskatchewan, for the well-being of all 

of our citizens is directly, or indirectly, dependent upon a stable and healthy agricultural economy. 

 

That 1951 was a disappointing year arises out of several reasons; first, the final payment on the wheat 

delivered to the five-year pool; second, the transportation bottlenecks, and the failure to appoint a 

transport controller in time; third, the position of the farmer in respect to the damp grain problem; and 

fourth, the absence of a parity price structure for agricultural commodities. 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

 

3 

Two or three years before the final payment was made, Mr. Speaker, farmers of the prairie provinces 

hoped, and indeed were given to understand by those in authority, that the final payment would be a 

substantial one. The Pools, and various farm organizations, in their calculations of what the final 

payment ought to be, arrived at a figure somewhere between 15 and 25 cents. It was, therefore, a keen 

disappointment to all the farmers of the west when it was announced, on March 2nd, that the final 

payment was to be 8.3 cents per bushel. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, the farmers had every right to expect 

substantially more than 8.3 cents, particularly when one considers that in 1946 Federal legislation was 

promised, similar to the Agricultural Prices Support Act, which was to be used to guarantee the farmers 

a fair price in the event that their cost of production rose when price controls were removed. 

 

The transportation problem which has bedevilled the farmers of the west was anticipated early in the 

year due to abnormal quantities of the 1950 crop stored in grain elevators throughout the prairie 

provinces and at the lakehead terminals. On April 4, 1951, a resolution was passed unanimously by this 

Legislature. I had hoped to have that resolution here, but I inadvertently left it in the members‟ room. In 

any case, that resolution drew the matter to the attention of the Federal Government, urging them that a 

transport controller be appointed with all possible haste, in order that the conditions which we foresaw 

would be obviated. Now, Mr. Speaker, had a transport controller been appointed at that time, and had he 

exercised his full power and authority, one might reasonably assume that he would not have been in the 

dilemma of trying to handle two crops at the same time. 

 

The appointment of Mr. Milner which came on August 30th, six months after this Legislature 

recommended such an appointment, came in effect too late to deal adequately with a situation which had 

become virtually hopeless. And I think it fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that had the C.P.R. assumed a more 

co-operative and responsible attitude the situation would not have deteriorated to the extent that it did. It 

is significant that on C.N.R. lines the congestion in grain elevators was not nearly so pronounced. In fact 

there were numerous C.P.R. points from which farmers hauled grain to elevators on C.N.R. lines. It is, 

therefore, abundantly clear that the C.P.R. assumed little responsibility in making boxcars available to 

ease the serious congestion in country elevators where its lines were concerned. I submit, Mr. Speaker, 

that the C.P.R., operating on the scope that it does, has clearly a national responsibility, and in evading 

that responsibility it has heaped hardships on the farmers of the west, on whom incidentally, it has 

grown rich. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Erb: — The C.P.R. has received increase after increase in its freight rates, increases which have 

fallen most heavily on the farmers of the west. Since the freight rate on wheat is governed by statute, 

commonly known as the Crow‟s Nest Pass rate, the C.P.R. has shown a callous disregard for this 

commodity. It no doubt feels that, because it has other and more profitable lines to handle, this 

commodity is an unprofitable one, indeed. That is the situation, Mr. Speaker. I reiterate what I said in 

this House, last year, in this regard — that the case for the nationalization for the C.P.R. was never so 

clear as it is now. 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

4 

 

At no time in the history of farming in Saskatchewan have the farmers been faced with such a serious 

damp grain problem. It is proof once again how vulnerable to the elements our agricultural economy is. 

The damp grain problem is a serious one, Mr. Speaker. Millions upon millions of dollars are involved 

and unless a policy is forthcoming soon, the farmers stand to face tremendous loss. 

 

An article appearing in The Leader-Post, dated January 26, shows clearly what the condition is: 

 

“Estimates of the Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture show that there are at least 40 million 

bushels of damp wheat in storage on farms throughout the province‟, Agricultural Minister Nollet said 

Friday, in a Bureau of Publications release. „It is estimated that there is an equal amount of damp oats 

and barley in storage. These estimates do not include the additional estimated 45 million bushels yet to 

be harvested in the Spring. This damp grain poses as a serious problem‟, Mr. Nollet said.” 

 

Now I think it not presumptuous to say, Mr. Speaker, that those who are responsible for marketing our 

wheat should also assume reasonable responsibility in the present problem, in order that the greatest 

possible quantities of wheat be put into condition so that it might find its way through the export 

channels to the hungry peoples of the world. In view of the fact that, when the warm weather comes, 

damp wheat will deteriorate very rapidly; therefore every effort should be made by those in authority to 

salvage as much as possible of the millions of bushels of damp grain in western elevators and on the 

farms. 

 

The best guarantee for stability in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, is an agricultural policy based on parity, not 

only in respect to wheat, but in all the diversified aspects of agriculture. Floor prices of farm products 

are a sort of guarantee against greatly depressed prices. But floor prices do not, by any stretch of the 

imagination, always insure the farmers against operating at a loss. There are some people, incidentally, 

who do not like the word “parity”. They say that parity has too many definitions. Well, Mr. Speaker, to 

the farmers parity means something real and tangible. It means that having produced a commodity, they 

will receive a price for the same that has a proper relationship to the production cost; and it is that 

condition that offers the only real hope for agricultural stability and economic security for the farmers 

and all those people who are dependent directly or indirectly upon agriculture. 

 

These are the conditions that I have outlined, Mr. Speaker, that have brought disappointment and a sense 

of economic insecurity to tens of thousands of farmers in Saskatchewan. Speaking of the farmer, it 

seems to me that if the economic welfare of the people, not only of Saskatchewan, but of the nation as a 

whole, is to be maintained as well as the proper functioning of all other economies to which agriculture 

is basic, it is of paramount importance that the position of agriculture be maintained strong and stable at 

all times; and it is to this end that this Government shall continue to strive. 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

 

5 

The appointment of a Royal Commission to enquire into the maintenance of a sound farm economy and 

the improvement of social conditions in rural Saskatchewan, as forecast in the Speech from the Throne, 

is a sound and practical approach to the problems in agriculture and will be heartily endorsed by all the 

farmers. Farmers will also welcome the appointment of a legislative committee, Mr. Speaker, to 

investigate the high price of farm machinery. The high price of farm machinery has been largely 

responsible for the high cost of production of agricultural commodities. It is also gratifying to note that 

the Government has pledged itself to an expenditure of $33 million as its share of the construction of the 

South Saskatchewan River project. It is hoped that this project will be brought to fruition with the 

earliest possible speed. The Royal Commission will, no doubt, recognize the feasibility of this great 

project and the outstanding benefits that will accrue to the economy of Saskatchewan therefrom. 

 

Since coming into office in 1944, the C.C.F. Government has brought a measure of progress and 

security to the people of Saskatchewan such as they have never known. It is safe to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that no government anywhere has done so much in so short a time. The reason for this, of course, is that 

the C.C.F. is a people‟s government — that the C.C.F. constitution is so designed that its membership 

determines what government policy shall be. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the legislation that we have on the 

statue books, today, is not the will of a political hierarchy, but rather the will of the common people. 

 

This widening of the political horizons of democracy has enabled the people of this province to do 

collectively what they could never have achieved individually. As a result we have such legislation as 

the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan — a plan whereby hospitalization is provided for every man, 

woman and child of this province for the small sum of $10 for a single person and $30 for a family of 

four or more. No one can speak more eloquently, Mr. Speaker, of the hospitalization plan than those 

who have experienced hospital care. For many who had the misfortune of a protracted illness prior to the 

inauguration of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan it meant financial disaster. Probably as bad, or 

even worse, was the situation in many cases where hospitalization was denied people until they could 

establish their ability to pay. It must be a great source of comfort to a family on a small income, made 

even smaller by unwarranted inflation, to know that they are financially protected in the event of illness 

by the Hospitalization Plan. 

 

Since the inauguration of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, over one million people have 

received hospital care, including our old-age pensioners who receive complete medical, surgical, dental 

and hospital care. These services could only be properly provided, Mr. Speaker, with an expanded 

hospital building programme. As a result of that programme, Saskatchewan today has the greatest 

number of hospital beds in relation to its population of any area in the world, — approximately seven 

beds per thousand people. The Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, Mr. Speaker, will go down in 

history as one of the greatest pieces of legislation ever enacted by this Legislature. And it will always 

remain a monument to those whose vision, courage and concern for human welfare made this plan a 

reality. 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

6 

 

Great credit to due to those who have administered the hospital plan so efficiently. The Name of Dr. 

Mott especially will be held in esteem. His selfless efforts demonstrated that there are still men of his 

calling with tremendous ability and great capacity for work, whose desire to serve humanity transcends 

any personal or monetary consideration. It is hoped, Mr. Speaker, that in the not too distant future not 

only hospital, but complete medical, surgical and dental care will be provided for all the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Last summer, Dr. Carl Menninger, the world-famed psychiatrist, visited Saskatchewan. What he said in 

respect to our mental institutions substantiated what was generally believed, — that Saskatchewan was 

the foremost area in the world in its approach to the treatment and cure of mental illness. In that 

connection, Mr. Speaker, I should like to quote from an editorial appearing in The Leader-Post, last 

summer of 1951: 

 

“It was with gratification that the Saskatchewan people learned the other day that we continue to add 

to our laurels, this time in the field of psychiatry, the treatment of mental illness. 

 

“The bearer of these glad tidings was Dr. Carl Menninger of the famed Menninger Clinic of Topeka, 

Kansas, who is acknowledged to be one of the world‟s leading psychiatrists. Dr. Menninger told a 

Regina audience recently that in this comparatively new field of health Saskatchewan has made so 

much progress that „you ought to be proud of yourselves‟.” 

 

To his knowledge, Saskatchewan is the only area in the world that has all the competent psychiatrists it 

present needs. He also declared that the Psychiatric Aide Training programme being carried on in 

Saskatchewan is envied throughout the world, and is being copied as fast as other areas can arrange it. 

 

When one considers, Mr. Speaker, the state of our mental institutions prior to 1944, the progress that has 

been made since then appears all the more momentous. Today, we have a Psychiatric Aide Training 

programme — a programme whereby young men and women are trained to assist in the cure and 

treatment of mental illness. This training programme is analogous to that taken by nurses in general 

hospitals, with the exception that in the training in this case the emphasis is on the cure and treatment of 

mental illness rather than on physical illness. In physical disorders, the earlier the diagnosis the more 

favourable the prognosis. Likewise, the early detection of a mental disorder enhances the possibility of a 

cure. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, diagnostic clinics were established throughout Saskatchewan — two in 

Regina and Saskatoon, and part-time clinics in Swift Current, Assiniboia, Moose Jaw, Weyburn, 

Yorkton, North Battleford and Prince Albert. This expanding programme, Mr. Speaker, naturally called 

for additional fully-trained personnel. We have, therefore, increased our staff of psychiatrists from 15 in 

1945 to 40 fully qualified psychiatrists at the present time. 

 

The humanitarian aspect of this programme should never be overlooked. Prior to 1944, the cost of 

treatment of a mentally ill patient had to be borne by the relatives of the patient, or by the estate of the 

mentally incompetent. Today, Mr. Speaker, this individual financial burden 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

 

7 

has been wiped out, because all the people of Saskatchewan share this responsibility through their 

Government. Due to our advanced programme there is, Mr. Speaker, a new hope for the mentally ill — a 

new hope that it is being fulfilled every day in that more patients are being returned to take their place in 

society than one had dared dream a few years ago. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan is to be commended upon this great achievement, through its ability 

to attract to this province such renowned men as Dr. McKerracher and his associates, whose work is 

attracting world-wide attention, and to whom such credit is due for making Saskatchewan the foremost 

area in the world in its approach to the treatment and cure of mental illness. 

 

In the field of diagnosis and treatment of cancer, Saskatchewan is also in the forefront. In this disease 

the emphasis on early diagnosis is greater than in any other forms of pathology. The Saskatchewan 

Cancer Clinics at Regina and Saskatoon are among the finest on the continent in respect of the 

diagnostic and treatment equipment. Recently, and for the first time in the world, radioactive cobalt, a 

product of Canada‟s atomic plant at Chalk River, is being used at the University of Saskatchewan in the 

treatment of cancer. Dr. Watson and his staff are considered among the foremost men in their field, and 

Saskatchewan is indeed fortunate in having the services of these men. 

 

Like mental illness, cancer has no respect for persons, whether rich or poor, old or young, or any ethnic 

group. In meeting the onslaught of this disease the people of Saskatchewan stand shoulder to shoulder 

on a great humanitarian front. No man, woman, or child, stricken with this dread malady, is denied 

treatment, because the treatment is free. Saskatchewan is the only area on the continent where it is free 

— the cost again being shared by all the people of Saskatchewan through their Government. 

 

Time does not allow me to review other notable achievements of this Government in the field of health, 

such as the diagnosis and treatment of tuberculosis, polio, veneral diseases, and so on. Suffice to say, 

Mr. Speaker, that what has been done, and the manner in which it has been done, has earned for the 

Government of Saskatchewan the undying gratitude of hundreds of thousands of our citizens. 

 

I should like briefly to mention the outstanding service rendered to the people of Saskatchewan by the 

Saskatchewan Air Ambulance Service. No other service, in my opinion, has contributed more to the 

saving of human life. Hundreds of thousands of our citizens in the small urban and rural areas of 

Saskatchewan feel secure in the knowledge that, should an emergency arise which requires immediate 

medical and hospital care, the Ambulance is constantly on the alert, ready to fly by day or night to 

village, town, hamlet or farm, wherever its services are required. The Saskatchewan Air Ambulance 

Service, inaugurated six years ago, has flown over one and one-half million miles, and has carried over 

4,000 people to hospital. It has also made numerous flights out of Saskatchewan. The people of this 

province, Mr. Speaker, salute the fine, courageous young men and women who fly through 

Saskatchewan skies on “wings of mercy.” 

 

I should like to draw to the hon. members‟ attention, Mr. Speaker, three articles which have recently 

appeared in leading periodicals. “The Saskatchewan Flying Ambulance Service”, an account thereof is 

given in 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

8 

 

“Saturday Evening Post” of December 29, 1951, in “World Affairs of November 15, 1951, “Health 

Services in Saskatchewan”, and then the most recent one in “MacLean‟s”, I believe of last week, 

February 15 “Atom Bomb that Saves Lives”, describing Saskatchewan‟s cancer programme. It is 

gratifying to note, Mr. Speaker, that people outside of Saskatchewan are learning about some of the truly 

great things that are done in this Province, and we are, therefore, at long last punching holes in the “Iron 

Curtain.” 

 

It is generally recognized, Mr. Speaker, I believe, that the virility of any nation is proportional to its 

standards of health and education. We in the C.C.F. movement believe that the economic inequities are 

too great for all the people to have the best standards of health and education on an individual basis. We 

believe in collective and co-operative action to attain our individual well-being. The Saskatchewan 

Hospital Services plan, which clearly establishes this principle, has brought security and well-being to 

hundreds of thousands of our citizens. Likewise, Mr. Speaker, the principle of equalized educational 

costs has brought about a better standard of education for our children. The larger school unit, which 

makes this principle operative, guarantees that all our children shall receive the best primary and 

secondary education it is possible for us to provide. 

 

There was a time, Mr. Speaker, when one had to speak in defence of the larger unit. That need no longer 

exists, because the idea of the larger unit has been accepted by all forty-five unites which were 

established after this Government took office in 1944. In this connection I am proud to say that the vote 

that was held in the Milestone Unit last November 16, was overwhelmingly in favour of the unit — as a 

matter of fact, approximately three to one. 

 

Since this unit system has been set up, Mr. Speaker, a great school-building construction programme has 

taken place. 647 new schools have been built, and 1,157 new class rooms added. The educational 

facilities have been greatly increased, so that every town, village and country school has such facilities 

that heretofore were possible only in the larger city centres. They have today home economics, 

workshops, audio-visual aids, greatly increased library and laboratory facilities, and so on. As a result, 

our children are receiving not only a better education, but more children are receiving secondary or high 

school education than ever before. In some centres where dormitories have been erected, the high school 

enrolment has more than doubled. In 1944-45, the Government spent $3,849,673 for education at a per 

pupil cost of $22, but in 1945-50, $8,286,394 was spent at a per pupil expenditure of $49.85; and the 

cost of administration was reduced from five per cent of the total cost of education in 1944 to 3½ per 

cent, in 1950. Grants to schools have also been increased under the C.C.F. Government, so that it is now 

providing two and a half dollars for every dollar that was provided by previous administrations. This 

money, Mr. Speaker, is almost entirely spent on an equalized basis. 

 

The Government is also providing financial assistance to students wishing to attend normal schools, 

universities and schools of nursing. As a result of this policy, hundreds of needy and deserving students 

are finding it possible to realize a career. 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

 

9 

Bringing services to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, entails problems of distance such as are 

found in no other province in Canada. The topography of Saskatchewan is such that our population is 

widely dispersed. With the accelerated opening and developing of our northern areas, this dispersion is 

becoming even more marked. One can, therefore, readily recognize the immense problem that arises in 

respect to linking the various communities of Saskatchewan with power, telephones and roads. With the 

vast development that is taking place in our northern areas, highways, power and telephones are geared 

to an expansion programme such as this province has never before witnessed. 

 

Due to our dispersed population, a vast provincial highway system is necessary. As a result we have 

over 8,000 miles of highway which represents approximately 38 per cent of all the road mileage of 

Canada. When one considers that we have only 7 per cent. of the population of Canada, one can 

appreciate the problem of building and maintaining such a colossal highway system. 

 

In 1944 when the C.C.F. Government took office, 70 per cent. of the roads were worn out. Less than 100 

miles had been built to the present standard of construction. There were only 138 miles of blacktop road, 

of which over half was most entirely worn out. Saskatchewan had the reputation of having the worst 

roads in the west. Since 1944, Mr. Speaker, there has been a dramatic change in the highway picture. 

Since 1944, this Government has built or re-built over 3,000 miles of road. It has gravelled over 7,500 

miles, and increased the blacktop from 138 miles, in 1944, to over 700 miles in 1951. This notable 

achievement, Mr. Speaker, suggests tremendous activity by our highway construction crews during the 

past eight years. 

 

There has been some talk, Mr. Speaker, that an election might be held this year. It is said, Mr. Speaker, 

that prior to 1944 one could fairly accurately guess when an election would take place, judging by the 

sudden activity of the Highway Department of that date. 

 

Mr. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — I wouldn‟t say too much about that. 

 

Mr. Erb: — Today, Mr. Speaker, the activity of the Highway Department would not justify such a 

supposition, because its activity is a continuous operation. While unprecedented work has been done to 

our highway system, there is still much to do. It is, therefore, gratifying to note in the Speech from the 

Throne, that the highway programme will be greatly expanded. The rural municipalities, which have 

received more aid under the C.C.F. Government than under any other government in the past, will 

welcome further consideration in respect to their problem of re-building their timber bridges and market 

roads. 

 

Probably no expansion programme by this Government is discussed or welcomed so much by the rural 

population as is rural electrification. And quite obviously so, Mr. Speaker, because electrical power on 

the farm transforms the pattern of living wherever it is being put to use for the first time. Power has 

ceased to be a luxury; it has become a necessity of the first magnitude. It is for this reason that the 

Government has embarked on the greatest rural electrification programme ever envisaged in this 

province. From a statistical point of view, the development of rural electrification in Saskatchewan is 

nothing short of remarkable. 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

10 

 

In 1944, when the C.C.F. Government was elected, the Saskatchewan Power Commission was “in the 

red” some $231,000. Only 135 farms in the province had received power, and power rates were 

prohibitive. There were only 1626 miles of transmission lines and less than 1300 metres were in service. 

That, Mr. Speaker, was the Saskatchewan Power Commission. Shakespeare once said: “One cannot 

make a silk purse out of a sow‟s ear”. Well, Mr. Speaker, if I may use that figure of speech in respect to 

the old Power Commission, this Government not only made a silk purse out of a sow‟s ear, but it put in 

a silver lining, as well. Because, today Mr. Speaker, the Power Corporation has a capitalization of over 

$41,000,000. Its accumulated surplus for 1950 was $2,195,984 as against a deficit of $231,000 in 1944. 

More than 8,000 farmers have received power as against 135 farms in 1944. Over 7,000 miles of 

transmission lines have been constructed compared to 1626 in 1944. The number of metre users 

increased from 12,989 in 1944 to over 70,000 in 1951. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — How many? 

 

Mr. Erb: — To over 70,000 in 1951, Sir. Power rates have been reduced five times, the most recent 

reduction being last month. These rate reductions have meant a tremendous saving to users of electric 

power; and they testify to the efficiency of the Power Corporation. It is all the more outstanding in view 

of the rising costs of materials and construction. Certainly, if any industry has endeavoured to hold the 

cost-of-living down, it has been the Saskatchewan Power Corporation by its reduction in rates. Mr. 

Tomlinson, general manager, Mr. Roy Sarsfield, the business manager, and Mr. Charles Smith, 

superintendent of the rural electrification, as well as all their associates, have done a magnificent job. 

 

On the basis of such an expanding programme as I have outlined, Mr. Speaker, it is reasonable to expect 

that by the end of 1952, 4,000 additional farms will have received power, making a total of 12,000 farms 

energized, since this Government took office in 1944. 

 

There has been some loose talk about stagnation in Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people that 

indulge in this loose talk must be living in the past, because stagnation ended in Saskatchewan in 1944. 

To keep the record straight, we must remember that prior to 1944 there was no industrial development in 

Saskatchewan. There was very little gas discovered, and there was definitely no oil production. No 

inventory had been made of our natural resources, consequently no information was available of what 

might be developed of our natural resources. That was the picture of development in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. When one talks of industrial development there comes first to mind the basis for such 

development. This calls for an inventory of the resources that might be developed, and secondly, the 

necessary adjuncts to that development, such as power, communication and, in some cases, roads. Also 

an industrial development fund is essential to assist in some cases the setting up of an industry. Let us 

now examine the picture of development in Saskatchewan today. 

 

Since 1944, over $41,000,0000 have been invested in transmission lines, power and generating 

equipment. A $400,000 brick plant has been constructed at Estevan, which is now in full production. At 

Chaplin, Saskatchewan, a million-dollar sodium sulphate plant was constructed and is in full production, 

and is capable of producing 100,000 tons of sodium sulphate yearly. Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, sodium 

sulphate sales for 1950 were in excess of $600,000, which was an increase of more than 65 per cent. 

over the preceding year. 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

 

11 

At Unity, Saskatchewan, where a rich salt deposit had been discovered, a salt plant has been established, 

and as a result, Saskatchewan is now one of the major salt producers of Canada. A $350,000 high 

utilization saw mill was built at Big River. With the assistance of the C.C.F. Government‟s industrial 

development fund, a plywood factory at Hudson‟s Bay Junction was built and is now in production; and 

another plywood factory is being built at Prince Albert. Also at Prince Albert a new box and grain door 

factory is in full production. Two new refineries have been established in Saskatchewan — one at 

Moose Jaw, and another at Prince Albert, so that with these two refineries along with the refineries that 

were in this province, together with the co-operative refinery in Regina, it is now possible to refine some 

60,000 barrels of oil in Saskatchewan. Incidentally, this is a 100 per cent. increase over 1945. 

 

The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool constructed a flour mill at Saskatoon, as well as a vegetable oil plant for 

processing linseed oil from flax. The co-operative horsemeat packing plant was established at Swift 

Current, with financial assistance from the Government, and at Saskatoon, Intercontinental Packers have 

established a large packing plant. 

 

These then, Mr. Speaker, are some of the industries that have been established since the C.C.F. took 

office. I submit that, inasmuch as these industries were established under a C.C.F. Government, we can 

with confidence expect spectacular industrial development in Saskatchewan in the near future. The 

C.C.F. Government has tossed stagnation out the window. 

 

Oil has become a major topic of discussion these days, Mr. Speaker. The importance of this commodity 

to the proper functioning of all our economies is obvious. Even some political machines require grease 

on occasion. During the past two years or so, the people of Saskatchewan have been subjected to such 

doleful sounds: that under a C.C.F. Government Saskatchewan will have no oil development. The 

undisputed fact is, Mr. Speaker, that oil was not found in this province until we had a C.C.F. 

Government, because prior to 1944 not one oil well was in production in Saskatchewan. Today we have 

196 oil wells in production. At the end of 1951, we had produced 1,250,000 barrels of oil. Last summer, 

a new oil field was discovered in the Coleville-Brock-Kindersley area, and nine wells have since then 

been brought into production, and ore wells will be brought in, no doubt, as drilling continues. Several 

gas wells have also been discovered in this area — some capable of producing 10,000,000 cubic feet of 

gas per day, and one capable of producing better than 40,000,000 cubic feet of gas per day. Immense 

possibilities are suggested by these discoveries, due to the versatility of gas as fuel in domestic and 

industrial consumption. 

 

The discovery of light oil in the Fosterton area marks the beginning of what might well become a major 

oil-producing field in Saskatchewan. You will remember, Mr. Speaker, that the search for oil in the 

Leduc area continued for ten years. Just when the search was to be abandoned, oil was discovered. It is 

therefore, significant that oil should be found in such a relatively short time in Saskatchewan. Therefore, 

there was never any logic in the statement that oil would not be found under the C.C.F. Government. 

The gentleman who formulated that argument will have to toss it out the window. 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

12 

 

In 1951, 18 to 20 millions of dollars were spent in the search for oil, and it is anticipated that between 30 

and 50 millions of dollars will be spent in oil exploration by the oil companies in 1952. There is no area 

on the continent, Mr. Speaker, where as much money is being spent in search for oil as in Saskatchewan. 

That Saskatchewan is about to enter into an unprecedented phase of development and expansion is also 

indicated by the vast research for minerals. In 1951, six million dollars were spent on mineral search, 

and it is estimated that six to ten millions will be spent in 1952 on mineral exploration. Incidentally, the 

value of mineral production in Saskatchewan increased from $35,600,000 in 1950 to $50,900,000 in 

1951. Most promising of all minerals, Mr. Speaker, is uranium. The great deposits that have already 

been located indicate very strongly that Saskatchewan will become the largest producer of uranium in 

the world. The importance of this element is of such magnitude that it foreshadows a second Industrial 

Revolution. A great destiny, indeed, awaits Saskatchewan. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to state that the C.C.F. Government has demonstrated by its record 

that it has kept faith with the people of Saskatchewan. Therefore the people of Saskatchewan are looking 

to the future with trust and confidence, secure in the knowledge that the affairs of this province are in 

good and capable hands, and that with the C.C.F. Government this province shall keep its date with 

destiny. 

 

It is therefore, with utmost pride, that I now moved, seconded by the hon. member for Gravelbourg (Mr. 

E.H. Walker), that an humble Address by presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE WILLIAM JOHN PATTERSON, 

 

Lieutenant Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it Please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty‟s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious speech which Your 

Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 

Mr. E.H. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to second the motion in Reply to the Speech 

from the Throne, and I want to, first, express my regrets at the sudden passing of His Majesty, the late 

King, and along with the rest of the people of Saskatchewan, to express my sympathies to the other 

members of the Royal family on their great loss. 

 

I want to congratulate the mover of the motion, the hon. member from Milestone (Mr. Erb), for his kind 

personal remarks and for his very eloquent address in making such a thorough review of some of the 

more outstanding accomplishments in the past eight years of this Government; and also for his 

discussion of some of the greater things to come, as suggested in the Throne Speech. 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

 

13 

Before speaking on the motion specifically, Mr. Speaker, I should like to congratulate His Honour, the 

Lieutenant Governor, the Hon. W.J. Patterson, on his appointment to his present position. I think it is 

one of the finer things of our democratic way of life to have a man who was born, raised and educated in 

this Province appointed to such a high position. He was first elected to this Legislature in 1921, for what 

was then the constituency of Pipestone. At redistribution a few years later he represented the 

constituency of Cannington, which he held until his resignation in 1949. He was first appointed a 

Minister of the Crown in 1926, I believe, and held a number of different portfolios; and in 1935 he was 

appointed Premier of the Province, a position which he held until the general election of 1944 when he 

was voted out of office. He then acted as the Leader of the Opposition until his resignation and his 

appointment as a member of the Board of Transport Commissioners in Ottawa, resigning last year to 

return to his present appointment. I am sure all the hon. members will join with me in expressing the 

wish that long may he reign as Her Majesty‟s representative to this Government. 

 

I want to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, Mr. Speaker, on again acting as Speaker of this 

Legislature. I understand that you have acted longer than any other Speaker has ever acted in this 

Assembly, and I am sure we all join in expressing the hope that you will be with us for a long time to 

come in your present capacity. Because of the valuable service which you have given this Assembly, 

you have built up a reputation throughout the length and breadth of this Province — because of your fair 

decisions, your high ideals and sincere conviction — and for being, shall we say, politically neutral in 

the House. 

 

Paying a tribute to people who have done something useful, or complimenting the people who have 

contributed to a great cause, I want to also include the good people of the Gravelbourg constituency for 

their support to this Government last July. I want especially to thank them for giving me this opportunity 

of representing them in this House, on this side of the House, and especially with this particular 

government. 

 

There were a number of reasons why I was elected, and of course one of the most important was the 

large number of loyal and hard workers; people who were the leaders in their own communities and the 

more highly respected members of their communities were determined to get out and work for the best 

government they ever had. It was readily recognized that one of the better examples of workers we had 

was a man who was known throughout almost the entire constituency, a man who had worked with and 

for these people almost all his life, a man who was respected almost as much for his work in his 

profession, as for his personality and wise advice to those who needed and asked for his help. We were 

all very proud indeed to have Mr. Soucy working so hard for this cause. It was very encouraging to see 

that he knew what he wanted and had the courage to go after it; and I wish also to congratulate my 

campaign manager and all the others who worked so hard for victory. 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

14 

 

It is very significant, Mr. Speaker, that when a people, such as the people of the Gravelbourg 

constituency, who are from such varied racial origins and who have been in the habit of voting for 

another political party; the first member, Mr. Cummings, Independent, the first member elected for 

Gravelbourg constituency elected in 1921; 1925 elected Mr. Ben McGregor, Liberal — he held the seat 

until his death; a by-election in 1935 elected Mr. E.M. Culliton, who held the seat until he was defeated 

in the general election of 1944 by the C.C.F. candidate, Dr. Houze, who in turn lost in the 1948 election, 

again to Mr. Culliton. Mr. Culliton resigned last winter to accept his appointment to the Bench, and I am 

sure the people of the Gravelbourg constituency join with me in wishing every success in the future to 

Mr. Justice Culliton. 

 

And so a people who have been voting Liberal almost continuously for the past 30 years, and after 8 

years of administration by this government, should see fit to now support it, is certainly very 

encouraging, because it clearly indicates that they are fully aware of present day problems and are 

prepared to trust their future to this government. 

 

It was very encouraging to see the enthusiasm and sincerity with which the people carried out the 

campaign, and it was quite obvious that these people knew the record of the government and understood 

the principles and methods which would be involved in carrying out the administration of the 

government in the next few years in Saskatchewan. Of course, Mr. Speaker, the great record of past 

achievements and the confidence the people have in this government for the future is undoubtedly, to a 

very great extent, due to the leadership given the government, and the confidence that has been inspired 

in the people by our Premier (Tommy Douglas.) The great leadership he has given can be attributed to 

his clear vision in being able to see and clearly understand the problems of the people, his brilliant mind 

being able to give a humane solution to our problems and for his great courage in leading his 

government into taking the bold steps forward which have been taken by this government, and which 

has made possible the rapid development taking place in the province at the present time. I know, Mr. 

Speaker, that because this government nearly always measures the successes of its Public Enterprises 

and government assistance in dollars and cents, that is merely for convenience because that seems to be 

the only thing that means anything to the hon. members opposite. 

 

But let us not forget the real object of these things, which is first and foremost relieving of human 

suffering, either in sickness or the living conditions of the more unfortunate and under-privileged people 

of the province, and secondly for the betterment of the average person through better education to 

prepare the younger people for the difficulty they will have to face in future life, and to try to relieve the 

economic plight of the individual, the small business man and particularly co-operative enterprises 

which, in turn, make possible the raising of the living standard of its members, but also make possible 

the democratic control of our economic system instead of the barbaric and outdated mess we are now in, 

economically. 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

 

15 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have very briefly indicated the great leadership given the government by the 

Premier, but I do not wish to, in any way, slight the work done by the various department heads. It 

would be quite impossible for me to go through all the departments and discuss all the things which have 

been done to help the people and to protect them or help them in their everyday life, but I would like to 

point out some of the more important highlights of some of the departments. 

 

I want to deal first, with what has always been considered more important by the C.C.F. people 

everywhere — the achievements by this government in regard to health and welfare. The health 

department was first under the direct supervision of the Premier, until 1949, and it was during this 

period, that among many other things, the great Socialist principle of hospitalization was put into 

practice. The department came under the present Minister, the hon. Tom Bentley, in 1949, and he is to 

be congratulated for the work done and planned for the future. Thanks to these two men, Saskatchewan 

now has the most advanced hospitalization programme, hospital facilities, cancer care and treatment, 

preventative health, public sanitation, T.B. prevention and treatment, and mental health care and 

treatment, and in certain areas complete medical care — the most advanced health programme on the 

North American continent. 

 

And of course, the Department of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation, under the very capable leadership 

of the hon. J.H. Sturdy, has its programme tied in very closely with the Department of Public Health. I 

remember the 9 point programme of the C.C.F. campaign in 1944 which was drawn up by the people 

prior to that time, which elected this government in 1944, and which has been subsequently carried out. 

Of a total of 9 points in this programme, 3 of them called for: 

 

(1) Medical, dental and hospital services, irrespective of the ability to pay. This point needs very 
little explanation. We now have our hospitalization available to all who need it in those areas 

which particularly wanted it, and with two-thirds of the cost borne by the Province. In other areas 

we have limited care, mostly preventative, for school and pre-school children. This government, 

last year, spent over $547,000 for municipal medical care and health regions. The last Liberal 

government in office spent nothing to promote these necessary services. For hospital 

construction the last Liberal government spent nothing, last year this government spent over 

$300,000. 

 

(2) Increased Mothers‟ Allowances and care for the disabled. The Department of Social Welfare has 
made some wonderful strides forward in this regard with their main point of interest to bring the 

living standard up, make education possible to people who need it, and at the same time keeping 

the number of inspectors to a minimum, as well as other administration costs. The Social 

Welfare Department, under the last year of Liberal administration, spent only $1,215,000 

compared to $4,498,000 last year by this government. 

 

(3) Increased Old Age Pensions. The last Liberal government spent $783,000 on Old Age & Blind 
Pensioners in 1943-44, in comparison with over $3 million by this government, last year. 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

16 

 

(4) The fourth important point in the C.C.F. election programme means, in practice, two things — 
first, equal educational opportunities for every child in the province, regardless of finances; and 

secondly, children in the country should get just as good teachers and equipment as in the most 

up-to-date and best schools in the cities. 

 

The department has made equally noteworthy improvements in the better type of education being 

given through improved curricula. The expenditures for education in this province have gone up 

from a low of $2,848,000 under the last Liberal government, to over $7,554,000 last year, by this 

government. 

 

The other phase in which this government has tried to improve the lot of the common people of this 

province is economic. This has been done in a great many ways. One of the first and most important has 

been point No. 1 on the 1944 election platform, security in your home, which puts an immediate stop to 

the Banks and Loan companies taking the people‟s land and homes from them because they had a crop 

failure. This was done under the Attorney General‟s department, who fought for the people‟s rights all 

the way through the courts against the Liberals and Loan companies, and other selfishly interested 

people who were trying to gain more privileges at the expense of the unfortunate farmers and home 

owners. 

 

The second point on the 1944 platform and most expansive was real debt reduction. This came under the 

Provincial Treasurer‟s department, one of the honourable members for Regina who has so brilliantly 

handled the finances of this province for the last eight years. Not only was the provincial debt reduced 

from $238,142,000 to $168,049,000 — a reduction of over $70,000,000 but the municipal and relief, 

agricultural aids, seed grain debts, etc., from away back to 1917 — a period of 27 years — have been 

reduced since 1944 over $72,000,000. The 1935, 1936, 1937 seed grain advances, $21,000,000; 1938 

seed grain advances plus refunds on seed grain adjustments, $11,500,000; seed grain and relief account 

back to 1917, $7,381,000. Provincial share of direct relief advances to those in need during depression 

years, $33,000,0000, a total of $72,881,000. The other way in which this government has been able to 

accomplish this is through the Crown Corporations which are designed to give the people service at a 

reasonable cost and any profits made are turned into the treasury or are turned back into the enterprise to 

expand service or to start new ones. 

 

The Department of Natural Resources, under the hon. member for Tisdale (Hon. Mr. Brockelbank), has 

done an excellent job in forest and game conservation, in providing fur and fish marketing service to the 

trappers and fishermen and is to be congratulated for taking these services out of the hands of the dealers 

that formerly run them and are still trying desperately to get hold of them again. I can remember the 

speech given by the hon. member for Athabaska (Mr. Marion), last year, in which he complimented this 

Government on the wonderful work which has been done in the northern part of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Minister is also to be congratulated for his policies on natural resources, which has been so effective 

in the encouraging of such rapid mineral development and yet has preserved such a large share for the 

people of the province. 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

 

17 

While speaking about natural resources, Mr. Speaker, I should like to congratulate the Minister of 

Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) for the preservation and development of our greatest natural resource — 

our land, and the agricultural industry on that land. He is to be congratulated for the lead being given in 

the attempt to preserve the highly fertile soil we have, to make better use of the soil and climate and for 

bringing back into production of some kind, land which had been abandoned because the people did not 

know how to use it. The leasing of government lands is to be highly commended, particularly that of 

new lands which have been set up under the 33-year lease and the co-op farms in conjunction with the 

Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development, formerly under the hon. member for Prince 

Albert (Hon. Mr. McIntosh) and now under the Hon. Mr. Premier. 

 

I want, also, to congratulate the Minister of Power and Telephones, the hon. member for Watrous (Hon. 

Mr. Darling), on those corporations. I remember that, only eight years ago, we have practically no power 

system in this province, with only 13,000 customers, mostly in the cities and larger towns. There were 

only 135 farms electrified. The constituency of Gravelbourg is one of the constituencies with little 

electrification because of the large unsettled area — nonetheless we have quite a lot of electrification. In 

1944 there were no farms in the Gravelbourg constituency electrified and there were only 290 customers 

getting electric power from private companies. This private company was bought out in 1946 and since 

1947 the town customers have gone up from 297 to 616 — the farms from 0 to 55 already hooked up, 

with about another 130 to be hooked up before spring, and projects approved for another 55 farms to be 

hooked up by the end of this year. I was very glad to see that the Minister has announced in the Throne 

Speech that generating and transmitting facilities have been built to a stage where a greatly accelerated 

programme for rural electrification can now be undertaken. 

 

I am very happy to see, also, in the Speech from the Throne that the Minister of Municipal Affairs, the 

hon. member for Prince Albert, is continuing the policy of close co-operation with local governments of 

the municipalities by the set-up of a municipal advisory commission, made up of officials appointed by 

our municipalities and our provincial government. This body will greatly facilitate the plans of S.A.R.M. 

to make any of the necessary re-arrangements of municipal boundaries, to help out those municipalities 

which are at present too small, economically, to do the job they want to do, and to facilitate the other 

business between the two governments. 

 

I have tried to point out, Mr. Speaker, how this government has helped the lot of the average person. The 

government, this year, as in the past six or seven years, has been spending approximately half of its 

budget on health, social welfare and education. The real humanitarian features of this administration 

have improved our way of life tremendously — by better highways, better market roads, bus service, 

real debt reduction, and a good many other ways; but as was pointed out in the Throne Speech, there are 

so many things which are actually out of our direct control but which so seriously regulate our way of 

life, that we feel it necessary to ask our senior government to consider certain things. One of the ways in 

which I feel, as a farmer, that our Federal Government has let us down, is over our wheat again this year. 

The fact that they were so slow and careless in getting last year‟s crop out of 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

18 

 

the way, as well as failing to do something constructive to handle the tough and damp grain in the 

province. The fact that they can spend thousands and hundreds of thousands of dollars on building 

airports, army barracks, bank buildings and war production — yet they cannot find the money to build 

anywhere near enough driers to handle our grain which is already grown and all it needs is drying. 

 

The total elevator capacity in the western division is only 433 million bushels and this includes Fort 

William, Churchill, Vancouver, and all the local elevators and terminals throughout the country, west of 

Fort William. The 1950 crop was estimated, in Saskatchewan only, at 420 million bushels of wheat, oats 

and barley. Manitoba and Alberta had another 420 million bushels. The last crop of 1951 was estimated 

to be much larger. The Board of Grain Commissioners have always told us that it is not practical for the 

average farmer to dry his grain, yet they have let us down completely; and as Mr. Vallance pointed out 

at University Farm Week, about a month ago, that they did not want to lower the quality of Canada‟s 

export wheat by exporting damp or tough or poor wheat last fall. It seems they would sooner have a real 

fire sale of heated and damp grain this spring, or see it spoil within the farmers‟ bins. 

 

I noticed a rather interesting article in the Co-operative Consumer, Saskatchewan weekly co-operative 

paper of January 25th, in which Mr. D.W. Brooks, President of the National Council of Farmer 

Co-operatives told the delegates at the recent annual S.F.C.L. convention, when he was comparing farm 

production by present farmers with farmers of the past, and he pointed out that in 1950, “Per capita 

income of farmers, both from farming and from work they did off the farm, averaged $804, compared to 

an average non-farm income of $1,546 — almost twice as much.” He goes on to say, “Never before 

have so few farmers produced so much, for so many, with such a small return to themselves.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have tried to point out to you the wonderful job which this government has done in 

the past eight years. I do not want to pass without giving credit to the private members on this side of the 

House who have done such a fine job of assisting the government to do their work. 

 

I will support the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before moving to adjourn this debate, I 

would like to say a few words in regard to what has been said this afternoon. I would like to congratulate 

the mover and seconder of the motion, thanking His Honour for the Speech from the Throne, 

considering what they had to work on in the way of the record of the government, and the emptiness of 

the Speech from the Throne has not been exceeded for many, many years — I cannot think back to the 

time when the Speech from the Throne conveyed so little of a constructive nature. I must congratulate 

the mover and the seconder for the good show they put on to try to cover up the poverty of the record 

and the contents of the Speech. 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

 

19 

When so much time is spent on the Federal government, its failure to do this, that and the other thing, in 

this provincial legislature my mind went back to a submission made by the Farmers‟ Union of 

Saskatchewan, headed by a former colleague, a member of this government, and I suppose he knew 

them better than any of us and so, when he says this I think he knew what he was talking about. He was 

speaking very much straight from the shoulder to them. He said, “As a provincial government you must 

be held responsible for those matters and items which do come under provincial jurisdiction and we do 

not feel the best interests of agriculture are necessarily well served when too often an effort is made to 

shift all responsibility for action or inaction upon the shoulders of the senior government.” 

 

You will notice there that the head of the Farmers‟ Union said that he did not think the best interests of 

agriculture are served when too often an effort is made to shift responsibility. He is speaking with 

experience, with knowledge of the present members of the government, and I could not help but think of 

that when both the hon. member for Milestone (Mr. Erb) and the hon. member for Gravelbourg (Mr. 

E.H. Walker) were outlining the shortcomings of the Federal Government. After all, this is a provincial 

legislature and we are dealing with provincial matters. I, of course, could not blame them. There is so 

little in the Speech from the Throne that deals in a constructive way with our provincial problems. I 

could not blame them for dragging in federal matters because, after all, they had to speak about 

something. 

 

And when one thinks about the fact that we have to hear again about the payment on grain, the five-year 

pool and we know that everything the grain was sold for was paid, and that 64 million was contributed 

by the Federal Government, and several of the C.C.F. members from the west did not even bother to 

vote in support of that $64 million contribution, one wonders why so much is made about that. 

 

Then we hear about the transport controller and the fact that he was not appointed soon enough. I 

suggest that the figures will show that more grain has been moved in the same time during the last few 

months than ever before in our history. Something has been said that the C.P.R. should be nationalized. I 

do not know if that is the definite policy of the party opposite, but I do say from experience that it was 

pretty bad in western Canada where there has been a railway monopoly and no competition. I do not 

think the farmers want to be at the mercy of a vast transportation monopoly even if it is controlled by 

some imported experts such as we have had so much experience with before. 

 

We have also heard about the damp grain. We spent a lot of money maintaining an agricultural 

department here, paying the salary of a Minister of Agriculture, but all we have from him is exhortations 

and speeches and so on — I have not seen anything that the provincial department has done to help ease 

this problem. I have certainly heard that the Federal Government has been active in the matter in 

arranging for grain to go down to United States points to be dried, in arranging for driers to be brought 

into Saskatchewan without paying a duty, the same as combines went south, and I have heard of every 

conceivable action that could have been taken being taken by the Federal Government. But what has the 

Provincial Government done? Of course, I cannot blame the 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

20 

 

hon. member who referred to it, because again, I say when his own government has done nothing, he 

must perforce attack the Federal Government. 

 

Now then, this suggestion that hospitalization was provided free without any question of ability to pay. 

As we all know, in the cases today where people cannot pay for hospitalization, it is exactly the same as 

it was before — municipalities have to pay for it. If they do not pay the hospitalization tax, they have to 

pay the whole hospital bill just to the same extent as before. There has been no change. And that brought 

back to mind a letter which I got within the last three or four days — a most moving letter from a 

woman whose husband was sent to jail and had to spend Christmas in jail because he had not paid the 

fine which was imposed, because he did not pay the hospital tax. 

 

I think that most of the members of this House understood from the Minister of Public health that last 

session we were removing the right to send a man to jail for not paying the hospital tax. And yet when 

this unfortunate man was sent to jail just before Christmas I enquired why he was sent to jail. “Oh”, they 

said, “There is a fine point there. He is not sent to jail because he did not pay his tax. He is sent to jail 

because he did not pay the fine which was imposed on him because he did not pay the tax.” That is the 

sort of twisting that the people of this province are getting sick of at the hands of this government. And 

that man served his time in jail and he served it in effect because he did not pay that hospitalization tax. 

 

As I say, the letter I got from his wife speaking about their straitened financial conditions and the fact 

that her husband was sent to jail because he did not pay the fine for not paying the tax, was a moving 

letter. And I could not help but think of that when the Minister was taking so much credit for this 

government. 

 

In regard to cancer there is an attempt continually being made to take sole credit to the C.C.F. for this 

humanitarian legislation. Everybody in the province knows, except some of our young people who 

perhaps do not know any better; however, I would not want our young members put in that category, but 

most of us know that the basis was laid for free treatment of cancer patients before this government 

came into office. It was initiated by the government led by Dr. Anderson, and it was carried on to a point 

where provision was made by all the necessary legislation in the session of 1944. When that government 

(the Liberal Government) was turned out of office in 1944, it naturally could not carry out the 

programme for which it had made provision. There is a very hollow laugh from the Minister of Natural 

Resources. From what I hear, he needs to laugh to keep up his courage. I know they are getting sick and 

tired of him in the north, all right. 

 

I was very glad that the hon. member for Gravelbourg (Mr. E.H. Walker) reviewed the promises upon 

which this government was elected because it certainly was a gallant effort to try to make out that 

somehow or another they had done something to try and carry out their promises. But the fact remains 

how immeasurably this government has failed 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

 

21 

to carry out its promises since elected. And I think we owe him a debt of gratitude for bringing that to 

public attention. 

 

I do not intend to deal with what the hon. members said much further but (I will deal with it tomorrow, 

don‟t worry); if I dealt with all the shortcomings of this government and their complete failure to meet 

the needs of this province, I would need to speak for a great length of time. I would need to — the 

subject deserves it! I think that the crowning irony of the Speech from the Throne was this: Here we are, 

in the middle of an agricultural province, predominantly agricultural — the greatest agricultural 

province in the whole Dominion of Canada. This government has been in office seven and a half years, 

and they still do not know what the agricultural problems of this province are. Isn‟t that really 

something! They have got to set up a Commission now to find out what the agricultural problems are. Is 

it not incredible? If I had not read it myself in the Speech from the Throne, I would think that I had 

misunderstood. Here is what the Speech from the Throne says, Mr. Speaker: 

 

“It is deemed advisable, therefore, to appoint a Royal Commission to investigate the problems that 

have arisen in our agricultural economy.” 

 

Think of it, Mr. Speaker. Here they are in office for seven and a half years, and they have to set up a 

Royal Commission to investigate what problems farmers have. 

 

Well, in that speech they admit their complete failure to meet the problems of agriculture in this 

province. If they do not know what they are — how can they meet them; so they set up an agricultural 

commission, after being in office seven and a half years. They may say the Farmers‟ Union asked them 

to do this. I think the Farmers‟ Union asked them out of sheer desperation. The Farmers‟ Union saw 

them here for seven and a half years, and they still did not know what the problems were, so they 

thought that maybe if they got them to set up a commission, we may be able to get the facts across to 

them, and the needs of our agricultural problems. 

 

Now then, we heard the same old story of debt reduction. I thought that boast was late. This government 

taking credit for $70 million of debt reduction which were made by the Federal Government, cancelling 

$36 million outright, by paying us $8 million in lieu of our claim for our natural resources, which 

amounts to $44 million, by the payment of the Wheat Pool of a debt which we guaranteed, by the 

payment of other indirect debts. It is just the same, Mr. Speaker, as if I endorsed notes for somebody and 

they paid them off, and I said, “Look what a wonderful job I have done in reducing my debt.” But 

outside of that, Mr. Speaker, the debt has gone up. I remember in 1948 the speech made by the Premier. 

He was so carried away by this situation that he said, “Why, if you keep us in office for another ten 

years, we would be out of debt.” I will be very interested to hear just whether we are reducing our debt 

outside of what other people have paid. 

 

That is one of the optimistic things that was held out to the people by the Premier and those that support 

him. But this whole problem 



 

February 11, 1952 

 

22 

 

of how this government has failed to deal with the needs of this province and the complete lack of 

anything really constructive to meet our needs in the Speech from the Throne, except a great deal of 

propaganda, is such an inviting thing that I do not think I should attempt to go any further into it now, 

and I will beg leave to move the adjournment of this debate. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:40 o‟clock P.M. 


