



















































Hansard: February 22, 1952


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eleventh Legislature 

11th Day 

 

Friday, February 22, 1952 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — A representative of the Board of Grain Commissioners 

interviewed us today, and since all hon. members are vitally concerned about the damp grain situation, I 

wish to tell you that we have been assured the representatives that they will be able to handle the damp 

wheat problem and there is no likelihood of any of the damp grain spoiling; and we will therefore not 

have a salvage problem. I should correct that and say „damp wheat‟. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — I wish to announce that the province has borrowed $20 

million for a period of 20 years at a rate of interest of 4 per cent. The balance was sold at par. This deal 

was done privately by a syndicate headed by the Dominion Securities Corporation. The deal is the 

largest Canadian provincial one ever placed privately in the United States. It is expected that this will 

look after the borrowing for the next fiscal year, 1952-53, including the refunding which will have to be 

done during the year. This borrowing is all the more favourable since in recent deals, other provinces 

have been paying a higher rate for smaller amounts for one-half the length of the term — that is, for 10 

years instead of for 20 years. 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to call your attention to the fact 

that something has occurred which affects the privilege of all members of this House was concerned; 

and I am sure that you did not hear any more yesterday, and it brought up a question which I draw to 

your attention and draw to the attention of the members of this House. 

 

On the re-broadcast, on the occasion when the Premier was rising to contradict something said by the 

hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) my impression was that after the Premier had made his 

observations that he went on to more or less make other remarks. My impression was that Your Honour 

was calling him to order. However, the way it came over the radio was a different impression altogether. 

Things were heard by the radio audience that were not heard by the people on this side of the House, and 

I am sure by yourself, Mr. Speaker, or you would have intervened. 

 

Now, while you were calling for order, apparently the hon. Premier was talking very closely into the 

microphone, and his voice was coming over much louder than yours, and one of the things, when you 

were calling for „Order! Order!‟ was that the hon. Premier went right on 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

2 

talking into the microphone; and one of the things that I was amazed to hear was in the course of these 

proceedings, that the Premier uttered the expression „tissue of lies‟. 

 

I want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, that if we had heard that on this side, that remarkable — and I might 

say impudent — statement, that these facts that were given by the hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. 

Cameron) were a tissue of lies, we would have drawn it to your attention, Your Honour, and I think you 

would have dealt with it; but you did not hear it, and we did not hear it; and why I bring it up, Mr. 

Speaker, is this — that, as we go out in the country, somebody is likely to say, at one of our meetings, 

„why the Premier branded your speech as a tissue of lies.‟ We would have said we never heard it, and 

the people in the country would have said, “Well, we heard it.‟ 

 

Well now, it is getting to be something that should be considered by this Legislature — if the Premier is 

going to go on talking into the microphone when you call for order, and if he is able to say things to the 

people of the province that the members of the Legislature do not hear; in other words, it upsets the 

whole basis of debate, and your chance to regulate it, Mr. Speaker. This is something that has to be 

given attention to, because it would be an outrageous state of affairs if a person in the Premier‟s position 

can say things over the radio that are not heard on this side, but they are heard by all the province, and 

not heard by Your Honour. 

 

I draw this to your attention, Mr. Speaker, because I am sure, you, had you heard that outrageous 

statement by the Premier, would have insisted that he resume his seat and obey your order. And I want 

to say further, that had we, on this side, heard that statement, that ridiculous statement in regard to the 

hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) that he was handing out a „tissue of lies‟, we would have 

repudiated it with all the energy we cold; because it was an uncalled for statement. 

 

What the member for Maple Creek said yesterday was substantiated over and over again in this House; 

and for the Premier to say that over the radio was quite uncalled for. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Tucker) of course has the privilege of drawing 

something to the attention of this House; but I might say that as long as this radio is going on, something 

may be picked up by the radio that I, myself, do not hear; and I am going to ask all the members that 

when I call them to order and try to keep the proceedings of the House in order — and that does not 

apply only to the Premier — that they will obey the rulings of the House. I had no cognizance of that 

going over the radio. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — This is a matter affecting the privileges of all the members of this Legislature. This is a 

debate in the Legislature, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is true, and you have drawn it to our attention, and . . . 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

3 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, in the light of Your Honour‟s remarks, so that you may control what does go out 

over the air, I do suggest that when a person is called to order, you should have some control so that if 

the member does not obey your order in some way, he shall be cut off the air; because otherwise you 

have no control over proceedings. That was shown yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If I enforced the orders, there would be a lot of members of this Legislature that would 

be named; because there are many, many members of this Legislature who do not obey the call of order, 

or sometimes, after a specific call of order, they continue speaking. Now, I have no opportunity to go 

over the radio script; that is already going out, and I cannot help that; and as you draw to the attention of 

the House, I did not hear the Premier made that statement, and maybe the Premier can explain — I do 

not know. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I wonder if the House would consider going on to Special Order and leaving the 

answering of questions until later in the day. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — When the debate was adjourned, there was an amendment moved by Mr. Cameron, 

seconded by Mr. McCormack, which I took under consideration. I have decided to allow the 

amendment, and instead of taking up the time of the Legislature with my remarks, these remarks will be 

included in the Votes and Proceedings, and the debate now, then, will be on the amendment submitted 

by Mr. Cameron, seconded by Mr. McCormack. 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed, from Thursday, February 21, 1952, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

Mr. Erb for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne, and the proposed amendment thereto 

by Mr. Cameron. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I was very much entertained 

with the very good speech of the member for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Dundas) yesterday afternoon, 

and I want to say that I will certainly miss him in this House. He and I have been the same number of 

years in this Legislature, although he happened to be here four years when I was not here, and I 

happened to be here four years when he was absent; there was certainly a touch of colour missing. 

 

We hope that his health is not too bad, and that he will live to enjoy very many more years. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

4 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I thought that the hon. member‟s speech had a good deal more sense 

than either of the speeches made by the other two members yesterday afternoon. 

 

for example, the member for Estevan (Mr. McCormack) proceeded to review an old radio speech which 

he had made just before New Year‟s; and in addition to the radio speech being not too good, the review 

itself was exceedingly dull. but, I was taken with one statement which the member for Estevan made in 

that review, when he called attention to his opening sentence in the radio speech. He said, “Within a few 

days, a brand new year will begin for all of us,” and you know, Mr. Speaker, I believed that that was 

true, until yesterday afternoon, when the member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) put the old cracked 

record of 191 on again and started it going round and round. We heard the same record of 1951 going 

round and round, and I thought sure we were back again in 1951. 

 

I will not have the time to deal, in detail, with all the wrong information given to this House by the 

member for Maple Creek, but I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that most of it was wrong. I do intend to 

deal with a few of the items which he touched on yesterday. He mentioned gulf Securities. Mr. Rhubbra, 

who is one of the officials of Gulf Securities, was getting permits on 14 million acres. Now, I know the 

member for maple Creek is not too particular, but I must inform the House that the land on which Mr. 

Rhubbra actually got permits was 9 million acres, not 14 million acres. of course, to him, a mere matter 

of 5 million acres may be neither here nor there when it comes to producing evidence which is correct. 

He mentioned the press release of January 22 and May 10. The January 22, 1949 press release said: 

 

“Possibilities of oil development in Saskatchewan have caught the imagination of oil men”, Natural 

Resources Minister, J.H. Brockelbank, said today, “with the result that applications for exploration 

permits covering about one-third of the Crown mineral rights in the southern half of the province have 

been received from such interests during the past six weeks.” 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

5 

Now, Mr. Speaker, he went on then to the press release of May 10, 1949. The May 10th release stated 

that: 

 

“Rights for oil and gas exploration covering more than 21 million acres of Saskatchewan Crown lands 

had been allotted to oil companies up to the present, Natural Resources Minister Brockelbank 

announced today,” 

 

And then it goes on to say that new applications were coming in faster than that Department could 

handle them. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is one trouble that the Liberals never did have — applications 

coming in faster than they could handle them. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is that, up until May 10th, a good quantity, quite a substantial quantity, of the 

permits which are now held by Tidewater were included in these amounts; approximately 4 million 

acres of the permits now held by Tidewater were included in those amounts. And so I do not think there 

is anything extraordinary about the amount of acreage that was being taken up at that time. The rush for 

land in Saskatchewan was on and everybody, except the Liberals, was very happy to see it. They had 

prophesied over and over again that there would be no exploration for oil, that there would be no risk 

capital put into this province, and certainly they were disappointed to see that risk capital coming in to 

do the job of exploration here. 

 

The member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron), using his fictitious figure of 14 million acres, said that 

that was the biggest monopoly that had ever been foisted upon the province. In addition to pointing out 

that it was 9 million acres rather than 14 million, I would also point out that this land went to the 

Tidewater group, which is composed of four companies and not one company. I would also point out to 

the members of this House that, previous to the time when we took office, one company held 20 million 

acres. It is wonderful how quickly a Liberal can forget what he wants to forget, and get all messed up the 

actual information which he is supposed to keep straight. 

 

The Imperial Oil Company — and I do not want any of the Liberal members quoting me in saying that I 

have said nasty things, today, about the Imperial Oil Company — is a smart company. They know their 

business, and because there was a dumb government, dumb enough to give them the kind of a deal they 

got, was no fault of the Imperial Oil. The Leader of the Opposition, (Mr. Tucker), stated, in his speech, 

that I had said that I would not deal with Imperial Oil Company. What I actually did say was that I 

would not deal with Imperial Oil Company or any other company on those terms; and it makes an 

absolute lie out of it, Mr. Speaker, when you quote the first part of that kind of a statement and leave the 

last part off; but that is the kind of stuff that the Liberals are good at in regard to this exploration 

programme. 

 

Now do not let it be forgotten either, when my hon. friends over there talk about monopoly, that in this 

20 million acres there was not one acre of Crown reserves set up — not one acre of Crown reserves — it 

was all gone. The royalty was 10 per cent, not 12½ per cent, nor a graduated royalty from 5 to 15 per 

cent. There was very little work required, and 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

6 

There was a long-term in which to do the work. It was an excellent agreement for Imperial Oil, but the 

had to abandon it. A lot of stories are told about why they abandoned it. In the „Leader-Post‟ the other 

day, on the editorial page, there was the article entitled “Six million dry hold dollars.” Hon. members 

might have noticed one paragraph in that report which reads this way: 

 

“So far, no oil has been found. The hopes of the company‟s oil seekers as to possibilities in 

Saskatchewan began to dwindle. At the same time, the results of exploration in Alberta made that 

province appear a more promising area, and in 1946 the company decided to concentrate its effort 

there.” 

 

That is why Imperial Oil left, because of the development which was taken place in Alberta. And even 

Imperial Oil is under the necessity of paying some attention to their budget. Even Imperial Oil Company 

is not in the fortunate position of the Leader of the Opposition, (Mr. Tucker), or the member for Arm 

River (Mr. Danielson), that they can build up a budget out of a hat, with all the money they want and 

reduce all the taxes at the same time; but when the Imperial Oil Company goes to dig for oil they have to 

have dollars to do it — real dollars — not those stage dollars that are pulled out of a hat. 

 

The statement was made that Mr. Rhubbra will receive $1,200,000 a year in royalties if oil is 

discovered. How do you know, Mr. Speaker? Who knows? If our friends over there are good at knowing 

these things, there are oil companies that would be willing to give them something for telling where the 

oil is; but as a matter of fact, if our programme of exploration for oil is no more successful than the 

Liberal programme, then I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Rhubbra will not get very much out of 

his over-riding royalties. In fact he will get nothing. and anyway, this money — any money that he may 

receive or that Gulf Securities may receive — will not be paid out of any share of the proceeds that are 

coming to the people of the province of Saskatchewan and is not being paid by the oil company. As a 

matter of fact, a high official in Tidewater stated that they had been in to look over the situation before 

that time, but he said there had not been, in their opinion, sufficient good geological evidence to make it 

attractive to them when they took into consideration the other opportunities they had to take on 

exploration programmes in other places. They could have had this land without an over-riding royalty, 

and he also stated that they were not particular about doing business that way, and they did not mind 

paying it to a man who had gone in first. But the important thing to remember is that any of that 

over-riding royalty that is paid is not paid out of any share that is coming to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

May I inform the House, too, that as far as I know Saskatchewan is the only province that has made any 

attempt whatsoever to control the amount of the over-riding royalties, and we do exercise control and we 

will not allow transfers with unlimited over-riding royalty which may, when you get into production, 

cause difficulty, and actually could result in shutting 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

7 

down the field. The member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) also spoke of Barclay Oils, and he said 

they had a paid-up capital of $3.00. I do not suppose he knows, Mr. Speaker, that under the ordinary 

Company Law, companies are usually organized with, as a start, three people who are the directors and 

they have to own one share each, but that is factual, and most companies are organized on a basis like 

that at the start. 

 

Actually this particular company, in May, had $1,053 paid-up capital. Now that still is not very much 

but again may I point out that to the member for Maple Creek it is apparently just a mere detail that the 

difference between $3.00 and $1,053 is still $1,050. That was in May. The permit was granted to them 

in October, but the important thing is, how did they perform? They did a gravity meter survey of that 

land in 1950 and a seismic survey has been done on it in 1951. That seismic survey cost in the 

neighbourhood of $35,000. 

 

He mentioned Albercan, intimating that Albercan was a small and irresponsible company. Albercan, I 

believe, was organized — I had the information here a minute ago — I think in the United States, but 

that is not the important part; here is the important thing — in 1951 Albercan spent, on exploration in all 

of their permits, $433,307, a fairly substantial exploration programme for one of the medium-sized 

companies. And in addition, the original holders of these permits — and may I point out to the House 

that the original holders were neither Shumiatcher nor Havard — did over $60,000 of work before they 

assigned them to Albercan. 

 

Now let us come to National Petroleums — and again there is just a slight inaccuracy of 75,000 acres. 

the member said 600,000 acres; it actually is about 525,000 acres. What have they done? They have 

done a gravity meter and air magnetometer surveys over the area. Shumiatcher and Havard were the 

agents for this company and got the permits in the name of national Petroleums. They paid the fees for 

getting the permits. They organized the company and paid the expenses of organization, and they raised 

money by looking after the selling of shares in the company. Incidentally, this company is very largely a 

local company, with local stockholders. They raised about $40,000, which was put into this work of 

exploration that I have just mentioned. The member for Maple Creek said they received $15,000 and 

25,000 shares — I think that is what he said. Actually, they received $8,500 in cash and 1/10 of the 

shares in the company, or 25,000 shares. Now what has happened subsequently? These permits have 

been assigned to Charles C. Hay. What were the considerations? A cash consideration of $100. In 

addition, $7,900 and a one per cent royalty to be paid out of oil and gas produced in the area. In other 

words, National Petroleums will not get that $7,900 nor the one per cent unless oil or gas is produced in 

that area. Shumiatcher and Havard have a 10 per cent interest in national Petroleums. Let my hon. 

friends get out their pencils and figure out 1/10 of what they may get out of that deal. 

 

This might be a good place to spend a moment or two explaining what rights a permitee gets. let it be 

clear that there is a difference between a permit and a lease. A permit only gives to the holder the right 

to explore, not the right o produce and take away any of the materials on or under that land. My hon. 

friend from Maple Creek was very emphatic, two or three times, as other s have been, in mentioning the 

costs of the permits as being 1/10 of a cent an acre. Mr. Speaker, that is pure nonsense. That is just the 

kind of misrepresentation founded on a little bit of fact which 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

8 

the Liberals in this province, like to spread around. The fee for issuing the permit is $250, it is not the 

price of the permit, it is an office fee. The price of the permit — the real consideration in the permit is 

that the holder of that permit undertakes to do a job of exploration which may cost him hundreds of 

thousands or millions of dollars to explore that land; and in exploring the land he explores also the 

Crown reserves, and I might mention that he also explores the privately held mineral rights for the 

C.P.R. and the Hudson Bay Company at the same time. He cannot help it, he is the victim of 

circumstances. But that is the real price that he pays. 

 

And then, when it comes to the end of the permit term, or when he discovers oil or gas in commercial 

quantities, then he can take leases, but he cannot take leases on those Crown reserves, and under the old 

regulations, which govern in regard to most of our land at the present time in Saskatchewan, that 25 per 

cent of Crown reserve, checkerboarded over the area, remains the property of the Crown. Under the new 

regulations, the Crown reserves vary from 40 to 60 per cent of the Crown-owned mineral rights in any 

township; and in that case the Crown reserves are not selected until the permitee goes to lease, and then 

there is a system whereby he selects what he wants to lease, and he must leave at least 40 per cent — 

from 40 to 60 per cent of the land in a township — as Crown reserve. 

 

Mention was made of Search Corporation and a couple of concessions, and these people in Search 

Corporation —again Shumiatcher and Havard, who are apparently being made the whipping boys for 

the Liberal party in the province — were supposed to have made some big and easy money out of these 

concessions. Here is the story on ZZ concession. It was 12 square miles, they paid $500 for it, they 

posted a $500 bond to guarantee work, and they sold it for $1,000 cash and shares in a company which 

they were supposed to get and never did get. What is the story in regard to LL concession? It is 25 

square miles and there was a $500 fee for it. They put in work on it, the first year, of $9,508 and put up a 

bond of $500. They assigned it, they received $7,500 cash, even though they had already put more than 

$10,000 cash into it, and 20,000 shares in Northern Uraniums, which also is a local company with 

several fairly prominent people in the city being shareholders and directors of it . . . 

 

Hon. Member: — Liberals as well! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, there are certainly some good Liberals in that company too. but I 

would suggest to my hon. friends that if any of their friends would like to buy some shares in Northern 

Uraniums, if they would offer Search Corporation $500 for these 20,000 shares, they might be surprised 

and find themselves shareholders in Northern Uraniums. It is a different thing to get up on the platform, 

or get up in this House, and talk about the $15,000 and the 25,000 shares worth 40 cents apiece, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think you could actually have them for 2½ cents apiece — but that is the kind of cloth 

that is tailored to make the stories that we often hear about these things. 

 

In this concession, 21 claims were staked, and the balance was open to staking on July 2, 1951. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

9 

Now the hon. member for Maple Creek said, in his speech, yesterday, it is essential that these names of 

individuals be brought out. Why? Actually, Mr. Speaker, these people who have, in a small way, done 

do something towards organizing companies, getting together some capital, to province a service, while 

the company of the hon. member for Saltcoats, (Mr. Loptson) gets a permit and does not do a thing on it 

and lets it go. People have got to do the job if it is going to be done, and I think to those local people 

who have had the courage to go to work to do an exploration job on our resources there is a great deal of 

credit coming. And people in the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, refer to them over and over again as friends 

of the C.C.F. One of these days the Leader of the Opposition will be saying, “Hear, hear” to a statement 

that the hon. Senator Thomas H. Wood is a friend of the C.C.F. One of these days he will be saying 

“Hear, hear” to a statement to the effect that some of the leading Liberals connected with McCallum Hill 

and company are friends of the C.C.F. But unless he gets a little more sense into his policies and a little 

better understanding with regard to the mineral and oil resources of the province of Saskatchewan, he 

will probably force even those people to have a complete lack of confidence in him and in his group. 

 

Senator Wood came to my office representing a company which could hardly be called a friend of the 

C.C.F. and got a permit to explore for oil. Likewise the company called Canadian Devonian, in which 

the Hills of Regina are very prominent, have got a permit in one of the best areas of the province, down 

by Estevan, so that I do not know why my hon. friends wants to distort the facts when they talk about 

this situation of the friends of the C.C.F. 

 

And then the member for Maple Creek referred to Mr. Young and Mr. Hirshorn as fraudulent racketeers. 

I do not think he would do that outside of this House, I think he was cowering in the shelter of 

legislative immunity when he said that here. Joseph Hirshorn is undoubtedly a very smart businessman, 

but I want to tell you this, that he has a record of organization and development of mining companies all 

across Canada. Preston E.D. mines is one of the outstanding Canadian mines with which he is 

connected. He has had several other successful ventures all across Canada. As far as Mr. M.E. Young is 

concerned, I informed the House last year that this man was a veteran of the first world war, that he was 

in the brokerage business in Toronto, and in the crash of 1929 he, together with hundreds of others, was 

caught, and action was taken against half a dozen or so of them and he was one of the unfortunate ones 

against whom action was taken. He went to jail, he paid the price. But I want to also point out to my 

hon. friends that, afterwards, he was in the army during the second world war and he was an officer of 

high rank, representing the Canadian government in the city of Washington. 

 

These are the people that my hon. friends referred to, in the shelter of this House, as fraudulent 

racketeers. Actually they would like to call everybody who dares to come into this province and invest 

money by names that would frighten them away from this province. 

 

Mr. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — On a question of privilege, Mr. Speaker. As Your Honour of 

course knows, the hon. Minister of Natural Resources has no right to make such a charge of disloyalty 

against the members of the Opposition. He is 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

10 

imputing motives to us that we would like to keep people out of the province. He said that and I ask that 

you ask him to withdraw, Mr. Speaker, because his statement, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely false and the 

Minister knows it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I suggest that actions speak louder than words. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I know that my opinions probably be distasteful to my hon. 

friends, but I still have the right to express my opinions, and it certainly is my considered opinion that 

the Liberal politicians, in this province and otherwise throughout Canada, and the Liberals press, has 

done everything they can to prevent capital coming to develop the resources of this province. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Tucker: — If you will not make the hon. member withdraw that — I say it is a lie and he knows it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member may know what his own opinions are — I 

sometimes doubt it — but he does not know what my opinions are, and when I express my opinions he 

cannot tell me that those are not my opinions. They are my opinions. 

 

The hon. Leader of the Opposition was saying something about motives, and I was just coming to that 

subject, because this strange behaviour of what would otherwise appear to be normal citizens of the 

province of Saskatchewan is rather hard to understand, and I wonder what are the motives which make 

the members in the Opposition, particularly some of them, and some of the Liberal campaigners out on 

the stump, take this line. I think one thing may help to explain it, and I would suggest that the Liberal 

party in this province is desperate today. Even the „Star-Phoenix‟, who certainly cannot be classed as 

unfriendly to the Liberals, on April 7, 1951, in an editorial, stated as follows — this was just after the 

close of the last regular session of the House, and I quote: 

 

“The Opposition has been unsuccessful in finding an issue in provincial affairs that will serve as a 

rallying ground for the opponents of the government.” 

 

They are desperate, Mr. Speaker. They have not been able to find any issue and so they do not depend 

on logic or fact, they depend on fiction and superstition and ignorance and fear. Those things are their 

stock-in-trade in their campaigning. 

 

Hon. Member: — Mostly ignorance. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — Who writes your speeches for you? 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

11 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — A better man than writes your speeches. 

 

In addition, I am afraid that I have to admit that these are normal Liberal tactics. I have been in politics 

in this province since 1938 and I have seen quite a bit of it. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff (Melfort): — You won‟t be here much longer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The hon. member for Melfort has not been here for very long, and will not 

be. I may be short on one end, but he is going to be short on both ends. 

 

It is the tactics that the Liberals have used, to appeal to superstition and fear to frighten people. I think I 

have informed this House before, but I must bring it to your attention again, that I once was at a public 

meeting in a campaign when there was a Liberal Cabinet Minister speaking. I was there with another 

C.C.F. member of the legislature — both of us happen to be veterans of the first world war, the other 

one served also in the second world war — and that Liberal Cabinet Minister referred to us in the C.C.F. 

as Nazis. Mr. Speaker, it is kind of dirty — it is a pretty dirty kind of stuff, but those are the tactics they 

use. And then, to make matters worse, even though I had only been in the legislature a year or so at that 

time, and that Cabinet Minister had had 10 years, when he was asked to give us an opportunity to reply 

to that charge, they would not let us say a word. That is the kind of free speech and bullying tactics that 

the Liberals use whenever they get in a pinch. They won that by-election on those tactics, by frightening 

the people in that constituency, appealing to their superstition and fear. 

 

The Liberals have a record, and they have not, as I have said, based their appeal to the public on logic or 

facts. In 1936, there was an article published in the Journal of Economics and Political Science about the 

Liberal machine in Saskatchewan prior to 1929. Here is an extract, and I do not think when this article 

was published that there were any libel suits instituted against the writer either. He is speaking about 

how the Liberal party used to interfere, even in the business of the churches. He said: 

 

“If two ministers were being considered for a local church, he (the boss man) would ask for reports 

from the party workers in the district in which they were then living. In one such instance one man 

was reported as having no politics and the other as being an ardent Conservative worker. The word 

was passed to the members of the party who were on the church nominating committee and the 

Conservative was not appointed.” 

 

That is the kind of stuff they used to do. He is another one: 

 

“A furniture dealer in a small town might, for instance, be told that if he and his family did not transfer 

their allegiance from the Conservatives to the Liberals, they would get no government business.” 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

12 

And here is another interesting excerpt: 

 

“The Saskatchewan Liberal machine was efficient, but it was corruption which furnished it with many 

of its workers, and when it could not win converts by legitimate persuasion, it did not shrink from 

using corrupt methods. Seldom, though, did it corrupt by buying votes with money, it used a more 

sophisticated method, when seducing an individual, of offering him a job or a contract and when it 

tried to seduce a section it offered a road or a public building.” 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You must have made a careful study of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I do not know whether the Leader of the Opposition is proud of the record 

of the Liberal party or not, if I were him I would not be. 

 

Then we come to something more recent. I said they appealed to fear, and they do too. In 1943, the year 

in which there should have been an election in the province of Saskatchewan, a civil servant wrote to 

Mr. Matte, who was head of the Northern Areas Branch at that time, and he wrote this letter about the 

people in the constituency of my hon. friend from Athabasca, and this is what he said: 

 

“If there were no prospects of an election I would recommend that relief be practically discontinued, 

although I am sure relief will be needed the last two months of the summer at least.” 

 

Those were the tactics and have been the tactics of the Liberal party. Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for 

Arm River (Mr. Danielson) made a speech . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I will make one again too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . on the radio, and I have no doubt that he will make another one, but I 

doubt if it will be any better than the last one. In that speech he ridiculed the whole organization of the 

C.C.F. He ridiculed the idea of the people of this province who believe in the C.C.F. taking a $5.00, 

$10.00 or $20.00 membership. But I want to point out to him that that is one of the fundamental 

differences between the C.C.F. and the Liberal party, because we get our political financial support from 

the rank and file people and not from big business. That is where we get it. It comes in by $5.00 and 

$10.00 . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — $500,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, that is the kind of stuff the Liberals get from Beauharnois, they got 

$700,000. In studying this question of the motives of the Liberal party, it shows how they so distort the 

facts in regard to our programme of exploration. I come to one more reason — and that is the Liberal 

record of squandering natural resources in Canada. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

13 

Someone on this side of the House made a remark about the Liberals squandering natural resources and 

the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) interjected “What a joke.” I want him to listen to the joke. In 

1908 in the House of Commons there was a debate on the forest resources of Western Canada and 

particularly Saskatchewan. Mr. W.F. MacLean in the House of Commons debate of that year said: 

 

“We are about to build up a forest reservation on the principle that made rich men by a reckless 

alienation of public lands and we propose to make them richer by buying that land back again which 

originally belonged to the people.” 

 

And the Minister of the Interior, Mr. Oliver, in the Liberal Government at Ottawa said, at that time, or 

just before that time: 

 

“The purpose of the government in administering timber is to produce revenue.” 

 

The Minister of the Interior said that the purpose was to produce revenue. Let us see how they go about 

producing revenue. On May 19, 1908, Mr. H.B. Ames, who we may rest assured was not a Liberal in 

that Liberal government, said: 

 

“Within a comparatively short period of 3½ years more than 300,000 square miles of selected timber, 

that is to say about one-half of the entire area under lease in the western provinces, fell into the hands, 

not of operators, but of speculators.” 

 

To illustrate this point further, Mr. Ames contended that the Burrows-Fraser combination . . . Mr. 

Speaker, would anybody like to know who the Burrows-Fraser combination was? Burrows was later 

Senator Burrows. He got his reward. And Fraser was the President of the Liberal Club in Ottawa. There 

you are. This combination held holdings of 250 blocks and if they were placed end to end they would 

form a continuous strip of thick timber one mile wide from Montreal to Winnipeg. That is the kind of 

stuff they dealt in in those days. He goes on to point out and to mention then a —par deal that took place 

between Big River and Prince Albert. Mr. Ames said: 

 

“There is no such demand as that in the history of the whole department, 500 square miles to be 

selected out of an area of 7,000 square miles. Both the area of selection and other features in 

connection with it were most unusual. It is impossible to understand at first sight how the department 

should have been persuaded to put such a proposition up. Think of the magnitude of it. It meant a 

monopoly on the timber resources of Prince Albert for practically all time.” 

 

Here is how it was advertised. One advertisement in the Manitoba „Free Press‟ and one in the Prince 

Albert „Advocate‟, the time allowed from the time the advertisement left Ottawa until the bid got back to 

Ottawa was 38 days from Ottawa to Ottawa. That meant four weeks for the people of Prince Albert to 

look their timber over and get in their bids. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

14 

Protests galore poured in to the Minister of Interior. Among them a telegram from the mayor of Prince 

Albert, who said, in the telegram: 

 

“People of Prince Albert protest against sale of timber berth north of river. Timber limits passing into 

hands of speculators to the detriment of settlers. J.F. Anstow, Mayor.” 

 

That was addressed to the hon. Clifford Sifton, everybody knows him. And another one to the Hon. 

Clifford Sifton from the President of the Board of Trade in Prince Albert, John H. Wilson, sending a 

resolution passed by the Board of Trade, protesting this way of handling the timber, asking for more 

time and asking for it to be put up in small, 30 square mile blocks instead of 250 square mile blocks. 

And here is the answer they got from the Minister of Interior: 

 

“As these berths were put up and advertised in the ordinary manner it was not thought advisable to 

make any change.” 

 

What is the result? Five thousand dollars was bid for the first choice and $1,000 for the second choice. 

The person who was successful in getting the first choice had first right to pick about 250 square miles 

out of the 7,000 square mile area. The man who got second choice could pick put the next 250 square 

miles. A.W. Fraser, at one time president of the Ottawa Liberal Club, using the name of William Brown 

of Prince Albert, but acting under the instructions of T.A. Burrows put in a bid in the name of the Big 

River Lumber Company for the first choice of $5,000 and again, this time using John McBains‟s name, 

he put a tender for the second choice, that was $1,000. The result was that Mr. Burrows in this way 

acquired these two berths, comprising 500 square miles with the right of selection out of 7,000 square 

miles for the sum of $6,000, or $12 per square mile or 2 cents per acre. Mr. Ames said in the House of 

Commons in 1908: 

 

“Today one-half the timber areas in the western provinces are in speculators‟ hands and for these areas 

the country has received a mere bagatelle. Our three provinces have been despoiled. The day will 

come when there will be handed over to these provinces the ragged remnants of the land which should 

have been theirs long ago, but before that is done practically all timber of value will have been given 

away. These are the assets which these provinces should have in order to develop themselves to carry 

on their internal affairs.” 

 

That is one outstanding example of how the Liberals handled natural resources for the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another one more recently. The Canadian National Railways has approximately 

three million acres of oil rights in the Province of Saskatchewan. These lands were given to the railway 

companies that finally went into the pot to stir up the brew that we call the Canadian National Railway 

today. The lands were taken over by the C.N.R. and therefore, through taking over the railways and 

these lands, they come back again as publicly owned lands, — about three million acres. They have the 

mineral rights for those lands. Does anyone know what has happened to the 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

15 

mineral rights in connection with those lands? The Hon. Leader of the Opposition had a news item in the 

paper on February 11th this year. He was down at Swift Current on a nominating convention and the 

headline was, “Tucker Accuses Government of Iron Curtain Tactics.” I want to take him down and show 

him an iron curtain in the House of Commons. Mr. Wright, C.C.F. member for Melfort, moved in the 

House of Commons for a copy of any agreement or agreements made between the Canadian National 

Railway and Imperial Oil Company Limited in regard to the exploration and development of mineral oil 

resources on the said company‟s land. I can just picture any member on the other side of the House 

moving a motion for a return to produce any of the agreements that we have made with the oil 

companies in this province and not get it. Mr. Speaker, the ceiling would not be high enough to hold 

them. They would be wild, even wilder than they are now. They had a recorded vote on this motion in 

the House. How did they vote? Well, there are so many Liberals in the House of Commons at Ottawa 

that I am not going to read all of their names, but there are a few local ones here. And the people who 

voted against giving this information, the people who voted against the motion; Baker, Liberal member 

for the Battlefords; Boucher, Liberal member for Rosthern; Dewar, for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley; Ferrie for 

Mackenzie; Helme for Prince Albert and McCusker for Regina; Studer for Maple Creek; Whiteside for 

Swift Current and if the hon. Leader of the Opposition had been at Ottawa I would also have been able 

to read out the name Tucker. He would have voted with his friends and would have refused to give to 

the people of Saskatchewan this information. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff (Melfort): — Will the hon. Minister permit a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — If it is a short one and not a speech. 

 

Mr. Egnatoff: — No, it is a short one Mr. Minister. Would your government table in this House any 

agreements made between any of your Crown Corporations and any other parties? The Government 

Insurance, for instance, agreements with any private individual, the loans you have made to them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That is a question I think will be sufficiently dealt with but I want to point 

out to this House — may I point out to this House that this is a question of three million acres of oil 

lands belonging to the people of Canada, and what interest have we in them? This province, and other 

neighbouring provinces, gave that three million acres of land to these railway companies to help them 

with their capitalization to get them here. In other words, a subsidy to get railway service and cheap 

railway service. What do they do now? They have these mineral rights which, on three million acres 

could turn out to be extremely valuable because they are like our Crown reserves, checkerboarded over a 

great part of the province, and they refuse to say anything about it. But I understand that they have 

leased these to Imperial Oil and again I want to make it clear that this is no criticism of the Imperial Oil 

Company. They are good business people, but again we have a dumb enough Liberal government to go 

into this kind of a deal at Ottawa. Lease these oil rights to them for three cents an acre, not even a dime 

an acre, no Crown reserves — all gone — and I do not know what there is, Mr. Speaker, about work 

commitments. I do not know that there is any work commitment on them, I do not know what the 

royalty is, 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

16 

it may be one per cent of five per cent of 10 per cent royalty, I do not know what the term is. You cannot 

find out because of the Liberal iron curtain in the House of Commons at Ottawa. 

 

In the state of Texas many, many years ago there was set aside two million acres earmarked for a 

specific purpose, for a university, and this two million acres included the mineral rights. Though the 

United States is certainly famous for its free enterprise we can learn something there. The state of Texas 

did not lease this land at three cents an acre without any reserves. The state of Texas held onto this and 

from sales of that land they have made $65 million. The total fund that has been accumulated from that 

two million acres of university land has been $175 million. They have built and equipped a university 

that will accommodate 15,000 people going to it. This three million acres of C.N.R. land, if properly 

handled, could do a lot to help out the railway company and so help out our freight rates instead of 

having to bounce them up every time we turn around. 

 

And I think there is a good deal of that argument applicable to the C.P.R. land too. The C.P.R. has over 

3½ million acres and if that land too was handled so as to get the best revenue, that is earmarked, or 

should be earmarked to help the operation of the railway, then probably we could get along without so 

many increases in freight rates. And so I think it is a normal procedure and a natural motive for the 

Liberal Party that, because of their record of giving away resources in Canada, they love to smear their 

opponents with the same kind of stuff. 

 

Another factor is the failure, the absolute failure of the Liberal Party to get a job of exploration done in 

this province. The hon. Leader of the Opposition, in his speech in this House at the opening of the 

debate, said: 

 

“The 1944 oil production was $46,000 in Saskatchewan and in Alberta at the same time it was $20 

million.” 

 

The point that struck me funny, Mr. Speaker, they have never been cursed with a Liberal Government in 

Alberta since 1921. At 1944 Saskatchewan had hardly had anything else but a Liberal Government. And 

our oil production was $46,000 worth. Alberta was $20 million. What were the Liberals doing before 

1944? Do they think that they can kid the public of this province that the good Lord just piled those oil 

resources in here since the C.C.F. took office. If ever there was a government who should be quiet about 

its record of achievement in exploration it is the former Liberal government of this province. Let us take 

a comparison another way. In the 10 years from 1934 to 1943, Alberta had 574 oil wells drilled — 574. 

That was not a Liberal government there. In Saskatchewan, where we had a Liberal government in the 

same 10 years, how many? 129 against 574, and of those 129 wells, 58 were less than 250 feet deep. 31 

more of them were between 250 and 500 feet deep, 8 of them were between 500 and 1,000 feet and only 

five of the 129 wells were over 3,000 feet deep, in Saskatchewan prior to 1944. From 1944 to 1949; 358 

wells — put that down, 358. In 1950; 124 wells and in 1951, 401 wells. That includes, in all cases, 

coreholes as well, shallow coreholes. 

 

From 1900 to 1943 the total number of wells drilled in the 43 years, 184. And the total amount of oil 

produced in Saskatchewan prior 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

17 

to 1944 was less than 400 barrels. Don‟t anybody ask me what year it was produced in because it does 

not matter very much. That was the total production from 1905 to 1943 inclusive. 

 

These are the people, Mr. Speaker, who talk about getting great development for the Province of 

Saskatchewan. Where have they been? What have they been doing? They do not know what is going on 

here. The seismic surveys that have gone on in this province are amazing. A total, drilled; 4,500,000 feet 

of drilling, that is 850 miles of drilling in seismic for oil as well as other minerals too, let us look at the 

1944 production and the 1951 production. In metals, $18 million in 1944; $39 million in 1951. 

Non-metallics; $1 million in 1944, almost 3 million in 1951. In fuels — that includes coal and natural 

gas and petroleum, $2 million. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Hon. Minister, I have a question. How many mines are producing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The question has no relation to what I am talking about at the moment. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I would like to know where — you do not dare to answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The fuels, Mr. Speaker, increase from $2 million to over $6 million. And 

the other odds and ends from $800,000 to $2½ million. Or, taking a grand total in 1944, the grand total 

in -production of minerals, after Liberal government ever since — I do not know — $22 million only. In 

1951, $50 million produced. The „Star-Phoenix‟ had an editorial on February 5th. Mr. Ross, the manager 

of Sohio Oil Company was up at Saskatoon speaking to the Board of Trade. Shortly afterwards they had 

this editorial that says: 

 

“The exploration programme which Sohio Petroleum Company has mapped out for Saskatchewan is 

remarkable. A company does not enter into a programme of this scope or keep it up unless it is 

convinced that there is a good prospect of success. A Company like Sohio can choose many fields 

whereat to employ its capital. It is encouraging to the people of Saskatchewan to know that they 

selected this province for such an all-out effort. It is even more encouraging to know that their 

programme will be continued.” 

 

One company — one company in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has drilled 22 miles of wildcat wells. 

That is the total depth if they were all in one big hole, 22 miles for one company. And the discoveries 

which we have had in Saskatchewan which have been so begrudgingly acknowledged by the members 

in the Opposition, who probably the day before had been telling somebody there were not going to be 

any as long as there was a C.C.F. government here. Down at Dahinda a very interesting show of oil, not 

commercial because of the formation it is in, but good light oil. At Tompkins, both oil and gas; more 

exploration and work has got to be done there. At Coleville, 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

18 

an excellent field of black oil where there are now over 20 wells dug, including three gas wells. At 

Brock, where a gas field of apparently major proportions is developing, a new strike at Fosterton and 

then the last one was the gas strike at Elrose. And so, it seems to me, that if we want to look for the 

reason of why the Liberals are like this, why they take this line of argument which is so fictional, why 

they talk about these fraudulent racketeers, is to distract the attention from their own failures in the past. 

So they are normal Liberal tactics and in desperation they throw mud. We have the record of the old 

Liberal machine in this province, their record of the handling of resources and their record of failure to 

get exploration done in this province. Liberals today make some very far-fetched statements about 

everything under the sun. I was reading over the radio speech of the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. 

Danielson) and he said, referring to some of these oil and gas discoveries, 

 

“Without A C.C.F. Government these discoveries might have been made several years ago.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, they never had anything done about exploration when they were here; they never got 

anything going. And then it was not good enough for him saying it once, Mr. Speaker, he had to go on 

later and say: 

 

“If we had not been handicapped by a C.C.F. government it is reasonable to assume our oil —prod in 

this province would be much greater than it is.” 

 

Four hundred barrels in 1943, from 1905 is the Liberal record of oil production, barely enough to oil the 

Liberal machine — there would certainly be no surplus. The hon. gentleman is very versatile, and he 

does not just stay with natural resources. And so he made another statement there that I cannot help but 

repeat to the members of this House, because if any of them were not listening to it, I am sure they will 

enjoy it now. He said: 

 

“Had the Liberals won the election (that is in 1944), you could have prepaid hospitalization at least 

one, if not two, years earlier.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1933 the late Hon. J.M. Uhrich, then Minister of Public Health, 1933, I think it was just 

before the election of 1934 anyway, told the municipal men at Saskatoon — but it was 1933, he was a 

Liberal member, he was not a Minister. No, it was not 1946. Dr. Uhrich said to those people at 

Saskatoon, in the middle thirties, “We will give you state medicine.” That is what he said. They got 

elected in 1934 and by 1944 what had they done? Nothing. They had passed the necessary provisions for 

free cancer treatment and had not yet put it into effect. One stop in 10 years and then they did not get 

that one done. I think the people of this province will have a good laugh when they hear the hon. 

members say that we cold have had prepaid hospitalization at least one or two years earlier if we had 

elected a Liberal government in 1944. 

 

The hon. member for Estevan (Mr. McCormack), as everyone knows, also made a radio speech and 

made some rather far-fetched statements in it too. Referring to the mineral rights he said: 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

19 

“Most of these farmers, because of the three-cent mineral tax, were more easily induced to lease their 

minerals because they thought they would lose their minerals anyway if they did not pay the tax.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) sitting over there and saying, “It‟s 

true, it‟s true, it‟s true,” does not make it true. That is not the last word in conclusive evidence. The 

actual fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, in Manitoba where there is no mineral tax yet, the proportion of 

mineral rights privately owned leased at 10 cents an acre is just about the same as it is here. As a matter 

of fact, I think the member‟s logic is completely wrong because I think that if the mineral tax did one 

thing it brought to the attention of these people that they had some valuable property there which many 

of them never knew they had before, and it is valuable property. It must be valuable property because if 

you listen to the hon. members of the Opposition talking about what we are doing with it, it is extremely 

valuable property. And they have promised, or I understand they have promised, to do away with the 

mineral rights tax. That is, Mr. Speaker, they are promising that an, of course, the greatest beneficiaries 

will be their friends, the C.P.R. and the Hudson Bay Company. 

 

Mr. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — On a question of privilege. Surely the member . . . Our 

programme is very clear and the hon. member, if he purports to deal with it should make sure of it. Now 

we say “only in regard to farmers” and when he says what he did he knows he is saying something 

untrue, but anything at all to smear up — anything at all, it does not matter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party is having a rather difficult job squirming 

around all of these corners and skating on thin ice, riding the fence and keeping an ear to the ground. But 

I understood they were going to do away with the mineral rights tax. Then they do recognize, I 

understand, they recognize that the mineral rights tax then is just a tax insofar as the C.P.R. mineral 

rights are concerned and the Hudson Bay mineral rights are concerned, and I am glad to get that 

admission from them that that is a just tax in regard to those mineral rights, because, naturally, if they 

did not consider that just, they would do away with it. Of course, I wonder a little bit in the case where 

one individual may hold 20 quarter sections of mineral rights, just where they would draw the line 

between the C.P.R. and the farmer. Do all the farmers, big and little, or only the little fellows, escape 

from the mineral rights tax? But, of course, mot people know that . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Will you permit a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, you are going to have a chance to speak. Mr. Speaker, if I wanted an 

intelligent answer to my question I would not be asking the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. 

Danielson).l 

 

As a matter of fact, the meeting of the Manitoba Union of municipalities asked the Manitoba 

government a year ago to impose a Mineral Rights Tax. My friends do not know that. 

 

The hon. member for Estevan (Mr. McCormack) — I am sorry he is not in his seat, but he said 

something like this — I think I have got 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

20 

his speech here. He said: 

 

“Early in 1948 the Canadian Pacific Railway commenced court action to have the Mineral Taxation 

Act declared un-constitutional and in July 1948 acquired a court injunction to restrain the Minister 

from further action.” 

 

That was in July 1948. I am just quoting this, Mr. Speaker, to try to get people to be a little more careful 

with their statements. Then he goes on to say: 

 

“In October 1949, or nearly two years later, the government by order-in-council suspended forfeiture 

proceedings in respect to all mineral rights until the disposition of the court action taken by the C.P.R. 

and also provided upon conditions for the redressment of forfeited lands.” 

 

Now, what is the true story in regard to that? well, it is a lot different from that, Mr. Speaker. The hon. 

member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. McCormack) quoted the order-in-council and so I assume that he must 

have had a copy of this order-in-council. The order-in-council is dated October 14, 1949, and it starts out 

this way: 

 

“The executive council has under consideration a report from the Minister of Natural Resources and 

Industrial Development dated October 12, stating as follows: 

 

„By order, on the 6th day of July, this injunction was issued, restraining the minister.‟ 

 

“And the report of the Minister stated this: 

 

„That upon the issuance of the said Order‟, (that was in July, the 6th of July), „it was decided that not 

only forfeiture proceedings in respect to the minerals owned by the plaintiffs in the said action, but in 

respect of all minerals, irrespective of who the owner may be, would be suspended until the 

disposition of the said action. And since that said time no forfeitures under the said Act have 

occurred.‟” 

 

And the member tried to make out that it was nearly two yeas after the injunction was issued before the 

procedures stopped in connection with other minerals. It was stopped immediately the injunction was 

issued and no further action was taken. And in January of 1949 a statement was in the press to that effect 

as well. I think my hon. friends over there who are lawyers had better look into the ability of the member 

for Estevan to read law if that is the way he reads an order-in-council, because he may become a menace 

to his clients. Anybody that makes such a mess as that at reading law needs checking up. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

21 

There has been a great deal said about the C.C.F. government and what it might do with regard to 

mining companies and oil companies. May I remind this House that, as far as I know, there is only one 

government in Canada that has expropriated the mining company and that government is the Dominion 

Liberal government. They are the only government to expropriate the mines and just a little while ago 

there was a letter in Toronto „Saturday Night‟ from a shareholder, on the 16th of February, complaining 

about being expropriated by the Federal Government. It was expropriated from the shareholders of the 

El Dorado Mining and Refining Company and my hon. friends sitting over there do not need proof of 

that at all. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — You did not deal with the government‟s action under the circumstances, or don‟t you 

approve of them? Do you not approve of them taking the mine over? 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member would sit down I would point out to him 

that his friends at Ottawa, the great champions of private enterprise, I cannot conceive of those 

champions of private enterprise having to admit that they had to expropriate El Dorado because of the 

failure of private enterprise to do the job. Surely my hon. friend would not confess that kind of a 

weakness in a system he has believed in for so long. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — It was for security reasons, for national defence. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Then my hon. friends admit that when any emergency comes private 

enterprise is unequal to the task. Is that correct? That is what they say. They just cannot have this think 

both ways all the time. That is not too easy. 

 

The member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) also mentioned the distribution of gas in his radio speech 

and he said: 

 

“Distribution is to be a government monopoly. It is still the socialism of the Regina Manifesto.” 

 

I would suggest that he and the member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) get together and get themselves 

straightened out. As a matter of fact the Provincial Treasurer and I were not nearly as tangled up in our 

facts — one of them says we left the Regina Manifesto and the other fellow says we are still with it. 

 

Then the member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald), in his speech the other day, said: 

 

“Private enterprise should have a chance to get in to compete in the distribution of gas.” 

 

I think that is what he said. I know that if the Liberals were in power in Saskatchewan today, with the 

gas fields being developed, they would proceed to make the same unholy mess of it that they made of 

the power distribution in this province, with all bits and pieces, not using the good sources of power, not 

using the best distribution system or any- 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

22 

thing else. So that I wonder that they are opposed to development of resources for the people of 

Saskatchewan. I wonder if they are opposed to Crown reserves. They never had them when they were in 

power. The Liberal Government at Ottawa does not have them in the C.N.R. lands. I wonder if they are 

opposed to a public owned utility like the public utility of natural gas or power. I take it that they must 

be. They must be opposed to the public ownership of these public utilities. And power or natural gas 

distribution is not a monopoly by anybody‟s choice. It is a monopoly by necessity for the simple reason 

that it is entirely uneconomical to run two sets of electric wires down the street and two sets of gas 

mains down the streets. We believe that a monopoly, where it is a natural and necessary monopoly, is 

safest and best and most efficient and most economical, when operated and controlled by the people 

themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to say one word or two about one of the Liberal promises to the electorate in 

this province in regard to mineral resources. They have promised a royalty to the owner of the surface 

rights. I do not think that I ever heard of a political bribe to the electorate that was more misleading and 

fictitious than this one. the Liberal party has bought the electorate in many, many cases in the past. I 

have read off in this House the record of grants to municipalities when the only year they got grants was 

in the year when there is an election on. And here they are offering this as a bribe to the electors of this 

province. And what is it going to do? Well, first of all, I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that it is 

generally recognized that the natural resources should belong to the people of the province and the 

benefits from their exploitation should come to the people of the province. That is, that the best deal for 

development of those resources should be made. 

 

I want to point out, also, that only a very, very small proportion of the owners of surface rights will have 

oil discovered or gas discovered on their land. We will have wonderful success if in the next 10 years 

there are three or four hundred farmers, owners of surface rights, in this province who have oil 

discovered under their land. And so, in the first place, what the Liberals are promising to the people of 

Saskatchewan and trying to get everybody to believe is that everybody is going to share in this, when the 

actual fact will be only, at the very most, a very few hundred people. And if that takes place, those few 

hundred people might become millionaires. 

 

And where will that money come from if it is a two per cent royalty? It will come either as a higher price 

for oil products or a reduction in revenue to the people of the province generally, through the 

government. Of course it is apparent that the Liberals would be delighted to see any action taken that 

would cut down the revenue of the province of Saskatchewan and therefore compel us to give less 

service. They do not want a good revenue budget in this province. They want to give away revenue and 

get rid of it. The Leader of the Opposition says, “The same place as Rhubbra.” No, it is not. The Leader 

of the Opposition, if he believes that, then what they intend to do when they get in office is to take 

another two per cent royalty out of the company after the agreements have been made. That is the only 

explanation. Their over-ride royalty to these people comes out of the company. And so if this is going to 

come out of the same place it means that these people on your left, Mr. Speaker, on your left, are going 

to abrogate those contracts that have been made with the people that are exploring oil in this province. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

23 

And so, there are other questions that arise too. Are they going to go to their friends in the C.P.R. and 

say, “Now look, here is a farmer that owns the surface rights. You will have to pay him a royalty on the 

oil from your mineral rights.” I wonder what the C.P.R. would tell them to do. I think the C.P.R. would 

give them a ticket to a station that is often mentioned — a one-way ticket. I wonder if they went to the 

Hudson Bay Company and said, “Look, you have got the mineral rights and this farmer has got the 

surface rights and you have got to give him a royalty.” 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, there never was anything built up better by the Liberals than this is, to deceive the 

people and give them nothing in the hopes of getting political support. 

 

And just before I sit down, and I promise you, Mr. Speaker, I am going to sit down right away, there has 

been a great deal said about industrial development and investment in this province and these are figures 

taken from table 118, Private and Public Investments in Canada, from 1926 to 1951, published by the 

Department of Trade and Commerce, and Mr. Howe signed his name in the front of it. 

 

Strange as it may seem, Mr. Speaker, if we take the two dates, 1948 and 1951, Saskatchewan has ranked 

second in all the provinces of Canada in increased rate of investment between those two years. Second 

of all the provinces. The speed with which the investment in Saskatchewan is taking place n a 

percentage-wide basis is second in all Canada. Sometimes that percentage may lead you astray, but if 

you take the actual dollars, Mr. Speaker, if you take the actual dollars of increase between 1948 and 

1951, Saskatchewan takes fourth place in the Dominion of Canada, in actual dollars increased in 

investment. 

 

So when my hon. friends go out to tell the people the gloomy, dark story about no investment in the 

province of Saskatchewan and it is going to the dogs, they are thinking of the days when they were in 

office and when there really was not very much doing. When they produced 400 barrels of oil in 35 

years. that is what they are thinking of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I do not think I need to say to you that I will oppose the amendment. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

24 

L.L. Trippe (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, at this time I wish to address a few words to you with regard 

to matters before this House. I know you have permitted us considerable latitude in our discussion, and I 

do not intend to go as far as some people have gone in this regard. I do not wish to be repetitious, but I 

have not spoken before in the House during this Session, and I wish, Sir, to review the matters that come 

to my attention, in a general way. 

 

I would like to comment briefly on the death of the King, and our grave concern over this — our deep 

sorrow over this, and our hopes that his successor, the Queen, will have a very long and joyful reign. 

There are many of us in this House who have had the privilege of serving under him as 

Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces, and there are also some of us in this House who have had the 

privilege of serving under his father as Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces. We know these people 

very well; we know that in the times when there was extreme danger they were out in the field; they and 

their heirs, their sons — facing the same dangers, practically, as the ordinary troops. On that account we, 

who were serving at that time had very particular regard for them, and I am sure that everyone in this 

Dominion and the other Dominions of the Empire have great regard for the Crown. It is certain that the 

politicians and the generals and the great men of the day will come and go; their names will be 

forgotten, but the Crown will always persist, and again I wish to say that we wish the new Queen the 

very best of luck. 

 

We are engaged today with our forces, in co-operation with the other United Nations, in armed conflict 

in Korea. Resisting forces which are against us, which we have had to face to get a square deal for the 

people in South Korea, and if it continues it is going to be a considerable drain on our resources and our 

manpower, together with the effort that we must make to prepare ourselves, to defend ourselves, in case 

anyone wishes to perform any other act of aggression. We recognize the need for adequate defence and, 

perhaps, that adequate defence should mean that we will be fully equal to and a little better prepared 

than those people who wish to perform any act of aggression on us. 

 

We, together with the United Nations, seek nothing but to defend our position. We have no intention of 

any aggression on any peoples whatsoever, and as long as they do not have that idea everyone will get 

along first-class. It is our desire, as mentioned in this House, to aid and assist those under-privileged and 

hungry people of the Asiatic and European nations, and there has been some comment that perhaps we 

are not doing that to the best of our ability. 

 

I believe that, taking everything into consideration, Mr. Speaker, we are doing a very good job of that. 

We and our neighbours to the south are supplying food in large quantities; funds to purchase that food 

where it is more closely available; and munitions to those people who are preparing to defend 

themselves, and in that way release them from that obligation and permit them to use that same money 

that they would . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I am allowing the hon. member a great deal of latitude on the grounds that he 

did not speak to the main motion. Of course, there is no reason at all why this amendment could not be 

disposed of, if he is not speaking on the main motion and is speaking before the House again. It is only 

on that grounds that I am allowing you the latitude I am. It is taken for granted that you will not speak 

on the main motion. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

25 

Mr. Trippe: — That is right, Mr. Speaker. I do not wish to speak on the main motion. I thought I would 

consolidate my remarks here and do away with the whole thing. 

 

I believe that with firmness and good-will on the part of ourselves and the United Nations that we will, 

as has been said achieve a just and lasting peace, but we must certainly in that regard back up the United 

Nations and take our fair share both in the defence of the Koreans and in the re-establishment which 

may come later. Our firm resolve should be first, to stop Communist expansion wherever it may occur, 

and to try and do some business with them that will get them to stay within their own borders. Also, to 

have no dealings with them as long as they show war-like attitude towards us — or any of their 

satellites. We do not need them in the United Nations, for the simple reason that they go in there, 

nothing but to stop the United Nations from doing good and effective business. 

 

In that same way we do not need Red China in the United Nations, because they are today engaged in 

fighting our troops in Korea, and there is nothing closer to real offensive that they could do to us than 

that. They have shown a cruel and inhuman attitude towards our prisoners and towards the civilian 

population of Korea, and I think that is very much out of line, and I am of the firm opinion, myself, that 

we should fight them forcefully back to the Manchurian border and keep them there. After that time, in 

conjunction and support with the United Nations, we could see that they have free elections all over 

Korea and then we could go in there with all our supplies and help, and unite those people and set them 

on their feet, and really make a nice little democracy of that country. 

 

Today we have been visited by the Peace Council, and I do know just exactly what this Peace Council 

represents, but I have an idea. I have a clipping here from the Star-Phoenix of April 30, 1951, in which 

they make some comments on the Labour-Progressive party and their connection with the Peace 

Movement. They say here: 

 

“The Labour-Progressive Party will nominate a number of candidates in the next provincial election, 

Nelson Clarke, provincial leader said this morning. He said the party welcomed Premier T.C. Douglas‟ 

statement of opposing rearmament of Germany and Japan, and criticizing Canada‟s foreign policy in 

the Far East. Such statements help to strengthen and encourage the peace forces in the province, and 

throughout Canada, Mr. Clarke said. 

 

“But the L.P.P. opposed the Government‟s policy on oil leases, and the past acceptance of the Federal 

Government‟s trade and fiscal policies, and therefore it would nominate some candidates. 

 

“To the extent that the Saskatchewan Government asked for peace in line with the Premier‟s 

statement, we will give it whole-hearted support, Mr. Clarke says.” 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

26 

Well, I do not know if that is the Third Force or not, but perhaps it is. In last night‟s paper (The 

Leader-Post) I noticed a little article here — a diary of Dr. Endicott‟s journey around the country. He is 

visiting over there now, and I will just quote extracts from it, as it is quite long. He has been in London 

where he met an organization there that was going to act on lower prices. They met with Monica Fulton, 

Stalin-peace-prize winner and member of the W.I.D.F. Women‟s Commission in Korean, who is 

chairing the meeting, and the next thing they got over to Prague, where Dr. Endicott made a radio 

broadcast, addressed the Czechoslovakian Peace Committee, and gave a peace conference. Then, the 

next thing, he turns up in Moscow, where the Soviet Peace Committee gives a reception and welcome 

for Dr. Endicott. 

 

A few days afterwards, he preached to 2,000 people in Moscow, in the Moscow Baptist Church. At the 

end they all sang: “God Be with You ‟Til we Meet Again.” A few days later the Endicott-for-Canada 

presentation of the Stalin peace price to George Amando, famous Brazilian poet and member of the 

World Council for Peace, and he said: “This month in the Soviet Union makes me feel rather humbled 

about my peace efforts in Canada. I feel that I ought to have worked twice as hard.” He said later on that 

“the Soviet Peace Committee has done a truly heroic job of educating the whole nation on the meaning 

and great purpose of the International peace movement. Peaceful existence, disarmament and world 

trade is quite possible as far as this side of the fence is concerned”. (That is when he was on the other 

side of the fence!) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we had a letter from those people and in their brief they suggest among other things, 

the signing of a pact with the world‟s five great powers, including United States, Russia, Great Britain, 

France and the People‟s Republic of China, for the admission of the People‟s Republic of China into the 

United Nations; to reduce armaments and to trade. There are a great many of these things that we could 

be in favour of, but unfortunately we cannot do that while we are fighting these people. If they would 

withdraw their armed forces and show a disposition to deal with us in a good and reasonable way, I am 

sure that we would be more willing for the United Nations to deal with them. 

 

They propose that we ban the Atomic Bomb and make an agreement among the five world powers for 

disarmament, those being the only persons who would be able to start a world-war. Well, we are in 

favour of that, Mr. Speaker; in fact, the United Nations have gone a long ways to do that, only to be 

flouted by the fact that the Russians would not permit proper inspection of their potentials to make the 

atomic bomb. The people who really make the atomic bomb and know how to do it, are those people 

who really make the atomic bomb and know how to do it, are those people in this continent who would 

be most willing to scrap everything in the war-like potentials, and use all those resources to the peaceful 

use of the atomic energy, if they could be assured in any reasonable way that the Russians would cease 

making these bombs for military purposes. They have agreed to that whole-heartedly, and every member 

of the United Nations has agreed to it except Russia and her satellites, and as soon as they permit neutral 

inspection behind their liens, this tremendous amount of money that we throw into this expensive war 

material could be stopped at once. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

27 

I note that the Peace Council advocates controlled supervision, and in that respect, if they would use a 

little of that influences on the Russians, where Dr. Endicott is working at the present time, perhaps we 

would all be in agreement, and that would be a very good thing. They do make one slight error, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is their proposals are in accord with the backing of the vast majority of the people in 

the province of Saskatchewan. I do not think this is the case, because I do not think the vast majority of 

the people of Saskatchewan know very much about this, or have seen very much about the literature. 

 

Mention has been made about the uncontrolled inflation which is taking place today. I cannot say that I 

am in agreement with that idea that there is uncontrolled inflation. I believe that we are taking the very 

best and most effective steps that can be used to control any inflationary tendencies. There is really only 

one thing that you can do to stop inflation, and that is to get less money in circulation and produce more 

goods. The Federal Government have come forward in every way possible to limit the amount of money 

in circulation — that is, they are taxing it off and when they get it taxed off they do not issue more 

money to go out into circulation. That is about the best thing they can do there. As far as our production 

is concerned, the farmers in this country have gone forward and have produced abundantly and very 

well. Their products are in abundance, and in fact the hard truth is that just at this moment some of them 

are going down when their costs are very high in other regards. These are people who work long hours 

and hard, and produce for a reward, the greatest amount of production that they can possibly get with the 

up-to-date machinery and everything the have at their command. If everyone else would follow the 

farmers‟ example and produce to the very maximum capacity, this matter of inflation would not bother 

us very much. 

 

We have had some discussion in this House with regard to grain, and particularly with regard to wheat. 

There has been some mention of the fact that the farmers may be stuck with some damp grain this year, 

and I and other members who have very close association with the farmers of this province are very glad 

to hear the Minister‟s statement today that this situation is not as bad as has been made out. I do trust 

that the majority of this grain will be taken care of. It is a very hard thing indeed for the farmers to be 

left with damp grain on his hands in the Spring. There is nothing very much that he can do with it. His 

capacity of bins and one thing and another does not permit him to spread it out and dry it. It must be 

spread over thinly and would take a great quantity of space in order to do any good at that. Practically 

the only way that this can be dried in large quantities is with the commercial driers installed in the 

elevators and at the terminals. We have tried various types, and I am afraid, Sir, that the farmers are 

going to be victimized with a lot of these trashy driers, a good deal the same as they were done with 

certain swathers and other machinery, immediately after the war when machinery was so scarce. Even 

now today we find that considerable qualities of this grain have been dried, and spoiled the milling and 

germination qualities of it. 

 

Something has been said about making loans to farmers on un-threshed grain. Well, that has been done 

— I do not suppose there is a district in the country that has more un-threshed grain then the place where 

I come from, and the arrangements have been made that the banks loan the farmers this money. But 

some suggestion has been made that this 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

28 

should be interest-free. Well, the farmers‟ organizations did not recommend this, for this reason, that a 

person who had marketed their grain and did not need a loan would, thus, through the Wheat Board, be 

paying interest for people who did borrow money. People who did not benefit would be paying interest 

for people who did, and it was thought that a reasonable rate of interest would be established, and that 

those who benefited by those loans would pay this interest and they would not need the money for very 

long. The Government, in order to see that no one lost any money guaranteed 25 per cent of these loans. 

I believe that was a very good thing, because it could be possible that farmers with grain un-threshed 

would get into a position (a few of them, but not very many), where they did not get this grain off in the 

spring. If it came very wet in the spring and rained time after time, and got this grain down into the mud 

and it commenced to grow, it could just be possible that a few of these loans might be lost, and so in 

guaranteeing the loan to the loan agencies at 25 per cent, it makes it practically a good deal. 

 

A Royal Commission has been set up on agriculture, and as far as I can see I cannot see any good and 

valid reason for doing that. Every year we have a meeting of Reeves and Councillors of all the 

municipalities in this country, and last year they were in Regina. The year before they were in 

Saskatoon, and this year they are going to be in Saskatoon. Just at the time of the last session they were 

down here in Regina at the city hall. A lot of us went down there, and we heard everything about what 

they wanted and what they thought was good. They passed resolutions — every member of the 

government knows what they were. They are well-advised on just what the needs of the farmers are, and 

if they are not well-advised, all they had to do was to go down and sit in for a few minutes, and they 

would soon be told. But, in spite of that, in spite of the recommendations of the Britnell Report, it was 

thought advisable to hold meetings all over the country and call the farmers together again this year. I do 

not think those meetings were held for much of any purpose, except to tone the farmers down on their 

demands a little bit. The farmers knew that they wanted certain services from this government, and it 

seemed at the time the government was not in a position to give them, and so they held these meetings, it 

seems to me, to try and argue them out of it. 

 

Someone has suggested that one of the railway lines was giving better service than the other in the 

movement of grain, and so I took the trouble to look this up, and find out just what the situation was. 

Considering the mileage of lines and the box-cars available for service, it looks to me as if they were 

both giving just exactly the same service. The intimation was made that the C.P.R. did not give the 

service that the C.N.R. did, and it was using its box-cars for some other purpose, but taking the largest 

elevator company in Saskatchewan, which is the Pool, with 1,168 elevators, with them distributed just 

about evenly on both the railway lines, the position at February 12 was that 247 elevators were plugged 

on the C.P.R., and 231 on the C.N.R. — very little difference — 16 difference. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

29 

So it seems that they are both serving them quite well. I know that as a matter of overall policy, there are 

not any of us getting the service that we should get, but the matter of fact is that this grain is down there. 

I saw a circular to the Pool to their agents which says, “Do not have over two cars of damp grain in your 

elevator at any one time, because everyone of these facilities are booked to capacity until sometime in 

June, and this grain comes down there and stands around in cars, and as we all know, that as soon as we 

get warm weather it will spoil in a matter of a few days.” 

 

Now, the reason it did not get down there in the fall — someone said a lot more of this should be moved. 

It was quite late before we knew we were going to have a lot of damp grain, and even when we knew it 

and there was a lot of damp grain left, a warm spell came along at that time of the year and it was not 

possible to ship even in November, a very large quantity of damp grain. Unless that grain is frozen, it is 

liable to heat in the cars — the railway companies will take it only at the owner‟s risk, and it seemed 

impossible to move large quantities. Everyone knew it was there. As soon as they were able to move it, 

they took it down in tremendous quantities, and have been drying it night and day ever since. I am very 

pleased to know that we are going to be in a little better position in regard to that damp grain. 

 

We looked for development of power in this country in the hopes that we can give our farming 

population better rural electrification, and the policy of this party is to subsidize that a little bit, such as 

is done in Manitoba, in order to give more farmers better rural electrification and keep them on their 

land. The only perhaps large amount of power that can be developed should be hydro, and in that 

connection I have a table here that shows hydro development in the Dominion, from 1945-55. There has 

been a tremendous development. The hydro development has gone p by 60 per cent. We say the year 

1955 because these projects are under construction, and are anticipated up to that time. The capacity as 

at 1945 was 10 and 3/10 million horsepower, and, Mr. Speaker, if you can get that water to working for 

you, you really help industry out an awful lot. But at the end of 1955 they expect to have 16½ million 

horsepower — perhaps 17 million, and the gain in 1951 alone was 778,000 horsepower. 

 

Well, we wonder where that is, and how Saskatchewan is doing, but we find out that up at Island Falls is 

our large power plant location (this supplies power for one of the mining companies). I believe it is 

Hudson Bay Mining & Smelting, and that is within this province, Island Falls, which has an installed 

horsepower capacity of 109,000 horsepower. Well, the listed horsepower capacity of the provinces 

shows Saskatchewan as 111,000 horsepower, so that must be just about all there is. 

 

So we look over these provinces and wonder just what is going to be done about increasing that. We see 

what the increase in 1951 was, and all of the provinces except Prince Edward Island and Nova Scotia 

had increases in that year; the total of them added up to 778,000 horsepower, as I have said, but 

Saskatchewan had none. Then we go to the anticipated increase in 1952-53. All of the provinces in this 

period anticipate an increase, except the provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta, and in the period 

1953-54 Saskatchewan anticipates no increase in the hydro installations either. I believe that we should 

go forward with this, and install more hydro power in this province. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

30 

but in spite of the fact that they do not contemplate installing any more further horsepower in the way of 

dams, they did collect from this source way up in the northern part of this province (it is used for 

nothing but running this mining company), by way of water rights this year $66,647.43, so they find 

them up there and collect from them anyway. 

 

Well, we should have more mineral production, and something has been said about the mineral 

production in this province, but when we ask the question in the House a little while ago, we asked the 

value of base metals produced in the last quarter of 1951, and the reason we asked that was because we 

had it up to that date, and the answer was “around $9 million.” Then we said: “What amount of this 

value is produced by the Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company?” The answer was, “All of it.” 

 

Well, that company happened to get into this province, Mr. Speaker, more or less by way of a fluke — 

before there were any surveys up there, the company was working in what they thought was Manitoba 

and later on, when the surveys were made they found they were in a little bit of Saskatchewan, and we 

collect a very substantial tax from them every year, but we do not do very much up there to put any of it 

back. They are badly in need of a road up there, and I had hoped this province would see its way clear to 

putting some of that large money they receive in taxation of this mine, back into a road which they wish 

for very much. 

 

The search for oil and gas goes on, as we hear, and the Minister of Natural Resources said something 

today about the expropriation of uranium ore by the Dominion Government. As everyone knows, Mr. 

Speaker, that ore was expropriated because it just had to be. It was found out that people were getting 

this ore and exporting it, illegally on the side, to countries that we did not ship this ore to. There were 

people behind the Iron Curtain getting uranium that we needed ourselves, and so of necessity, the 

Federal Government expropriated this material. If these people had shown a disposition to do this thing 

rightly and properly, I expect they would be in control of this today. 

 

Well, the search for oil and gas is all right, except that now and before now there has never been enough, 

and I think we all know the reason for that. The people who had the disposition to come in here and drill 

for that just did not get a fair deal — did not get a reasonable deal that would cause them to want to put 

very much money in this province. They had hanging over them the Regina Manifesto which has never 

been repudiated yet, and just in a late press release, we see that they do not want to change again. So 

everyone knows that that still hangs over the heads of the people; also the confiscatory legislation passed 

and on the statute books of this province, by which they can take over anybody‟s property quite easily. 

 

Well, just lately they have found a little natural gas, and we are all wondering just what the 

government‟s policy is on that, and we would like to hear something about the government‟s policy 

regard to this natural gas. There has been intimations made, but we do not know very much about it yet. 

If they are going to develop this natural gas, they had better leave it open to bids, and let people perform 

the service 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

31 

who will do it at the best for the most reasonable cost. If the Power Corporation wants to enter into this 

business, let them compete with other people on the distribution of this gas, and let them make a rate 

that would be more favourable than anybody else, and then if they want to turn it over to some otherwise 

responsible people, make the best deal as far as the —pr is concerned, and as far as the consumer is 

concerned; let them supply the natural gas to the people. In that way, the consumers would get a better 

deal and the province will get a better deal also. There is some fear that the government may make a 

monopoly on this gas, and they can do that in a very easy way. All they have to do is say they are going 

to distribute it, and set their own price for it at the well, and socialize that just about as quick as you 

could do in any other way. 

 

Some mention has been made that perhaps even this government now is going to give the farmers a little 

something on royalties for oil in cases where they do not hold the mineral rights, and the Minister of 

Natural Resources (Hon. Mr. Brockelbank) has spoken on that today; he did not seem to give us very 

much encouragement, but I thought that we did get an intimation from some other Minister the other day 

that they were going to do something about this, and if they do, why, we are going to be something in 

the role of Wordsworth here, and they know what is supposed to have been done by him about the old 

age pensions. It is sure that if they do anything about this, why, we can get the credit for bringing it 

about, in regard to the royalties to the farmers on oil. If they do it, I hope they bring down legislation at 

this session, and I hope that it is fair and reasonable. There is no reason why any Promoter should run 

around over people‟s land holdings and make themselves money without ever doing a thing to dig an oil 

well, while the farmer on the land does not get anything out of it at all. I am sure we will back up 

something they bring in that is good and reasonable to the farmers in this connection. 

 

The Public Revenue Tax has been mentioned, and in that connection, I suppose they finally got around 

to where they are going to do a little something about this. If we look back to the record of the 

Provincial Treasurer when he was a councillor in town here, why, he was all in favour of that in those 

days, according to The Leader-Post of yesterday. He was right in favour of that idea to get it out of the 

government, and I suppose he is still in favour of it since it has been called to his attention, and he will 

probably do something about it now. The pay-rolls and employment industries are record high, and I am 

sure that is good news to all of us. We are well pleased to see everyone prosperous; particularly the 

workers and the farmers. It is a hard thing when the working people are not prosperous because a great 

majority of them may not have any other way to supplement their income, except the actual income of 

what they earn. They are in a very hard position, indeed, if their income is reduced in any way 

whatsoever, and it has been the policy of this party to give them every encouragement to see that they 

are protected in case of sickness, to see that wages must be paid to them promptly and in full, and give 

them special chances to collect from anyone who does not pay them. But we do know that there is no 

power within this legislation to legislate prosperity to anybody. That has to be done by production, and 

the only thing that we can do is stand as referees between the producers and the people that we work for, 

and try to see that everybody gets a just and fair deal, which I am sure that everyone in this legislature 

will do. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

32 

The right to sue the Crown is going to be brought into effect, I believe, and that will be a welcome 

move. It is away overdue as a matter of fact, because we have had some glaring instances since this 

government has been in power where people were not given the proper right to sue the Crown, and as a 

result, they got a very miserable deal over it. We had the case of some returned soldiers who had land 

allotted to them, and subsequently taken away from them. One of these fellows was permitted to sue the 

Crown. He got a very good and substantial judgment, but it did not look very good, I guess, so the next 

two of them were refused permission to sue the Crown, and they had to settle out of Court for a small 

portion of what the fellow got who was permitted to sue. 

 

I hope they pre-date this a little bit, so that fellows like Ivanchuk can get in and get his rights established 

also under this legislation. 

 

The new tax rental agreement will provide this province with considerable more revenue, and of that we 

are sure we are all very well pleased. It is a result of Liberal policies, of course, that the province was 

able to get that, and if we were as tough politically on these people as they would like to be on us, I 

suppose it would not be anywhere near as generous. 

 

We have had in this province, as has been said, a certain grave loss of population, which has distressed 

all of us, I am sure, and in this connection I just today got a letter from my constituency, written by one 

of the fellows in that district, and he said: (I will just summarize it in a general way): 

 

“We have just lost a lot of population, and we hope something will be done to keep the young people 

on the farm, and the people in the province.” 

 

He sends me a clipping from the paper, and this is quite revealing to me, Mr. Speaker, because I was not 

quite aware myself that this was the condition. This article goes on to show that while other parts of the 

province may have lost population, the northern part of this province really gained. I will just read a 

short quotation here: 

 

“There is one section of the province which has experienced something in the nature of a boom, as the 

census figures indicate. North Battleford is almost in the heart of that area, for it is in the 

Saskatchewan northland. The cities and towns of Saskatchewan‟s northern area recorded a gain of 55 

per cent which has been unmatched anywhere in this province, or Manitoba, and exceeded only in 

Alberta, where development of new oil resources have been a major influence. 

 

“North Battleford heads the list of all places large enough to be incorporated as a city, with an increase 

of 57 per cent since 1941. Prince Albert made the largest gain of any city large enough to 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

33 

support a daily newspaper at 36 per cent. Nipawin holds the further distinction of being the town 

where the automobile bonspiel is located and has acquired new claim to fame. In 1941-51 period it 

registered the greatest percentage of gain in any town or city in Saskatchewan or Manitoba — up 133 

per cent. 

 

“On a percentage basis, all of the top gains have been made along the northern fringe — two of this 

city‟s neighbours have grown impressively — Lloydminster, which has shared in the oil discoveries 

and their development has shot up; Meadow Lake has advanced 101 per cent; over in the east Hudson 

Bay Junction has expanded 99 per cent.” 

 

Well, that goes to show you, Mr. Speaker, that if all cities did as well as we do up there, they would hold 

their population pretty well. 

 

The proposition has been brought up that we pay something on the Government Corporations engaged 

in commercial business in lieu of tax, and we are fully in support of that over here. We are in support of 

it if it is done on a good and equitable basis. If it is something near equal to what the other people have 

to pay engaged in the same occupation, and if it is not — if it is just a matter of a grant, there is a chance 

for little political favouritism, and we do not like that very much. 

 

In the matter of education, health, crown corporations, highways, and the Turtleford seat, Mr. Speaker, I 

will reserve those items for the budget debate, and I may say that I will vote for the amendment, and 

against the motion. 

 

The House resumed at 8 o‟clock p.m. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I feel this is a good time to add my congratulations to those 

who have spoken before; particularly to the mover and seconder, because I realize they had a pretty 

difficult time to find anything good to say about the Speech from the Throne, which, of course, they 

were naturally expected to do. But they made a pretty fair job of it. There is quite a lot in that that we 

could talk on, but I am going to confine my remarks pretty much to the amendment to the Address, and 

reserve my rights and come back on the Address if I so please, so I would appreciate it, your Honour, if 

you will draw my attention if I should happen to wander off. 

 

Now, I listened to the speech this afternoon from the Minister of Natural Resources (Hon. Mr. 

Brockelbank), and I was hoping to get something out of it that would pep me up a little bit, but I have 

been scrutinizing it since he quit, and really have not anything that I can be „hepped‟ up about. Most of it 

has been said before in this House, except for the fact that he went way back to the last century to find 

something that the Liberals had done at that time, in order to justify something they had done this time, 

so I would just like to take a little time to review 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

34 

what has been done with regard to our natural resources in the north, since we do not exactly have to 

confine ourselves to oil alone, and by the time I get through with that question maybe the Minister will 

be in his seat. Now, whatever might have been done by the Liberals „way back in 1905 or 1900 is 

neither here nor there as far as we are concerned today. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — But I would like to draw to the attention of the House that since the C.C.F. 

Government has been in power, the north country has been pretty well socialized. They started by 

socializing the fishing industry; they started by socializing the forest products, and they socialized to a 

great extent the fur production. If you went back to the record of production of those industries before 

the war, I think you would see that it stands just as favourable as it is today, in spite of the fact that it 

should be many times more now. It is significant to see what is going on there; but in order to see the 

picture right, you pretty well have to travel through the area where they are doing their work, to see the 

scatter machinery, jeeps, trucks, bull-dozers and Caterpillars, and what not all mover the north country 

which they are using for the transportation of forest products. If you go and check up on their mills, you 

find a lot of them are dilapidated, and some are only partly working, and some of them are not working 

at all. 

 

I just had a return showing the number of mills that our money has been paid out for, and it is not a very 

pretty picture. The mill at Big River, of course, is a new mill and a lot of money has had to be spent in 

order to build it, and whether it will be justified or not remains to be seen; but up to date it has not done 

very much, according to the returns tabled in this House. I find they handled about (at least they give 

that mill credit for) five million feet, which represents about two years‟ production; a mill that should 

turn out about 10 million feet a year. Then we see the returns, which will be discussed, I presume, in 

Crown Corporations Committees, do not compare very favourable with the Government or the province 

to the east of us. Last year‟s production does not reflect much credit on the activity of the north in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member asked the Speaker to remind him if he was transgressing. I believe 

the rule we have been following is that anyone who did not speak on the main motion is being allowed a 

certain amount of latitude, but you have already signified your intention of speaking on the main motion. 

You were going to confine yourself to the -amendment, so if you are leading up to it, it is all right. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — No, this is the Natural Resources — the wood product is natural resources, and I just 

wanted to draw it to the attention of the House that . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If you will notice, the amendment does not say anything about Natural Resources. It 

confines itself to the mineral and oil resources. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, then, if that is the case, I will dispense with this until later. I understood that it 

took natural resources as a whole — with lots to talk about. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

35 

Then, first of all, I want to check up on some of the statements that the Minister made this afternoon, 

and one of the things he did was to concentrate pretty much on criticizing the hon. ember from Maple 

Creek (Mr. Cameron) for what he had said yesterday; and one of the things that seem to be a bone of 

contention is the fact that this man Rhubbra and his associates had got the largest acreages in the 

province. No company, nor individual, had got such a monopoly. He maintained that Rhubbra only had 

9 million acres, and he said that the member for maple Creek said that he had got 14 million acres, 

which made a difference of about 5 million acres. 

 

Well now, I took a little time to check up on this thing, and there is no secret of where these 14 million 

acres are. As a matter of fact, I think during the last Session it was fully proven that Mr. Rhubbra did get 

14 million acres in this way — that he had got a permit for 9 million acres, but he had an option of 5 

million acres besides that. 

 

Hon. Members (Opposition): — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Now it turns out that he must have had an option — or at least he got compensation in 

the way of over-riding royalties for 10,550,000 acres, -because in the statement of his company‟s 

financial standing he is stated as having a royalty on 10,550,000 acres. So he must have picked up these 

1,550,000 acres from some place to make that up, in addition to the 9 million that he had a permit for. 

Well, I think the way he obtained the rest of this 14 million acres was accounted for during the last 

Session. The -Minister of Natural Resources (Hon. Mr. Brockelbank) admitted that he had made 

application for the balance of this acreage, and, through an agreement, the terms of which may not have 

been known to the —min, later relinquished or withdrew the application to make it possible for 

Tidewater or Sohio to pick it up. What the consideration may have been in that deal may not be known 

to the Minister, and I do not suppose he has any right to delve into it to find out what the consideration 

was; but I imagine that he did not drop it for nothing, since he had an absolute monopoly on 14 million 

acres, and these companies required it for their business. 

 

So I think it is fair to say that the statement of the hon. member from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) is 

correct when he said that Rhubbra had 14 million acres. He had a permit for 9 million, and than had an 

application in for 5 million more, and in consideration for dropping these permits, the application and 

making it possible for these companies to apply for these permits direct, he got an over-riding royalty on 

1,550,000 acres, plus whatever amount of consideration that may have been agreed upon. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is useless for any of us to try to make out that men who are in that kind of a game 

are doing things for nothing. They are dealing in millions, and everybody expects to receive millions in 

return. You go into the oil fields of Alberta today. There is no use talking in the hundreds with anybody 

there. You cannot even talk hundreds in repairs for your machines — nothing less than thousands, 

hundred-thousands, millions. That game is a game of millions, not a small amount of money; and when 

small fellows go into it, it is pretty hard for them to get along without have some consideration from the 

Government. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

36 

Now, the Minister made the remark that small companies had done well. That is, he appreciated what 

they have done. And I agree with him, because it was the small companies that started the oil movement 

in this province, plus the fact that this Government, after the 1948 election, when they saw they were so 

near defeat on their Socialistic policies on oil —development, deleted the clause they had in their lease 

agreements. They deleted the cancellation clause. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — What Clause? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Clause 19 in the agreement that you asked the Imperial Oil Company to sign. It was 

not the term of the lease that the Imperial refused to sign; it was Clause 19 at the bottom in red type, 

where the —min reserved the right, notwithstanding anything in this agreement, to cancel any or all of 

these lease on 30-days‟ notice at the end of any calendar year. When this Government is talking as they 

are talking about the Imperial Oil Company wanting everything for nothing, and that they do not do 

business that way, they are not telling the truth. But they do not like to have to pay high-binding 

promoters a large amount of over-riding royalties. They want to do business direct with the Government. 

And this agreement was not asking for 2 million acres. The agreement calls for about 2,000,000 acres — 

I may be wrong; but it is not over 2 million acres. It sets out the townships, sets out the ranges and 

everything was satisfactory except Clause 19, and when these gentlemen get up on their feet and say that 

the Imperial Oil Company walked out because they wanted to grab all the natural resources of this 

province, they are not telling the truth. The only area they asked for in that agreement was out west, 

pretty much in the area where the oil is discovered now. They are kicking about the Liberals, saying that 

they should have had oil before this; but I am going to say tonight, that had this viscous Imperial Oil 

Company been allowed to continue its exploration in 1945, they probably would have had oil long ago. 

 

And not only that; you had a little independent company operating in this province, an independent 

company composed of local Saskatchewan citizens — some 2,500 shareholders who put up about 

$80,00 or $90,000 — or was it more than that? It might have been, -because they had drilled 30 wells 

which must have cost them close to a million dollars. They were the first ones to locate gas of any 

quantity. I have never in this House heard their name mentioned, when the Ministers have been blowing 

about the gas and oil that has been discovered in this province, and it is Data Petroleum. They never 

mentioned that little company, although they were responsible for setting the oil boom going in 

Saskatchewan. They discovered gas — as a matter of fact, the Government is buying gas from them. 

They have one of the biggest wells in the province. They are distributing gas in unity; there were 

responsible for locating the salt which is perhaps the finest plant in Western Canada; they were 

responsible for locating the Potash which is now under development. But what did the Government do 

to them? When that little company was struggling to raise money to keep on developing a large acreage 

that they had procured under development permits about a million acres of their holdings, this 

Government orders an investigation of their affairs. I understand the Attorney-General refused to sign 

the order for the investigation. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

37 

Hon. Mr. Corman (Attorney General): — That is not correct. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Yes, it is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — It is not correct that I refused to sign it. I was not in the province at the time. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, I was going to give you credit for having refused to sign it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — Well, I will take all the credit that‟s coming, but I did not refuse to sign it. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Then the credit is not your. 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — I just want to keep the record straight — I do not know which way I was quoted, 

but I did not refuse to sign it. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — You would not want the credit then, for refusing to sign it, eh? 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — I am stating facts. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — But anyway, the blame goes on your Deputy Provincial Secretary for having signed an 

order for an official investigation. What did they do? they did not send a man to check up and 

investigate their books. they just sent the squad in to close up their office, seize their books without any 

notice, close up their bank account so they could not even pay their employees, tied them up for months, 

and then, when everything was cleared, the investigation was completed, (that was their “Bill of 

Rights”), and when the smoke was all cleared up, the books were released, no prosecution was made, 

but they were minus over a million acres of their holdings. I will show you a map of it; this is what they 

took; this is what they have now; this gas well has been taken away from them since. I am holding the 

map up to you, so that the Minister of Natural Resources can see. They also took a block of land away 

from here. Well, now, that is what happened to that little company of local shareholders in this province, 

who did all the spade-work and pioneer work, and brought the oil boom as we are enjoying it at the 

present time. We are hoping we will get gas and oil out of it. At the present time we cannot say that we 

have. We are just being teased; but where there is smoke, there is generally fire some place. 

 

Who was behind this thing? Dr. Shumiatcher (and he was then an employee of the Government and an 

adviser of the Premier) — he had access to all these things in the Natural Resourced Department. He, 

apparently, was the man who did the prosecuting. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. gentleman just how he knows that Dr. 

Shumiatcher had access to things in the Department of Natural Resources, because I want to tell you he 

is talking through his hat! He never worked for the Department of natural Resources. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Now see here, Dr. Shumiatcher was, for a number of years employed by the C.C.F. 

Government as legal counsel of the Executive Council, and a member of the legal council to the 

Economic Advisory and Planning Board, which was set up by the C.C.F. Government. He could hardly 

be considered an ordinary civil servant. Is that not right? 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

38 

Some Hon. Member: — Who wrote that? You did? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — He had access to every department of the Government, as a private adviser to the 

Premier. Now, where did this oil acreage go to? We find that it landed in the possession of Albercan 

Petroleums. Dr. Shumiatcher at the same time was their solicitor. He gets a job there (I do not know 

whether he is a shareholder or not), but his job, they say, pays about $18,000 a year plus his expenses, 

which is worth-while. But that is the reward that this Government gave to this local company which the 

Minister is now praising for the work they have done. I understand there was oil located by a group 

somewhere west of the present oil find — Fosterton. I understand that they have both gas and oil there; 

but whatever became of them, I do not know. 

 

But the thing seems to be that this government thinks it more convenient to deal with men who can get a 

good slice out of the big companies, because they can afford to pay. Now, we are interested to know 

who got the slice. The Provincial Treasurer says that these companies prefer to pay a 2½ per cent 

over-riding royalty. Well, I would like to suggest that had this Government had any consideration for the 

farmer, and the companies were willing to pay this over-riding 2½ per cent royalty, it would have been a 

lot more legitimate to give it to the man who owns the farm on which oil was found, than to hand it to 

high-binging promoters. I would think that that would be a far more practical thing to do. The farmer 

would appreciate that, but then there would not have been the slices to be divided among these 

associates of Mr. Rhubbra, and consequently, it was more profitable to deal in that way because some 

people were getting a big slice out of it. 

 

Now what slice might there be in this deal? There has never been anything said in this House about the 

possibility of a fairly substantial cash consideration. Let us at least be practical about this thing. These 

companies had been paying the farmer from 10 to 25 cents an acre for free-hold leases, which was 

costing them in the neighbourhood of 80 cents to $1.00 an acre, by the time they had paid the man out in 

the field to collect the leases, by the time they paid the searches made in the Land Titles Office, and by 

the time they had paid for the caveats and registering them. 

 

Well, then, could we not surmise that if these companies had paid Rhubbra and his associates even the 

half of that amount by getting a whole block, without all this trouble, of 9 million acres, or even 14 

million acres, they would be quite prepared to pay them 50 cents an acre for it? Well, it was a nice little 

bit of money — $5 million or $7 million; whichever way you would like to figure it. But I would say 

that, if I wanted the acreage, then I would be prepared to pay at least half as much as I would have to 

pay for free-hold, and get it all in one lump sum. And I think, if it came right down to real facts, that is 

where the big pay-off is — not so much in the 2 ½ per cent over-riding royalty, but in the large sum of 

actual cash that these men got out of these monopolies — these holdings of the Crown lands of this 

province. And I am going to tell the people out in the country that, and I think I am justified in doing so. 

Every farmer knows that oil companies have been out there, hungry for leases. They have been buying 

their free-holds, and they know that it is 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

39 

costing them in the neighbourhood of 80ɇ to $1.00 an acre, when they had it all set up, and that it would 

have been quite cheap for them to pay Rhubbra and his associates even nearly as much as the free-hold 

would cost them. 

 

Now, what has it cost this Government? In view of the fact that we found oil and we found gas, 

particularly gas, had you left these small companies to operate in 1945 and develop this gas, even saying 

that you chased the Imperial Oil Company out; had you let Bata go ahead and develop their leases, and 

let another small company (and there are lots that are ready to go if this Government would give them 

any encouragement), you would have had gas five years ago, and the city of Saskatoon would have been 

enjoying industrial development that Edmonton is enjoying today. Over $100 millions is slated for 

Edmonton‟s industrial development this year; some of it has already started. 

 

I would ask the member from Saskatoon what he has to say to his electors about the loss they have 

sustained as a result of the C.C.F. policy in this province! He can very well go and ask himself how he is 

going to justify it. You know the gas is there; it is right at the door-step of Saskatoon. You know it now 

and it was there five years ago when the oil boom started after the war. You knew it was there in 1945, 

because it was already located, and you defied anybody putting money into it because of your Socialistic 

policy. As a result of that, Saskatoon has lost all the industrial development that was justly theirs. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Rosthern too! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Saskatoon is the natural industrial centre in Saskatchewan, because of its river water. 

You cannot bring industry into Regina because of lack of water. You may be able to bring offices, but 

you can to Saskatoon where the water is in abundance that is required for industrial development. For 

instance, the refineries, the chemical plants that are being built in Edmonton at the present time should 

have come to Saskatoon. They had to be where there was water. I know there are a lot of people who 

would like to see Regina grow, but we must be practical about this. There are natural advantages in 

Saskatoon that lend themselves to the development of an industrial centre. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — Don‟t leave out Prince Albert, please! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, you might have had it in Prince Albert too, and you are responsible for that, too. 

You might have had gas developed so that Prince Albert might have been the centre of a big industry. 

The quicker you see the fallacy of the policy of the Government of this province, the quicker you get 

down to basic facts and get something done. You have not got oil in Saskatchewan yet. All you have got 

is a teaser. You have got gas and you can develop that if you go after it. I am still doubtful if you are 

going to get very much oil until this Government is out of power. It is all right; they can laugh at that. I 

am going to tell you right now, if the oil companies produce oil and the Government does carry out its 

policies and take it over for the people, and develop it themselves, the oil Companies have no comeback, 

because they know what the C.C.F. policy is. You know your legislation — you know your policy — or 

will I have to tell you. Here is one of your policies. I quote: 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

40 

“He says the C.C.F. is democratic” — false or true. 

 

No. 6 — “The C.C.F. is controlled by higher ups and will led to dictatorship.” 

 

That is false. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Do you say it is true or false? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — No, the C.C.F. say it is false. Here is No. 6 again: 

 

“The entire C.C.F. policy is formulated by the people‟s convention. No person and no small group in 

the C.C.F. has power to make or change this programme. Any authority held by the C.C.F. office a, 

(that includes the Government) is constantly subject to the approval of the convention. The C.C.F. 

type of organization is the only true protection against dictatorship.” 

 

That is true — they say that is true. Now, then, what right have you to make the kind of a deal that you 

are making with the oil companies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — May I ask the hon. gentleman a question. Does the Liberal policy, or the 

Liberal Party, believe in that policy of having their programme controlled by conventions, or do you 

believe that it should be controlled by higher ups? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — We have a policy — the Liberal policy is a party of private enterprise and our 

conventions have been controlled, and have been conducted along that policy. The C.C.F. policy is 

based on socialism and public ownership, and consequently their convention is truly conducted along 

that policy. And when the boys come to the C.C.F. convention after we have a good oil-field, I am going 

to be right with them to see that it is socialized, because that is the policy under which the oil companies 

have undertaken to drill and bring the oil in here. I do not blame them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That is the policy we were elected on. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — If they want to bring oil into this province under that policy then that is fine. They 

already know where the gas is. This Government has taken control of the gas. This Government can also 

take control of the oil and have it delivered to their order at the refineries, or they can take over the fields 

and drill it themselves. Well, taken either way, it is all right; there is a certain amount of profit in it. It is 

not unprofitable. But that is the policy of this Government, and that is why you are not getting the oil 

-development that you should be getting. But you do know where the gas is now and there is no excuse 

for not developing it. 

 

And what it has cost the people of this Province to have a socialistic government, I would not like to 

start to figure out; but each city, each industrial centre that might have had this gas five years 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

41 

ago, and even if they get it now, they lost the chance of these large industries which lend themselves to 

be located here in this Province, which have gone to Alberta, and are not to be had now. Even if you find 

oil here, you have not the markets that you would have had if you had not waited seven or eight years to 

get it. 

 

The Minister criticized the Federal Government for letting the C.N.R. mineral rights, I understood him 

to say, without reservations — that is, to take a portion of the land as we do under the Crown system in 

the province. I would like to ask him how he proposed to take our reservations out of the C.P.R. or 

C.N.R. land holdings where there is maybe one section in a township or two sections in a township; 

where it is broken up and scattered all over. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The C.N.R. land is very often all the odd numbered sections in the 

township, and the way they could have set up Crown reservations was to take half of every section, and 

retain it and leave the other half. It would be quite easy. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Would you expect anybody to sink $100,000 into a hole and only have about four well 

sites? Would you expect anybody to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — They could have done that. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — If you imply that, then you do not know much about the expense off drilling for oil, if 

you think that anybody is going to risk $100,000 to $200,000 in a hole that, if he did get something, all 

he had was about four to eight well sites close in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, who said, Mr. Speaker, that the company was drilling any wells on 

this land? Nobody said anything about it. They have already been drilled. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — What are they spending on it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — They could sit on half of it just as well as all of it. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — What did they take it for? What are they paying lease money for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Like you are doing most of the time. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They are not in Rhubbra‟s business. They are not in the business with Rhubbra or 

Shumiatcher. It is practically impossible to take a reserve out of either the C.P.R. or the C.N.R. lands 

because they are so sparsely located that you just cannot impose them. If they want to get any 

consideration in lieu of reservations, they might charge an extra royalty. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You have heard about the uranium . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Now, then, we come back to find that this man Shumiatcher is a fine fellow. He is a 

pretty smart fellow anyway. He has been able to do pretty well out of his Government. We find some of 

his 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

42 

associates, both locally and abroad, are mostly fairly well experienced oil operators. He has organized, I 

think, five companies — and he may have organized more. One of his associates, as has already been 

mentioned, is Charlie Broughton. Where does he come from? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Working for the Government. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I think he is the Premier‟s organizer. Well, he is not going to have a very good going 

this next election, because they tell me that the farmers are pretty much up in the air in the Weyburn 

constituency. He has been taking some freeholds — leases, from them for these freeholders, and now 

they find that the leases are worth more money, and they think that they have been pretty badly done up 

by the Premier‟s organizer. I wonder how the Premier is going to fix that up with them. But anyway, 

there is the Search Corporation — I have a list of the directors here. I have got Barclay Oils Limited. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: (Provincial Treasurer): — What is the hon. gentleman reading from? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I have got Albercan Petroleums, organized a year before he resigned, and while he was 

still in the employ of the Government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Might I ask the hon. gentleman what newspaper he is reading from? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — It is a chapter — yes, “Saskatchewan Liberal.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No wonder he is reading it to us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Freeholders‟ oil. This is a real picture; is it not a fact that he has organized all these 

companies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, you are trying to argue what Mr. Hood says in that paper must be 

true. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, he never said anything that he could not back up, you know that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — He said a lot of things in 1948 that he did not backup. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I am sure that the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Brockelbank) would like to 

catch him not printing the truth. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I do not want him — you can have him! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — But anyway, in numerous of these operations, Dr. Shumiatcher has not only 

monopolized the natural resources of this province, he has just walked in and taken everything that was 

of any value for himself and his associates, according to the records. You know, that is a fact, and there 

is no getting away from it. But the thing is, who are his associates? And that is the question we are 

asking. Who are his associates? That is what the province wants to know. After all, this talk 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

43 

about the oil business, the main point is to find out who Shumiatcher‟s associates are, and how much did 

they get. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have proven everything that the member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) has said. 

And all that we are asking for is the facts. We want to know, and people are entitled to know, that when 

one-third of the oil rights of this pr are handed out to one man and some associates, we have a right to 

know who his associates are and how much of a slice was taken as a result of giving him a monopoly of 

one-third of the oil rights of this province. The Premier says that there was a security area and a 

development area. Well, I think that there are some men who really got security; Rhubbra is one, 

Shumiatcher is another, and Broughton seems to be pretty well fixed. Those men are pretty well local, 

but Rhubbra is not, and they really got security. I do not think there is any doubt about that. 

 

The whole question of the oil situation is that we, as Opposition, are trying to draw out from this 

Government the details of his huge deal, and they will not come through. About the only way to get it is 

through an investigation and so find out how this thing came about. Why was it necessary, as the 

Provincial Treasurer says, to invite in a man of the type of one Rhubbra, and hand him 14 million acres 

of oil rights? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, may I again correct the hon. gentleman. Yesterday, I got up to deny 

that Mr. Rhubbra was invited to come into the province. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — But you said that he was invited. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I said no such thing. Mr. Rhubbra was not invited to come into the 

province. Mr. Rhubbra came into the province and did his deal. 

 

Some Hon. Member (Opposition): — You are confused, you don‟t know what he did. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Let me tell the story this way. After these little companies, such as Bata Petroleums 

had discovered oil and gas in this province, I can see the picture of Dr. Shumiatcher, along with 

Broughton and more of these C.C.F. prominent men, getting together and saying, “Here is a chance for 

us to make a killing; but since we cannot do it ourselves, we will get a guy in here that knows how.” 

And they could not get a better man than Rhubbra. And they could not get better men than some of these 

other men that are hooked up with him, because they had already been in the game, and they knew how 

to go about it. They know how to put just about how much they were prepared to pay. They knew what 

they were paying for freeholds, and they could very well set the price according to what the freehold 

was costing, for the Government lease. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Just the way you used to sell hay. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

44 

Mr. Loptson: — Yes, and it did not cost the Government half as much as it costs you to put it up now. 

It cost you $10.25 a ton just to put in the stack, and it was delivered in the car then for $6.25 baled. 

 

Hon. Member (Govt.): — You are trying to hitch the horse to the hay! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, now, what is this all about and what do we want? What we want, as I said 

before, is to find out and get a clear picture of what is happening to our natural resources here. The first 

is, who were Rhubbra‟s associates; the second is, if, as claimed by the Government, they do knot know 

who they were, why was the deal done with men they did not know? I think that is a fair question. Why 

was the deal entered into without securities? Why was the deal with Shumiatcher and Havard entered 

into which was later signed to National Petroleums? Why did that happen, when there were applications 

there galore rolling into the Natural Resources office, as the Minister said, so fast that he could not take 

care of them all? Many of those applicants would have gone and developed this land. There has not been 

anything done on the land that National petroleum has taken a permit out on; nothing but a little survey. 

That is all it has done. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I stated, this afternoon, that they have 

done a magnetometer survey and a gravity meter survey. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — That does not make any difference. What does that mean? Then, the other thing we 

want is: what was the relationship between Shumiatcher and the Department of natural Resources before 

leaving the employ of the Government? What access to the files of the Natural Resources did he have? 

What happened regarding Bata Petroleum so that Albercan, represented by Shumiatcher, obtained about 

a million acres of their leases. Why were the uranium deals placed with Hershon and his associates, 

without some investigation as to his reliability? Doing business with men that the Government of 

Saskatchewan does not know anything about does not sound real. They say they did not know a thing 

about them, and still they handed them one-third of the natural resources of this province. The Minister 

of Natural Resources admits that he had never seen the man and did not know a thing about him. I think 

he admitted, last session, that he did not even make the deal with Rhubbra. Was the deal really made by 

the Premier and the Provincial Treasurer? The only way the matter can be cleared up is be an 

investigation through the Government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Are you through . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If this is a point or order, it is quite in order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Did I understand the hon. gentleman to say that the deal with Mr. Rhubbra was 

made by the Premier and myself? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I said you had never met him, and the Premier said he had never met him, and the 

Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Brockelbank) said he never met him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that if he said that he is an unmitigated liar. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

45 

Mr. Loptson: — I said that you said you did not know him, and the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. 

Brockelbank) had never met him. He did not make a deal with him. I said, “Who did make a deal with 

him?” You said the deal had been made so that you must know something about it. Somebody must 

have made the deal. 

 

Some Hon. Member (Opposition): — The deal was made by the Premier and the public relations 

committee of the Natural Resources. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — He said he did not make the deal. Somebody must have made the deal. The Minister of 

Natural Resources . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I am insisting that that be withdrawn. I want to say that I 

never in my life even met Mr. Rhubbra, until the day that he and the representatives of Tidewater and 

the Sohio Oil Company came to my office months and months after the deal was made. I am going to 

demand that he withdraw that. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I can withdraw that, because I did not say that he made it. I said that . . . 

 

Some Hon. Member (Govt.): — Don‟t pull that. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — The Minister of Natural Resources says he did not make the deal. Who made the deal? 

He had nothing to do with it; then who made the deal with Rhubbra? That is the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, I never said that. I never said . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, will you admit that you did then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — On a point of privilege, the Department looks after the administration of the 

resources, and what was the name of this B.L.P. Drilling Company, for example, in which the member 

for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) was interest in? I never made the deal with that company. They came to the 

Department and made their application, and likewise these other people came to the Department and 

made their application. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, if the Minister did not make the deal, that makes it all the worse. Then the whole 

deal must have been made with Shumiatcher, and my hon. friend did not know what was in it, or what 

the terms were. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — They are all trying to “rotten egg” it. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They are all trying to . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — May I have the floor on a point of privilege? The hon. member for Saltcoats 

(Mr. Loptson) makes some pretty ridiculous statements. When permits are issued, they are issued in 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

46 

accordance with the terms of the regulations and I have at least a rough idea of what the term of the 

regulations are, and know that those are the terms. So I would suggest that he was wrong when he said 

that I did not know on what terms they were issued. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Will you admit then, that you have permitted the officials of the office to give 

one-third of the natural resources to one party, without knowing anything about it? Do you admit that? If 

you will, then I would say that you hardly qualify to fill your position. Do you admit that you allow your 

employees that much rope in the office? Why, they can walk away with the whole natural resources of 

the province, without you even knowing about it. 

 

Some Hon. Member (Opposition): — That lets Mr. Fines out, anyway! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Last year I tried to give you a break and say that I did not think you knew what was 

going on in the office, in the Natural Resources. You would not accept that, last session; now you admit 

that you do not know what is going on. 

 

Some Hon. Member (Opposition): — It sure smells, anyhow! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Oh, it small bad! Well, let us see what we want. Through the Government official 

investigation, whether such an investigation is to be of value depends entirely on the nature of the 

investigation, and whether it is designed to get to the bottom of things or to cover up. That, of course, is 

natural. Unless the persons carrying it out are determined to get to the bottom of the matter, and have the 

full support of the Government in so doing, little can be accomplished by an investigation. And that is 

true. For example, unless department records are made available, and civil servants are made to feel that 

they can make full disclosures without fear of retribution, an investigation could get very little more than 

the facts that we have already. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank): — You are not a very good reader. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — 

 

”Which, to say the least, looks as if the interests (and we are going to make this clear, because there is 

not gong to be any mistake about this, of what we want so you cannot contradict it) of the province 

were sacrificed for the benefit of a small group of people, and some of them had been very close to the 

government itself.” 

 

and that is true. You cannot get a large proportion of the province, without being very, very close to the 

higher-ups. 

 

“Further an investigation by Royal Commission now would mean that the matter could not be 

discussed in the coming campaign.” 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

47 

And it would probably be a very nice thing for the Government if they put a Royal Commission on to 

whitewash them and shut us up. 

 

“Further, a Royal Commission, just as any other investigating body that endeavours to get the facts 

could get nowhere without the sincere co-operation of the Government.” 

 

I doubt if it would be possible to get that from this Government. This obviously could not be expected 

from the present Government, as they are so closely involved with the men it concerns. If elected to 

office — I think I am safe in saying this, without disclosing any policy of the Liberal Party; if elected to 

office, the Liberal Party will arrange for an investigation of the circumstances and terms of the deals 

involving natural resources. 

 

This investigation will receive the full support and co-operation of the government. All necessary 

assistance will be provided, records will be made available, and civil servants will be assured that they 

can testify without fear of being dismissed. All proper steps will be taken in the light of the results of 

such an investigation, in the best interests of the province. Those who have not been involved in any 

improper deals need have no fear that if it is found that our resources have been handed out, enriching a 

few persons at the expense of the province as a whole, appropriate action will be taken. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member knows it is accepted parliamentary procedure that no 

member can read from a document of facts — it does not matter whether it is facts or not; but no 

member is allowed to read a document that can be made and prepared by someone else. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Okay. This is made by myself, and it is matter of policy . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If you are reading from notes, it is all right. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Partly it is notes, and partly a statement; but we want to make these things clear so that 

there is not going to be any misunderstanding about it. This particular part of my remarks is important, 

and I have them written out so that there will be no comeback. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, on this point, it has been an accepted custom in parliamentary practice 

that when an important statement has been made by the Government of policies, such as on the budget, 

it is read as a matter of course. This is representing the fixed policy of the Liberal Party, and he is 

reading it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If the hon. member gives his word to the Chamber that this is his own composition, 

and that he is just reading it to be sure that there will be no errors, that is accepted. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, that is the purpose and that is what we are after. We are prepared to go this far in 

an investigation if the Liberal party gets into power. Furthermore, I would like to say that anyone who 

has suffered as a result of the improper dealings of the government department, 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

48 

to come forth and they will be restored to their proper place, and the culprits shall be punished for such 

improper dealings, because it looks as if there have been some individuals and groups of individuals, 

who have lot the money they put into development of our resources, in good faith, and they have lost 

their permits because of lack of co-operation of some officials in the Department, because they wanted 

those permits for somebody else — that is plain language. 

 

Now, this is the policy of the Liberal government, if they get into power. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, the Hon. member is continually 

throwing insinuations that someone has lost their permits because of non-co-operation of the 

Government. I would suggest that he should name the permit and the occasion. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I did not say they had. I said if there are some that lost their permits. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You have been insinuating that there are. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I said “if” there is anybody that lost their permit as a result of improper dealing 

through the Department, then they shall be restored to their proper position. 

 

It is rather unfortunate that we should have to be suspicious that there might be somebody higher up 

included in that, and it is something that I did not have the slightest suspicion of until the Premier of this 

province brought in that Act amending The Legislative Assembly Act at the last session. The Premier, in 

his speech, was very indignant about some member on this side of the House making use of it, and 

passing insinuating remarks about somebody in the Government being implicated in this natural 

resources situation. I do not know more that could have been done that would have thrown more 

reflection in the Minister, than the amendment to The Legislative Act, last Session, which immuned all 

members from prosecution . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — On both sides of the House. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — . . . by the fact that they may be, directly or indirectly, interested in natural resources. 

He accuses us of voting for it. Well, maybe I did. I saw the Act go through and the significance of it 

never entered my mind, which directly throws a reflection on every member of this Government. 

 

Hon. Member (Government): — And the Opposition! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, maybe the Opposition too, but you did not have to pass the Act for the member 

for Saltcoats, because he had no interest in any acreage, nor any holdings, in this province. There wasn‟t 

anybody on this side, that I know of, who had to be protected by that Act . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Oh yes there was. There was a little dog! 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

49 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, I am not accusing anybody of being implicated in anything, but that Act, in 

itself, does . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — On a question of privilege, this shows the kind of thing; we are dealing with facts. As a 

matter of fact, I had a dog killed; I had a right of action against a man named Mr. Wilderman. He was 

insured with the Saskatchewan Insurance Office. I was satisfied with the claim against him. They came 

in to settle the claim that I had against him, and, on his behalf, offered me $60. I figured I was absolutely 

justified in taking that compensation because I was taking it from Mr. Wilderman in effect. But, because 

I did not want, in any way, to even come close to infringing the Legislative Assembly Act, I never in 

any way cashed that cheque until an amendment was put through that members could deal with the 

Saskatchewan Insurance Office. Now that is a horse of an entirely different colour than what has been 

brought up today. 

 

I am not afraid of anything, Mr. Speaker; but let the people on the other side get up and make a clean 

breast of things. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Some Hon. Member (Opposition): — People like Shumiatcher! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! There have been enough innuendoes spoken across the floor. If I remember 

correctly, only a short time ago, the Premier read a statement in this House that every member on the 

Government side of the House had signed a declaration that they had not taken any benefit out of that 

particular piece of legislation. I well remember the Premier reading that statement, and the hon. member 

who is now speaking also heard the statement. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — What the Premier said . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Let me finish please. I do not think it becomes any member, on either side of 

the House, to cast innuendoes on any member of this Legislature. If there is anything wrong, then let 

them take the proper proceeding. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, just let me deal with this thing. Here is a perfectly valid transaction, as the 

Provincial Treasurer well knows. He had told members that they can deal safely with the Insurance 

office, because they were doing business the same as any other insurance office. They stepped in to 

settle a claim that I have against somebody else, and then a Minister of the Crown tried to throw it 

across the floor at me. Such a thing is shameful, that is all. It shows just how badly they are driven into a 

corner; and furthermore, all the Premier said was this, “I am authorized to state, on behalf of the 

members on this side, that none of them had anything, in anyway, covered by this legislation.” Why, Mr. 

Speaker, I have been acting for many criminals in my time, as a lawyer, and they always authorize me to 

state that they are innocent. That does not prove anything, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, on the point that has been raised. The Premier, speaking on 

Wednesday, February 13, did, on behalf of all the members of this . . . 

 

(interruptions) 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

50 

 . . . just a minute. If the Premier did not say that every member on this side had signed a declaration, I 

will say that tonight. Every member on this side of the House has signed a declaration. Moreover, we are 

prepared, and are bringing in, amendments to The Legislative Assembly Act which will remove those 

sections that were put in last year; and we are quite prepared to make them retroactive. Just as soon as 

the Legislative Counsel gets them ready they will be here, I can assure you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason we brought them in was because a certain gentleman, namely, the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Tucker) wrote in wanting us to amend the Act, so as to make it perfectly safe for him to 

collect the insurance on his dog. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, I challenge the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines) to produce that 

letter. He is lying. All that I said was this. I wrote to the Attorney General‟s office and said something to 

the effect that I think it is safe for me to take settlement through the Insurance office, but, I said, I am 

not going to take it if, in any way there is any thought — I would rather do without the money for all 

time. I will not take it. Well now, then what in the world has amending something to do with the 

Insurance Act got to do with providing that a man like Rhubbra could take an interest, and hold it in 

secret for some of the members over there? They are entirely different things, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Tucker: —  . . . and when the Provincial Treasurer tried to put this upon me, he is lying, and he 

knows it; and I tell him to produce the letter in question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Tucker: — . . . or else it will prove that he is a liar. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Keep cool! Just keep cool! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! I do not think we can go on like this. If you are going to have this 

arguing between individuals, that is no way to carry on this legislature; and if there are certain provoking 

statements made, sometimes some members will feel pretty badly about it. As a matter of fact, the hon. 

Minister of Natural Resources (Hon. Mr. Brockelbank) was not justified in making that remark . . . 

 

Hon. Member: — Make him take it back then. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — . . . I did not catch it, or I would have made him take it back. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — It was just a sneaking little remark. He thought I would not have the nerve to get up and 

tell exactly the circumstances, and he would sneak about it, and talk about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Tucker: — It was just a sneaking remark; and entirely worthy of the Minister of Natural Resources. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

51 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition sits down in his chair and talks 

about sneaking remarks. If you say, Sir, it was improper for me to make that remark, I will withdraw. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. fines) has just made a statement in 

this House which has been admittedly untrue . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — What was that? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — The statement that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Tucker) objected to, and 

evidently you made an untrue statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I wish the hon. gentleman to withdraw that statement. I made no 

untrue statement here. I stated that the reason the amendment was brought in, last year, to The 

Legislative Assembly Act was because of a request which came from the Leader of the Opposition . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — And I say that that is absolutely untrue! Absolutely untrue! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Does the Leader of the Opposition deny that he „phoned the Deputy Attorney 

General of this Province? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I explained what I said. I said, “Is it, in your opinion, a violation of The Legislative 

Assembly Act for me to take settlement through the Insurance Office? The Deputy Attorney General 

told me, “I think it is perfectly safe for you to take settlement.” I said, “Well I wish you would look into 

it. In my opinion, I would rather not, in any way, even come close.” And so I got an opinion from there. 

I let the thing drop. I never asked for any amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — I sent down to get the documents here, if there is any question about it. This is a 

letter from the Deputy Attorney General — I hope I have permission to read this — and this is what it 

says: 

 

“On May 6, 1950, Mr. Walter Tucker, Leader of the Opposition, received a cheque from the 

Government Insurance Office covering damages caused to him by a man running over his dog, where 

the car involved was covered by a policy with the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office.” 

 

Hon. Member (Opposition) — To whom did the Deputy write that letter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — He wrote to me, as the Minister in Charge of the Insurance Act. It goes on: 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

52 

“Mr. Tucker hesitated to cash the cheque as he felt it might disqualify him under the Legislative 

Assembly Act on the ground that he was indirectly benefiting from a contract with the Crown, so as to 

conflict with the provision of Section 13(1) and 14 of the Legislative Assembly Act, which reads as 

follows: (I will not read that) . . . 

 

“He telephoned me as he felt that this Department would be familiar with the interpretation to be 

placed on The Legislative Assembly Act, but I did not advise him in the matter, but merely pointed out 

to him the relative sections quoted above, and gave him a few references to interpretation of the words 

„directly‟ or „indirectly‟. I also referred to Section 24 of The Saskatchewan Government Insurance 

Act, which reads as follows: (I will not read that either) . . . 

 

“Mr. Tucker suggested consideration be given to amending the said Section 24, and he stated that he 

intended to hold the cheque un-cashed for the time being. 

 

“A number of years ago when a Liberal Government was in power, Mr. Procter was appointed by the 

court to act as counsel for an accused, and he hesitated to accept payment, and as a result payment was 

not made to him until an amendment was made to Section 15 of The Legislative Assembly Act by 

adding thereto the present clause. 

 

“In view of the fact that some doubt might arise as to whether Mr. Tucker could safely accept the 

cheque, I would suggest that consideration be given to amending Section 24 of the Government 

Insurance Act of 1946, by adding thereto the words: „or receiving payment of a claim in the said 

Insurance Office‟.” 

 

Now that was the letter that came from the Deputy Attorney General, recommending the change; and 

then we received a letter also from the Attorney General, who suggested that we might widen it up, and 

gave certain reasons as to why it should be done. 

 

Now this is the thought I had for when the Legislative Assembly Act comes up I intend to say all of this, 

and a great deal more at that time. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege, the Provincial Treasurer said I wrote and asked 

for this . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — No, Mr. Speaker, I never did. 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

53 

Mr. Tucker: — Yes, you did. Don‟t try to lie out of that now. For goodness sake, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I said . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — You said I wrote a letter asking for an amendment to The Legislative Assembly Act. I 

said I never wrote any such letter. I said I discussed it with the Deputy Attorney General. The Provincial 

Treasurer said it was suggested that consideration be given to permitting people to deal safely with the 

Insurance Office. That suggestion came from the Deputy Attorney General; and I said, if they are gong 

to do business with the people in the province, perhaps it might not be a bad idea. But I never asked for 

it. I challenge him again to produce any letter I wrote asking for it. I challenge him again to produce it 

— and if he cannot produce it, I ask him to get up and say that he made a misstatement in this House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think this thing has gone far enough. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Let him withdraw what he said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — You withdraw what you said. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Evidently what happened, as the result of certain happenings, the Deputy Attorney 

General made certain recommendations to the Minister, and as a result of those recommendations, the 

Act was amended. Now, if that is wrong, you can put it out. And as a result of that Act, I think the hon. 

member for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) is using that Act and is casting innuendoes against members of this 

Legislature and insinuating that they are making profit which was made possible because of the passing 

of the Act. I think that is all there is to it. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, might I point out this further fact, the complete unfairness, because there 

is some thought that The Legislative Assembly Act should be amended so people could take settlement 

from the Saskatchewan Insurance Office, that there is an attempt made to use that as justification for 

saying that they should introduce an amendment that would enable a person to have a secret interest in 

some mineral or oil rights, and retain their seat in the Legislature. Did anybody ever imagine or hear 

such a fantastic thing? And the Minister of Natural Resources (Hon. Mr. Brockelbank) is so driven that, 

in his desperation, he brings out this suggestion about the amendment to the Insurance Act. They are 

entirely different things, Mr. Speaker; entirely different. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that discussion has given me quite a lot of time to look for 

something that I cannot find, but you made the remark that I had thrown in an innuendo. I did not do 

that. I said the very fact that the Act was brought in threw an innuendo, or at least threw a reflection on 

every member of this House, including the Government. Bringing that Act into this Legislature threw a 

slur on 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

54 

every member of this House. That is its hidden interpretation. That is what it has done. And, you know, 

we are all human, and this gave us all the right to do as we pleased in regard to natural resources in the 

province, and it protected us from anything that we might have done in the past in this regard in the 

province. And while I did not give it much thought when it went through the House, it was simply 

because I could not think that anyone could be implicated by it. Then, when it was drawn to my 

attention, about three months ago, by a lawyer who had noticed it, and drew my attention to the 

importance of it, well, I was thunderstruck. 

 

It implicated me as it did every other member of the House. Now, that is the case, and when the Premier 

gets up in the House and says he will vouch for every member on that side of the House, I am sure the 

Leader of the Opposition can do the same here. But the question is whether the Premier‟s word is any 

better in this case, when he has an incentive to do it, than it is in the number of statements that he has 

made in this House and out of this House that are not correct. Those are facts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I think that statement should be withdrawn. I think that the hon. 

gentleman has no right to say that the Premier makes statements in this House and out of this House that 

are not correct, and I ask that this statement be withdrawn. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Withdraw it if you like, Mr. Speaker, but I know it to be true. 

 

Well, now, we will quite the oil question; but I am going to saw a few words about the mines — that is 

included in the resolution, Mr. Speaker. I was very interested in the Minister of Natural Resources 

making the remark that Dr. Shumiatcher might be prepared to sell his 25,000 shares in the American 

Uranium for $500. I was just wondering how those people felt about the shares they paid $3.50 a share 

for, when he is prepared to see his for two cents. The original promoters got their share; Shumiatcher got 

his share for nothing in part return for the lease, and the rest of it sold for $3.50 to the public, I 

understand. Now, if it is right that Mr. Shumiatcher is prepared to sell his shares for two cents, then I am 

just wondering what kind of a racket went on when they took $3.50 a share out of the public. That is 

another thing we might try to find out. 

 

I also want to say that the operations in the mineral resources in this province, which are so much talked 

about, not only on the hustings, but over the air . . . we have been listening to dialogues about every 

week about some employee of the Natural Resources office, questioning the Minister of Natural 

Resources about all these Mineral rights, and how much was being done since this C.C.F. Government 

came into power. I think about all that has been going on there is what the Federal Government has been 

doing. They are about the only people that are spending money. The rest are only holding leases, and 

doing such work as is absolutely necessary to hold the lease. In spite of all that the Government says, 

there has not been one mine added to the production 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

55 

in Saskatchewan since this Government came into power. There is only one mine operating, and that is 

the one that came across the border underground in 1931; there has not been a single hard-rock mine put 

into operation since, according to returns that have been filed in this House today. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — There is only one which is sinking a shaft, as far as I know. There was one that sunk a 

shaft which is Nicholson Consolidated, and they had to quit. Nesbitt-Lebina is working because they are 

adjacent to the Federal Government mine down there at Beaver Lodge. I probably know more about this 

than the Minister of Natural Resources himself, and when he files a return or statement tome here, I 

know whether it is right or not, and the one that he filed here, the last time, in respect to what is going on 

in the development, some of those answers were not exactly according to the facts. These people are just 

barely holding — holding, why? Hoping that they might get a change of Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! I think the hon. member must withdraw that remark, as he distinctly 

said that the Minister of the Crown had tabled answers that are not according to the facts, and I think he 

should withdraw that. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They are not exactly according to facts, because there is a difference between 

 

Mr. Speaker: — There may be a difference of opinion, but you have made the direct charge that a 

Minister of the Crown was filing replies that were not according to the facts, and I would ask the hon. 

member to withdraw that statement. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Let us withdraw it, then. That is immaterial. It is only a matter of another mine 

operating or developing, and we are not gong to quarrel about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! That is not the question at all. Any member knows that, according to the 

rules, you cannot directly charge a Minister of the Crown, or any other member, of making statements 

that are not according to the facts. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — We will withdraw it for the time being then, and thresh it out later on, Mr. Speaker. 

But anyway, the fact is that there is nothing going on to speak of — there is absolutely nothing going on, 

except doing what we call “homesteading” there, and I think the reason for this is, simply, that they are 

afraid of the Socialist Government. Everybody says we have large uranium prospects, and according to 

all facts from the mining companies, they are doing practically nothing. The Federal Government is the 

one that is spending large amounts of money. The next mine to it is Nesbitt-Lebina; and they are sinking 

a shaft. The Nicholson Consolidated is shut down. Isn‟t that a fact? 



 

February 22, 1952 

 

 

56 

Who are the other mines that are sinking a shaft? I do not think there is another one at the present time. 

 

Now, that is all the development of our tremendous mineral resources in Saskatchewan; not one single 

mine has been brought into production. There are only one or two that are even making an attempt to 

develop a mine, and the rest are just sitting waiting for the next election, to see what happens. That is 

what is happening. That is the stagnation of our natural resources development in this province, and as 

long as this outfit is in power, it will continue that way, irrespective of the fact that they have adopted 

the capitalistic system to invite some of the rich capital in order to try and get development. The boys 

are ready to go to work. If this Government was defeated tomorrow, instead of having a few drills that 

you have now scouting around, using up the rental money, there would not be enough drills in North 

America to comply with the drilling demand in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Kuziak (Canora): — How many are there in the province of Manitoba? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — There are two I know of. And how much oil is there in Manitoba? They are getting oil 

there now. They just opened a new oil well there at Reston, the other day. We know now and the oil 

companies know now that there is oil between those two points, Alberta and Manitoba. It has always 

been known, as far as geologists are concerned, that there is oil in Saskatchewan. I read an article 25 

years ago — a report from a meeting that was held in New York, which reported one of the most 

eminent geologists as saying that there is more oil in the three western provinces than any other place on 

the North American continent, and he said that, in his opinion, the centre of that pool would be 

somewhere within the central part of the three provinces, and that placed it in Saskatchewan. That was a 

statement which made was made 25 years ago, and that is why some oil companies are here, and want to 

hold their leases. They are trying to spend their rental money, they are trying to do all they can to get the 

information, and are hoping the election will change the complexion of our political situation, and if it 

does, boys — won‟t we go to town! I‟ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, we will have industries — we will have 

everything booming. Just get these Socialists out, and we will have money in here by the hundreds of 

millions, because it is waiting on the border! 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to support the amendment and oppose the motion. 

 

The question being put, it was negatived by 26 votes to 15. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The debate is now on the main motion. 

 

Mr. WM. S. Thair (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:00 o‟clock p.m. 


