



















































Hansard: February 08, 1952


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eleventh Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, February 8, 1952 

 

The House met at three o’clock p.m. 

 

TRIBUTES TO HIS LATE MAJESTY KING GEORGE VI 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, this Assembly meets under the shadow of a great loss. I 

do not think it is an exaggeration to say that when the word was received on Wednesday morning of the 

passing of His Majesty King George VI, a pall of sadness settled over our entire province, and, from all 

reports, over all parts of the British Commonwealth of Nations. That loss was more than the death of a 

Monarch. It was more than the passing of a great public figure. It was, to many people, a sense of 

personal loss, in that they had lost one whom they had come to feel was very close to them, one with 

whom they had been associated throughout the dark days of the war and through the troubled years of 

the peace. Associations come out of common experience, and the people of the Commonwealth of 

Nations have never forgotten, and I am sure never will forget, throughout those terrible days when 

bombs were falling on London, and when we were not too sure as to how long the free world could 

survive, that there was consolation in seeing pictures of His Majesty the King visiting bombed-out areas, 

reviewing the services and carrying on the duties of a monarch. And in the years that have followed, 

through difficult times, through trying times, through periods of change, the fact that the King was there 

doing his duty, giving a sense of stability in a changing world, has brought him very close to the people. 

And, for that reason, when the news came over the radio early Wednesday morning I know that, for 

many people, it was a feeling of loss, not in the ordinary sense of the passing of a great man, but a 

feeling that one who had been very close to his people, one who had become almost a personal friend to 

his subjects, had passed away. A great deal has been said, and much more will be said, about the late 

King and there is no need for me to attempt to add to the eulogies that have been paid to him; but 

certainly he was, I think, our ideal of a constitutional monarch. His fine domestic life, the domestic 

felicity which he enjoyed and which he exemplified to all his people, I am sure has had much to do with 

the high moral standard of the people of the Commonwealth. 

 

When the visit of the Princess and the Duke of Edinburgh took place last fall, I has occasion to talk for a 

while to Princess Elizabeth, as she was then and, talking about the happy periods of her life, she made 

this remark. She said, “The happiest periods were the periods when our family went on tours.” She said, 

“We were a sort of team. If it should happen when we stopped at some town or village some member of 

the family had to be absent because,” she said, “on a long trip that extended into weeks and months and 

someone had to have their hair washed or someone had to have their hair cut, if one member was absent 

that was the member of the family that the crowd would ask for.” She told me the amusing incident of 

Princess Margaret who was busily engaged in having her hair washed and the crowd was so insistent 

because she was the only one of the family absent that they finally had to wrap a towel around her wet 

hair and have her appear before the crowd would quieten down. That is, the people have come to think 

of them as a family unit, 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

2 

 

of a father and mother and their happy children. It has been an excellent example to the people of the 

Commonwealth. The King was exemplary in his devotion to his church at a time when too often religion 

has come to have a perfunctory place in the life of the community. The King was a loyal supporter of his 

church, and one came to feel that his religion was more than the tribute one ordinarily pays to the church 

of one’s community, that there was in him a sense of faith in those intangible things that enables a man 

to meet the vicissitudes of life with his head up and his courage high. 

 

I think the thing that will be remembered most, by his people, about King George VI was his strict 

adherence to duty. He came to the throne as a result of a call of duty when the abdication took place. He 

who had had no expectation of ascending the throne left the more secluded life, which he then followed, 

to ascend the throne, and to assume all the heavy burdens and responsibility that that entailed, and from 

there on in the long tours to different parts of the Commonwealth, in the dark and terrible days of the 

war, with all of the heavy duties that have devolved upon him since the war, he carried on following a 

programme that would have prostrated even sturdier and more robust men than he. There can be little 

doubt that he paid a terrible price for the carrying on of the duties which were laid upon him by his high 

office. 

 

In Canada, and in Saskatchewan, we had the privilege of having a visit from the late King and his 

gracious Queen in 1939, and in this chamber members, some of whom are still here, had the privilege of 

meeting them on that occasion. The people of Canada — and I am sure, especially the people of 

Saskatchewan — came to have a higher regard for the King and his Queen and they won for themselves 

a place in the affection of the people of Saskatchewan. And they remembered Saskatchewan, if the 

House will pardon me a personal anecdote. In 1949, as members will remember, it was my privilege to 

represent this Assembly at the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference. That Conference was spread 

over some 6 weeks and wound up with visiting the British House of Commons on its official opening, 

and in the evening all the members of the various parliamentary delegations were invited to Buckingham 

Palace to participate in a buffet supper and to visit with Their Majesties and, in company with the rest of 

the group, I was received by the King and Queen. I noticed even then, while he was standing shaking 

hands and chatting with the different delegates, every once in a while he would kick his foot out at the 

side, that even at that date it was giving him a good deal of pain and a good deal of trouble. If you will 

remember he stood there for between three and four hours, one can begin to understand why. After we 

had all been received and were taking part in the supper, an attendant came and touched me on the 

shoulder and said that the King would like to see me and I went back to where the King and Queen were 

standing and he said, “How is my friend, Archie McNab”? I had to tell His Majesty that our Lieutenant- 

Governor had passed away, that Mrs. McNab was still with us; and he chatted quite a bit about his visit 

and was particularly impressed with the refreshing personality of the late Lieutenant-Governor. 

 

He said, “Of all the people I met on that trip, two I shall never forget, one is Archie McNab and the 

other was Mayor Camilien Houde of Montreal.” He said, “I enjoyed Mayor Houde’s hospitality”. I 

reminded His Majesty that, for some years following, Mayor Houde had enjoyed his hospitality, and he 

laughed quite heartily and said that he had been informed of that but he said, in spite of the fact, he had 

very kindly memories of the Gaelic charm and courtesy which had been extended to him by the Mayor 

of the 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

 

3 

city of Montreal. I think, of course, it is a great tribute to the late Lieutenant-Governor McNab and to the 

people of Saskatchewan that, ten years after, the King of this vast Commonwealth should remember a 

visit to the City of Regina and to the Province of Saskatchewan, which after all is a very small part of 

the vast domain over which he reigns. 

 

Now we have a new sovereign, and as Queen Elizabeth II ascends the throne and takes over the 

responsibilities which her father has laid down, I am sure that members of this Assembly, speaking for 

the people whom they represent, will want to express to her, as we did in our Oaths yesterday, our 

loyalty, our affection, and our prayers that she may be guided and strengthened as she takes upon her 

young shoulders the arduous duties as the Sovereign of the greatest Commonwealth in the world. It is 

fortunate that it is only a few months since Her Majesty visited our Province and only a few months 

since she stood in this chamber and met most of us who are here today. For that reason, the memory of 

her and of her gallant husband is fresh, and we feel that we know her and that she knows something of 

this Province and of its people and that, when she ascends the Thrown, she will not be a stranger but one 

for whom we have a very personal attachment. A constitutional monarchy is a strange thing — the 

bonds that bind people together in a Commonwealth like ours can only be understood by those who live 

in that Commonwealth. It is very difficult to explain it to people who do not live in the Commonwealth. 

We have a monarch who reigns but who does not rule; we have one crown that is the symbol of unity for 

a nation, governments and heads of governments may come and go, but the crown stays on as an 

imperishable symbol of the unity of the people and certain high ideals for which they strive. 

 

And that concept of the constitutional monarch within a nation has now spread to cover a community of 

nations — nothing like it has been seen in all the history of mankind — it is the greatest experiment in 

human relations that the world has ever seen that some 580 million people of different tongues, of 

different tates, of different colours, should be bound together, not only by the sword as the great Roman 

Empire was, not by fear and hate as Hitler tried to build a hegemony in Europe, but bound together in a 

voluntary association of free people, held together by common ideals and common aspiration, seeking to 

harm no one but seeking only to have the broadest possible brotherhood as between races and nations. 

So the Crown has a deeper and greater significance as the years go by. As this young and gracious queen 

ascends the throne, she takes on responsibilities and duties that we, or anyone else, can only dimly begin 

to understand. It is a crushing load to be borne by so young a person — yet I feel that the loyalty of her 

people, the affection in which she is held by her subjects will be a sustaining power in the years that lie 

ahead. 

 

I thought, Mr. Speaker, the House might be interested if I put on the record the cablegrams which I sent 

on behalf of the people of the Province, which I felt sure they would want me to send, and I think it 

might be wise to have them on the record as part of the record of our proceedings. This is the cablegram 

to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, Clarence House, London, England: 

 

“Your loyal subjects in the Province of Saskatchewan desire me to express to you their sympathy on 

the death of your father, our beloved King, for whom the people of this Province had the highest 

admiration and respect. We renew our pledge of loyalty and affection 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

4 

 

to your throne and person, and have many happy memories of the visit which you and your husband 

paid to our province a few short months ago. Our prayers go with you as you assume the arduous 

duties which your father has laid down. May God bless and prosper your reign.” 

 

And the cablegram to Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth, Buckingham Palace, London, England: 

 

“On behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, may I respectfully convey to you our deepest sympathy at 

the loss of your husband, our beloved King, who held such a high place in the hearts of all his people. 

We have happy recollections of the visit which you and His Majesty paid to our Province in 1939, and 

the loyalty and devotion expressed at that time has been strengthened with the passing of the years. 

His Majesty’s fortitude and exemplary conduct have been an inspiration to all of us. We pray that you 

may be comforted by Divine Providence and the knowledge that you enjoy the affection and esteem of 

all the people throughout the Commonwealth.” 

 

And one to Her Majesty, Queen Mary, Marlborough House, London, England: 

 

“The people of Saskatchewan mourn with you the passing of your son, our beloved King, and pray 

that you may be comforted by Divine Providence and by the knowledge that His Majesty discharged 

his responsibilities as a King with such courage and steadfastness as to make him a worthy successor 

of his father, who was held in high esteem by all his people.” 

 

There is no need, Mr. Speaker, for me to add any more. I am sure that what I have tried to say most 

inadequately is said on behalf of all members of this House, and all people in this Province. 

 

I would, therefore, like to move, seconded by Mr. Tucker: 

 

“That an Humble Address be presented to Her Majesty the Queen in the following words: 

 

TO THE QUEEN’S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY: 

 

Most Gracious Sovereign, 

 

We, Your Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, members of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly beg leave to express our deep sympathy with your 

Majesty in the affliction and loss You have suffered by the death of Your Majesty’s father, our late 

beloved Sovereign. 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

 

5 

Your Majesty’s sorrow is shared by the people of Saskatchewan, whose representatives we are, with a 

deep sense of personal loss arising from their vivid recollections of the gentle and kindly Monarch 

who visited them in 1939. King George VI, by His selfless devotion to duty, His integrity of purpose, 

His physical and moral courage in times of crisis and ill-health, His steadfast determination to share 

the lives and lot of His people, His truly Christian qualities of heart and mind, endeared himself to all 

His people throughout the Commonwealth, enhanced the dignity and prestige of the Crown and won 

the admiration and respect of the whole Free World. 

 

Amid the grief attendant upon the death of Your beloved father, we welcome Your Majesty’s 

accession to the Throne of Your ancestors, firm in the conviction that Your Majesty will enrich the 

noble heritage which is Yours, that you will ever seek to promote the happiness and well-being of all 

Your people. Fresh in our memories is the picture of the Gracious Princess whom we were honoured 

and privileged to greet in our Legislative Chamber, a few short months ago. We demonstrated then our 

attachment to the Throne, our pride in the Commonwealth, and our affection for Your Person. We 

assure Your Majesty of our continued devotion. As members of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, we pledge that, in the discharge of our duties and responsibilities, it shall be our 

constant desire and determination to uphold and support Your Majesty to the utmost of our wisdom 

and authority”. 

 

(CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY) 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, the words of this proposed resolution 

or address have very eloquently expressed the thoughts, I think, of this Assembly and also the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

What has happened in the last three days must have brought home to all of us the very transitory nature 

of human life and human affairs. I cannot help but think of the visit of the late King George VI and 

Queen Elizabeth to Ottawa in 1939. They were held up in arriving there and four days of various 

activities had to be combined into two and I remember as they went around attending these various 

activities which were arranged, the feeling that I got at that time was that they were a comparatively 

young couple, at the start of which might be quite a long reign and quite a long life together; and 

certainly that is the feeling, I think, that most people had at that time — that they were a young couple 

visiting one of the countries of the Commonwealth, at the beginning of their lives, and here a little over 

twelve years later, the King is gone and we are passing an Address to His daughter, who was then, of 

course, very, very young. I believe at that time she was about twelve years of age. It shows that we never 

know how long is going to be given to any one of us and it shows the very transitory nature of human 

life and human affairs. 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

6 

 

The King apparently was very much aware of the very grave state of his health. Anyone who has seen 

any loved one who knew that death was approaching and who actually knew it might come at any time 

and went on courageously with their activities, must have felt that the words of Churchill in that regard 

were most eloquent and appropriate. We must be thankful that a man in a position such as the late King 

was in was able to give such an example of courage in the face of what must come to all human beings, 

be they high or low station. 

 

Mr. Churchill said — “The King walked with death as if death were a companion, an acquaintance he 

recognized and did not fear.” I think that was certainly true of the King during the last days of his life 

and that represented his state of mind. He has given us an example of courage that could be of great 

help, I think, to every one of us. 

 

I would like to associate myself with what the hon. Premier has said in regard to the late King’s life. I 

think the thing that everyone is unanimous about is his sense of duty — duty right up to the very last 

breath he drew, and his high courage — physical and moral, and his truly Christian qualities as a man in 

public affairs, as a husband, as a father and in all his human contacts, and his family virtues in regard to 

bringing up a family and being a good husband. If one contemplates his life one must feel that it was an 

example that any human being could be proud of — proud that another human being was able to be so 

noble and be such an example of the nature of a person who tried to live as a Christian — of the high 

quality of life that could be attained. He was of such an exalted nature that perhaps not many could hope 

to do as well as he did, but it should be an inspiration, I think, to all of us. Certainly it can be a source of 

pride to us that a man who is in the position he was in, the Monarch of our Commonwealth and King of 

our country, should actually be able to attain that position, not only in the eyes of the peoples of the 

Commonwealth, but of the whole world. He has made a contribution there that I think we may all be 

very thankful for. 

 

He has lived through a very troubled period of the world. I think very often that people in our country 

were not able, perhaps, to be told of the difficult and dangerous nature of certain events from time to 

time during the course of the second war. Some of those things are beginning to be revealed now by the 

writings of such people as the present Prime Minister of Great Britain; I knew something of them from 

attending secret sessions of parliament. I doubt if anyone fully guessed at the danger we were in of 

losing the war, and actually losing our freedom. It was much greater than was generally realized. As the 

head of this great Commonwealth of free nations, the King must have borne a terrible burden of worry 

and we have been told by the Prime Minister that he always wanted to be kept informed of what was 

happening, and was anxious to share with his Ministers in their anxious vigil that everything possible 

should be done that what was left of the freedom of the world should not be lost in our generation. I 

think he carried a tremendous burden of responsibility at that time, and of course his determination to 

share in all the difficulties and dangers that his people had to endure in London were certainly an 

inspiration to everyone. He certainly helped to maintain the determination of people everywhere that 

what had to be endured would be endured. 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

 

7 

I think that everybody is proud of what he and the Queen and the rest of the royal family did at that time 

in showing their determination to share with their people all the privations, even to the point of one of 

their family, a brother of the late King, the Duke of Kent, actually being killed in active service. There 

again, Mr. Churchill, the present Prime Minister of Great Britain, I think demonstrated or put into words 

the feeling of most of us in regard to the late King. He said when the King was still alive, speaking in 

Ottawa on January 14th, in respect of the visit of the present Queen, Queen Elizabeth the Second, he 

said: “We have a truly beloved King. In constitutional duty he is faultless. In physical and moral courage 

he is an example to all people.” 

 

There is one way in which I think the King came closer to the people generally, than practically any 

other predecessor, and that was the use of the radio to give his Christmas messages which were 

inaugurated by his father, King George V, and which were carried on by the late King, and by virtue of 

his message coming into the homes of everyone on Christmas Day. Even last Christmas when it was 

quite clear that it must have been an ordeal almost beyond belief for him to give that broadcast, he still 

did his duty as he saw it and gave the broadcast. I think anyone who has to fight against anything in the 

way of physical disability must have felt a great feeling of warm admiration for the courage of our King 

in doing such things as that, even though, as it now appears, he was close to his own death. 

 

Now then, I, as has been said by the Premier, realize there have been so many eloquent tributes paid to 

the late King that I do not feel that it would be fitting for me to attempt to say, in a much less eloquent 

way, what has been so well said before, but in regard to these matters it is fitting that we should express 

as best we can our feelings on such occasions as this. Certainly we do concur in the telegrams that were 

sent by the Premier on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to the person who has become another 

beloved figure, and that is Queen Mary, the mother of the deceased King. She has also given an example 

of devotion to her people, and her devotion has been absolutely unwavering. Her willingness to serve 

has been unwavering through a long life, and certainly the sympathy of everyone must go out to her as 

she loses now a third son. 

 

Then, in regard to the Queen Mother, Elizabeth, as I have said already in regard to her my thoughts go 

back to just twelve years ago when she was visiting here with her husband, apparently with a long and 

happy life ahead of them, and she was a radiant figure. Everyone who saw the two of them together 

could not help but be happy, that we had at the hand of our affairs a King and a Queen who were so 

obviously happily married, and who were so happy in the family they had. I think it is true to say that 

wherever the King and Queen went during that year, 1939, the people of Canada as a whole came to 

have an affection for both of them that surprised a great many of them themselves. I think that some 

people who came to look at some of the ceremonies, or some of the processions as a matter of curiosity, 

felt that stirring within them of something they could not understand, and perhaps could not describe 

afterwards. As the Premier said, it was something there that we cannot explain — we just experience it, 

and I was one who was surprised at the feelings I experienced myself in seeing that illustrious couple as 

they visited amongst us. I am sure that it is not any form of words, or anything like that that we utter, 

when we say we extend to Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, our sincere and deepest sympathy, that 

we actually realize that she is a human being who has lost her beloved husband and we know that 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

8 

 

her sense of grief and pain, and her sense of loss must be almost unbearable; and I hope she may 

somehow be made to realize that in her bereavement and in her sorrow she has the affection and the 

deepest sympathy of people all over Canada, all over the Commonwealth, and I think largely all over the 

world. 

 

In regard to the new Queen, the first way in which we came in touch with her, and most of us, I fancy, 

heard the broadcast, was when she spoke to the children when she was fourteen years of age herself, and 

during a very difficult period of the war, when her voice came over the radio, and I think that we were 

all thrilled with her words on that occasion. Then, we followed with great interest her marriage to the 

Prince Consort, and certainly we were very fortunate that we were able to have a visit from them so 

recently, and a chance to feel that we know them personally. 

 

I am sure insofar as we think of her at the present time, taking on these great duties that have descended 

upon her, we are very glad that it has been so brought about that she has at her side such an able and 

such an outstanding and such a splendid man as the present Prince Consort. We, I am sure, cannot help 

but think of the parallel that exists as she ascends the throne to the situation of England when Elizabeth 

the First ascended the throne, when England’s existence — her very existence, was at stake. The battle 

of Armada had yet to be fought. England, when Elizabeth came to the throne, was at one of her lowest 

ebbs in all her history, and under Elizabeth’s leadership the great expansion took place across the seas of 

the world, the great Elizabethan era, and Shakespeare wrote his great plays and England enjoyed her 

greatest period — her greatest flowering of national life, both intellectually and in regard to expanding 

her influence over the world up to that time, but at the beginning of the reign, England was at a very low 

ebb. As one sees what is happening in the world today, we all hope that history again will repeat itself 

— not that we want to see anything happen in the way of extension of the imperial sway of any country, 

but we feel, I think, in Canada here, very proud of the way things have worked out. 

 

We are very proud of the fact, I think, that it has been demonstrated in a very real way, that the present 

Queen is the Queen of Canada, because instead of us accepting her as the Queen proclaimed in Great 

Britain, Canada proclaimed her Queen before Great Britain did herself, and this should help to bring 

home to everybody that fact that we are a free and independent nation, associated with other nations 

through the Crown. 

 

I think we all feel that one of the influences working in the world today for the preservation of peace and 

liberty is the influence of the British Commonwealth; this is one of the things that we can be happy 

about, that through the workings of the Commonwealth, and all that it means, the great country of India, 

the great country of Pakistan, the great country of Colombo, is associated with us and through us with 

the Western World; if there is a real hope for one world where peace and freedom can prevail, today it 

exists practically through the Commonwealth and that is something that we can be very thankful for, 

because surely we all look forward to a day where we will not have to be afraid of the outbreak of 

another war when we may live with a feeling that peace will be continual. We must all look forward and 

hope for that day, and through the Commonwealth the bridge is there, and the example is there. 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

 

9 

A thought comes to me, as a matter of face in that regard. I do not know whether these are the exact 

words or not, but the late King, when unveiling our great and beautiful national war memorial in the 

heart of our capital city of Ottawa, referred to the figures that are brooding over that national memorial, 

celebrating the sacrifice of Canadians who died to preserve liberty in two great wars, the King said 

something like this — that it was very fitting that there should be over that memorial a representation of 

two figures — peace and freedom — because, he said, without enduring peace there can be no lasting 

freedom, and without freedom there can be no lasting peace. They must go hand in hand down through 

the ages, and I feel in that spirit a real hope, that the influence that is represented by the Commonwealth 

in such a fine way by the reigning family in Great Britain down through recent generations, there is a 

hope there, there is an example there, a desire to bring to all mankind freedom — to build up in all 

mankind the dignity of the individual that exists under the British parliamentary system, and the desire 

that through that freedom and through that respect for the dignity of the individual, peace may ultimately 

come to prevail between all races and all creeds that inhabit this earth of ours. 

 

And so we as we greet our new Queen on her accession to the throne, we greet in her one whom we 

think will be a worthy successor of an illustrious line of sovereigns who have done their duty in 

extending the influence of the Commonwealth — not that one man may prevail over another, but that all 

may exist together as fellow men — in peace and harmony one with another, and as that is certainly the 

hope and aspiration of the peoples of the world today, and as I think that is the aspirations of the people 

who have reigned over us for many generations now, and is certainly typified in this splendid young 

person who is now our new young Queen, I think we can certainly say this without any feeling of undue 

pride, or anything else. 

 

We may certainly feel that as we sing our great National Anthem we will sign it with all fervency and all 

hope that she may be spared to make the contribution I feel she can in her high office, and certainly in 

that work she will have no more loyal and devoted supporters than the people of Canada, and we will, as 

we think about all that may be done, all that we hope may be done, we will wish her well in her reign 

and in her future life. In regard to all that she will work for, the heartfelt wishes of the Canadian people, 

and their loyal respect and affection, and their loyalty to her person and to her throne will never waver, I 

am satisfied. 

 

As I stood here yesterday and sang the Anthem and the prayer of the British peoples, “God Save the 

Queen” I thought to myself what a splendid Anthem it was if one associated it at all with what the 

British peoples are trying to do today in the world, and with what they are going to do. I would like to 

express humble and sincere support of this very eloquent message of greetings and sympathies to our 

new sovereign Queen Elizabeth the Second, and my support of the resolution which is going to be 

moved of sympathy with the beloved former Queen, and now the Queen Mother, in her great 

bereavement as she faces the years ahead without her beloved husband by her side. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — This motion is going to depart a little from the usual procedure, because I know that 

practically everyone in this Chamber would like to rise and pay their personal respects, their feelings 

and their loyalty, so I am going to ask you to all rise and support this motion. Thank you. 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

10 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), seconded by Mr. Tucker: 

 

“THAT the Address to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II be engrossed, signed by Mr. Speaker, and 

forwarded through the proper channels”. 

 

(CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY) 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), seconded by Mr. Tucker: 

 

“THAT a message of condolences be sent to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, in the 

following words: — 

 

YOUR MAJESTY: 

 

We, members of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, respectfully beg 

leave to tend to Your Majesty our heartfelt sympathy in your great sorrow and bereavement. We share 

Your Majesty’s grief and loss in the passing of our late Sovereign, King George VI, whose Christian 

virtues and exemplary conduct in His high office won Him the love and affection of all His subjects, 

the respect and admiration of peoples throughout the world. Our hearts go out to Your Majesty in 

Your anguish, cherishing, as they do, profound impressions from Your visit to our Province in 1939. 

 

We pray that Your Majesty may find solace and strength in remembrance of all Your loving 

companionship meant to our late, beloved King throughout His life and reign, and in the many 

evidences of the world-wide esteem he had won for the Throne and for His Person. We pray, too, that 

in the sympathy and affection, universally expressed, which surround You in Your sorrow, in the 

memories of service shared, of high duties courageously assumed and diligently performed, Your 

Majesty may find present satisfaction and future happiness”. 

 

(CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY) 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), seconded by Mr. Tucker: 

 

“THAT the Message of condolence be forwarded to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, 

on behalf of this Assembly, by Mr. Speaker”. 

 

(CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY) 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

 

11 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — At the beginning of each Session of the Assembly, it has become 

customary for us to pay our respects to the memories of former members of the Legislature who have 

passed away since we last met. 

 

I, therefore, would like to move a Resolution which will cover some five former members of this 

Legislature; and in moving this Resolution I think it is appropriate to place on the records of the House 

some account of the services of each of these gentlemen, rendered in their day and generation. 

 

It will be noted that all of them were pioneer citizens, that they participated in events which helped to 

shape the future of this Province, and each played some part in the development of Saskatchewan in its 

early formative period. It will be noted, also, that three of them were of German extraction, two were 

Russian-born immigrants, who, because of the Democratic system under which we live and because of 

personal qualities which won them the esteem and respect of their neighbours, were able and privileged 

to participate in the government of their adopted land, and to share in the great task of laying the 

foundations upon which their successors might securely build. Theirs is an example from which all 

might profit; their story an incentive to others now here or who may come here to join actively in the 

tasks arising as Saskatchewan enters a new period of transition and change brimful of opportunities and 

potentialities and of challenge. 

 

The names in the Resolution which I propose moving and which I am asking the Leader of the 

Opposition to kindly second, are as follows: 

 

MR. GERHARDT ENS, who died on January 2, 1952, at the advanced age of eighty-eight years, who 

was the founder of the town of Rosthern. He built the first house there in 1893, was the town’s first 

storekeeper; its first Justice of the Peace; the father of Rosthern’s first boy and first girl, and he was the 

constituency of Rosthern’s first member of the Legislature. 

 

Though of German nationality, Mr. Ens was born at Ekaterinoslav, Russia, on December 28, 1863. 

Educated in Southern Russia, he married there, in 1883, Anna Dyck, by whom he had ten children. 

Primarily to escape oppression he migrated to Canada in 1891, locating in the Rosthern district in 1892, 

as one of its first farmer-settlers. 

 

In 1905, some thirteen years after his arrival in Rosthern, he contested the first election in the new 

Province of Saskatchewan, and was elected member for Rosthern in the First Legislature. He was 

re-elected in 1908 and again in 1912. Following completion of his third term as a member of this 

Assembly, he was employed by the Provincial Department of Public Works as an Inspector of 

Government buildings, and later served as a Dominion Immigration Agent in which capacity he did 

notable work at home and abroad. The fact that he had found freedom and opportunity in this new land 

added persuasion to his tongue. He was thus instrumental in bringing many new citizens to this country 

and province. 

 

MR. ALBERT FREDERICK TOTZKE had the distinction of being the youngest member ever elected 

to this legislature. He also served in the Canadian House of Commons for a period of ten years. Of 

German descent, Mr. Totzke was born in Kitchener, Ontario, and was 69 years old at the time of his 

death, October 17, 1951, at Yellowknife, N.W.T. 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

12 

 

Educated at Kitchener and Toronto, Mr. Totzke graduated with honours from the Ontario College of 

Pharmacy, in 1903, and the following year came to Rosthern, where he engaged in his profession for a 

time before starting his own drug business at Vonda. 

 

In 1903, when only 25 years old, Mr. Totzke successfully contested Vonda constituency in the general 

election of that year. Re-elected in 1912, he served that term as Government Whip. Retiring from 

provincial politics to contest the Federal Constituency of Humboldt, he was elected to the House of 

Commons, in 1925, having failed at his first attempt. He was re-elected in 1926 and again in 1930. 

Following his retirement from active politics in 1935, he was appointed Manager of the Government 

Liquor Store at Yellowknife, N.W.T., and, in 1946, was named superintendent of Territorial Liquor 

Stores. Mr. Totzke is survived by his widow, two daughters and two brothers. 

 

MR. WILLIAM HAMILTON DODDS was 84 years old at his death, which occurred on July 14, 1951. 

Born at Bemsford Corners, near Peterboro, Ontario, he moved to Manitoba early in the century and 

farmed in the Elgin vicinity. Later, he came to Saskatchewan and homesteaded in the Cutknife district. 

Widely respected throughout the area, he was first elected to the Assembly for Cutknife constituency in 

1917, he was re-elected in 1923 and again in 1925, retiring from active politics in 1929. 

 

A quiet, unassuming man — his biography occupies just two and a half lines of the “Parliamentary 

Guide”. His kindly disposition won him many friends, and he enjoyed the esteem of his contemporaries 

in the House, on both sides. Some 15 years ago, he returned to the old Ontario homestead where he was 

born, and it was there that he died. Of his immediate family, a brother survives. 

 

MR. ANTON HUCK, like Mr. Ens, was born in South Russia of German parentage. In 1892, when he 

was 11 years old, his family migrated to Canada, settling at Qu’Appelle, where the young immigrant 

boy started work in a store. In 1896, the family moved to Vibank, where the father and sons 

homesteaded. In 1908, when the railway came through Vibank, Mr. Huck moved into the town, and with 

two partners organized a store and lumber yard which later established branches at Kendal and Odessa. 

 

In 1921, Mr. Huck contested the provincial constituency of South Qu’Appelle in the general election of 

that year, but was defeated. In 1925, however, he was successful, and again in the elections of 1929. He 

retired in 1934, the seat having been eliminated in the Redistribution of 1932. 

 

Mr. Huck was appointed a Liquor Board inspector, in 1935, and later was a member of the 

Saskatchewan Debt Adjustment Board. He died December 10, 1951, at the age of 70, and is survived by 

his widow, ten children and 22 grandchildren. 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

 

13 

JUDGE KNOWLES was 79 at his death on July 17, 1951. Born at Alliston, Ontario, of Irish descent, 

November 9, 1872, he was educated at Pembroke High School, McGill University and Osgoode Hall. 

After graduating from law school, he worked for a while in a Toronto law office before moving to 

Moose Jaw, in 1904, to establish practice. He was made a King’s Counsel in 1916. 

 

Judge Knowles’ parliamentary experience began at Ottawa, following his success in a by-election in 

Assiniboia, then the largest electoral district in Canada. That was in 1906. He was returned to Parliament 

in 1908 for the then new constituency of Moose Jaw. Re-elected in the general election of 1911, he was 

a member of the Canadian Parliamentary delegation that visited Great Britain and the Continent during 

the First World War. 

 

Appointed provincial secretary in the Saskatchewan Government of 1918 after winning a provincial 

by-election for Moose Jaw City, Mr. Knowles was named Minister of Telephones in the following year. 

In 1920, he resigned his portfolios and his seat to contest Moose Jaw in the Federal election of that year, 

but was unsuccessful. He re-entered the Saskatchewan Legislature in 1925, again representing Moose 

Jaw City, resigning in 1927 upon his appointment to the Saskatchewan Court of King’s Bench. Ill health 

forced his retirement from the bench in 1938. A son survives him. 

 

MR. NEIL McVICAR was another of that quiet, unassuming type which yet contrives to amass many 

friends and contribute greatly in public service. Born in Caradoc township, Ontario, he attended business 

college at London. On completing his course, he joined the staff of the Industrial Loan Company of 

Sarnia, and later became associated with the Traders’ Bank, serving that institution at Stratford and 

Tavistock, Ontario. In 1909, he was sent as accountant to the Saskatoon branch, and when, in 1910, the 

bank opened a branch at Rosetown, Mr. McVicar went there as Manager. He left the bank to manage the 

North-West Land Company at Rosetown, but finally set up in business for himself in real estate and 

farming. 

 

Mr. McVicar took a keen interest in community affairs throughout the period of his residence in 

Rosetown. He was a member of the town council and of the school board for a number of years, and was 

Mayor of the town for four years. He was also active in fraternal organizations in the town. 

 

Mr. McVicar represented the constituency of Rosetown in this Assembly from 1934 to 1944, when he 

retired from active politics. Ill health dogged his latter days. He died on December 6, 1951, and is 

survived by his widow, one son, one daughter and three grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is a long list and I am sure it would not be wise for me to comment on each of the six 

men whose names are listed here in this Motion. Some of them I have met, but several of them I did not 

have the privilege of knowing. I do think one thing should be said and I think the practice of keeping in 

mind these pioneers and paying tribute to the public service which they render, is a fine custom and one 

which we certainly ought to continue in this House. 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

14 

 

Men and women who give up their time and their energy to take an interest in public affairs do make a 

contribution to their day and generation. It may not always be appreciated at the time, but undoubtedly 

as we look back we see that all of these people in various public offices have helped to form and mould 

and shape the history of our Province, and we do well to pay honour to these men for the part which they 

had in helping to lay the foundations of the Province of Saskatchewan and of its social institution. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I should like to move, seconded by Mr. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): 

 

“THAT this Assembly records its deep sense of the loss suffered by the province through the recent 

deaths of the undernoted former members of this Assembly, and expresses its grateful appreciation of 

the contribution each made, in his day, in service to the Province, to the community in which he lived 

and to this House: 

 

MR. GERHARDT ENS, a member of the First, Second and Third Legislatures of Saskatchewan, 

having represented the Constituency of Rosthern from 1905 to 1917; 

 

MR. ALBERT FREDERICK TOTZKE, a member of the Second and Third Legislatures, who 

represented Vonda from 1908 to 1917; 

 

MR. WILLIAM HAMILTON DODDS, a member of the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Legislatures, having 

represented Cutknife from 1917 to 1929; 

 

MR. ANTON HUCK, a member of the Fifth and Sixth Legislatures, who represented South 

Qu’Appelle from 1925 to 1934; 

 

HON. WILLIAM ERSKINE KNOWLES, a former Judge of the Saskatchewan Court of King’s Bench 

and Member of the Canadian House of Commons, who represented Moose Jaw city in this Chamber 

from 1918 to 1920 and from 1925 to 1927; 

 

MR. NEIL McVICAR, a member of the Eighth and Ninth Legislatures, who represented the 

Constituency of Rosetown from 1934 to 1944. 

 

Further, this Assembly, in paying tribute to the memory and services of these departed former 

Members, extends its deepest sympathy to the bereaved families”. 

 

(CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY) 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

 

15 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I do not wish to detain the Legislature 

longer than I feel I should in saying a word of tribute to the brave pioneers, whose passing we are 

passing a Resolution in respect of. However, I do feel that I should say a word or so because I knew 

some of these members personally so well and am so conscious of the contribution they made to our 

Province that I feel it would not be fitting if I did not say a few words in regard to them. 

 

In regard to MR. GERHARDT ENS, I have known him intimately ever since I went to live in Rosthern 

nearly 27 years ago now; and I, of course, feel that in his passing I have suffered the loss of a close 

personal friend, and also a very able and loyal supporter of the Party which I have the honour to lead in 

this Legislature. 

 

Mr. Ens was a most devoted Liberal, and he believed in the Liberal Party as a matter of principle. He 

believed in Canada, and he believed in what Canada stood for, and what Canada had done for the people 

who sought the chance to make a new home here for themselves, away from the troubles and the 

hardships and some of the brutality which some of them had to endure in Europe. Mr. Ens has said to me 

on more than one occasion that he was quite satisfied that people who had lived in Central Europe and 

knew something of what it was to live under a regime where people did not have the freedom that they 

enjoy in Canada, appreciated the freedom that they enjoyed in Canada much more than those who had 

been born here, because he said, “You people seem to take it for granted that these liberties and the 

freedom which you enjoy under British constitutional system, under Canadian laws and so on, are 

something which falls natural to man, as the sunshine or the air; and you do not seem to realize that 

there are millions of people in the world who do not live under those free conditions, and who would 

dearly love to be able to enjoy that freedom and liberty”. 

 

As said in what the Premier has set before the Assembly, the fact that he found freedom and opportunity 

in this new land added persuasion to his tongue. He was instrumental in bringing many new citizens to 

this country and province. He made, during the time when Sir Clifford Sifton was bringing people to 

settle our great western country, and when his policy was under so much attack because there was some 

doubt about whether people who had been brought to our shores were going to make worthy citizens of 

Canada, several trips to overseas to tell people about the opportunity and freedom they would have in 

Canada and also he made trips to the United States. He also helped to settle these new citizens in their 

homes. I must say that I am satisfied that the people with doubts of the wisdom of what we are doing 

with regard to the settlement of our country have now been satisfied. 

 

I remember talking to the late Lord Tweedsmuir, then Governor-General of Canada, in regard to the sort 

of nation we are building in Canada; and he said, “I am satisfied that by virtue of bringing to your 

national bloodstream some of the most virile representatives of the great nations of all Europe, that you 

are going to create one of the most virile nations on the face of the globe.” He said that he had given 

some study to these matters and he said he was quite satisfied that, very shortly, the fact of the great 

virility of the nation that we were going to build up here was going to manifest itself in an 

ever-increasing degree. As I live in a community where 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

16 

 

there are people of so many different racial origins and so many different religious creeds, I consider it 

has been a great privilege because I have come to see where every human being is pretty well the same 

if only they are permitted to live together in peace, in harmony and in freedom, and just how much good 

there is in people of all racial origins and all different religious beliefs. 

 

I have often thought that people who are intolerant, if they could only have the privilege of living in a 

community such as I have for the last 27 years, would lose that intolerance very rapidly. They would 

come to know great Canadians of the nature of the late Gerhardt Ens. When one meets, as I did at his 

funeral, his family and see what good citizens he has raised to help build up this country, one realizes 

again what a contribution he has made, because those people are sincere Canadians to the very fibre of 

their being —every one of them — they are proud of Canada and they love Canada. I am very proud of 

the fact that when the Citizenship Act was passed and a few representatives of grand old pioneers were 

asked to come down and accept certificates of Canadian citizenship, Mr. Ens was one of those who was 

able to make that trip, old as he was, and he received his certificate of Canadian citizenship at the hands 

of a man for whom he had the greatest affection and the greatest amount of admiration, the late Prime 

Minister of this country, the late Mr. King. 

 

I was very glad that he was able to make that trip. When we hear, today, about people who do not take 

the trouble to attend public meetings, who will not take the trouble to go out and vote, I think of the 

stout citizenship of a man like Mr. Ens. Of course the gentlemen opposite would think he was working 

for the wrong cause, but I think they would say that that is the kind of supporter we all like to have. Mr. 

Ens, when he was 84 years of age in the 1948 election — 84 years of age in the 1948 election — when I 

was running to take the seat representing Rosthern which he had represented in this House for so long, 

drove a car the whole day long and did not stop until the polls had closed on election day — 84 years of 

age. 

 

I think there is an example that anybody might be proud to hold up and rejoice. I feel that I would like to 

say in this place here, of this man who sat in this Assembly of our province in its first Legislature, 

coming as he did from Europe and within ten years of his coming here, at which time when he first came 

little knowing that he was able to actually be elected here, and come to be one of the most respected 

citizens of our province, and make a home and bring up a splendid family like this, I think it is 

something that we can be proud of that there is that sort of situation in our country, that there should be 

so much tolerance and such a chance for people. 

 

For that reason, I hope we never close the door to those of other lands who want to come here and make 

new homes for themselves. There is great room in Canada for people of that calibre, and I am sure that 

we rejoice in the life and example of men like Gerhardt Ens, and we extend to their families our deepest 

sympathy. 

 

Mr. Totzke actually started his life in Rosthern and represented the neighbouring seat of Vonda for 

many years, and later on went to represent Humboldt which was a neighbouring seat to us in the Federal 

House for many years. I knew something of his life and he was a man who gave practically his whole 

time and attention during the time he was in legislature and at parliament again to working for the 

principles and working to uphold the 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

 

17 

party in whose principles he believed, and when finally he left politics, he was a man who had 

accumulated nothing at all, because he had given all his time and all his energy to working for the party 

whose principles he believed in. He was a most respected member of our party, and I certainly want to 

say that as far as I am concerned, I pay a humble tribute to his work and to his life, and extend sincere 

sympathy to his widow and the members of his family. 

 

In regard to Mr. Dodds, the report here covers the situation. I also had the privilege of knowing him as a 

young fellow before I really had done much more than be interested in public affairs. I think we were on 

a trip about railway troubles down at Ottawa in 1927. I remember Mr. Dodds was a member of the 

delegation. I came to know him at that time and the type of a man who was, as was said the Premier 

Douglas, a quiet, unassuming man. He was the kind of a man who had at heart the best interests of the 

people he represented, and was ready to serve them in every conceivable way he could, and he was a 

man of whom any party would be proud to have as one of its members. We certainly extend our 

sympathy to his surviving brother. 

 

Mr. Anton Huck was a man like Mr. Ens, who believed in Canada, believed in the liberties that we enjoy 

in Canada, and believed that anything that threatened them should be repelled with all possible force, 

anything that appeared to undermine the freedom and liberty that we have in Canada should be repelled 

and opposed. He believed in the future of Canada, the task of upholding Canada with all his heart and 

soul. He brought up his family that way, to believe that they should be ready to serve anything that 

would promote the interest of Canada in every way, shape and form, and anyone who knows the 

members of Mr. Huck’s family must be glad that people of his character were brought to help lay the 

foundation of our country, by starting to farm, and then bringing up here a family of the nature which 

Mr. Huck brought up in this country and who are now in turn making their contribution. 

 

Anyone who has visited Mr. Huck and enjoyed the kindly hospitality of himself and Mrs. Huck, and 

who saw the wonderful type of man he was, must be glad that he was able to come to Canada and make 

the contribution he did. He is survived by his widow and ten children, and surely, I feel, word should go 

out from this Assembly that he has won a real tribute in his life as a husband and father, the grandfather 

of the 22 grandchildren he left, and our sympathy goes to them in the loss of Mr. Huck. 

 

Judge Knowles was also a very outstanding member of our party, a very able man. As a young lawyer, I 

had the opportunity of appearing before him on various occasions, and I can say that he was a very able 

judge, a very competent judge. I knew very little of his political work, because when I came to know 

him he was already in the judicial field, and of course I have very little knowledge, except what I have 

heard, of his ability as a worker in support of the party in which he believed. But I understand that he 

has made a great contribution in that field, and surely it was a matter of regret that he had to retire at a 

comparatively young age from active life on account of ill health. 

 

Mr. McVicar was very well described in the remarks of the Premier. He was a quiet, unassuming type, 

which yet contrived to amass many friends and contributed greatly to public service. I think that does 

describe the kindly affable gentleman that Mr. McVicar was. Everybody who knew him had great 

affection for him, his position in the party was one where his opinion 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

18 

 

was deeply respected and continually sought, and he also made a real contribution to the building up of 

this province of ours. I would draw to your attention, Mr. Speaker, that all of the people that I have 

mentioned are men who took a great part in laying the foundations of our province, and are rapidly 

passing from our midst. I think there are only four gentlemen left now that were members of the first 

legislature. There is one in our midst now, and I think everyone would join with me in extending to him 

wishes for continued health and happiness, and that is the gentleman who represented Regina City in the 

first legislature, Mr. Frank Boles. 

 

Then another gentleman who was a member of our first legislature — it is hard to believe when one sees 

him going about his duties today and meets him going in his light, springy walk about the streets, the 

Chief Justice, J.T. Brown. 

 

Another one is a great old pioneer, I believe he is over 90 years of age — Tom Carry. I think he 

represented the seat of Yorkton in this House over 20 years ago; I just cannot remember exactly. He sat 

here seemingly almost indefinitely. And the last is Senator Calder, who also must be approaching 90 

years of age, and who was also a member of the first administration, holding the two posts of Provincial 

Treasurer, and Commissioner of Education. 

 

It is really worthy of note, Mr. Speaker, when there are only four of that original legislature left with us, 

that gradually the pioneer days are passing away. I thoroughly agree with the Premier in this custom of 

saluting the memory and achievement of those who have done so much for the great province we are so 

proud to belong to today —the people who laid the foundation of it — their numbers are diminishing so 

fast now it is quite fitting that we should pay our humble tribute of respect to their work and service, and 

sympathy to their bereaved ones. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Rosetown): — I would like to join in with the mover and the seconder of this 

resolution in paying tribute to those men who have passed on. While I have not had the opportunity of 

knowing so many of them, I did know Mr. McVicar of Rosetown very well, and I feel that it is my duty 

today to place before this Legislature a few comments regarding Mr. McVicar, and the high esteem in 

which he was held by all people in that community. 

 

While he served in this Legislature, I believe, for two terms, he took his work very conscientiously in 

the constituency, and I can say this, that in all of the public duties that he associated himself with, he 

filled them cheerfully and very well. There is not much more that I can say than was outlined by the 

Premier and the Leader of the Opposition this afternoon, but I did want to associate myself with those 

remarks and also to convey to his widow and to the members of his family the condolences of this 

House. 



 

February 8, 1952 

 

 

19 

 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, it was my privilege to be very intimately acquainted with 

Mr. W.H. Dodds, who represented Cutknife constituency for approximately twelve years. In addition to 

his public duties which he discharged most faithfully and conscientiously, I think that he will be 

remembered in his community principally because of his devotion to his public duties, but more 

particularly for the contribution that he has made to his community in general, and in addition, his very 

exemplary life. 

 

It can be said that Mr. Dodds was truly a Christian gentleman. I think it is in that particular field with his 

quiet, diligent and dutiful disposition, that he will be remembered. As has been mentioned, many of 

these pioneers with their fine traditions and their fine principles are leaving and I think that in the case of 

Mr. Dodds his influence, by his example, will be long remember by the young people who follow in the 

communities where they had the opportunity of becoming acquainted with this gentleman. 

 

I held Mr. Dodds in the highest personal esteem. We met often and I have had a full opportunity of 

understanding his sincerity and his honest, quiet determination. I think he was quite renowned, when he 

was a member of this legislature, for the quiet and dutiful manner in which he discharged his 

responsibilities. 

 

When paying tribute to anyone that passes away, I do not gauge the contribution that they have made to 

human society in passing on the basis of any of their affiliations, whether it is political affiliation, 

religious beliefs, or nationality. When those great events take place, as the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Tucker) has stated, events that bring home to us the very short nature of our existence on this earth, then, 

when that times comes, we commence to gauge the men by the actual contribution that they have given 

to society as a whole in all their fields of activity. 

 

We are particularly impressed by the example they have shown while going through life. It has always 

been my belief, Mr. Speaker, far greater influence springs from example than from preaching. I think 

that has been borne out by fact. I know in my association with the many fine people that I have known in 

the old-timer field, those that I remember the most are the ones that led the good lives and they are the 

ones that have influenced my own life the greatest. 

 

I thought I should say this, Mr. Speaker, or add these few words to what has already been said, since 

there are some hon. members, perhaps the hon. member from Arm River, who knew Mr. Dodds 

personally, as I did. I am quite certain many others did not, and I thought it was my duty, and indeed it 

was a privilege, to have an opportunity of paying a tribute to the memory of William Hamilton Dodds. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:40 o’clock P.M. 


