



















































Hansard: March 12, 1952


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eleventh Legislature 

24th Day 

 

Wednesday March 12, 1952 

 

The House met at three o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, referring to the few words that I said 

before the Session began, yesterday, I was quoted as having said: 

 

"Mr. Nollet said, in the Government's opinion, and he thought it was generally recognized by 

everyone, that the Federal Government had had complete constitutional and administrative control 

over contagious animal diseases for four years." 

 

I said "for years" — with the "four" deleted. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed from Tuesday, March 11, 1952, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair. (The Assembly to go 

into a Committee of Supply). 

 

Mr. J.E. McCormack (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, when the House adjourned last evening I had 

mentioned a few of the remarks which had been put forward by members on the other side of the House 

in this debate. I am very sorry that we had to adjourn so early — it was getting near 6 o'clock — because 

I think we had quite an entertaining afternoon, and possibly something was required to try and dampen 

down some of the spirits, particularly of my very good friend from Swift Current (Mr. Gibbs) who came 

in here with the oil. I was rather looking for him, hoping he would be around with something that would 

float on top of that a little later in the evening, but unfortunately, I did not see him. 

 

Reference was made to the elections recently in Great Britain, and in some of the other countries that 

once had Socialist Governments. I really do not think that the Government of this province can get very 

much comfort from the results of those elections. To go to the two previous elections, to the last one in 

Ontario, there was some indication that the people in Ontario were swinging to the left, with the C.C.F. 

gathering strength. In the previous legislature 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

2 

in Ontario the C.C.F. were the official Opposition and they held 22 seats, I think, however, the C.C.F. 

boom down there has fizzled out the same way it is going to in Saskatchewan. Ontario not only failed to 

re-elect 20 of its C.C.F. candidates, but its leader, Mr. Jolliffe was even defeated, and, in this area where 

union labour predominates, I think this is particularly significant. There is very little doubt that a fuller 

understanding of the dangers involved in Socialist thinking and Socialist theory and practise had 

everything to do with the results in that election, and really it just confirms the trend that is going on in 

the English-speaking world today such as Great Britain, New Zealand and Australia. They are swinging 

away from Socialism. If we look at the Ontario election, there is no other major group that lost votes in 

Ontario at all, except the C.C.F. and they lost 140,000 votes, or about one quarter of their previous 

supporters. To look at Saskatchewan, back in 1948, about a thousand well-placed votes in the province 

would have tumbled these gentlemen out of office that sit across the House here today. 

 

We have rather missed the member from Swift Current (Mr. Gibbs), and the Minister of Social Welfare 

(Hon. Mr. Sturdy), getting up in this House this session, telling us about these by-elections, mentioning 

that labour has won. I hope to hear something from them sometime before this session is over, telling us 

the results of the elections in England, but to date at least, Mr. Speaker, we have not had any word from 

them. Well, the hon. member from Hanley (Mr. R.A. Walker) I see is chortling again. If he will just let 

me finish my speech, then he can get up and make another one himself. 

 

I would like to mention something about the highway problem in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. We 

have — prior to 1948 (at least prior to the election in 1948) when there was a C.C.F. member sitting in 

this House, the constituency was accorded a great deal of attention. As a matter of fact, we even got in 

on a piece of blacktop roads that run south from Regina to North Portal. It comes through Weyburn, so I 

do not think they could do much else, except extend it down through Estevan. However, if you take a 

drive over that road today, particularly from Corinne down No. 39 to North Portal, you will find that in a 

large measure it is pretty well breaking up. Last summer it was just loaded with crews down there, 

patching here and there, and patching spots all over. It would be very interesting to find out how much 

money was spent in trying to patch up that road, because it looks very much as if all they put on was a 

pie-crust, and they were not too interested in what was underneath. 

 

Well, the constituency of Souris-Estevan, which I have the honour to represent in this House, is in the 

extreme southeast corner of this Province. We are bounded on the south by the United States, on the east 

by the Province of Manitoba; I have the Premier on the west of me, and around a bit on the north, and 

my friend from Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) has the northern boundary of that constituency. In common 

with all the other hon. members in this House each year, I have felt it incumbent upon me to bring 

forward some of the problems with respect to highways. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

3 

The constituency has one main highway running throughout its entire length, and several highways 

running north and south. The constituency is rather long and narrow, and the principal highway bisects it 

down the centre, running from east to west. Some work, I will say, has been done on Highway No. 18 

which runs from the Manitoba boundary right through to the western part of the constituency, and the 

government crews or the contractor they have there now doing some work (or at least he was there last 

summer), had constructed and reconstructed and regraded some of the highway as far as the town of 

Oxbow. I certainly hope that the Minister of Highways does not get any of his government crews back 

down there. We had a return in this House about a year ago, I believe, and it was tabled, which showed 

that they spent $92,000 in expenditures for a government crew building three miles of construction, 10 

miles of regrading, and three miles of gravelling, and 27 miles of regravelling. Well, to me that seems to 

be an exorbitant cost. That was a piece of road that was being built from Carnduff towards Glen Ewen, 

and I do not think the Minister can honestly tell anybody in my constituency who was down there that 

his government crews can do the work any cheaper than a contractor can. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — On a point of privilege, I expect the hon. gentleman to 

at least be honest when he makes a statement of that kind. What you failed to tell them was that it was 

necessary for our government crew to go over the work that was done the year previous by a contractor, 

and increase that grade in addition to this other. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I will leave it to the good people that live around Carnduff and 

Glen Ewen to see what these government crews were doing. They had four bulldozers there, and I do not 

think they ever had more than one of them running at any time. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — Again, Mr. Speaker, that statement is not correct. There was only one bulldozer 

in the whole crew. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — It is quite obvious, Mr. Speaker, to anybody who lives down in that part of the 

country as to where the money is being spent. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — You do not know the difficulty . . . 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Well, you made a speech here the other day and I never interrupted you once, so 

you let me make mine. 

 

We were rather disappointed, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Highways proposed expenditures which 

he gave this House, I think it was last week, did not provide for any reconstruction of Highway No. 47 

which runs north and south through the seat, and particularly for the portion which runs from Estevan to 

the American border. This piece of highway is particularly important, not only because we have an 

airport which is just four miles south of Estevan. At that airport, there is a hospital run by the Sisters of 

St. Joseph which has 46 or 47 beds, I believe. There are about 35 families housed out there. It is also the 

home of the Estevan Flying Club, and the headquarters of the South Saskatchewan Regiment. We 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

4 

also have several coal mines down in that area which deliver coal on a domestic basis and there are 

some very fine tourist resorts in that area. As far as 47 is concerned, in the winter time it is virtually 

impassable, and it is a great source of concern to the people in the town who have people living out at 

the airport, because the town has to supply it with its fuel and its power, and they are continually having 

to keep that road open. 

 

The same situation exists with respect to Highway No. 18. I would like to just point out — I am not 

going to take the time of he House today, because I have not got the time due to the fact that I am 

sharing this air time with somebody else, — but I would like to point out that within the last three or 

four days, I have received letters concerning Highway No. 18 and Highway No. 47 from the Torquay 

Board of Trade, and the letter is signed by Mr. St. Onge, the President, and Mr. Bercum, the Secretary 

Treasurer; the rural municipality of Cambria from Mr. Vinge, the Secretary Treasurer there, writing on 

behalf of the council, the customs officers at the border south of Estevan, Mr. Everett Murphy; the reeve 

on behalf of the R.M. of Estevan No. 5, a letter from the Estevan Board of Trade, signed by the 

Secretary, Mr. Bannatyne; a letter from Fred N. Perkins, the reeve of the R.M. of Benson; a letter from 

the Village of Torquay, Secretary-Treasurer, Mr. Vinge; a letter from George T. Green who is the 

operator of one of these tourist establishments, and a letter from the town clerk of the town of Estevan, 

writing on behalf of the town of Estevan, in addition to one of the coal mine operators, Mr. Jenish. 

 

All these letters express the same feeling, that there is a certain amount of discrimination they feel 

because nothing is being done with respect to these particular sections of highways, and they are getting 

in such a condition now that they are virtually impassable. The rocks are sticking up through the roads, 

and they are wondering when and if something is going to be done. I can certainly tell them that after the 

next election, when I am sure that these boys sitting on the other side of the House will not be in office. 

Mr. Speaker, I am positive of that, then these problems will be looked after and these roads will be 

maintained in the proper manner as they should be. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — As they were before. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Much better than before. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the problems that we have in this province is the decreasing population. We 

have read in the press about a redistribution bill which is coming through in Ottawa, and I think it should 

cause every one of us, regardless of what side of the House we are on, a great deal of concern, because if 

our population keeps on decreasing we are going to end up with a very small representation in the 

Federal House at Ottawa. The only province in the Dominion of Canada that had a decrease in 

population during the past 10 years is the Province of Saskatchewan, and it is particularly significant Mr. 

Speaker, that during seven and a half years of those 10 years, we have had a Socialist C.C.F. 

Government in power in Saskatchewan, and this is the Government from whom the Socialists, at least, 

expected such wonderful things. During the 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

5 

first four years of this period — that is, from 1941 to 1945 — my hon. friends across the way will laugh, 

but some of us happen to have known something about it — there was a war on, and people were away 

in war industries and in the armed forces. In the period 1946-1951, however, if we compare 

Saskatchewan to our neighbouring provinces of Alberta and Manitoba, it shows that these provinces 

actually made real head-way while Saskatchewan actually lost population. I would just like to give you a 

couple of the figures: 1946 to 1951 period shows that Alberta had a gain of 133,000 people. Manitoba 

had a gain of 44,000 people, while the Province of Saskatchewan actually lost 2,000 people. 

 

Premier T.C. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure it was 960. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Saskatchewan, then, is the only province in Canada to show a decline in 

population during this period, and it is the only province, as I said before, Mr. Speaker, that has a 

Socialist Government. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure our hon. friend would not want to misquote the figures, 

but the official figures by the D.B.S. is 960 of a loss, instead of 2,000. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — I will stand corrected — that is a thousand people. I contend that the lack of 

comparable industrial development in this Province, Mr. Speaker, under our C.C.F. Government is 

largely responsible for the loss of population. We all depend for our incomes in this province, directly or 

indirectly, on agriculture and 85 per cent of our wealth comes from the farms. In order to provide a more 

balanced economy in the province, we need more industries. Since the end of the war, if we look at the 

Dominion of Canada we find that Canada had forged ahead faster than ever before in her history, and 

proportionately to our population, Mr. Speaker, faster than any country in the world. 

 

I would like to refer to a brief extract from an article which appeared in Time Magazine on February 4 

of this year. It says: 

 

"Since 1939, Canada has quadrupled her national production, climbing from a lowly par with Norway 

and Sweden to a point where she nearly triples the output of these Scandinavian countries and rivals 

that of France. She made a 15 per cent advance in the Canadian standard of living, raising her average 

income for a family of four to $4,000 a year, that is $622 above the corresponding U.S. average. She 

kept her finances in splendid solvency." 

 

Then it goes on to say that even though we are dwarfed in productivity by the United States that our 

industry has expanded terrifically to an extent never achieved before by 14 million inhabitants of any 

country. Then it goes on to list all the wonderful things that the Dominion of Canada has, and the great 

achievements that it has made. I think, Mr. Speaker, that it is particularly unfortunate that we sitting in 

Saskatchewan here, when all the rest of Canada is going ahead at such a great rate, that we 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

6 

have to sit here, and we are just barely moving. I know that some of the hon. gentlemen opposite like to 

quote 1944 figures and compare them today. But I am sure, Mr. Speaker, if you and I were to say in 

1944 we had $1 and today we have $10, we would probably say we are ten times better off. But in the 

same period while you and I are getting ahead by $10, somebody else has made $1,000 (the rest of the 

country has made $1,000 in comparison) — we are going to look pretty poor. I would just like to give 

some figures as to what, in my opinion, is happening in this province. We have about 90 million acres of 

the pre-Cambrian shield which is potentially a great mineral bearing area . . . 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank: — Have you ever been there? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — We have practically no development — that is where you had better go after the 

next election — they will not have you around here anyway. We have had practically no development in 

that area compared with Manitoba, Ontario and Quebec, which have similar areas. My feeling is, Mr. 

Speaker, that the blightening effect of Socialism is the reason that we have not had any great 

development in this area, when other provinces are. 

 

If we go into the figures that have been given with respect to manufacturing industries, we find that from 

1944 to 1949 the number of people employed in such industries in Manitoba increased by over a 

thousand, by over 4,000 in Alberta, and decreased by nearly 1,500 in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We have heard a lot too, Mr. Speaker, about the development of our oil and gas reserves. Last year, 

while we had about $200 million being spent in gas and oil development in Canada, in western Canada, 

according to recent figures, the Province of Alberta had about 195 oil drilling units working in the 

province, and Saskatchewan had 26, I believe, and I think it is the belief of most thinking people in this 

province, that if we had a government in office which capital was not afraid of, that there is no reason 

why we would not have as many oil drilling rigs in this province as they have in the Province of Alberta 

today. I am going to say this again, that the real test is whether we have progressed or not at the same 

rate, the real test is whether we have progressed at the same rate as our neighbouring provinces. And 

there is no doubt in my mind that our development in this province has been retarded by a C.C.F. 

Socialist Government. That is a government which, as you know, Mr. Speaker, has as its objective the 

eradication of capitalism and the establishment of a socialistic state in which the natural resources and 

principal means of production would be ultimately owned and controlled by the Government. Did 

somebody say "Hear! Hear!" over there? Just one, eh? Well, there are not many Socialists left in that 

bunch. I think they area little bit on the self-seeking side these days instead of being Socialists. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the C.C.F. Government leaders in this province, recently at least, have been 

assuring people that if they come in and invest their money in our mineral and oil resources in this 

province that any contracts they make with such people will be honoured, but they still maintain on the 

statute books, Mr. Speaker, legislation by which they can expropriate or take over without the owners 

consent any oil well or 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

7 

any minerals or manufacturing establishment, and they also have legislation by which they can and have 

increased royalties even though they contracted with certain people with respect to royalties. The 

Premier was up at Saskatoon, I think, and if I have got the newspaper clipping correctly at that time he 

boasted quite recently about the Provincial Government's action in taking over the box factory for an 

alleged breach of some labour laws which has never been proved in any court. They just went in and 

took the thing over. He also implied that such action would be taken again, if the government felt like 

doing so, and thought it necessary to do so. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Obviously you disagree with that action of the Government? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — In view of the following action which your own Minister of Natural Resources 

took, when he had a little bit of labour trouble, he went up there and he said, "If you do not like it, if you 

don't act the way we want, we will close the place down", and you would have taken the place over if 

somebody had said that, or anybody else had said that. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You have not answered the question. Did you disagree with that? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — But I still say that the result of this legislation and basic attitude of the C.C.F. was 

exactly what might have been expected, and people with money to invest in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

are just not coming in because they do not trust these people, over here, no matter what they say, and I 

doubt if there are very many people that would trust them, no matter what they say. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. McCormack: — I do not think there is the wholehearted search for development going on in this 

province today . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Would the hon. member permit a question? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Certainly, go ahead. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Is that the reason why the Imperial Oil paid $48,000 for permits just 

recently? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — That might be the same reason why Mr. Rhubbra got about 9 million acres of land 

in this province for one-tenth of a cent an acre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every year the C.C.F. on the other side of this House have stood up to a man and voted for 

the Regina Manifesto, and I think it can be called the Bible of the C.C.F. Party. I think it was the 

Premier last year who said that it was the greatest political document in Canadian history. I am going to 

say this, as long as it remains the basic philosophy of the Saskatchewan Government, we are not going 

to have the industrial expansion to which we are entitled in comparison to the rest 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

8 

of Canada. In fact, if we can get rid of this fear of socialistic expropriation that we are going to get this 

capital flooding into this country. I also feel sure that after the C.C.F. are booted out this summer, and I 

do not think there is any doubt about that if they call an election . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Like Gravelbourg. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — If you had got enough votes in Gravelbourg except the measly 79 you got, you 

would have gone to the country last summer — but you did not have the guts to do it. I feel sure, Mr. 

Speaker, as I said before, that if this Liberal Government gets in, as it will after the next election, that we 

are going to have increased development within this province which will yield increased revenues out of 

which more can and will be done to help these social services that have been established in this 

province. I still think the whole question before the voters of this province, today, the electors of this 

province, is whether we are going to lag behind under a Socialistic Government, or whether we are 

going to go ahead and experience a great industrial boom under a Liberal Government which believes in 

free enterprise, and letting Saskatchewan take its proper place . . . There is somebody chortling over 

there — it looks like the member for Willowbunch (Mr. Buchanan). He won't be there after the next 

election, so he might as well have a good time now. 

 

I would like to give you some facts about the Dominion of Canada, Mr. Speaker. I do not want to take 

up too much time of the House in respect to it. I just wanted to mention that I entirely disagree with what 

the Minister of Labour had to say the other day. I know he got up and explained it, but he still did say 

that he did not think we should have immigrants coming into this country, scrambling for jobs with the 

unemployed. My own personal opinion, Mr. Speaker, is that we need immigration into this country; we 

need lots of it, and when we are sitting here with 14 million people and there are other countries of this 

world that are over-populated, if we are going to have any form of security in this country at all, we have 

got to give these people a chance to go someplace else. We have got to build our own population up, and 

take time to let these other people see that we do not want to hog everything for ourselves. I think that 

the Province of Saskatchewan has a dazzling future. Saskatchewan, I think, can share in the 

development that is going on in the rest of Canada, but I think the first thing we have to do is get rid of 

this monstrosity of a government, with its hordes of heelers and nitwits and imported planners, and all 

the rest of the people they have brought in here. 

 

The Leader of the Independent Party yesterday wanted to know what the difference was between the 

C.C.F. and the Liberal Party. I would just like to tell him. He gave a record of all the payments that were 

made by the Federal Government to people in this province. He said that the Federal Government made 

these payments. Well, the Liberal Party believes in giving service, and they believe in social services — 

they have always been in the vanguard of social services — and the Liberal Party is willing to give the 

people and the people of the Province all the social services that they are willing and able to pay for. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

9 

But Socialism, and I would like to see how many people on the other side still believe in this — 

Socialism means the operation or the ownership of all the means of production and distribution. They 

were going to make profits out of all these Crown Corporations they set up. They are wriggling a little 

bit now, you see; a lot of them are headed for private enterprise where they can make a living after they 

get trimmed the next election. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You were afraid we would. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer to the question of the discovery of oil in the 

province. You know, down in my part of the country we are still very interested in oil discoveries, and 

the large portion of the people who own their own land are looking at their titles to see if they have got 

their mineral rights. I said in this House earlier this year, I have said it for the last two years, that I think 

that in any case where the owner of the surface rights who does not own the minerals — that he should 

get a proportion of what discoveries are made, what comes up out of the ground to compensate him 

adequately for the loss and damage to his surface rights. That is my opinion. Now, we have had a great 

deal of discussion recently about the Farm Implement Legislation, to protect the farmers from the 

implement people going around taking them for a ride when they sell them implements. But there was 

not one thing done by this government to stop these lease sharks running around the country and buying 

up leases on mineral rights at 10 cents an acre. There was not a thing done by anybody. The Premier of 

Manitoba got up and made a statement on it, and I have the clip-ins right here, but there was not a thing 

done by any of the members on the other side of the house, nor any member of the Government. And 

today a lot of farmers, — and principally because of this 3 cent an acre mineral tax that has been piled 

on — they leased their land out for very small sums, their oil rights, and today a lot of them even have 

transferred their minerals — transferred their mineral rights for a few hundred dollars to some of these 

smart gentlemen going around the country and talking them into giving up their mineral rights and 

putting documents in front of them which they do not understand. 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet: — Free enterprise. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — What did your Government do? Not a thing about it. And you are the Minister of 

Agriculture, and you never went out and told one farmer about the releases. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I am sure the hon. member does not wish to misrepresent, but we did something 

about surface rights in the Lloydminster area. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, I just want to refer to another matter that came up 

in this House. I was rather amused at the speech that was made by the Minister of Natural Resources. If 

you will remember a little earlier, the member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron), outlined what to me at 

least, appeared to be a very unusual, and I think scandalous situation with regard to the handing out of 

large acreage rights to some of these people, principally a man named Rhubbra, and one in 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

10 

in which our friend, Dr. Shumiatcher — another deal in which he was involved. But do you know what 

the Minister of Natural Resources did, Mr. Speaker? Did he get up in this House and give a factual 

explanation of what had happened? No, I will tell you what he did. He did not try to justify the actions 

of the Government or his department in any manner — at least, he did not to my satisfaction. Instead of 

that, he got up in this House and gave a long, harangue about some timber deal that some Liberals, or 

the Federal Liberal Government was alleged to have got into about 1908. Well, imagine! That is about 

the only answer he can make to this House. I would like to point out to the Minister that there are some 

of us on this side, many of us in this whole House, who were not even born in 1908. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I'll say you weren't! 

 

Mr. McCormack: — I hardly feel responsible for something that a Government at Ottawa did nine 

years before I was born, and that is the only satisfactory answer the Minister of Natural Resources could 

give to this House. He must be very hard pressed for something to say. Well, Mr. Speaker, listening to 

some of the gentlemen opposite during the past three years here, and particularly in the past few weeks, 

you would almost think that the Holy Bible had been written, edited, and published exclusively for use 

of some of the gentlemen opposite. They have tried to tie up the C.C.F., Christianity, Socialism, all in 

one package. I made an offer here about four years ago, and I would like to make it again, particularly 

some of the landed gentry who sit on the other side of the House, and who would like to socialize 

everybody but themselves. If they really believe in Socialism, why don't they get together here — and 

the 53 of — or the 52 of us we can pool all our resources right here and set an example to the whole 

Province of Saskatchewan. By Golly, I would end up with a lot of good farm land — I'd be interested in 

theatres, oil wells, and the Lord knows what I would be into! I certainly have not got any at the present 

time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — We might not have any good law, though. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Well, we might even be able to teach the Minister of Natural Resources 

something, but I doubt it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that I have exhausted my time here today. I realize that the Premier has probably 

been squirming there. He still has got the seat of his pants to wear out like the member of 

Qu'Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Dundas) said. However, because this government is the most extravagant, 

inefficient and incompetent government we have ever had, and because I do not believe in Socialism, 

and I do not think that half the people over there believe in Socialism, and because I object to 

discriminatory policies with respect to highways in this Province (your highways came depending on 

how you vote), I do not intend to support the Budget, and I think possibly, Mr. Speaker, that may have 

been obvious from the outset. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

11 

I am just trying to get as much of this in during my portion of the air time. I was very interested last 

Saturday when I was home, Mr. Speaker; a young chap came up to me who is in business down there, 

and he wanted to know if he could get a loan from the Government. I had to tell him that unfortunately I 

did not have too much influence with the government, and maybe he would have to go to somebody else 

if he was going to see about getting the loan. He told me he had heard that loans had been made to 

people in the theatre business. He said he did not have a theatre; he only had a small business and he 

wanted to got hold of about $10,000. I had to go into this quite fully with him, because I am certain that 

he had a misapprehension, if we take the statement that the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines) gave 

to the Committee of this House, I am certain that this gentleman who saw me had a misapprehension as 

to how he went about getting this money. He wanted to know — he said he was very surprised to hear 

the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office was lending money on business, and I told him that the 

Provincial Treasurer had told us that they did not loan money on business until May, 1950. But prior to 

that time there had been no mercantile loans made. I also pointed out to him that in April, 1950, a man 

by the name of Bodinoff made an application to the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office for a 

loan. On the 3rd of May the insurance officials recommended that the loaning policy be extended to 

include mercantile organizations. On the 9th of May, 1950, an appraisal was made — now these are 

from the Provincial Treasurer's own statements — of the property owned by Mr. Bodinoff which 

consisted of two theatres in Weyburn. Then on the 19th of July, 1950, a loan was approved and present 

at the meeting which approved the loan were the directors of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance 

Office, which consisted of Mr. Fines, Mr. Cadbury, Mr. Valleau, Mr. Thurston and the Manager, Mr. 

Allore. 

 

Now, the Provincial Treasurer also told us that the directors set aside $300,000 as the limit for 

commercial loans, and I believe he told us that about one-half of the total loans of the Insurance Office, 

which amounted to about $350,000 at the end of the last year under review was made up of mercantile 

loans and there were only two mercantile loans made — one was made to Bodinoff in the amount of 

$75,000 and the other was made to co-operatives — I think the amount was $77,000. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure the hon. gentleman does not want to be inaccurate. There 

were six mercantile loans made. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — But your mercantile loans included mortgages. You said two mercantile loans. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — All of them are secured by mortgages. There were six mercantile loans, all of which 

were secured by mortgages. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Well, in any event, Mr. Bodinoff get $75,000 loan, This loan was approved on 

July 19, 1950, The Insurance Office was instructed, I assume by Mr. Bodinoff's solicitor, on the 30th of 

August, as to how this money was to be distributed or dispersed. The mortgage, which is registered, is 

dated August 30, 1950, and was registered on September 7, 1950, The solicitors for Mr. Bodinoff is the 

firm of Shumiatcher and McLeod, the same Dr. Shumiatcher we have heard so much about in this 

legislature before. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

12 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, may I again point out that the solicitor in this case was Mr. D.G. 

McLeod, not Dr. Shumiatcher. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — The firm is Shumiatcher and McLeod. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — And Mr. McLeod was the solicitor. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Well, I think these are some things that the legislature would like to know and 

should know, Mr. Speaker. We have another theatre, and this is one thing I had a hard job to convince 

this young fellow of — although I was trying to be as kind as possible to the Provincial Treasurer. He 

wanted to know in the first instance — I have been trying to be kind to the gentlemen opposite, but he 

wanted to know if this loan was made to the theatre in which the Premier and the Provincial Treasurer 

and Bodinoff and Shumiatcher were interested in, and I said, "No." The Provincial Treasurer told us that 

was not so. I told him the "Theatre Under the Stars" was incorporated in August, 1949, which was a year 

— or about eight months — before Mr. Bodinoff made the application to the Government Insurance 

Office for the loan, and that the Premier, the Provincial Treasurer, Shumiatcher, and Bodinoff did not 

become directors and active shareholders in the Theatre Under the Stars, apart from Mr. Bodinoff — I 

believe he was the first instance until October 3, 1930. I think the shares were actually allotted on 

October 16, 1950. Well, this worries me — what this young fellow asked me — is this, is this 

Shumiatcher, is he the same fellow that was mixed up with this deal in the Department of Natural 

Resources. He and an employee in the Natural Resources Department got some uranium concessions 

from the Government shortly before, or shortly after, as the Minister says, his resignation in 1949. And 

is this Shumiatcher the same fellow who in 1949 got oil and gas permits covering 600,000 acres of 

Crown lands from the Natural Resources, and these permits turned up two days later after he got them in 

the hands of National Petroleum, and he had a very substantial cash profit for them, and 25,000 shares in 

the company. 

 

Now, I am not going to give anything else, except the dates, Mr. Speaker. I think the facts can speak for 

themselves, and people can draw the inferences from them. 

 

Before as I said, I do not intend to support this budget. I do not believe in Socialism — I think it is a 

flop. 

 

Walter A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before I deal with the Budget, I would 

like to say a word in regard to one of the oldest members of this legislature, in point of service who 

acted as our chief financial critic, and who, in my opinion, made a very splendid contribution to this 

debate in his criticism on our behalf of the Budget. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

13 

I do not intend, this afternoon, to cover the ground that he covered entirely. I just wish to deal with some 

outstanding points of the Government's record and of the Budget. Certainly there is very little in the 

budget by way of relief to the taxpayer. The one helpful proposal was in regard to the paying of the 

equivalent of taxes to municipalities in respect to commercial corporations owned by the Government. 

 

The Liberal Party has argued for several years now that this should be done. It was recommended almost 

two years ago by the Britnell-Cronkite-Jacobs Committee, and it is pretty hard to feel that the 

Government could refuse any longer to carry out something which that committee said had no 

justification whatever. However, while this proposal will help the urban municipality, it will give little 

relief to the rural municipalities. There is very little in the budget for them except the belated promise to 

help in respect to assistance in building and re-building of municipal bridges. 

 

I suppose the outstanding disappointment in the budget was the failure of the Government to remove the 

Public Revenue Tax. They have said they are going to use it to pay increased school grants. I think, that 

by so doing they thought they would avoid having to take it off altogether. School grants had to be 

increased anyway, and if they had not done it this way, they would have had to take it out of increased 

revenues; by doing it this way, the Government perhaps think they may have something to defend them 

for not taking it off in the future. As a result the Government can use its increased revenues for other 

purposes, and now holds out the hope that it will take the tax off next year. 

 

Can anyone be sure, Mr. Speaker, that if an election is held this summer and the C.C.F. manage to win, 

that the Public Revenue Tax will be removed? The people of the Province have not forgotten the definite 

and reiterated assurances of the C.C.F. leaders, including the Premier himself, that when they got elected 

the education tax would be removed when they had other revenues to take its place. Now at the time 

they made this promise, the education tax amounted to about $4 1/4 million. Since then their revenues 

have increased by $37 million, and that promise has not been carried out, Mr. Speaker. It has been 

absolutely ignored. Now if they can get by without taking the Public Revenue Tax off on this promise, 

which is not nearly as explicit as that in regard to the education tax, what hope has the Province got that 

we are going to get rid of this Public Revenue Tax? 

 

One excuse given by the Government for not having taken the Public Revenue Tax off now is that they 

claim that the Britnell Committee said they should take three years to carry it out. This is important 

enough, Mr. Speaker, that I should think we ought to examine just what the Britnell-Cronkite Committee 

did say in that regard. The Committee made the following specific recommendations: 

 

(1) That the Public Revenue Tax be repealed; that as a matter of policy the real property tax field be 

considered henceforth as belonging exclusively to the municipalities." 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

14 

Now, this was an outright recommendation. In the body of the Report, the following is stated, and I am 

quoting from the report again: 

 

"Your Committee is of the opinion that it is highly desirable that the municipalities should have one 

field that they can call their own. Allocation of this field to local units would go far in the direction of 

developing a feeling of responsibility. They would realize that they have one dependable and 

significant field of revenue, with reference to which their plans may be made." 

 

I am still quoting from the Report: 

 

"The principle of the real estate tax field should be considered as belonging to municipalities 

exclusively in practise. It is pretty well conceded in Canada, revenues of a provincial tax on land 

remain in only three of the other provinces; namely, Alberta, Manitoba and Nova Scotia, and for the 

last fiscal year available, the combined collections in these three provinces for provincial purposes 

amounted only to $442,614." 

 

Only three provinces in Canada, outside of Saskatchewan, collect this Public Revenue Tax and in those 

three provinces, the combined collection only amounted to $442,612. Still quoting from the report: 

 

"Abolition of this tax was recommended by a Royal Commission after thorough examination of the 

fiscal structure of the province." 

 

Notice this, Mr. Speaker: 

 

"The present is a reasonably opportune time for securing this field to municipalities. Provincial 

revenues are comparatively buoyant and the adjustment could be made with much less shock than in a 

period of depression." 

 

That is quoting from the report. I draw your attention to where they say definitely 'the present is a 

reasonably opportune time to do it'. Not three years later. Now then, I read in another part of the report 

this: 

 

"The responsibility is, of course, that of the Government and of the Legislature. There can be no doubt 

that the implementing of the proposals would involve an appreciable dislocation of provincial finance. 

Three years, in the opinion of your Committee, would be a reasonable period in which to implement 

all the proposals advanced in this part, if the Government should decide to proceed by progressive 

stages." 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

15 

Mr. Speaker, note the phrase "if the Government decides to proceed by progressive stages", then the 

three years would be all right. Now that is not the recommendation. They say it should be done at once. 

Now the Government is trying to get out of the report of its own committee. 

 

In regard to public debt, the hon. member from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) pointed out that the 

Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines) had omitted tables from his Budget Speech in regard to the debt 

of the province, and asked why that had happened. Well, I suggest the reason they were omitted was 

because they would show that our debt has increased; it has gone up almost $16 million since December 

31, 1948. The Provincial Treasurer included the tables when the debt was going down by payments of 

other people. These payments from other people altogether totalled over $82 million. Then, through 

them there was a reduction of public debt, but only by $53 million at that time. In other words, the 

public debt did not come down by as much as other people paid in indirect liabilities of the Government. 

It fell short by $28 million of the amount which they paid. The people have paid those debts off, which 

had been guaranteed by the Government — such people as the Wheat Pool, farmers for Seed Grain, and 

so on. They paid off a total of $82 million — the debt only came down by $53 million. Now it is starting 

to go up again, and the Provincial Treasurer very conveniently leaves out of his budget speech these 

tables which show that the increase since 1948 has been $16 million. 

 

In view of the fact that the debt is increasing, and has been increasing since 1948, I could not help but 

smile when looking over the report of the speech made by the Premier at Wawota, reported in June 18, 

1948. Here is another sort of promise held out, for a suggestion. It had no foundation that ever, in fact, 

whatever, as is shown by what is happening today. Here is, what the Premier said, and I quote: 

 

"We feel that the complete debt could be eliminated in perhaps another two terms of office." 

 

That is what the Premier said, and this is the goal to which the Premier said the C.C.F. Government is 

working. Well, if they are working towards it, they are certainly going backwards instead of forwards. 

 

Now in regard to the budget — one of the striking things about it is its size. It is not realized by many 

people that it has actually increased as much as it has, because the figures have been for the last two 

years, and are now being kept on a net basis, whereas three years ago they were kept on a gross basis. In 

other words, before this change was made, for example, expenditures made on old age pensions were 

included in the totals, and the amounts paid including the 75 per cent, paid by the Federal Government 

towards old-age pensions was included in the total. 

 

Now, the way the budget is made up only the 25 per cent paid by the Government is included, and so it 

brings down the total very much. This is explained in the public accounts. I am not suggesting there is 

any attempt to deceive — it is just a matter of understanding the effect of the public accounts. It is 

explained on Page 578 of the 1950-51 Public Accounts where it gives the amount of expenditures which 

must be added, in 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

16 

order to make a fair comparison with previous years. If one looks at that table, one will see that to get a 

comparable figure with the $29,800,000 spent on revenue account in 1943-44, one must add $8,460,000 

to the $55,800,000 of expenditures in the 1950-51 budget, or rather 1950-51 public accounts. That 

brings it up to a total of $64,300,000 expenditure on a comparable basis on revenue account. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the increase from 1943-44 to 1950-51 was from $29,800,000 to $64,300,000; 

an increase of $35 million or more than doubled in seven years, Now, if we add to that the expenditures 

on capital account we get these figures; 1943-44 there was spent by the Government of this province 

$30,149,000. There was spent in 1950-51 $79,939,000 or nearly 80 million; this is from the public 

accounts for 1950-51. That is an increase of nearly $50 million in seven years; an increase at the rate of 

$7 million per year in expenditures every year since this government has been in office. 

 

Now, sometimes an attempt has been made to explain it all by the increase in the cost-of-living, and I 

thought I would deal with that for a moment. The cost-of-living index as at April 1, 1944 was 119.1. On 

April 1, 1951 it was 181.8 — an increase of 52 per cent. Now, this would have warranted an increase in 

the budget of $15 1/2 million, not $50 million, Mr. Speaker. If one takes the estimates for 1952-53 just 

tabled, and allows for supplementaries, add 6 million (and they were over $6 million last year), and over 

$8 million the year before — you get the following figures as the probable total expenditures by this 

government for the coming year on a gross basis; 1943-44, as I have already said, $30,149,000; in 

1952-53, $94 million; an increase of over 300 per cent. This is more than the total farm cash income of 

Saskatchewan farmers in 1938 — $11 million dollars more than the total Saskatchewan farm cash 

income in 1947; the total farm cash income in 1936 was only $25 million more than this. It was not until 

1941, Mr; Speaker, that Saskatchewan's cash farm income rose to $180.8 million. 'That is not even twice 

as much as our Provincial Government will likely spend this coming year. 

 

C.C.F. speakers and canvassers talk continually about the 'thirties and why more was not done in the 

'thirties; they want more credit for the fact that more is being done now than was being done in the 

'thirties. I ask you, or any other person, is that an honest argument? How could a Government spend 

more than the total farm cash income? On the basis on which the public accounts are now kept (the net 

basis) the average receipts of our government for the nine years (1935-1943 inclusive) was slightly over 

$20 million. The average annual receipts of the government from 1944-1950 inclusive, during the seven 

years the average receipts were $43 million — more than double in every year of those seven years, as 

compared with the previous nine years — $23 million on the average every year more. On a gross basis 

the increased amount this government has to spend would be even more striking. 

 

Now, are we getting value for this vastly increased expenditure? From $30 million to a likely 

expenditure of $94 million? An estimated expenditure is $88 million without taking into account 

supplementaries. Farmers keep asking me what they are getting out of this increased 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

17 

expenditure, and I am bound to say, Mr. Speaker, that I find it very difficult to explain that they are 

getting very much. I see in our neighbouring province, Manitoba, that the farmers are getting, some real 

benefit from governmental expenditures. There 46 per cent of the farmers are already getting the benefit 

of cheap electric power; and they have a programme under which 85 per cent of their farmers will be 

connected with high line electricity within the next five years — 85 per cent. Now this programme is 

going ahead so fast because the Manitoba Government takes electricity right to the farm buildings 

without cost to the farmers, and he only pays half the capital cost of that farm electrification programme 

in his electric light rates, and the other half is carried by the province as a whole. Now that is why they 

are able, even though the farmer does not have to pay $600 or $700 as he does in Saskatchewan to get 

connected, to charge so much lower rates for this electricity to the farmer, than they have to charge in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Minister argued that Saskatchewan is not as thickly settled as Manitoba, and I agree that parts of it 

are too sparsely settled to think of bringing farm electrification to those parts, but there is a great portion 

of Saskatchewan that is thickly enough settled to warrant such a program, and if those parts that warrant 

such a programme are slightly more sparsely settled than similar parts in Manitoba, it warrants more 

help from the Government, not less. It has been the experience of all of Europe, except Great Britain, the 

experience of Nova Scotia, Ontario and Manitoba, that you cannot get a proper farm electrification 

programme unless you have scarce government subsidization, and that is particularly true in areas where 

you babe relatively sparse settlement as we have on the western plains. 

 

It is certainly easier to go ahead with a programme if you do not have to ask the farmer to put up $600 or 

$700 to get connected, as you do in Saskatchewan. The farmer in Manitoba files the application, and all 

he has to do then is wire his own house. Why in the world is it that this Government, spending far more 

money than Manitoba cannot do as much for the farmers as the Manitoba Government is doing? What is 

the record of connections? The Minister said there was some difficulty in getting materials after the war. 

Well, if there was any difficulty getting materials for the first few years after the war, I say not to the 

Minister, but to other people (because the Minister has not made this dishonest claim) — the Minister 

has never pretended that it would have been possible during the years of depression, and the years of 

war, to go ahead with a great farm electrification programme, but some C.C.F. speakers and canvassers 

have made that dishonest claim, and so I am only taking the period from 1947 on, and during that time 

Manitoba made connections to farmers of over 24,000 while Saskatchewan made 6,757. There is the 

record of connection. 

 

Now there is another thing I would draw to your attention, Mr. Speaker, that practically nothing was 

done in regard to farm electrification, although we demanded it and demanded it from 1945 on, until this 

Government almost got beaten in 1948, and then they put the present Minister in charge and began to 

take some steps in that direction. And so I do not think too much credit can be taken by the C.C.F. They 

did it in fear of their political life. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

18 

One of the reasons for the lack of farm electrifications in the past — (I am glad the Minister did not 

make this claim, either), was lack of hydro power. Well, it is quite properly pointed out that you can 

now generate electricity from natural gas, or from the use of very efficient systems with steam outfits 

cheaper than you can generate it from some of the hydro electric developments which are today being 

built. For example, in Saskatoon we have been generating electricity in that steam plant, after having to 

haul the coal the long distance we have to haul it, for about .9 a kilowatt, so that not having the power 

(water power) was not such a hindrance as some people made out. 

 

In regard to another matter that farmers are dissatisfied with is the fact that they are still paying the 

education and hospitalization tax on their farm fuels and greases. They are taxed upon production; 

farmers in Alberta and Manitoba do not pay such a tax, and if you are farming any amount of land with a 

tractor, it amounts to quite a substantial tax. This Government, although it is increasing its expenditures 

at the rate of an average of $7 million per year, still exacts that tax out of the farmers. 

 

Farmers are still under obligation to pay three cents an acre mineral tax, and as has been pointed out by 

the hon. member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. McCormack), that had no small part in making many farmers 

sign over their mineral rights, because they did not want to have to pay a tax on something they were not 

too sure they owned. Some people managed to get control of mineral rights they otherwise would not 

have had control of, and this government, by its action, certainly played right into the hands of those 

people. 

 

I have already referred to the Public Revenue Tax. In regard for example, to a municipality, with an 

assessment of $4 million, it means that that municipality has to collect even in a poor crop year, or a 

year of crop failure, from its people on their land or their homes, $8,000 and send it in to this 

Government, with its swollen revenues — and while the Government is expanding its expenditures at 

the rate of an average of $7 million every year. Is it any wonder that the farmers feel that this 

Government does not care about them? Is it any wonder that wherever you go, the farmers say, "We are 

through with this Government?" Well, that is what we hear, anyway. 

 

Our farmers need better market roads; they need them more than ever now when they are relying on cars 

and trucks to get to town. They see the Federal grants — grants from the Dominion Government 

increased, including the constitutional subsidy, to $24 million during the coming year. That is $15 

million more than the Patterson Government ever received — $15 million more from the Federal 

Government. They see the estimated receipts from car licenses up by $1 million over the Patterson 

Government's highest receipts; they see estimated receipts from the tax on gas up by almost $5 million. 

They still have to pay the Public Revenue Tax, under which $1 3/4 million will be collected, and from 

those increased revenues alone, the Government will receive $21 million more. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

19 

How much help extra is going to be given to municipalities? According to the speech by the Minister of 

Highways, the only increase contemplated is in regard to assistance in respect to municipal bridges. If 

one includes, Mr. Speaker, secondary highways, the total help to rural municipalities and L.I.D.'s in the 

way of direct grants for bridge work, to assist with the construction and maintenance of roads, including 

secondary roads, is to be around $1 1/2 million; less than the amount of the Public Revenue Tax they are 

holding back from the municipalities. The Minister of Highways seems to think our farmers should be 

very grateful for this treatment. His government is planning to spend $58 million more than the 

Patterson Government spent, and only plans to increase assistance to municipalities by approximately 

from $600,000 to $1,600,000, an increase of $1 million on an increased expenditure of $58,000,000. The 

Minister sought to excuse himself with the time-worn excuse, by going back to 1943-44, when we were 

in the midst of the greatest war that mankind has ever seen. When machinery was not available — when 

the boys who might have manned it were either overseas, or in the armed services, or in war industry. 

Yet he brings that out as an excuse, and tries to give credit to himself because he is doing more than was 

done in 1943-44. Well, that is not fooling anybody in the province, Mr. Speaker. They are not fooled by 

these stupid and dishonest arguments. 

 

Now, in regard to schools. We are told that a thousand rural schools have been closed. We are told that 

558 are being kept open by study supervisors; that 433 are staffed by partly qualified teachers. Farmers 

have seen their school taxes rising steadily on their farms, but at the same time are seeing their schools 

closing or being staffed in increasing numbers by more or less untrained people. They know that 

teachers have been leaving the Province in hundreds — that 630 teachers left this province in the last 

two years. They know that 163 less people are in training this year to become teachers in the normal 

schools and the College of Education than the previous year. Why should our people, Mr. Speaker, put 

up with that state of affairs? There is no use of the Minister of Education thinking that they are highly 

satisfied with it. 

 

And what does the Government propose to do about the situation? Estimated receipts from education 

tax, interest on investment of school lands, funds, education funds, the receipts from school lands, and 

miscellaneous receipts of the Department of Education, from these items the total is $9 1/4 million. And 

what did they do? In order to raise the grant by $1 1/2 million to $8 1/2 million, they hang on to $1 1/2 

million of the Public Revenue Tax money. Here the receipts from these educational items amount to $9 

1/4 million dollars, and they have to take municipal money in order to raise the grants to $8 1/2 million. 

Does anybody suppose that the taxpayers of this province are going to be satisfied with that state of 

affairs? 

 

Now then, what would the Liberal Government do? I would say (my friend from Hanley (Mr. R.A. 

Walker) may laugh at that) but I think the people of the province want to know. As soon after our 

election, as soon as possible — at the first session we will abolish the Public Revenue Tax. We will 

abolish the mineral tax on land owned by farmers. We will at once abolish the educational and 

hospitalization tax on farm fuels and 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

20 

greases. We will inaugurate a scheme of subsidization of farm electrification along the line followed in 

Manitoba. We will maintain school grants at the level provided at the present estimates. The cost of 

doing these things will not exceed $6 million. This would mean that the increased grant from the Federal 

Government would be diverted in its entirety to relieving the tax burden on our farmers and 

municipalities, both urban and rural, in assisting to bring electricity to our farmers in assisting our 

schools with increased grants on an equalization basis, and in assisting the municipalities in building 

better market roads. 

 

It is the custom of C.C.F. canvassers to take entire credit for money administered by this Government. 

For example, old-age pensions and hospital grants. At the same time they pretend the Federal 

Government at Ottawa has been doing nothing. Leaving aside the work done by the Federal Government 

directly to promote social welfare, such as family allowances, crop-failure bonus payments, payments 

towards unemployment insurance, the programme to assist veterans; a contribution was made to the 

payments administered by the province. 

 

To get some idea of these payments, let us look at the last table in the printed budget speech, where it 

gives the comparative statement of the gross revenue of the province on revenue account. We find the 

Dominion of Canada subsidy accounts for $22.85 per capita, and taxation was $26.21, but in the 

miscellaneous receipts there is included $7.90 per capita to cover payments towards old-age pensions, 

blind pensions, assistance for education and health. Now, adding those to the $22.85 we get a total paid 

by the Federal Government of $30.82 towards this Government, to assist it to carry on its work. That is 

$4.50 more per capita that is raised by taxation that is paid by the people of this province. I admit that $2 

million of that was due under the constitution, but taking that off what do we get? We this situation, that 

36.5 per cent of the money spent by this Government, covered by the Budget Speech in the 1950-51 

estimates, was paid by the Federal Government to this government, under the financial agreement, or 

under legislation providing for payment of part of the old-age pensions or otherwise; in other words, 

more than one-third of the expenditure of this Government were handed to them by the Federal 

Government, not under any obligation in the constitution, but by virtue of the fact that they are assisting 

in those services, such as health services, old-age pensions, and so on. 

 

When the C.C.F. speakers and canvassers go out and try to take all credit for what this Government has 

done, let it be remembered that over 36 per cent of the expenditures being handled by this Government 

comes from the Federal Government, which is under no constitutional obligation to pay them. 

 

Now I was not surprised to see the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines), this man who has been 

increasing our expenditures on an average by $7 million every year — laugh at my suggestion that we 

were going to give same help to the farmers. But I suppose he will come up tomorrow with the 

suggestion (or whenever he speaks next), and ask where the money is going, to come from. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

21 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Tucker: — He says, "Hear! Hear!" Well, I will tell him. The increase in payments by the Dominion 

Government amounts to $4 million. The balance we can easily make up by ceasing to increase 

expenditures at the rate of $7 million per year. We will cease to use people working for the Government 

for political purposes. We will cease to put out party propaganda at public expense. We will cease to 

waste public funds. Let me give some examples of what I mean: 

 

Take for example — and a very good example — of a sheer waste of public funds — is this book that 

was circulated by the Minister of Agriculture at a cost to the people of this province of $4,950. In the 

front of it appears "With the Compliments of the Hon. I.C. Nollet, Minister of Agriculture". We are told 

that he sent out 2,200 over this province. Now, there are some good ideas in this book, but there are also 

some ideas that I submit, Mr. Speaker, we should not be spending public money on, in circulating it all 

over the province. I am going to read a paragraph, Mr. Speaker, but I will not read the whole paragraph, 

because there are some things in this paragraph that I would not want to read over the air. I will leave 

them out. Here is what is in this book, sent out at public expense, by the Minister of Agriculture: 

 

"Vigorous birth-control campaigns, using all educational and advertising techniques, should also be 

organized by individual countries. Contraception should, of course, be voluntary. There is more than a 

little merit in the suggestion made many years ago by H.L. Menchen of sterilization bonuses, small but 

adequate amounts of money to be paid to anyone, especially the males, who would agree to the simple 

sterilization operation . . . 

 

Now I leave something out here, and go on: 

 

"Since such a bonus would appeal primarily to the world's shiftless, it would probably have a 

favourable, selective influence. In the point of view of society, it certainly would be preferable to pay 

permanently indigent individuals, many of whom would be physically and psychologically marginal, 

$50 or $100, rather than to support their off-spring that by both genetic and social inheritance would 

tend to perpetuate the shiftless." 

 

We are spending public money to send that sort of thing broadcast over this Province. I want to tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, that any Liberal Government will not waste public money like that. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

22 

Take another item. Mr. Black, head of our industrial development — he goes about the province making 

political speeches. He went down to Yorkton last March, and made what I would consider a political 

speech. His bill of expense amounted to $22 and some cents; that does not allow for salary he was paid 

on that work. His voucher, I think, indicated that he was supposed to be there on business of some sort 

for the Government. Now let us see what he did while he was in Yorkton. March 1 he made a speech, 

reported in the Yorkton Enterprise. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Would my hon. friend tell us who he made the speech to? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I will tell you later — he made it to the Chamber of Commerce, and this is what he 

said: Mr. Black spoke on the part that the Provincial Government plays in the industrial development of 

Saskatchewan, and said: 

 

"The Government in some quarters has received severe criticism which he claimed, was not coming to 

them." 

 

He said he wanted to tell briefly what this C.C.F. Government had done, and then he went on: 

 

"I would like to ask you if the Government going into business has hurt any of you?" We only took 

over industries which might be called monopolies, and which the Government felt might serve the 

public better if operated by them." 

 

C.C.F. Propaganda — that's all . . . then he went on to say: 

 

"We in the C.C.F. feel we have a job to do." 

 

The cost of this is being paid by the people of this country, and he says he and the C.C.F. feel we have a 

job to do. Then he said: 

 

"I did not intend to spend as long as I have on this phase of my remarks." 

 

He apologizes for spending so much time defending the C.C.F. in this speech. Of course, this does not 

please the Premier. He went on to say, "Tommy Douglas has done more for all the seven provinces of 

Canada in fighting the two central provinces, than any other man." 

 

Now then, this was a very good propaganda speech; it was much better than most of the Ministers make, 

but why should the people of this province have to pay people to run around this province and make 

propaganda speeches for this Government? And that is one of the ways in which we will save money. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

23 

Now let me give you another example. The present Minister of Public Health was appointed to this job 

of staff-training, or something of the sort, and of the things he was supposed to do was train the civil 

servants in better public relations — training them to be more polite, or something like that, I think. And 

of course he did such a good job on that, that this man who was paid by the people of this province — he 

was taken right into the government of the province. Well, he is an old colleague of mine, and I am glad 

to see him in office for the time being; I would rather see him than some others; but after he left, Mr. 

Castleden, former C.C.F. member for Yorkton, was taken on the Government payroll. I will not take 

time to go over all his travellings during the time, and which were paid for by the people of this 

province, but I will just indicate some of his travelling. During 1950-51 he went to Weyburn (that was a 

good place to go to, Canora, Carrot River, Green Lake, Mossbank, Moose Jaw, Lestock, North 

Battleford, Bankend, Wishart — lots of civil servants there, I suppose — Melville Indian Head, 

Theodore, — lots of civil servants there, too — Francis, Wawota, Moosomin, Kamsack; he went to 

Lebret twice, to Prince Albert twice, three times to Fort Qu'Appelle (three times as much attention given 

to Fort Qu'Appelle than North Battleford or Weyburn), but here is the interesting thing; apparently the 

civil servants in Yorkton really need supervision in regard to being polite, because he went 12 times to 

Yorkton, during that time. But that is not all — we find he went on a trip to Bethel, Maine, in the United 

States, in a Government car to attend a Laboratory on Group development (whatever that is). He left on 

June 21, visited Montreal, Toronto, Buffalo — and got back into the Province in his Government car on 

July 16 — paid for by the people of this province. 

 

I protest against things like that, Mr. Speaker, where we should have paid some of this money to assist 

the farmers of this province and other people. Another example of the misuse of public funds, (and I 

cannot call it anything else than that) — this election booklet called "Progress — 1952" — just an 

election booklet — election propaganda, trying to extol the virtues of this Government. A similar 

booklet was put out in 1948 — I do not think it was quite so elaborate, and it cost $9,946 to put out that 

bit of election campaigning literature at the expense of the people of this province. An absolutely 

unjustified expenditure of public funds. 

 

It is in regard to such items as this that we would save money. We all have heard about this imported 

planner, Mr. G.W. Cadbury, who was brought in to help the members opposite run this Province for 

several years, and we find that they threw a dinner for him that cost the people of this province $253. I 

say this, that if the members of the C.C.F. Party and Government wanted to entertain Mr. Cadbury, they 

should not have done it at public expense. 

 

When the present Government came into office there were 136 motor vehicles — now there are 626, an 

increase of almost 500. People know how much it costs to run a motor car, and they also know that the 

civil service has been increased by 64 per cent. This increase apparently 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

24 

has been put in motor cars, and the number of inspectors have been increased, and then the present 

Government thoughtfully provided that if these inspectors, if they wore so-minded, could engage in 

political activities. That is a retrograde step. It is a part of the British idea of Government that civil 

servants should work for the Government, no matter what party he belongs to, and once they are put 

under that permission to work politically, what effect does it have? For example, collections are made 

for the party. A person that may not want to support the C.C.F. at all knows that somebody else is 

contributing, and it somehow may tell against him if he does not. He knows that somehow or other, 

somebody else my be doing some political work. He knows that somehow or other that may tell against 

him when it comes to a question of promotion, and of course it puts the whole civil service under 

pressure to engage in political action. And what is the effect of it? The effect of that is this: that if the 

Government changes, many civil servants have pressed into engaging in political work, and that has 

been brought to the attention of the Government that takes the place; it then endangers the position of 

the civil service employee who has engaged in political work. 

 

What do the C.C.F. care? How they mistreat the civil servants by actions like this, which does not exist 

in Great Britain, and was done away with 25 years ago in Canada? The Canadian Civil Service Act 

today cannot be repealed except by the vote of the Senate, and the House of Commons protects them. 

There has never been any suggestion by the Liberal Government that it would be repealed. The 

Canadian Civil Service Commission make the appointment, regardless of politics, and everybody knows 

that. But what about this Government? Why did they put it in the statutes that civil servants could 

engage in politics, and then appoint somebody to go around the province contacting them? Well, after 

all, the people of this Province can see through these things. They understand what this government is 

trying to do. It is trying to set up the heaviest manned and best equipped political machine that exists in 

any province in Canada today. That is where a lot of public money has been going that should have been 

going to help the farmers, and help take off taxes upon the farmers, and help pay grants to keep down 

the taxes in regard to schools, and so on. We will do away with that misuse of the Civil Service if the 

Liberals are elected. We will do away with that. 

 

Mr. Kuziak (Canora): — It is a laughing matter! 

 

Mr. Tucker: — . . . .this interests me, this laughing about the promises that we make. You know, one of 

the things that we are told is that there is a tendency for people to judge others according to what is in 

their own hearts. 

 

Some Hon. Members (Opposition): — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Tucker: — And these people are so conscious of a long line of unbroken promises on which they 

got into office that when somebody else comes along and makes some definite promises, which are 

reasonable, they cannot believe that anybody can be sincere. They could not reflect on themselves 

worse. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

25 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You sound scared already. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Yes, I know some people laugh at sincerity. They do not believe in it. I can understand 

that after the actions I have seen of some of the hon. members opposite, I am not surprised. Now one of 

the things they like to indulge in, and I am hearing it all the time, that some of these workers go along, 

trying to create the impression that if the C.C.F. will be beaten in the next election; they may be 

adversely affected in regard to mothers' allowances, old-age pensions, or something of the sort. Well, 

there it is. I tell the hon. member for Canora (Mr. Kuziak) that he is telling what he knows to be untrue. 

 

Along that line it is sometimes suggested that the hospitalization plan would be involved and 

endangered. I want to tell the people of this province that this is absolute, unadulterated nonsense. It is 

put forward by people who figure they have lost the confidence of the people, and are now trying to 

frighten them into supporting them. If a Liberal Government is elected, no social services will be 

curtailed; the hospitalization plan will be continued; if we can improve its administration, in consultation 

with municipalities and hospital authorities and doctors and nurses, we will try to do so, but nobody 

needs to fear that the election of a Liberal Party means in any way the interference with hospitalization 

plan, or the carrying on of any social services that are presently being enjoyed by the people of this 

Province. Let there be no mistake about that. 

 

This campaign of fear and misrepresentation, which the members opposite know in their own hearts is 

untrue; I hope that the people of the province will recognize it for what it is — a despicable campaign of 

attempting to create fear. Nor let it be suggested that this represents a change in the policy of the Liberal 

Party. Let us look at the record of the party. When I consider the record of the Liberal party in this 

province, and in the Dominion of Canada, I marvel at the cheek and impudence of the members opposite 

who try to pretend that they are responsible for the social welfare set-up in this province. Here they are 

— getting over a third of all the money that they handle from the Federal Government itself, under 

payments which the Federal Government makes because it is part of Liberal policy, and not because it 

has to. 

 

Some Hon. Member (Government): — . . . what about that Rosthern deal? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I do not know what you are talking about — the Rosthern deal — I know you would 

like to bring up something, and I told you you could bring up anything you want against me, but you are 

not going to scare me from doing my duty for the people of this province. You have tried it and you 

have failed. That is all. There again — intimidation — an attempt to do that sort of thing. 

 

Let me deal for a moment, with that campaign of intimidation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — (Interruption) 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, when the people of Kelsey constituency get through with the Minister of Natural 

Resources, he won't be so chipper as he is now. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

26 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it perfectly clear that I 

do not even expect to be so chipper as I am now — 20 years from now. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, I said when they get through with you at the next election — not 20 years from 

now, I hope. 

 

Now, I was dealing with the Liberal party's record. I know that the C.C.F. tried to pretend in booklets 

they put out, that they were responsible for the free T.B. treatment in this Province; they tried to steal the 

credit for that, but the fact remains that it was introduced by the Liberals. And they tried to take credit 

for the plan for free cancer treatment, the basis of this was inaugurated under the regime of the 

co-operative government; and then the full plan was put through this House in 1944, when as the hon. 

member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) showed estimates of $215,000 were provided to start the plan in 

operation. Have they not tried to take credit for that? I never have been anything quite so dishonest in 

public life, as this attempt to take credit for the T.B. plan, and for the free cancer treatment. People who 

will do that, of course, will as you might expect, do almost anything, and some of the things which have 

happened under this Government should not have surprised the people of this Province. 

 

Approximately one-half of the municipalities of this province had free hospital, or provision for free 

hospital or doctor treatment at the time this Government was elected, and the Liberal Party introduced 

the mothers' Allowances in the province; it introduced workmen's compensation; it introduced the 

old-age pensions; the blind pensions in this province and these people have the sheer effrontery to run 

around and tell people, "Don't put us out; you may lose your old-age pension; don't put us out." That is 

the sort of thing they go around telling. I want to tell them — this will not work. The people of this 

province know probably a good deal more about the history of the province than they are given credit 

for. 

 

Now, let us look at the record of our party at Ottawa. You know, people speak very harshly about people 

with no pride of ancestry. While I was listening to the Minister of Natural Resources, trying to make out 

that members of all the old parties were either machine-ridden or foolish, or almost everything else that 

he could think of, so far as I was concerned, I thought of some people that I, as a Canadian, am pretty 

proud of, regardless of politics. Sir John A., the first Prime Minister of this country; Sir Wilfred Laurier, 

who did so much to build it up; I thought of my own father, for example; and I thought of other great 

men who were pioneers in this country and province, and when those people were pointed out and said 

to be not nearly as intelligent and enlightened as the people who happen to belong to the C.C.F. today, I 

just wondered what people must have been thinking of the Minister of Natural Resources, and what a lot 

of people who heard him might have thought — even people who belong to the C.C.F. party, and who 

had not such a low opinion of their own fathers as he seems to feel they should have. 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Hanley): —(Interruption) 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

27 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, I will not say anything to the member for Hanley (Mr. R.A. Walker), because he 

knows that it is now or never as far as Hanley is concerned. 

 

Hon. Members (Opposition): — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Now, in regard to the record of our party — old-age pension; pensions for the blind; 

unemployment insurance; family allowances; the veterans' assistance; (I am very interested in that, and 

had some small share in it, and as far as I am concerned, am very proud that I had that chance to be of 

service to my fellow service men). 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — . . . birth control. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, if you would look after your Department a little bit more, and not undertake to 

educate the people in birth-control, it would be better for this province. 

 

Then we have the old-age assistance plan. It is sheer nonsense for the C.C.F. to attempt to claim credit 

for these measures. They were passed by Liberal Governments . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I am sure that the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition is not going to leave the impression with the Public that I favour birth-control. He read 

certain extracts, but he did not read my covering correspondence, Mr. Speaker, and I went to say here 

and now that as a Christian and a Roman Catholic, I am absolutely opposed to any form of birth-control. 

 

Some Hon. Member (Opposition): — Why did you send out the book, then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I want to put that right on the records of this House, and if I have to 

take any religious instructions, I do not need to take it from the hon. members opposite. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Now, I do not think this is the place to discuss religion at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — That is what you are trying to do. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — What I said was this, that if the Minister would look after his department, and not try to 

educate people in birth-control, it would be better for the province. What more is it, to send out a book at 

public expense containing these things, if it is not an attempt to educate people in that? I do not care 

what the Minister may say about his personal beliefs, but I say that a book like that containing those 

ideas should not be circulated at public expense. I do not care if the Minister does not believe in it or 

not; if he does not believe in it, then he should all the more not have sent it out. 

 

Some Hon. Member (Opposition): — Try to tell the agriculturists that. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

28 

Mr. Tucker: — If you had just kept quiet, this would not have happened. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — (Interruption) 

 

Mr. Tucker: — And I will tell you some more, if you want it. There is another book too, which you 

sent out with a letter referring to the Road to Survival, indicating that you must have read it, or you 

would not have referred to it in the letter sending out "The Pursuit of Plenty" a year later. 

 

Will the Minister just explain why he sent out a letter, when he sent out the "Pursuit of Plenty", 

indicating that this book, "Road to Survival" was worth studying? Now, just keep on interfering, and 

you will get some more, Mr. Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I do not agree, Mr. Speaker. Why did Dr. Archibald invite Professor Vogt up to 

Canada to speak and lecture to the agriculturists in Ottawa? There are quite a lot of things that the 

Leader of the Opposition does not know . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I suggest you speak after I get through . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You'll hear about this, don't worry. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — All right, I expect to hear about it. I would like to hear about it — I would like to hear 

why public money is used to circulate things like that. I would just like to hear about it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You bet you'll hear about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I was saying that on these measures . . . the Federal Government will be spending $771 

million on them this year; that is more than $2 million today. Here is a party which I am proud to belong 

to, because its record of service to this country, and to the people of this country, with this record that is 

not bettered in the world anywhere, and what is the proof of that? The proof is not those beautiful books 

put out, with beautiful pictures. You can get similar books from the Soviet Union today — nicer pictures 

than you have got even in your "Progress — 1952" — nicer pictures, but that does not prove that 

conditions are better there. The thing that proves whether conditions are better or not, is where do the 

people want to go, and what are they trying to get away from? The fact that people will sometimes risk 

their lives to get away from these Socialist states and get to Canada — that is the proof that things are 

better here than over there — not in beautiful books; and I say that Canada has been brought up to her 

present position in the world under either Conservative or Liberal Governments; I am proud of what my 

country has done, and what our country has done, ever since it has been started, and when the C.C.F. try 

to pretend that other people have not the desire to serve their fellow-man, and have not got a record such 

as I just put on record here, and use public funds to try and scare people into voting for them — then as 

far as I am concerned, I am going to stand up and face all the threats that can be made as to what is 

going to be done to me; I am still going to go ahead and tell people what I think about these things. This 

thing has been laughed at. I refer to an example of jeering at me. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

29 

Mr. Kuziak (Canora): — Poor fellow! 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I am not worried — I am not asking for sympathy. I am glad of it, because you people 

are showing yourselves up for what you are. Now, just let me deal with one thing. I, in partnership with 

somebody else, took a lease on some land on an Indian reserve, with the consent of the Indians, Under 

that lease — first of all the lease was advertised for sale, and nobody applied for it. This man was 

farming some land for me, and he came to me and said, "Will you help me out with the finances? Will 

you go in with me . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Have you ever farmed yourself? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Yes, I have farmed myself. I will answer that. I have farmed myself. I .was born and 

brought up on a farm. I milked cows; I looked after the horses; I plowed; I walked behind the harrow; I 

put up hay; when we did not have power equipment, I stooked; I drove a binder; I looked after horses 

and cattle; I drew feed when it was 30 below; yes, I have farmed, and it would be a better thing for this 

province if there were more farmers in the present Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members (Government): — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I am glad that I got "Hear! Hear!" from someplace over there. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That's three to one for you! 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, I was dealing with the attack upon myself. I do know it was brought out that I 

was interested in farming. This ineffable sheet, the Commonwealth, had something in it that in a way 

jeered me because I was a farmer. I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I am not ashamed of having been 

a farmer, and of being directly interested in farming today. Well, that amuses some of the members 

opposite. I want to tell them that my grandfather was a pioneer . . . 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — Who wants to know about your grandfather? 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, whether you like to hear it or not — well, I am not going to be sorry that you are 

leaving. You are just pre-staging what is going to happen to you at the hands of the people. 

 

My grandfather came to this country and started to farm in Ontario — Gray country over 100 years ago; 

my father came to the Portage Plains and took up a farm there in 1889; I was born and brought up on the 

farm and farmed until I enlisted when was 18 years of age, and as soon as I got back from overseas and 

was able to earn and save a little bit of money, I naturally did what anyone of that background would do 

— I invested it in buying a piece of land up at Rosthern. I have been directly interested in farming for 

the last 25 years. Well, that amuses the Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet). Well, that that will be 

interesting to the farmers of this province. I was a member of the Wheat Pool for the last 25 years, and I 

am just as much interested in farming today as any farmer in this House — directly interested in it, and 

when this young man came to me and said, "Here is a piece of land that nobody else has applied for; 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

30 

let's go in together and make it part of our farm unit," I do not see anything wrong with that. I was not 

infringing on the Legislative Assembly Act; it was from the Federal Government with the consent of the 

Indians. 

 

I do not know what is so funny about it to cause the laugh from the Minister of Agriculture — I do not 

know what is so funny about that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I do not know what you are so worried about. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, I am not worried at all; I am just dealing with your attitude towards myself, and 

this has been talked about — it has been thrown at me by two Ministers of the Crown since this session 

started. This very thing — I was accused of having had land grants — an absolute lie, that's all. 

 

Here is this deal — we cleared the land of bush, and there was fairly heavy bush on it; we break it up, 

we pay a quarter of the crop, we pay the taxes, and we give that land back, all cleared and under 

cultivation to the Indians in seven years. Isn't that a terrible thing for me to undertake something like 

that? Well, I suppose — it seems to amuse these people on the other side. Is it any wonder that anyone 

who has been interested in farming all his life, born and brought up a farmer, that he likes to have some 

interest in farming, even though he goes into some other profession. This should be the last legislature in 

the whole of Canada, for anyone who takes an interest in farming and engages in farming, that he should 

be laughed at for that reason. 

 

Well, I will say this (the Minister of Agriculture continues to jeer), that I did not have any land leased 

from a government of which I was a member. 

 

Now then, I said that the best proof of whether conditions are good in the country is whether you want to 

go to that country, or whether you want to get away from it. Now, my hon. friend from Estevan (Mr. 

McCormack) has dealt with that situation, but one of the things sometimes overlooked as we talk about 

the decrease (the Premier took great pains to have it make clear that the decrease in population in the last 

five years was less than 1,000). I do not blame him for that, because when it is getting down to figures 

like that naturally every 1,000 counts. 

 

Premier Douglas: — We did not have anywhere near 100,000 like you did. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Yes, but we left when the depression hit the west; they left during the period of war. I 

know, the members opposite laugh about the war . . . yes, they laugh about that. Do they really laugh 

about that? I cannot understand that. 

 

Some Hon. Members (Government): — We are not laughing. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, nobody was laughing. Then I must be hearing things, because I heard a very loud 

laugh from across the way when I mentioned war. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

31 

Mr. Erb: — You even misconstrue laughs. 

 

Some Hon. Member: — You did not leave during the war. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — In regard to this question. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, we are getting a little tired of this, he cannot stop playing the hero, 

he has commented on his war service so often now that it is becoming a little monotonous. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I do not think anyone is playing the hero. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I was not referring to the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — That has even been laughed at by Ministers of this Government — "my" war service; 

just because I served as a private during the first war, and did not have a commission or something, that 

was laughed at by the Minister of Social Welfare. 

 

Some Government Members: — Oh no, it was not. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Yes it was, and my war record was sneered at. Lots of good boys go through the war as 

a Private. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It was created by the member for Estevan for making some reference to the member 

from Milestone; that is what the hon. member was saying. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, as a matter of fact, the Minister of Social Welfare himself served as 

a private and I am quite sure that at no time did he remark . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, he jeered at my war record. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Well, I am of the opinion that my hon. friend must be super-sensitive. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, I am not super-sensitive at all. I can stand a great deal, but the time comes when 

people should know just the sort of thing that is carried on by the members opposite. I think they should 

know that this sort of thing of laughing and jeering at people jeering at the war records, jeering at the 

fact that a person is interested in farming, engaged in farming, jeering at anything to try and belittle 

people. Well, it is high time that the people of this province knew the sort of people that are sitting in the 

C.C.F. Party in this province, on the floor of this House. It is high time. 

 

Now then, in regard to, I would say, the best proof of whether a country is a good country to live in or 

not is whether people leave it or try to come to it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — (Interruption). 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. The members will kindly refrain from interrupting . . . 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

32 

Mr. Tucker: — I do not mind at all, Mr. Speaker, It just gives me further opportunity to bring to the 

public attention the sort of thing that we have to put up with here. Now then, I was saying that the 

suggestion was made that we have only lost less than 1,000 in population in the last five years, but the 

natural increase, the surplus of births over deaths in Saskatchewan, was in the neighbourhood of 78,000, 

actually 77,872. In other words, we lost our natural increase plus that 1,000; or in other words we lost, 

on the average, during the last five years, about 15,000 every year, who left this province. Now can it be 

pretended that we have had real development during that period, when 15,000 people a year had to leave 

our province to get work elsewhere? Well, I think that is a complete answer to any figures that may be 

brought forward to show that we have had development. Especially when we have had such 

development in all the other provinces around us. It is not for lack of resources, Mr. Speaker, it is not the 

lack of these. Their own Director of Industrial Development said this in a speech: 

 

"Unquestionably Saskatchewan has much more oil than Alberta. We have minerals the like of which 

Alberta has not now nor ever will have." 

 

I agree with that, Mr. Speaker. I believe that is right, but is it not too bad that here we are, with these 

great resources, far beyond that of Manitoba or Alberta, and they are going ahead by leaps and bounds 

and this, the only Socialist province in Canada, is losing population at the rate of 15,000 every year. 

 

Well, I think, and somebody said on the other side of the House, when the people come to vote they are 

going to say: "We are very much more interested in having our province go ahead in proportion to the 

ability of its people and its great basic natural resources; we are much more interested in that than in the 

fortunes of the C.C.F. Party." 

 

I do not say anything about the first three years they were in office, when we were in the midst of 

scarcities and troubles following the war, but during the last four and a half years, when other parts of 

Canada forged ahead, all we have had from the C.C.F. has been suggestions that this industry is looking 

into the situation and another industry is looking into the situation, and that we are on the verge of 

having some great developments. I was looking over speeches made in 1948; I suppose they will be 

trotted out again. Then, we were on the verge of getting a pulp factory, we were on the verge of getting a 

ceramics factory, we were on the verge of great industrial development, and here they are going 

backwards, when other parts of Canada, as I say, have forged ahead and have increased in population — 

every one of these provinces, and we have lost population at the rate of 15,000 every year. 

 

There is no use talking about the period before 1946, the period of depression and war which hit all of 

Canada. There is no use of the. C.C.F. doing that. The thing the people will look at will be what 

happened when the rest of the country, particularly Manitoba and Alberta began to forge ahead. What 

happened to you? And you are the Socialist Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, somebody said the other day that I had said there would not be any oil discovered while this 

Government was in office. To 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

33 

my knowledge, I never said any such thing and never thought it. I will tell you why . . . 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — You back out of a lot of things. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — My attitude is this, I have watched what has happened in countries in the Middle East, 

for example, where they have the most backward and most untrustworthy governments on the face of 

the globe, but if they had enough natural resources and enough riches somebody would take that risk, 

just like they would take any other chance. A Socialist Government is just an extra handicap to the 

development of a province. They have a basic policy here in this Party which they endorsed at the last 

convention in the Regina Manifesto. That policy means that they reserve the right to take over any of 

these natural resources whenever any convention so decides. 

 

Then the Premier writes a letter to these companies and announcements are made that they will not live 

up to that Socialist programmes. But people who are thinking of investing millions here never know, 

they fear the C.C.F. may suddenly say: "Well, we insist on living up to our programme," and so people, 

in their choice between areas of equal riches in regard to natural resources, will say: "We will go to the 

country or the province where we do not face that risk." But, in spite of that risk, you will got some 

development. These people know we have great resources and they want to hold a place in the 

development of those resources if they can. That is all it means. It does not mean we are getting the 

development we should get. It just means that these people are going ahead, doing the developments on 

the scale they feel that is justified by the extra risks they are taking in a province like this, which at 

present is regarded as a Socialist province. 

 

Now, in regard to natural resources. I do not intend to say very much about that, except to make it very 

plain what our programme will be in that regard. We would administer the oil, gas and mineral resources 

with the sole purpose in mind in protecting and promoting the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan. Risk capital, knowing it need not fear ultimate confiscation, would enter this province, as 

it is entering other provinces today, on better terms to the province, because they would not have that 

extra risk to undergo. We would not make deals such as those made with Rhubbra, under which he 

stands, and his associates, the identity of which we still do not know, may make large sums of money 

because they got control of millions of acres of oil land in this province. They were able to turn them 

over to other companies, with an over-riding royalty retained by themselves. 

 

We will arrange, if elected, Mr. Speaker, for an investigation of the various deals involving our natural 

resources, concerning which we have not received satisfactory explanations and answers in this House. 

This investigation will receive the full support and co-operation of a Liberal Government. All necessary 

assistance will be provided, records will be made available, and all civil servants will be assured that 

they can testify and produce those records without fear of harming their position or prospects in the civil 

service. 

 

Some Hon. Members (Opposition): — Hear! Hear! 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

34 

Premier Douglas: — I wish to remind my hon. friend I offered him an investigation last year. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Yes, know. The hon. Premier would have liked very much to have had an investigation 

under his auspices where, of course, an investigation cannot gat any place if the government is not 

prepared to make all records available, if it is not ready to co-operate, if civil servants might be afraid to 

come forth with information. Without a government anxious to get at the bottom of these things, even 

under a most able commission, an investigation might have been, in spite of their best efforts, nothing 

but a smothering up of the real facts. 

 

What the people of this province want is to get at the bottom of these deals and find out what really 

happened, and they will never find out unless they change the government and put in a Liberal 

Government. Those who have not been involved in any improper deals need have no fear, but if it is 

found that our resources have been handed out to enrich a few selected persons at the expense of the 

province as a whole, appropriate action will be taken in every way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. member a question? Just exactly what does 

he mean by "appropriate action?" 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Just exactly what I say, Mr. Speaker. Let the Minister understand that. My final word 

would be this; if this government is defeated and replaced by a Liberal Government, real development 

and prosperity will come to our province. It will begin to forge ahead again — yes, again, like it did up 

until 1931 when we became the third province in point of population in Canada. It will begin to forge 

ahead again. All will benefit by that prosperity. Our farmers, our working people, our workers in the 

field of education and health, our children in the schools. We have nothing to lose, by removing this 

Government from office and the hope of much benefit to the people of this province, by replacing it with 

a Liberal Government. 

 

I say to the people of Saskatchewan, let us get rid of this Government and begin to go forward together 

again. 

 

Hon. J.W. Corman (Attorney General, Q.C.): — Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the Provincial Treasurer 

(Hon. Mr. Fines) on the presentation of the Budget. I may say that I did not intend to enter the Budget 

Debate and I do not intend to speak for more than five or ten minutes. I am not here to follow the two 

barristers on the opposite side who just sat down. Either they have been answered, or they will be well 

answered before this session is over. The field for reply is so wide and so inviting that if I entered that 

field, I am afraid I would not get on to the few things that I feel I should say on the Budget Debate. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

35 

I was not amused, but I was interested in the optimism either felt or pretended by my good friend from 

Souris-Estevan (Mr. McCormack). He pretends to be confident of a Liberal victory. Now, it may be he 

is sincere, or he may be whistling in the dark to keep up his own courage, or the courage of his 

followers, but it is not for that reason I referred to it. I, personally, hope the Liberals will continue to 

boast — or continue to hold out the — what I might say, the fear of a Liberal Government in 

Saskatchewan, so as to get the C.C.F.'ers on their toes and working. I am going to preach the gospel of 

the election being close, because there is only one thing that can beat the C.C.F. in this province and that 

is complacency, cockiness and too much dependence on the good record of the government, without 

doing enough work. I really hope that my good friends will continue pretending in any event that there is 

the danger of a Liberal Government taking over. That is all I have to say in regard to anything that has 

been said. 

 

My friend from Souris-Estevan referred to — he brought out the old chestnut — I do not think it 

originated with him — that if he had a few thousand votes to play around with in the right 

constituencies, he could have defeated enough members on this side of the House to have elected a 

Liberal Government. That would mean defeating, I suppose seven or eight here. Well, it is a silly game 

— I say it did not originate with the member — but it is a silly game. Sometimes I do not mind playing 

silly games. There were 500,000 votes cast in the election of 1948. If he will give me 5,000 out of that 

half a million, I can defeat every member sitting opposite. If there is any skin of your teeth about it, Mr. 

Speaker, it is not on this side of the House. 

 

My learned friend from Souris-Estevan spoke in Moose Jaw at a rally not long ago. He was 

accompanied by a prominent member of the Women's Regina Liberal Association. She spoke on 

industrial stagnation. My good friend, from press reports, had the good judgment not to mention that in 

Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. This lady did not — I understand that, our good friend, Mayor "Scoop" Lewry 

had to impose a curfew on the sound of hammers and saws so that the good lady could be heard talking 

about the industrial stagnation, but the member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. McCormack) — the theme of 

his remarks was that the C.C.F. had lost strength in the rural areas. As two lawyers, I do not think 

neither of us knows anything about that, but I am prepared, Mr. Speaker, to go to the records and to the 

last object lesson we had was in the by-election in Gravelbourg in July last year, 1951. My good friend, I 

can refer to him by name as the candidate of that time, Ed Walker, who is now a member, took the seat 

from the Liberals by a majority, I think it was 77, but the C.C.F, candidate, Mr. Walker, went into the 

urban centres of Gravelbourg, Mazenod and LaFleche with a majority of dirt farmers behind them of 

500. I only mention that, Mr. Speaker. I believe the record probably is more reliable than what either of 

us lawyers think about it, and that by-election showed that the dirt farmers are still behind the C.C.F. I 

think, Mr. Speaker, I could enjoy myself in a happy way if I could continue, but I only have a few 

minutes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the Budget Debate a Minister has the opportunity of discussing the work of the 

department. May I say this in view of the limited time I have, especially this afternoon, I am going to 

leave most of that for the estimates. I would like to report, however, that we are still doing business at 

the old stand, and I would like to say 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

36 

this, that if mistakes are made in my department and they are made in all departments, they have been 

mistakes of judgment. There have been no mistakes made because of politics or personal favouritism. I 

believe the House will believe me when I say that. I would like to just make a passing reference to the 

Royal Canadian Mounted Police who, under the Act, come under my jurisdiction or supervision. I may 

say that our relations with them are excellent. They know that they are expected to enforce the law 

without fear or favour, with the tolerance, Mr. Speaker, in the way of warning that they feel should be 

given, but there is absolutely no political interference with the police that enforce the laws in this 

province. I was told by an officer of the R.C.M.P. outside of the province that every member of the 

force, every member of the R.C.M.P. in Canada likes to be transferred to Saskatchewan under the C.C.F. 

Government that now is in power because there is no political interference with their activities. 

 

Might I pay a compliment, or whatever the word is, to the staff with whom I have to work. A 

Department, Mr. Speaker, is just as strong and no stronger than the quality of the personnel who work in 

that department. And I want to pay a tribute here to the loyalty, the co-operation and to the 

public-spiritedness of everyone who is associated with me. That includes my Secretary, the Deputy 

Attorney-General, it includes all the law officers, it includes the stenographical and clerical help, either 

in the building or in the my offices we have throughout the Province. It includes the official guardian, 

the Master of Titles, all our sheriffs, local registrars, the registrars of Land Titles Offices, the coroners, 

the magistrates, the agents of the Attorney General, and all others; if I have omitted any who work with 

me in discharging the duties set out in the Attorney General's Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, attached to my department, or to myself as Minister are a number of Boards or branches. 

There is the Local Government Board, the Mediation Board and the branch that administers the estates 

of the mentally incompetent. I do not think that there will be any difference of opinion that those boards 

and branches are doing a good job in view of the difficulties of their work, and in view in some cases, of 

the controversial nature of the work they have to do. I want to say that there is the minimum of 

ministerial interference with the functioning of those boards. I believe that is the way that this 

legislature, on both sides of the House, want it, and I believe that is the way the people of this Province 

want it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I should pick out the Mediation Board for special mention, it is only because of the 

nature of its work, work that brings it before the public eye, probably more than some of the other 

activities of the Department. Now, the Mediation Board has to do with debt adjustment, and with 

protection to deserving debtors, among other things, it has to do with those. It is, I think, providing a 

useful service in that regard. I can give this assurance, that as long as this Government remains in power, 

the Provincial Mediation Board will be maintained as a strong militant force to protect where necessary 

the weak against the strong. It is well known that rent control comes under the Provincial Mediation 

Board. I believe there, as in other things, they are doing as good a job as is humanly 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

37 

possible. Now, poetic justice cannot be achieved in such matters as fixing rents or deciding either for or 

against evictions — but I believe the decision of the board by and large have been fair to both landlords 

and tenants, and here I would like to say that the majority of landlords in this province have accepted the 

necessity for rent control just as the government has been forced to accept it, and have been, the majority 

of them, playing the game. 

 

I might say that the primary purpose of setting up rent control was protection and security for tenants 

where necessary and deserving, and the Leasehold Regulation Act, Mr. Speaker, has served that 

purpose. The percentage increase in rentals in Saskatchewan since our Act was brought into force has 

been less than in any other province. 

 

As is known, certain constitutional conferences have been held — called by the Prime Minister of 

Canada, first attended by the Premiers of the different provinces and sub-committees attended by the 

Attorney General. Whether those conferences are going to be reconvened or not, I do not know. I might 

say, Mr. Speaker, that just recently a counterpart in the Province of Quebec, Mr. Revard, called Solicitor 

General there, on February 22 last — that would be within the last two weeks — in a radio address, 

issued what I consider an ultimatum, not only to the Federal Government, but to the other provinces that 

Quebec could thwart the will of other provinces, and the Dominion if she so desired. I intended to read 

the address, but I have not time. In reply to that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that this province is 

issuing no ultimatums; but in answer to the ultimatum that has been issued, I want to say that if the 

constitutional conferences are reconvened, it might as well be known now that as long as there is a 

C.C.F. Government in power in Saskatchewan, this province will never consent to any formula that 

gives Quebec or any other province a veto over amendments to the B.N.A. Act. That is our answer to 

this ultimatum from Quebec, and I think the people in this province will support us in it. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — That's the attitude of the Federal Government, isn't it? 

 

Premier Douglas: — We don't know; they have never stated their attitude . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, I will just close on a local or a constituency note. I can 

assure you, Mr. Speaker, that Moose Jaw will return two C.C.F. mayors. Moose Jaw, along with the rest 

of the province, has prospered under this Douglas Government, and she is not going back to the days of 

Liberal administration when Moose Jaw was just dark spot on the map. Now, Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw 

has no aspiration to be the largest city in Saskatchewan. We will let Regina and Saskatoon thresh that 

out, if they care to. Population, Mr. Speaker, whether it be rural population or urban population is not an 

end in itself. Moose Jaw's ambition is to be a city of happy, contented people, good neighbours, good 

citizens, with their fair share of prosperity and security, and that ambition has come, Mr. Speaker, closer 

to realization in the last eight years than ever before. It is hardly necessary for me to say that along with 

the majority of people in the friendly city, I will support the motion. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

38 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural Resources): — First of all, I would like to take this 

opportunity to congratulate our Provincial Treasurer on the — not only on the way he presented this 

budget to the legislative Assembly, but on the long term of very excellent service he has given to this 

province in leading the way and managing the financial affairs of this province. I think this province 

does owe a debt of gratitude to the Provincial Treasurer for the job he has done. It is not a matter of 

opinion, but a matter of record, that the successive budgets brought down in this legislature have been 

good budgets, and have not only brought benefits to the people in this province, but have also enhanced 

the economic and financial position of this province throughout the Dominion of Canada, and in fact 

throughout the North American continent. I hope that I may be able at least in a small degree, to bask in 

some of the reflected glory that falls on the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines) for this work, in that 

the policies in regard to the development of the resources of this Province have probably made a 

contribution to the successful improvement of the financial and economic position of this province, not 

only here, but its standing in the financial centres of this continent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Tucker) this afternoon spoke of the booklet 

"Progress, 1952." He took very strong objection to it. It is a factual report to the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan; things that have been done in the Province of Saskatchewan during the past years. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to ask the hon. Minister about the refineries? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, not just now, Mr. Speaker. I have read a good many booklets put out by 

the Federal Government departments on their work giving what I assumed was, and what I hope was a 

factual report of the work of those departments, and I believe that the people of Canada appreciate 

having those booklets so as to know what was being done by the various Departments of health, and 

welfare, and so on, and so forth, throughout the Federal Government. But, my friend, the Leader of the 

Opposition, never got up to say that that was political propaganda, and of course, the only hope that my 

hon. friend, the Leader of the Opposition, has to get any place politically in this province is first, that the 

people of the province will not get the facts with regard to what has been done, and second, that they 

will only have as a source of information, the speeches that he makes, and his colleagues make, in this 

House and throughout the Province of Saskatchewan. You know, it would not take a very big book, 

perhaps this is one of the reasons why the Leader of the Opposition does not like Progress, 1952, 

because it is quite a large book, and it is worthwhile reading, but it should not take a very big book to 

hold the achievements of the Liberal Party for eight years. They could certainly save some money. It 

would cost a lot less to publish that. I know that the Leader of the Opposition was mistaken this 

afternoon when he said that we laughed and jeered at him, and at the fact that he was a farmer, the fact 

that he had leased a piece of land from the Department of Indian Affairs. No, he missed the point. We 

have cause to laugh, but that is not what we were laughing at. What does make us 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

39 

laugh, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that the Leader of the Opposition can talk so much about Provincial 

leases of land and then all of a sudden we find him in the position of being a tenant with less security 

and probably not as good a deal as we could give him if he were a farmer, and not a member of this 

legislature. We were not laughing, or jeering at him because he was a farmer. We were not doing that at 

all. What we do laugh at is the idea that he has to take refuge in things like that every once in a while. 

We did not laugh and jeer at the war effort, but we do laugh at the fact that the Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Tucker) hardly ever makes a speech except he has to take some refuge in the war effort. I am not 

going to give you any autobiography . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — On a question of privilege. If he is referring to me as taking refuge in the war effort, 

referring to it, he knows he is not telling the truth. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that is a matter of opinion. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! If I understood the remark correctly, he was not referring to you 

individually. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, Mr. Speaker, I am not referring to the service of the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition in the army during either war. It's a matter of fact, he and I have one thing in common, and 

this has raised my opinion of him a little bit. He, in the first world war was a private, and he was able to 

hold that rank, I understand, and so did I. So we have got something in common, that way. What he was 

doing was taking political refuge in the war. "Well, you could not do things when the war was on." And 

he objected to using comparisons of war and pre-war times in regard to grants to municipalities. But the 

funny thing about it was that no matter what kind of a depression we had, no matter what kind of a war 

we had, on election year they could make plenty of grants to municipalities. The war only counted, or 

the depression only counted when there was no election in the offing. 

 

Then he told us that they were going to give some help to the farmers if and when they are ever elected 

to office in the Province of Saskatchewan. Well, it will take a lot more than words to convince a lot of 

farmers in this Province that that is true. The farmers of this province remember the dire straits they 

were in with regard to the seed grain debt, and they remember too, their request to the Provincial 

Government and the little and insufficient action which they received from the Liberal Government here 

in Regina, and they know what kind of treatment they have received from the C.C.F. Government. 

 

Then he said, "Let us look very carefully at the record of the Liberal Government at Ottawa." Well, that 

is a very interesting thing to do too, Mr. Speaker. We quoted quite a lot of things — old age pensions, 

and everybody knows that the Liberal Government came through with old-age pensions on a political 

sick-bed, as it were. When the devil is sick, the devil a saint would be, and he was a saint long enough to 

put through the old-age pensions in the Dominion of Canada. And with regard to family allowances, I 

would just like to remind this House . . . 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

40 

Mr. Tucker: — The hon. member says everybody knows — well, I certainly do not know that, because 

I know that the old-age pension was passed in 1927, the Liberals had a clear majority, and they did not 

ally Mr. Woodsworth, or anybody else . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, that was not a point of privilege. The Leader of the Opposition 

. . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — It was as much a point of privilege as you people raise all the time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The Leader of the Opposition was just bragging about his lack of 

knowledge. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Have I the same rights as they have got, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, you have allowed 

points of privilege. . . on a point of privilege again, I rose on a question of privilege to say that I do not 

know something that the hon. member said I knew. He said everybody knew it. Now, when he is 

suggesting to you that that was not a question of privilege, you have allowed members opposite to raise 

questions of privilege, including the Minister of Natural Resources, on less ground than that. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Hon. leader of the Opposition was allowed just as much privilege as I have 

allowed anybody else. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the point I want to make is that the Leader of the Opposition 

should not brag about not knowing these things, because the people of Saskatchewan and a lot of the 

people in Canada know it, and know it very well indeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sorry that the hon. member for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) is not in his seat. The other 

day when he was speaking, he did a lot of proposing, and of course it could not help but come into my 

mind that he was proposing to that fair lady, the electorate of Saskatchewan. I am afraid, in spite of all 

the proposals there is little prospect of him getting married. I think the lady is going to continue to turn 

him down. But did a very good job of it. While he was on the radio he proposed to do this and do that, 

and then later in his speech it all went off like a damp squib, as it were. In his speech he said, "I propose 

to show this House that everything that this Government has done has decreased in physical 

production." Again he says, "This Government hopes to get a large amount of revenue out of the natural 

resources." 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have some information on that kind of thing, and I think it would be interesting 

to look some of it up. He tells us that in the Annual Report of the Natural Resources — he took the 

Annual Report of the Department of Natural Resources and proceeded to show that production had gone 

down. Some of these things, I will not have time to deal with tonight but I hope to finish on that 

tomorrow. But at the present time I want to take this particular reference which he made to mining when 

he said, "In the eight years that the C.C.F. has been in office, not a single mine has been put into 

production," Of course, it is very interesting to note that the Liberals had 34 years of office and only one 

mine. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

41 

We have a long piece to go before that. Then he dealt with the figures of production, and he pointed out 

that the production of gold and silver had done down — incidentally, he made some mistakes and said 

ounces of copper instead of pounds, and he said one thousand instead of one million on silver, and that 

sort of thing, but that is a small matter. I would suggest that he correct those figures in his speech, or 

they will be very ridiculous figures if they are printed in the record like that. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — They are all right in the record. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, I have the record here, and your figures are not correct. You state here, 

"In 1950, it dropped" — that is about gold. "In 1944 they produced in silver, 1,736 ounces." Now, the 

right figure is 1,736,000 ounces, I am trying to tell my hon. friend there is something wrong with that, 

and if he let this go out . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — My comparison was the same — the comparison is the same. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That is how he backs up. It is true that the production of metals during the 

war from this mine was higher than it has been since the war, measured in ounces and pounds of gold, 

silver, copper and zinc. That is correct, but there is a reason for it. This mill at Flin Flon is built to 

handle 5,000 tons per day of ore. That is the rated capacity of the mill. During the war as much as 6,100 

tons per day were milled, but this greater tonnage overloaded the plant, causing metal recovery to drop 

and was stopped as soon as the war was over, and since the war they have been on a constant average 

production that is within a very few tons of 5,000 tons a day right through. Then, a mining company of 

course has many other things to consider too. They are using ore both from Saskatchewan and Manitoba. 

During this period of time there was a small mine on the Manitoba side which came into production, and 

the ore from that was trucked to the mill at Flon Flon. While they were working at that, and cleaning out 

that mine, that small ore body, that was one of the reasons for a further reduction of using the ore from 

Saskatchewan. You cannot use it from both sides at the same time. There is another thing the company 

is interested in watching, and that is the profits per share, because we must realize that these people are 

not in the business just to produce copper and lead, zinc and so forth. They are there to make profits for 

their shareholders and so, considering the reserves of ore they had, and the making of profits, the income 

tax structure — they have to pay attention to that too. Then, during this recent period, the last two or 

three years, when prices of metal have gone up to a very considerable extent, it put the company in a 

position where they could economically mine ore of a much lower value, and this is best illustrated in a 

report on their reserves. In 1939 they had 27 million ton of reserve ore, and the average copper content 

of that reserve ore was 2.23. Now, they have only 20 million tons of reserve, instead of 27 million — in 

1950, that is — but the grade had gone up from 2.23 to 3.04, so naturally what they were doing, while 

the price was high, was taking out these bodies of ore which were lower in grade because at those prices 

they could make a profit at it, and if the price went down they could not even mine them. The same 

thing applies to zinc, only in zinc their ore reserves have increased in quality over one per cent from 4.2 

per cent of zinc to 4.34 per cent zinc. Not one per cent, pardon me — one-tenth of one per cent. But a 

very substantial 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

42 

increase in the quality of the ore. And so when it comes to reading these figures, there area lot of these 

things to take into consideration. 

 

My hon. friend from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) loves to use something like this, but most people will 

realize that no matter what government was in power, this is the thing that would have been done, and 

the company, besides being interested in making profit, are also interested in maintaining not only the 

life of the mine, but the life of that community of Flin Flon, and that community probably has another 

20 years of life, even without the discovery of any more ore bodies in the area that can be used there. 

 

It is very interesting to know that my hon. friend did not continue with other minerals after he had dealt 

with gold, silver, copper and zinc. He never told us that there was any coal mined in Saskatchewan at 

all, but the number of tons of coal produced in 1944, 1,393,000 tons — in 1951, 2,235,000 tons. It all 

comes from down in the Estevan constituency. 

 

Mr. McCormack (Souris-Estevan): — In spite of you. 

 

Mr. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Public Health): — If it is less, it is our fault; if it is more it is in spite of 

us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The hon. Minister of Public Health (Hon. Mr. Bentley) says "if it is less, it 

is our fault — if it is more, it is in spite of us." That is the typical attitude of the Liberal Opposition. 

Well put. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — I happen to know something about it. I have had some experience. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — In sodium sulphate — my hon. friend has had some experience all right 

down there in the coal fields — on sodium sulphate, 96,000 tons in 1944, 188,000 tons in 1951. Now my 

hon. friend from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) forgot there was such a thing as oil at all. He did not tell us that 

in the Province of Saskatchewan in 1942 and in 1943 and in 1944 the Province produced no oil at all, no 

oil at all, and that in 1951 in the calendar 1 1/4 million barrels of oil . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — 23,000. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The same comparison with regard to natural gas, from 138,000 — pardon 

me, 138 million cubic feet to 869 million cubic feet. He dealt also with some of the other resources, 

lumber; and fish, but I want to deal with those tomorrow. I just want to say a word or two, Mr. Speaker, 

if I can before 6 o'clock in regard to some of the other work. 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

43 

He gave us to understand that there was nothing done except this one mine. I want to tell this legislature 

that during the past few years there has been more prospecting done, more claims staked, in the last 

calendar year over 2,000 claims. For the last two years we have broken records for the number of claims 

staked in the Province of Saskatchewan. Some member on the other side of the House made fun of the 

prospectors' assistance plan. I think they said this was the only province that was giving these fellows a 

free trip to the North and so forth. Well, there is one other province in Canada that is pretty prominent in 

the production of minerals that adopted, copied this programme from Saskatchewan, and that is the 

Province of British Columbia. That have copied more than that from us. And what has been done in the 

last few years? The development of Nisto on Black Lake, adits and drifts, a great many hundreds of 

thousands of dollars spent there. Unfortunately, they have not yet struck the luck that will make it a 

mine. Nicholson Mine, near Goldfield — a shaft and underground drifts, thousands of feet of them. 

Goldfield's uranium — an underground adit is being pushed through right now. Nesbit-Labine, near 

Goldfields — are shaft-sinking at the present time. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — It is the only one doing any work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Oh no, my hon. friend does not know anything about it. Cinch Lake Mines 

will sink a shaft this year. Rix-Athabaska has an edit in now, and will sink a shaft immediately this 

spring. Then Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company has two concessions in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, and they have been doing a lot of work, and that work has been showing good results, 

and they have made some very good — have uncovered some very good signs of ore. Hudson Bay 

Mining and Smelting Company, I believe, are sinking a shaft on what I am sure will be a new mine close 

to Beaver Lake. The St. Joseph Lead and Zinc Company have done extensive diamond drilling, and a 

shaft will likely be sunk this year. Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company have many claims, and 

have done many thousand feet of diamond drilling. The Mining Corporation of Canada has a 

concession, and has a work programme to put into effect. Then we come to El Dorado. El Dorado has 

sunk two shafts and at the present time a third one, a five-compartment shaft, is being sunk and the mill 

is being built this year. 

 

When my hon. friend was talking about El Dorado, he said that the reason the Federal Government had 

to take El Dorado over was because they were afraid the enemy might get the uranium. I think that the 

hon. member for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) was joking. I do not think he really believed that the private 

company of El Dorado was prepared to turn this stuff over to the enemy. Of course, there are two 

reasons, probably, why the Government took it over. One was because they could not get enough action 

out of the private companies to do the job, and they wanted to go ahead regardless of the will of people 

to invest money in it or not. It was a necessity during that time. But, of course, they are keeping it on 

now, and the El Dorado has also made the statement that if they find on their area gold or silver, or 

nickel or copper, or zinc or lead, they will mine it and produce it the same as any other company would 

do. They have done a great job of development in that particular area, but those other companies are also 

doing a good job, and it is safe to say 



 

March 12, 1952 

 

 

44 

that it is very likely indeed that in this area, among this group, there will be at least a couple of mines 

developed in addition to El Dorado. Then there is the Charlebois Lake area. The Charlebois Lake area, 

which incidentally was discovered by a prospector operating under the prospectors' assistance plan. 

Charlebois Lake uranium, Consolidated Mining and Smelting, Dee Exploration, and Partridge and 

Associates are in there, and they have done there — they worked last summer, and they did 15,000 feet 

of diamond drilling. Dr. Mawdsley made his survey there, and in his report he says: 

 

"The work done in the area up until the end of August, 1951, has confirmed the presence of at least six 

widely separated bodies having an aggregate tonnage of at least 1,000 tons per vertical foot; whose 

aggregate grade would run possibly .2 per cent uranium oxide." 

 

Mr. Speaker: — May I draw the hon. gentleman's attention to the time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, well, I will ask for adjournment in a minute or two, Mr. Speaker. 

 

"The tonnage of materials now indicate with an average grade of .08 per cent, which incidentally is 

minable, is many times one thousand tons per vertical foot." 

 

So in the Charlebois Lake area too, there are excellent prospects that there will be one or two or more 

mines. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on account of the fact that it is six o'clock, I think probably I had better ask leave to 

adjourn the debate. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6 o'clock p.m. 


