



















































Hansard: March 03, 1952


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eleventh Legislature 

17th Day 

 

Monday, March 3, 1952. 

 

The House met at three o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

RE DAMP GRAIN AND FOOT & MOUTH DISEASE 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I am 

sure that all members of the House have felt the same concern regarding two very serious problems 

facing agriculture; one is the concern regarding the damp grain situation and the other is in respect to the 

results of the foot and mouth disease outbreak on the livestock market generally. 

 

This morning I gave a statement to the press, Mr. Speaker, which I would like to read to the members of 

the Legislature. This statement, I think, will keep members up to date on what action has been taken by 

the provincial government. The statement was as follows: 

 

"In light of the serious market consequences resulting from the outbreak of foot and mouth disease in 

Saskatchewan, and because of the great concern that is still felt regarding the damp grain situation, the 

provincial government, last Friday, decided to call a conference of officials representing all farm 

organizations to be held on Friday, March 7 at 10 o'clock a.m. in the Legislative building, at which 

meeting the above problems will be thoroughly reviewed. 

 

"The provincial government stands ready to co-operate to the fullest extent with the Federal 

authorities, to prevent any possible financial loss to farmers. 

 

"Wires went forward Friday to the hon. C.D. Howe and Rt. Hon. J.G. Gardiner requesting their 

attendance at this meeting, if possible, and if not, to have representatives of their respective 

departments present in order that the meeting may have the benefit of up to date information on both 

problems, now of major concern to the farmers of this province. 

 

"Mr. Howe intimated that he would not be able to attend, but we are hopeful that a representative of 

the Wheat Board, at least, will be present . . ." 

 

I am now informed, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. McNamara will probably attend this meeting. 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

2 

"Mr. Gardiner advised that if we thought it would still be necessary for him to be present, after hearing 

his public statement on foot and mouth disease situation, he would endeavour to do so. We have now 

heard Mr. Gardiner's statement with reference to the problems presented as a result of the foot and 

mouth disease outbreak and it is felt that the steps being taken are completely inadequate as far as 

control of prices, marketing and movement of livestock in Canada are concerned. We are disappointed 

that no assurance has been given to livestock producers with regard to maintenance of stable price 

levels. The present chaotic situation caused by provincial embargoes is intolerable and can only be 

remedied by invoking national emergency powers, with the Dominion government taking complete 

control of the situation and with the price of livestock supported at least at price levels prevailing at 

week ending February 23, until the disease is brought under full control and the livestock markets 

again return to normal. 

 

"We are hopeful that Mr. Gardiner will be able to attend the above meeting." 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to read to the House the initial reply I received from Mr. Howe, which reads 

as follows: 

 

"Your wire February 29. Marketing of western wheat, oats and barley is responsibility of the Federal 

government. Problem of damp grain is being dealt with to full extent of available resources and seems 

to be well in hand. Control measures foot and mouth disease and marketing of livestock products 

being dealt with by Federal Department of Agriculture with such assistance as this can render. 

Statements issued from time to time are intended to keep those interested fully informed. Under these 

circumstances it would doubtful if Regina meeting could benefit matters referred to in your wire, 

particularly at a time when our officers are fully occupied in dealing with these matters. Therefore I 

cannot attend nor can other Federal officials mentioned in your wire attend." 

 

I wired again and he stated that would possibly be getting Mr. McNamara. I thought I should read this 

particularly for the benefit of the hon. members opposite so they know definitely whose responsibility 

this is. And we are almost bluntly told, in this wire, that it is none of our business. But, Mr. Speaker, we 

intend to make it our business. 

 

Mr. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, in regard to the way in which this is being 

handled, if we, as a legislature, are going to be concerned in the matter it seems that we should concern 

ourselves in a rather orderly way. 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

3 

Now we are told that there is going to be a conference on Friday, in the morning. If this conference is 

going to be of value, it should be handled in a way in which the Legislature is set up to handle important 

matters, and it should not be held in a way in which all members cannot be properly represented in some 

way or another. There are many different ways in which it could be handled, in which we, as a 

Legislature, could take a part in the matter. One way is to simply have it understood that the conference 

will he held in the House when committee meetings are not in session so the members can all take part 

in the matter. Another way is to have a meeting of the Agricultural Committee of this Legislature and 

ask all concerned to appear and make statements on which they can be asked questions and so on. The 

members who are not members of the Agricultural Committee could attend and hear what is going on. 

 

If we are going to take a part in this thing, then let us take a part, Mr. Speaker, in the way prescribed by 

our rules and regulations. It seems to me that this is being handled in such a way more designed to make 

it appear that Ottawa is to blame for not doing something, rather than to find out what is going on, and 

make suggestions at the Legislature. I suggest that if we are going to ask these people to send 

representatives, or to appear themselves, that it be done under proper proceedings. Just a suggestion is to 

have a meeting of the Agricultural Committee of this House and then there will be a channel duly 

appointed by the House and statements can be given in an orderly way, and questions can be asked, and 

so on. Let us take advantage of the machinery we have in order to handle the thing properly. 

 

Now this is just a suggestion. It may be that a special committee should be set up to look into the thing if 

it is deemed to be of importance, but this business of having the Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. 

Nollet) get up and make a statement on the Orders of the Day, and then more or less challenge us and 

attack us because of what is being done at Ottawa, it seems to me that that is not the way to handle an 

important matter like this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, may I point out that it may be necessary, at a later date, either to 

have a full discussion here in the Legislature on a Motion to adjourn in the matter of urgent public 

importance, or to follow the suggestion of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Tucker) and have the 

whole matter referred to the Agricultural Committee or to a Special Committee. 

 

I think all hon. members will agree that before there can be any general discussion there are two things 

which we need. The first is we need full and factual information from the Federal. Government as to 

exactly what steps are being taken and what steps they propose taking, with reference to the problems, 

namely, damp grain and the outbreak of foot and mouth disease. Now we will get that information, 

specifically and factually, we hope, at that meeting Friday. The second thing we require is that we leave 

some opportunity of having the farm organizations present to the Federal and Provincial governments, 

and to the municipal governments, who will be represented at this conference, the things which they 

think those respective governments can do to assist in dealing with these two problems. 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

4 

Now when we have had that information from the Federal Government on the one hand and from the 

farm organizations on the other, we will then be in a position to see whether or not there ought to be a 

general discussion in the House, or whether the matter ought to go to a Special Committee. 

 

I think the suggestion of the Leader of the Opposition is probably a good one — that the committees 

scheduled for that morning might not sit, allowing members of the Legislature to sit in on that 

conference in order to hear exactly what is being done by the Federal authorities and what suggestions 

the farm organizations have to make. I think it would be completely premature to begin to discuss this 

matter until the groups I have mentioned have placed some facts before us and then, when that has been 

done, I will be glad to confer with my hon. friend and see what would be the best way to have the matter 

proceeded with further, if it is found that there is some value in a further discussion and in any further 

steps that should be taken. 

 

Mr. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, what I had in mind was, if we are going to 

get these statements they should come before us in an official way. We could have statements from the 

Federal authorities and representations by the farm organizations laid before the committee on 

agriculture, and then they would become officially part of the records of this Legislature, and what has 

been suggested by the Minister of Agriculture would be in the nature, as I understand it, as more or less 

of an informal nature, Mr. Speaker. And I think that these things are important enough, if we are going 

to interest ourselves in them, we should do it in a formal way; and I think that probably the people 

involved would go to more pains in preparing a representation and realize that we are more earnest if we 

told them that we asking them to make official statements before a committee of this House, and then 

we could arrange to have transcripts made of the statements made by the Federal representatives and by 

the representatives of the farm organizations and so on. 

 

I think it should be done in an official way so that everybody concerned will know that we are really 

interested in the matter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition that, as far as the Government is concerned, it has these responsibilities and the farm 

organizations have been contacted in an official way, and the representatives of the Federal government 

have also been contacted in an official way. 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

5 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed from Friday, February 29, 1952, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of 

the Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer), That Mr. Speaker do now leave the chair. (The Assembly to 

go into Committee of Supply). 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned the debate Friday 

afternoon I had dealt with the Liberal thinking on the policy in regard to Crown Corporations and I 

believe I pointed out fairly conclusively at that time that if by any chance they should be returned to 

power in this province we would see many, or possibly all, of these Corporations turned back to private 

enterprise. Then I think I answered the criticism of the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) that 

the Department of Highways have been charging part of their administration costs to capital. I think I 

also dealt very effectively with the statement with regard to sound financing as it pertains to the Liberal 

party. 

 

This afternoon I would like to discuss for a moment or two one of the great problems that faces the 

province, and that is the problem of transportation, and I would state that from the very outset this 

government recognized that problem and commenced to deal with it in a very effective manner. We 

realize, Mr. Speaker, that if this province was to progress in a manner that is required of it, that it was 

necessary that both highways and roads be provided for people of this province. We realize that 

transportation has been an important factor in the whole economic life of this province, and we also 

recognize the fact, Mr. Speaker, that it is going to continue to be a factor in the economic life in this 

Province. As a matter of fact, I would say that, inadequate as Saskatchewan's roads have been, they have 

played, and will continue to play, a very important part in our whole economic life. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the advent of the car and truck has brought advantage to this province. 

They have also brought with them many problems, and they have brought problems particularly to 

provincial and municipal governments, which have outstanding qualities and also outstanding problems. 

 

I would also say that the advancement that has been made in our highway system has been largely 

responsible for, and has helped very materially in the mechanization of our farming industry. As a 

matter of fact, without better roads it would have been impossible. I would also say that as we increase 

the mechanization of our farms we are increasing the need for better highways and better municipal 

roads, because more and more of the farmers of this province are becoming dependent upon the need of 

all-weather transportation facilities and are wholly dependent today upon either the car or truck for 

year-round transportation. 

 

I find, Mr. Speaker, that while I have no records for the province of Saskatchewan, I find that in the 

Dominion of Canada practically 50 per cent of Canada's farm produce is carried to market by trucks. In 

the case of the livestock industry I believe it runs to about 90 per cent. Now, while the figures for 

Canada are pretty high, I believe the figures for Saskatchewan would be still a great deal higher. So that 

one must 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

6 

realize that in this province, if our agricultural industry is to progress, if we are to take much of the 

drudgery out of the farm life, then we must provide better transportation facilities. I would say, Mr. 

Speaker, that already we have extended to the agriculturists of this province better health and 

educational facilities because of our improvements in our highway system. 

 

I will go further, Mr. Speaker, and say that I believe one of the main factors in the smashing defeat of 

the Liberal party in 1944 was of their utter inability to understand or to make provision for the needs of 

this province. I would also say that in 1944 (I hear some rumbling across the way), I would like to 

remind them that in 1944 the Liberal party turned over to us one of the most dilapidated and shameful 

highway systems in the whole Dominion of Canada, and I would like to remind them that at the time 

there was not a single stretch of 25 miles in length where a person could drive at 35 miles an hour with 

any degree of safety. That is no exaggeration. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, at that time, as I pointed out Friday afternoon, they not only had turned over 

to us the dilapidated highway system with no equipment with which to maintain or to construct it, but 

they left us a debt of over $32 million, which I pointed out represented 37 percent of the entire amount 

of money spent on highways between 1905 and 1944. Yet they talk about sound financing across the 

way! But that is only part of the story. When we come to look at this problem I find there was not 

sufficient staff with which to carry on the required work. There was a small crew of engineers, but that 

small crew of engineers were handicapped, Mr. Speaker, because they were forced to work with a group 

of political heelers, and they were handicapped in the job they were trying to do, but I want to pay 

tribute to them. Those men were doing a job, but handicapped because of lack of numbers, and 

handicapped because of the men with whom they were forced to work. 

 

In addition to that, there was nothing — there was nothing in the way of equipment. There was no 

modern equipment at all, and we had very little in the way of modern maintenance equipment. There 

were, I believe, 65 graders — power graders — and 21 of them were old fashioned, and for the ash can. 

(Someone just said he thought they came out of the ark, and I think that is a very good description of 

them). But there were more of the old horse-type graders here than anything else, and it is just 

impossible, with today's modern type of transportation, to make a job of roads without modern 

equipment. 

 

Well, as I said, we undertook to remedy those two conditions. It had to be done before a start could be 

made on the improvement on the highway system. First we started to build up our staff. At that time, as 

it is today, it was practically impossible to go out and get trained engineers, and we were forced to 

recruit most of our help from the graduating class of university students. And at this time I wish to pay 

tribute to our universities, and particularly to the College of Engineering, for the very fine young men 

who were turned out, and we have today on our staff a number of young men who are making a mark in 

the highway construction field. 

 

On the matter of equipment, we again undertook to build up modern equipment, not just in the 

construction field alone, but in the maintenance field as well, and today you have eight construction 

outfits for earth moving purposes. They are equipped with the very best of equipment, 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

7 

and have the very best of facilities for the men, good cook-cars and bunk-houses. We use electric 

lighting plants to supply the power and have well-equipped cars for maintenance service. And, as a 

result, these crews are doing a first class job, and are competing very successfully with the contracting 

firms in this province. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, because of these crews, we are not only able to 

set the pattern of the type of work that is being done, but are also keeping an accurate check on the costs. 

This is very important if we are to keep down the costs of highway work in this province. 

 

Now, I do not want to leave the impression that the contracting firms in this province are not doing a 

job. As a matter of fact we have a group of very fine contracting firms in this province. We get splendid 

co-operation from them. We get very good co-operation from their organizations, the Saskatchewan 

section of the Prairie Road Builders' Association, and I want to say that these men are not objecting to 

the use of government crews. As a matter of fact, they know that these government crews are testing out 

the very latest in modern equipment, they know they can come to us and get any advice that is available. 

The results of any of the experiments that we carry on are open to these men and, as a result of the 

co-operation existing between that organization and the government, you are getting, in Saskatchewan 

today, some of the best highway construction work carried on anywhere in the North American 

continent. 

 

As a matter of fact, when I was in Montana last fall and we doing a little, conversing with the Highway 

Departments across the States and seeking information on some of our problems, because we have 

problems here, I found that these people, of course, are very cooperative. They are always ready to give 

us the benefit of their knowledge and experience. But I found this; I found that we were not talking to 

any of those for any length of time until they were asking us questions. I found that we had done things 

here in Saskatchewan that they had not even done in Montana, and these men knew about it and were 

seeking information. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the difficulties we faced when we took over was the lack of judgment on the 

part of the Liberal party. They never seemed to get past the stage of a municipal-type of grade, and 

across this province we had less than a hundred miles of road that would come anywhere near the 

standard that we are now constructing. 

 

Now, at that time, in 1944, when this government took over, realizing the need of this province toward 

better roads, we immediately embarked on a programme to reconstruct the entire highway system, and 

to build development roads in the northern part of this province, and also to give assistance to 

municipalities because they too are faced with a very great problem. As a matter of fact, our problem, (I 

have mentioned this before in this House), of rebuilding and maintaining over 8,000 miles of highway, 

is vast a one. But the municipalities also have a very great problem, and I say combined — the highway 

system and the municipal systems combined — make for Saskatchewan one of the greatest problems 

which we have to face today. 

 

I was speaking a moment ago about our construction crews and the job they had done, the manner in 

which they had been equipped. I noticed a press clipping the other day that the member for the 

Battlefords (Mr. Maher), had criticized these government crews, and had suggested 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

8 

that we forget about them and go back to the method of doing all work by contract. Apparently he would 

be prepared to throw out the window this other government institution, but I am going to tell him that 

neither this government nor the people of Saskatchewan are prepared to throw those construction crews 

out the window. Already they have shown their worth in what can be done, and when we go across this 

province, and when I investigate and inspect many of the jobs that have been done, I am glad to report to 

this House that the work being done by our crews will stand up against anything that the contractors in 

this province are doing. 

 

As I said before, we have in this Province some of the finest contractors in this country. We have one or 

two firms which will stand up with anything in the way of efficient management and the type of work 

which they are doing. I also said that the contractors were not worried about the government operating 

crews. That is true. The thing that they are most anxious to know is how much the government is going 

to do, and I want to tell you that they are very satisfied, because since this government has been in office 

there has never been a letdown in the construction programme from one year to another. It has not been 

a case of just putting on a programmes the year before an election, it has been a continuous job from 

1944 to the present. As a matter of fact, it has not just been a continuous job, there has been a continuous 

acceleration in the amount of work which we have been doing, as equipment and staff became available. 

 

Not only are the contractors appreciating the work which we are doing, but I find that the public of 

Saskatchewan are appreciating the work which we are doing. Last summer with over 95 projects under 

way at one time, there was bound to be a great deal of interruption on the roads, particularly as we were 

suffering a great deal from wet weather, but, in spite of that, in spite of that interruption to our traffic, 

which I know was serious and very troublesome at times, I want to say that I got very few complaints 

last year. The public of Saskatchewan realize that if we are to rebuild the mess left us by the Liberals, 

we have to, at times, inconvenience the public in our rebuilding programme. And, by and large, that is 

realized and appreciated by the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, I would like for a moment or two to deal with some of the things which have been accomplished 

since we have been in office. I find that since 1944 we have rebuilt 3,554 miles (that is in grading), and 

have gravelled or re-gravelled (some of this work has been gone over the second time), over 8,600 miles 

and have black-topped 735 miles, bringing our total black-top to 815 miles at the present time. 

 

Now it is not just a matter of mileage that we can show results on because in 1944, when we took office, 

one of the first things this government did was to raise the standards of roads we were constructing. We 

widened it immediately from 100 feet to 150 feet, depending upon the standard of the grade required. 

We adopted the system of building grades with three to one or four to one slopes to the embankment, 

and in doing so, of course, we not only decreased the accident hazard but we also made possible better 

snow clearance during the winter months. We also reduced the curves in the road to six degrees and that 

has since been reduced to five and sometimes three degrees on some of our main highways. Again, these 

are safety factors, and also factors which lead to better snow removal services. When I mention snow 

removal services, I should point out to you that a year ago, up to the 24th of February, we had kept clear 

of snow 7,500 miles of road. From that date on to the 15th of March we reduced it to 6,344 miles. Up to 

that time this was the greatest record of snow plow 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

9 

work ever accomplished in this province. And that was done in one of the severest winters 

Saskatchewan has ever witnessed. This present year we have been able to keep open for traffic the entire 

highway system of the province of Saskatchewan. Even the outlying portions of our highway system 

have never been tied up for more than a few days at any one time during the present year. 

 

In addition to that we have been able to assist municipalities in opening up some of their roads, so I say 

that during the present winter, through the building of better roads and through the acquisition of better 

and more modern equipment, we have been able to do the job I have just outlined. 

 

Now I would like to inform the hon. members across the way that the best ever done by the Liberals was 

in 1943-44, practically an open winter, with very little or no snow. The best they ever accomplished that 

winter was 2,500 miles. That was the record for them. I remember back in 1935 I had to leave my car, 

on the 28th day of October, just out of the town of Delisle, 18 miles from home, and it stayed there until 

next April. That is the type of work we got under Liberal administration. 

 

I would like, for a moment, to deal with the programme of which we carried out during the present 

season of 1951, the past season. I would again like to say at the outset, Mr. Speaker, that from the very 

start of the construction season we were hampered by wet weather. A late, wet spring followed by a wet 

summer and fall have greatly hampered the work of the construction. crews in this province. And, added 

to that, of course, was the rather serious supply of certain lines of material, such as culverts and repair 

parts for of the machines. As a matter of fact, the shortage was very serious at times and greatly 

hampered the work that was done; not just in this province but over the entire Dominion of Canada. 

 

And then, as we come to the end of the season, there was a six-week period when practically no 

construction work was accomplished. I was talking to one contractor who was in the black-top work and 

he told me that, in the month of September; the best they were able to accomplish was 600 tons of 

asphalt, that is four hours' work in the entire month. 

 

Those are some of the difficulties which were faced in the present year. And, in addition to that, in the 

early part of the spring, on the western side of the province, it was necessary for us to use some of our 

equipment for doing maintenance work. I know some of these crews were not able to go into action until 

the end of June on actual construction work. In spite of all these difficulties, we ended one of the 

greatest construction seasons in the history of this province. We constructed 525 miles of grade that 

required the moving of 12,700,000 cubic yards of earth. A member a year ago, speaking in this House, 

pointed to the feat that been accomplished the past year in the building of a pipe line from Edmonton to 

Regina in one year. That project required the removal of 2 1/4 million yards of earth. But, in one 

summer, we have moved more than five times that amount of earth in our grade construction alone. In 

addition to that, we moved 2 million 300 tons of gravel on various projects of one kind or another, and 

24,800,000 ton miles of haul. It gives you some idea of the amount of work carried on in this province 

during the past summer, and that done in spite of, I would say, the most difficult construction season we 

have seen for many, many years. 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

10 

In gravelling, we completed 573 miles of gravel on construction projects and 848 miles of gravel under 

maintenance, making a total of 1,421.6 miles of gravel during the entire season. Now that is greatly in 

excess of the programme which we had laid out to do. The extremely wet weather made it necessary to 

do a lot of re-gravelling that had not otherwise been anticipated one year ago. In the base course work 

again, we exceeded our programme. We were able to do 157 miles of base course. In black-topping, 

however, the work, as I have stated, was very seriously handicapped by the wet weather and this was 

held down to 92 miles. 

 

Now the Trans-Canada Highway, I want to say a word or two about that. We, of course, faced the same 

difficulty as the other parts of the province. Possibly it was not any worse on the east side of 

Saskatchewan than the west, but it was all bad. In the eastern part of the province, of course, we had the 

results of three years of extremely wet weather. Three years ago there were 20 inches of rain, two years 

ago there were 32 inches and last year about 20 inches, which made it very difficult to get work done 

and completed. Now, in spite of that we did complete a very good season's work and I find that we have, 

in Saskatchewan, the greatest mileage of grading done of any province in Canada on the Trans-Canada. I 

have not the report for all of Canada for the past season, but for the year 1950 the report put out by the 

Department of Resources shows that Manitoba completed 30 miles of grading, Saskatchewan 120.8, 

Alberta 12 and British Columbia 17.4. Now the past year, as I stated, was wet and we were unable to 

complete our of work. Nevertheless, we are satisfied that, given ordinary conditions during the next five 

years of the contract period with the Federal Government, we can complete the terms of our agreement 

and see the completion of the Trans-Canada Highway all across Saskatchewan. 

 

One or two things I want to point out regarding the Trans-Canada. No. 1 Highway, previous to its 

relocation for the Trans-Canada purposes, measured some 465 miles. We have been able to reduce that 

to an estimated 414 miles. We find that there were 23 railway crossings on No. 1 Highway across 

Saskatchewan — that is at grade. We are going to reduce that to five railway crossings at grade. These 

five will all be over secondary lines where the rail traffic is not heavy — branch lines and, in all cases, 

they will be protected by automatic signal devices. Now I find that that 51 miles of savings is going to 

reduce the expenditure on our highway system by $2 1/2 million. It will mean an annual saving in 

maintenance of $2,500 and, on the basis of 500 vehicles per day, will mean a saving to the motorists of 

$400,000 per annum. That is what it means in the cutting off of the 51 miles. 

 

Now, at the present time, we have 196 miles of the Trans-Canada grade under contract or completed. 

160 miles of that have been completed and 105 miles of base course and black-top pavement is under 

contract. The specifications of the Trans-Canada Highway will be 40-foot width at the top, with a 

20-foot pavement and 8-foot shoulder on either side of the pavement, 6 degrees maximum gradient and 

5 degree curvatures, with a 600-foot sight distance, both vertical and horizontal. 

 

Now another feature that I would like to mention of our work in the past year, is that of the bridge 

building field, and I find that there we have completed again — not completed, but nearly completed — 

another very successful year. As a matter of fact our bridge crews are still at work and we hope this is 

one year they will go through 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

11 

without any interruption. But of all the work that was done that year, the outstanding feature, of course, 

is the completion of the Saskatchewan Landing Bridge. That structure, that project, which had been the 

political football for 40 years, kicked around by both the Liberals and the Tories, and held out as 

political bait before every election, was completed by the government. That bridge, Mr. Speaker, was 

unique in that it was the first bridge built across the Saskatchewan River in Saskatchewan and financed 

wholly by the province. Every other large structure which has been built across that river has been 

financed mainly by the Federal government. On this occasion, although repeatedly requested to do so, 

the Federal government refused to give any financial aid whatsoever, so this province undertook to build 

and to complete that bridge on our own resources. I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that this bridge 

forms a very important link in one of our very important highways in the province. No. 4, as you know, 

is the western main north-south artery in Saskatchewan, and I believe that road is destined to continue its 

way until it reaches the uranium fields in the north-western part of this province. 

 

Now, whether it was the realization of the importance of that highway, or whether it was a dream 

eventually come true to many of the people in the south-west and the west-central parts of 

Saskatchewan, but the official opening of that bridge on the 20th of June saw one of the largest crowds 

that ever assembled anywhere in the Province of Saskatchewan. I am sorry the Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Tucker) was unable to be present because some of them did expect that the test of that bridge was 

the Leader of the Opposition and the member for Swift Current (Mr. Gibbs) seeing who could cross the 

bridge the fastest in a wheelbarrow. We had the wheelbarrows there but the contest did not come off. 

However the bridge that day got, they tell me, the most severe test it will ever be called upon to perform. 

The engineers tell me that when the bridge was completely covered with people, as it was on that day, it 

was subject to a very severe strain and one that it may not be called upon again to face. 

 

Nevertheless, the bridge has been built and it stands today as a monument, not only to the people of that 

area who subscribed very generously to the bonds issued to build it, but it also is proof, Mr. Speaker, of 

the need of having a government in office that represents the people and not one that must answer to the 

crack of the financial barons of Eastern Canada. 

 

What is true of the bridge at Saskatchewan Landing, Mr. Speaker, is true of the entire highway 

programme that this Government has introduced. We have introduced that programme, long range 

policies of building roads where they are needed and building them as rapidly as the financial resources 

of this province will allow. And when members of the Opposition jeer us and tell us that we build roads 

for political purposes they are taking a very cheap attitude indeed, because the records will show that 

every year since we have been in office we have built roads through Opposition seats as well as through 

those on this side of the House. As a matter of fact, if we look over the last year's programme, we will 

find that there was major construction carried on in the following constituencies — Opposition ridings: 

Moosomin, Qu’Appelle-Wolseley, Humboldt, Melville, Rosthern, Cannington, Arm River and Melfort. 

So we are not only building roads in Opposition seats, Mr. Speaker, but we are building them so well 

that it was necessary for one of our engineers last summer to flag down the Leader of the Opposition and 

tell him that it was not safe to drive 70 miles an hour over one of these new grades, particularly when he 

had the Prime Minister of Canada in the car with him. 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

12 

Well, before leaving this year's work, there is one thing I want to mention. And that is, that we, during 

the past year, have carried out some tests in the oiling of some of our roads, and, while one year does not 

constitute a proof of the desirability or otherwise of these roads, we believe, from the results of tests 

carried on so far, that on many of our roads where the traffic is not too heavy, we have a solution there 

for the rapidly declining supply of gravel. It is certain that these oiled roads are not taking the place of 

black-top, but are going to make much nicer roads to drive on, do away with the dust menace, preserve 

our grades and preserve the supply of gravel which is rapidly declining in this province. In addition to 

that, we believe that on some of the newer grades, where we anticipate there may be some difficulty 

with the grades, it may be advisable to use oil for one or two years until these deficiencies and 

weaknesses show up. They can then be remedied without any great cost before we proceed with the final 

black-topping work. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn for a moment or two to the assistance that we are giving to rural 

municipalities. We have heard a good deal, Mr. Speaker, in this House, this year and other years, 

particularly from the Opposition, of the failure of this government to provide aid to rural municipalities. 

But I want to point out that from the very first year when we took office, one of the things we did was to 

pay attention to the rural municipalities. And one of the first things I did was to instruct the staff that any 

municipality that applied for a road grant was to receive one providing, of course, they were prepared to 

do the work and to match it dollar for dollar. Then, as we became established here, we brought in, for 

the first time in this province, a really substantial and worth-while method of making grants to 

municipalities, one that is fair and equitable, and one that today is accepted by the municipalities as 

being just and fair. This is not a plan whereby we give grants just the year before an election and place 

them, as the Liberals did, where they would count for the most votes. This is a plan whereby every rural 

municipality in Saskatchewan is entitled to a grant. 

 

These grants are based and distributed in the following formula: The first thing taken into consideration 

is the mill rate charged by the municipality; second, the number of farm families; the number of miles of 

road that is maintained by the province; the topography of the country; the soil index and the degree of 

stoniness and the degree of bush coverage. That is the form that we use in determining these grants, and 

I say it is working very thoroughly. And the present year we intend — in fact at the moment we are now 

working at a formula whereby we will distribute grants for bridges on the same basis. 

 

You will recall that, two years ago, I mentioned in this House that this government was prepared to 

come to the assistance of rural municipalities in the very serious burden which they have been carrying 

in their bridge building programmes. At that time I said that we were prepared to assume fifty per cent 

of the cost of building bridges in Saskatchewan from 20 feet to 100 feet in length and assume full 

responsibility for those over 100 feet. Last spring I discussed this matter with the committee from the 

executive of the Rural Municipal Association and, at that time, I broached the subject of making these 

grants on an equalization basis. They advised me that they preferred to discuss this at their various 

district meetings before making a decision, which I think was a very logical and wise thing to do. And, 

in running over the reports from these various district meetings, I would say that the rural municipalities, 

by and large, are prepared 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

13 

to accept the formula that will take into consideration the number of bridges within the municipality and 

the financial structure of the municipality. As I said a moment ago, my staff is now working on a 

formula on that basis, and I want to tell you it has been a very heavy job. We sent out circulars to all 

municipalities asking them to supply us with a list of their bridges. Some of them replied, but quite a 

large proportion did not, which made it necessary for our staff to go over completely the bridge files of 

this province, which number some thousands, and it has been very long and costly work. It is now 

finished and we are now working on a formula. 

 

I would like to point out that, since we have been in office, we paid out to municipalities over 

$8,260,000 and if this year's vote is taken into consideration it will bring the amount very close to the 

$10 million mark. Now that is moneys which have been paid out either as direct grants to municipalities 

for bridge work, for the construction and maintenance of secondary highways and for L.I.D.'s. 

 

Now, we have been accused, of course, of not playing fair in these matters, and I want to give you two 

illustrations. I want to compare the grants paid in Rosthern Electoral District, because there the Leader 

of the Opposition (Mr. Tucker) has told us that the Liberals have treated that constituency very 

generously whereas we have discriminated against them. Well in 1943, all rural municipalities in the 

electoral district of Rosthern — not all, but the municipalities who received grants in that area — 

received a total of $3,521.08 in 1943. In 1951, under C.C.F. government, they got $21,053.26, an 

increase of 700 per cent. All right, let us take a look at Elrose, that has been a C.C.F. constituency for 

many years. Now, what did the Liberals do in Elrose? Well, in 1940-1941 there were four R.M.'s out of 

the 12 in the municipality got a total of $971.01. In 1941-42 one municipality got a grant — $300.00. 

And in 1942-943 two rural municipalities got a total of $885.00. In 1949-1950, under the C.C.F., 

$23,320.95. 

 

When the Opposition undertake to criticize us for what we have done to rural municipalities, it must 

make the municipal people smile, because their memories are not so short that they cannot remember the 

tax cancellations of 1937, where by Act of this Legislature, under Liberal government, the greatest 

assets of the municipalities at that time were completely wiped out. And who got the benefit of it? It was 

the mortgage companies — the mortgage companies who saw that if this were not done they had two 

choices before them, they could pay up their taxes on the land and retain their security in their 

mortgages, and if they did not do that then, of course, the municipalities had the right to proceed under 

tax cancellation and take control of that land and the mortgage companies would lose their interests in 

their various mortgages. Now, they claim this was done to assist farmers. This did not assist the farmers 

any, all the farmers did was see that equity in the municipal council being wiped out and it meant that 

they had to be taxed over again to pay for the improvements that were required. The only people who 

benefited under that tax cancellation scheme to a large extent were the mortgage companies, and 

throughout the years they have known that they could depend on the people opposite to take care of their 

needs. 

 

At the same time, certain legislation was passed in this Legislature which made it possible for the 

mortgage companies to use what was known at that time as a "Form A Renewal Agreement." And it 

makes me 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

14 

smile when I heard the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) the other day criticizing this government 

for our 33-year lease which we are using on Crown lands. You know, under this Form A Agreement, in 

order to get a two per cent reduction in the mortgage rates, a farmer had to sign this agreement which 

made him a tenant, not to the government but to the company, and after the first three years of the 

agreement if he did not live up to the terms of that agreement he lost title to that land and lost if fast. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — Bunk, bunk, lies. 

 

Hon. Mr. J.T. Douglas: — No bunk about it. Mr. Speaker, I ask that that be taken back. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — May I remind the hon. member that there is an opportunity in this debate to reply 

without interrupting. 

 

Hon. Mr. J.T. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, the hon. member from Arm River (Mr. 

Danielson) calls me a liar and I ask that he take it back. 

 

Mr. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — When I gave the members opposite the right to correct 

things that were incorrect . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will you kindly let me run this Chamber or else you come up here and run it. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I know that you would like to run it just as you please but I suggest you run it fairly to 

both sides. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is a direct charge that I am not running it fairly. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Well, I asked you, Mr. Speaker, if you did not give the right to a member opposite to 

get up and correct something that was being said on this side. You certainly did, everybody here in the 

Legislature heard it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition knows very well that there is a proper method in 

which to make any request on behalf of a member — not to sit in his seat. And I am going to run this 

Legislature according to the rules, not according to the way you want it run. 

 

Hon. Mr. J.T. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to have caused an interruption. I would like to insist 

that the member for Arm River retract the statement. He called me a liar but nevertheless, I have agreed 

to share the air time with another member of this House and I will consider where it came from. 

 

I want to deal with the programme of work which we have outlined for the coming season. On the 

Trans-Canada Highway it is our intention to complete those small portions of graded work from Regina 

to the Manitoba border. The mileage is small, it is from 21 to 26 miles and in small sections. In that 

section will be the completion of an overpass in the vicinity of Broadview. Then we will complete the 

base course and the blacktopping from McLean to Oakshella. And then we will complete the 

blacktopping of those 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

15 

sections not now blacktopped between Moose Jaw and Swift Current. When that work is done, Mr. 

Speaker, we will have a continuous stretch of 200 miles of black-top from a point 9 miles west of Swift 

Current to Oakshella on the Trans-Canada Highway, that is practically one-half the distance of the entire 

414 miles. Then we will grade and gravel that section from Swift Current to Gull Lake during the 

present year. 

 

On. No. 2 Highway we have one of the largest construction programmes, I think, of any one particular 

highway in the province. We will grade from the U.S. border to Rock Glen — grade and gravel — and 

complete last year's contract south of Assiniboia. We will grade and gravel that section from Tuxford 

north and base course and asphalt from Watrous to Young and from Young north grade and gravel. 

Junction No. 5 Wakaw, grade and gravel. Wakaw to St. Louis, base course and asphalt. This leaves only 

short sections of No. 2 before construction on its entire length is completed and completes 175 miles of 

blacktop on the entire length of this road. 

 

Highway No. 3: construction in the vicinity of Green Lake, grade and gravel; St. Louis to Hagens 

Corner, grade and gravel — that is a completion of last year's contract; Tisdale to Crooked River, grade 

and gravel; Crooked River east, complete last year's contract and continue east to Prairie River. 

 

Highway No. 4: Kyle to Elrose, grade and gravel; Elrose to Rosetown, complete last year's contract, 

grading and gravelling; junction No. 7 to 7 miles south of Biggar, grading and gravelling; North 

Battleford south to connect with last year's work, grading and gravelling. This will give almost 

continuous good gravel or blacktop road from Meadow Lake to the South Saskatchewan River. South 

Saskatchewan River to the border, of course, will still need to be rebuilt but at the moment there is a 

good gravel road. 

 

Highway No. 5: Lloydminster east, base course and asphalt; junction No. 40 highway to Ruddell, 

grading and gravelling; Vonda east, grading and gravelling; Humboldt west, grading and gravelling, 

completion of last year's work; Rama to Margo, grading and gravelling, completion of last year's work; 

Rama to Canora, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway No. 6: junction of No. 13 Highway south, grading and gravelling; Raymore south, grading and 

gravelling; Melfort south, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway No. 7: Rosetown west, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway No. 9: junction No. 18 to Alameda, grading and gravelling; Carlyle north, gravel, complete last 

year's work; Yorkton north, base course and asphalt, complete last year's work; Endeavour north, gravel, 

complete last year's work. 

 

Highway No. 10: junction No. 14 to Duff, base course and asphalt; Balcarres to Fort Qu'Appelle, 

grading and gravelling. This will give a gravel or blacktop road from the town of Hudson Bay to Regina, 

of which 148 miles are blacktop. 

 

Highway No. 11: complete the asphalt, giving blacktop road from Regina to Saskatoon. The rerouting of 

this road shortens this 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

16 

artery to 165 miles from city limit to city limit and provides all-year, all-weather travel over the road. 

The saving to the public in reduced mileage amounts to $250,000 per year. The saving to the province in 

maintenance is $15,000 a year, with a first cost and construction saving of $900,000. 

 

Highway No. 12: north of Waldheim to Junction of old No. 12, grading and gravelling; and from the 

junction of No. 5 north, gravel. 

 

Highway No. 13: Manitoba border west, grading and gravelling; junction of No. 9 highway west, 

grading and gravelling; Horizon east, grading and gravelling; Robsart east, grading. 

 

Highway No. 14: junction No. 10 to Theodore, grading and gravelling; vicinity of Foam Lake, grading 

and gravelling; Perdue west, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway No. 17 north of Lloydminster: grading and gravelling, completion, of last year's work. 

 

Highway No. 18: Glen Ewen to Oxbow, gravelling; Oxbow west, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway No. 19: Kincaid south; grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway No. 20: junction of No. 22 highway north, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway No. 22: Stockholm to Esterhazy, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway No. 27: Sutherland east, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway No. 34: junction No. 13 highway to Bengough, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway No. 35: Colgate south, grading and gravelling; Upton to Leross, gravelling and completion of 

last year's grading; Tisdale south, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway No. 37: Shaunavon north, grading and gravelling, completion of last year's work; Climax north 

and south, gravelling. 

 

Highway No. 40: Shellbrook to Kilwinning, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway No. 43: junction No. 2 highway to Mazenod, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway No, 44: Mantario east and west, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway No. 46: Climax to Claydon, completion of gravelling. 

 

Highway No. 51: Major to Alberta border, grading and gravelling. 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

17 

Highway No. 55: Shell Lake west, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway No. 56: Indian Head north, grading and gravelling. 

 

Secondary and municipal road projects: Loon Lake to Meadow Lake, grading and gravelling; junction 

No. 26 near Goodsoil toward Meadow Lake, grading; junction No. 26 highway toward Pierceland, and 

junction No. 26 highway toward Frenchman's Butte, and Gronlid east, grading; junction No. 19 to 

Ferland, grading; Coronach to U.S. border, grading; and gravel connection from Waldheim to Blaine 

Lake. By the way, part of this work was to be done last year but on account of the wet weather it was 

held up, but the entire gravelling of this section will be completed during the present year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that outlines the greatest programme of construction that has ever been undertaken in this 

province at any one time. It covers an estimate of 778 miles of grading, 1,000 miles of gravelling, 171.7 

miles of base course and 229.21 miles of asphalt. When this programme is completed, we will have, as I 

have already said, 200 miles of continuous blacktop on No. 1 highway. We will have 369 miles of 

continuous blacktop from the International Border to Saskatoon, leading on to North Battleford. And on 

the road from North Battleford to Regina, I find that of the 266 miles on that road, 222 miles of it will be 

blacktopped. And on the road from the International Border to the Prince Albert National Park, 442 

miles of that will have been blacktopped at the end of this season's work. We have been criticized by the 

Opposition and by the Liberal press for building our roads in bits and pieces, but I want to point out, Mr. 

Speaker, that the day has now arrived when those bits and pieces are getting together and it is very 

evident to the people of Saskatchewan that they are getting a highway system that is not only well built, 

but one that is connecting up the larger centres of population, giving feeder roads to the new 

development of the north and, in addition, assisting the rural municipalities in building their main 

market roads to connect up with the highway system which we have undertaken to rebuild. 

 

Now, I would like to say just a word or two about the financing of our highway system. Each year we 

have increased the amount of money which we are spending on our highways. We have undertaken to 

spend, as nearly as possible from year to year, as much money as we receive from tax and from licenses. 

This year we will spend more. But, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, if we are to rebuild this vast highway 

system of ours as rapidly as we would like to see it built, then more money should be spent. I maintain 

that the province is spending all that we can financially afford to spend on highways and carry on the 

other services that are required. But I want to point out to this Assembly that across the line you have the 

Federal Government assist the States in the building of their highways to the extent of $500 million per 

year from 1944 to the present time, and I notice this year the public roads administration, the 

organization in charge of the spending of this money, is asking for $810 million for road construction in 

the coming year. 

 

Now I know the Federal Government is assisting in the building of the Trans-Canada highway. They are 

assisting to approximately 40 per cent of the total cost, 50 per cent of certain charges but, on the total, 

about 40 per cent. I find that the Federal Government are collecting — I have figures for 1950 — they 

collected, on their eight per cent sales tax on cars, trucks, accessories and so forth, some $62,345,000 

and on the ten 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

18 

per cent Excise Tax that they charged from April to August and the fifteen per cent from September to 

March of that year, some $70,641,000, making a total of $133,186,000 collected from those sources in 

1950. Now, since that time, the sales tax has been raised to ten per cent and the Excise Tax, to 

twenty-five per cent. And yet we find that, under the Trans-Canada Highway Act, only $150 million was 

set aside for this purpose. That is less than $22,000,000 per year. Now that is not enough, Mr. Speaker, 

to do the job that should be done across Canada. We hear a great deal about tourist traffic, and I know it 

is necessary. It is not as important to us as the roads for our own people but it is an important feature of 

our economy, and if we are to compete with the American states, who are today receiving a 50-50 break 

with their Federal Government, then we should be getting a greater assistance from the Federal 

Government than the small amount that they are paying out on the Trans-Canada highway alone, which, 

in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, should be a federal project entirely, and not one shared by the Provincial 

government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I see that my time is up and, needless to say, I am going to support the Motion. 

 

Mr. D.H.R. Heming (Moose Jaw City): — In rising to take part in this debate I do so as an organized 

labourer of years standing, having worked arduously and assiduously on behalf of the organized labour 

movement in my own area and in the province throughout the years. But it so seemed that a number of 

years back, in negotiating with employers, that the employee invariably seemed to be discriminated 

against and so organized labour decided then that it was necessary, in order to have adequate 

representation that we should enter the political fields of the province. From that time on organized 

labour has strived to secure a representation on councils and on governments — whereby their voice can 

be adequately heard and possibly have an effective voice in making legislation of benefit to organized 

labour and, too, those who are unorganized. 

 

But it so appears, Mr. Speaker, that there are some very heavy barriers being placed in the way of 

organized labour, not only in Saskatchewan, but throughout the whole world in these days. And in order 

to understand exactly how this is being effective, I would like to go back to after the war when the 

World Federated Trade Union movement was first formed of all trade unions of the world. They met and 

in some manner the two ideologies of those behind the iron curtain and those outside the iron curtain did 

not mix. So, subsequent to that time, they formed what is known as an International Conference of Free 

Trade Unions. These trade unions represented the 50 million organized labourers throughout the world 

and have met two or three times since their formation. 

 

They are very much concerned of the way in which things have been going recently. Last year at their 

meeting in Milan they issued a manifesto stating that the objectives of the Free Trade Union Movement 

of the free world would be Bread, Freedom and Peace. Bread meaning economic security and social 

justice for all; Freedom through economic and political democracy and Peace with liberty, justice and 

dignity for all. 

 

In speaking to those of that manifesto, the president of this organization, a man well versed in the labour 

trade union movement, gave voice to this expression, and I quote: 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

19 

"We are today in the most difficult situation known in the trade union movement throughout its 

history, for many years the position of the workers was a simple one. They had to fight against their 

exploitation by those who had control over the means of production and the markets. They had to fight 

against the ignominy of the upper classes which often amounted to tyranny. It was a clear-cut 

situation. Undoubtedly they still have to fight today for recognition of their rights to a decent standard 

of living, bringing release from privation and poverty. But in putting forward their demands they are 

confronted with ideologies which, whilst claiming to have common aims are in fact contradictory in 

their philosophy, their principles and their motives. On the one hand there is democracy and on the 

other hand totalitarianism. The first ideal is characterized in confidence in man's qualities of judgment 

and discernment and in his personal will to work for the improvement of his own condition. It aims at 

maintaining the greatest number of individual freedoms, allowing men to choose their way of thinking 

and to express themselves freely. It grants men the right to choose the people entrusted with the 

direction of the nation's affairs, to judge their actions and, if need be, to put them out of office. 

 

"The other ideology considers men only as a social or economic unit and aims at subjecting the lives 

of men through the edicts of political and technical oligarchies, without affording nations or 

individuals the possibility of expressing their opinion. It recognizes the supreme law only of the leader 

or the dictator and is prepared to smash mercilessly, if necessary by means of total liquidation, any 

attempt at what is considered to be a crime of lese-majesty against the leader who is elevated to the 

status of a deity. Furthermore, it does not hesitate to have recourse to violence, either individual or 

collective, to impose the dogma proclaimed by an oracle who, under the guise of proletarian 

dictatorship and the peoples' democracy; exercises practically personal dictatorship more powerful and 

relentless than that welded by the great potentates of history. 

 

"From the struggle between these two ideologies spring the difficulties and disturbances we know 

today. If the world at the present time is in the grip of war, threatened by a new world catastrophe 

which would destroy all the benefits a thousand years of civilization have conferred upon us, it is 

solely because Communist totalitarianism, aimed at perpetrating a state of disturbance which it 

considers favourable to an extension of its ideology. 

 

"While the Free Trade Union movement has chosen its position, the choice imposed urgent duties, that 

of guarding against a democracy of defence being used as a pretext for social reaction 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

20 

and that of seeing to it that the present situation does not afford the opportunity for rebirth of the worst 

sort of imperialism which ensures its supremacy by abusing the weakness of others." 

 

Which shows, Mr. Speaker, that the Free Trade Union movement of the world has adopted an attitude 

where they do not trust extreme right and they do not trust extreme left. They are adopting a 

middle-of-the-road attitude similar to what our government here on this side of the House have 

reiterated many times in the past. Having adopted a middle-of-the-road way I am convinced that I have 

the support of organized labour and of possibly a number in this House when I would commend the 

Provincial Treasurer upon his Budget. 

 

There has been criticism of $65 million of expenditure in the next fiscal year, criticism of $14 or $15 

million in capital account. Mr. Speaker, as far as I am concerned personally, it is not enough. We could, 

if we so chose, unquestionably take the profits from the liquor and give them back to the people, do 

ourselves out of $6,500,000 and let those people who use liquor get it at a dollar a bottle less. We could 

do without that. We could possibly too, if we wanted to be generous and get some more support from 

our taxi drivers, our truckers and car owners eliminate our gasoline tax. That would give them another 

$8 million. And too, Mr. Speaker, if you recollect, the hon. member from Swift Current (Mr. Gibbs, and 

some others, wanted the Education Tax removed here one time. We could do that, Mr. Speaker, and 

eliminate another $11 million. And when we are eliminating we could take the Vehicle Act and, just for 

the cost of publishing, just give them a little license, just the cost of paper and office staff and that would 

eliminate another $3,700,000. And that is half the Budget gone. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when you take half of that budget it has to be balanced somewhere on the other side 

of the fence, so supposing that we said to the University, "Well, we cannot give you that million dollars 

this year, you have had enough." What would happen? There would be lots of people who would not be 

getting their education there. I think they would have to shut down. Suppose we said to the Social 

Welfare Branch, "You are paying too much for your Old Age Pensions and for your Widow's 

Allowances and for your relief care. Cut down $5 million in your budget." You can do it. Sure you can 

do it. Supposing we said to the Minister of Health, "You are having a lot of trouble with your 

hospitalization plan this year, we will rescind the whole Act and that will save $8 million." We could do 

that too. We have the power and authority. And we could go to the Minister of Education and say; 

"Listen, those grants that you propose to give are too much, we'll cut them right out and also probably 

$3 or $4 million besides, so that the schools will have to get by the best they can." And we could go to 

the Highways and although he has given a good speech on what he is going to spend, we could even 

now cut him down in half and say, "Look, you are not going to hard surface that road between Moose 

Jaw and Touchwood, or from Touchwood to Chamberlain, we don't want it this year." And, of course, 

Public Works, we could defer $5 million of construction if we wanted to. But, Mr. Speaker, if we did if 

we did all these things which I suggest, this party would not be here and we would be in very, very bad 

repute all over the country and our friends opposite — mind you, if they got here they would make 

things just as bad, if not worse, because they could not reduce this amount down any way whatsoever, 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

21 

because we are obligated to maintain standards of living comparable to other provinces. We cannot 

lower ourselves in anything, whatsoever, because if we do that we would make ourselves look 

ridiculous. 

 

It is true that some countries have a deficit in budget. I understand the United States of America have 

$85 billion this year and they are budgeting for a deficit. We cannot do those things in this country. That 

is, not knowingly. We do it behind the door by supplementary estimates, but nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, 

I figure myself, because I speak personally now, I think we should be a bit more ambitious in our 

presentation of budgets. I think our Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Fines) has been particularly lucky, 

particularly successful, in securing loans from sources where money is. I would like to have seen, and 

personally speaking, a loan of $50 million available here for young farmers to purchase land. I would 

like to see another $50 million available for a self-liquidating fund here to build houses for urban 

workers. I would like to see, possibly, if the Federal Government refuses to build that Saskatchewan 

dam which they have been building for thirty years. I would like to see the Provincial Treasurer go down 

and get $300 million and build it for ourselves as a self-liquidating project. 

 

Mind you, Mr. Speaker, it is true that possibly I am not too timid to follow the gleam to unguessed lands 

of wonder and amaze, but I do dream at times and I do think, Mr. Speaker, that the time will come, and I 

think we will think about it if we do not talk about it, when we will have to siphon those waters in the 

great lakes in the far north right down into our north and south Saskatchewan river in order that we shall 

have water here for the prairies of the south, in order to maintain that growth that we need so badly here. 

I believe, too, Mr. Speaker, that we should ask the Federal Government here to let us have full authority 

over that amount of land which we could govern so adequately by extending the 60th parallel right up to 

the north pole, where we could have full sway and freer culture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is true that at times we do dream things. But in dreaming things in connection with 

Saskatchewan I know that the potentialities of the future are such that any dreams anybody has in 

connection with economic development, in connection with production, in connection with mining, in 

connection with any phase of activity amongst ourselves, even with the extension of our population, I do 

not think we could ever be disappointed, because everything looks these days as if we were on a march, 

we can see a gleam of the future, but how far we are going to go we have no idea except that those who 

seem to know are most hopeful and those of us, like myself, and organized labour, we are hopeful, 

happy and wishful about the whole thing. And in view of that and on behalf of my labour group and 

myself, Mr, Speaker, I am going to support the Motion. 

 

Mr. L.M. Marion (Athabaska): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

22 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 05 — An Act to Incorporate Co-operative Trust and Loan Company Limited. 

 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, Co-operative leaders in Canada have, for a long time, 

felt the necessity of having some co-operative credit facilities for members of co-operatives, and 

co-operative organizations generally. In 1951, I believe it was the Co-operative Union of Canada 

requested that their directors investigate the feasibility of setting up a Co-operative Trust and Loan 

Company for the specific purpose of having a trust company which co-operatives or members of 

co-operatives could use. At the annual meeting in 1951 of the Co-operative Union of Saskatchewan, 

they decided that if it was not opportune to proceed on a dominion-wide basis, that an Act of this type 

should be introduced in the Saskatchewan Legislature. They felt that it was not opportune and, for that 

reason, they did not petition the Federal government to set up a dominion-wide trust company, but rather 

to set up one within the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In addition to the Co-operative Union, who are the actual sponsors of this Bill, all the other large 

co-operative organizations in Saskatchewan have either associated themselves with it or endorsed it. 

Organizations such as The Credit Union League and the Saskatchewan Federated Co-operative, in their 

annual meetings, have both endorsed the principles involved in this Bill. In addition to that, other major 

co-operatives such as Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and allied organizations have also indicated, through 

petition, their support of this principle. 

 

The hon. members might note that in the Bill there is considerable change in form, at least to any other 

bills which have been put on our desk in this Session, particularly in connection with marginal brackets, 

which you will note on the Bill. As the members are aware, there is a model Trust Companies Bill to 

which all trust companies applying for corporations must confirm and any deviations from that model 

Bill must be set out in brackets. It is for the reason that this Bill does, in many respects, deviate from the 

Trust Companies Act that this was required in this case. I might say that this is not new in this principle 

because every co-operative which was set up by private Act has deviated from the Model Bill set up for 

the purpose of organizations following. 

 

For instance, the Wheat Pool Act, while it set up by the Saskatchewan Co-operative Wheat Producers 

and, as such, was based upon the Companies' Act, it deviated to incorporate the necessary co-operative 

principles. The same was true when we set up Federated Co-operatives by private Act. The C.C.I.L. was 

in a similar nature and it deviated from the model of the Companies' Act. 

 

This Co-operative Trust Act does deviate from the model Bill set up under the Trust Companies' Act to 

conform, I suggest, with certain co-operative principles. For instance, as an example, the par value of 

shares necessitated under the model Trust Companies Bill is $100. That is not practical under a 

co-operative set-up. They have been set in this proposed Bill at $10. Another example which might be 

given is that under the Trust Companies' Act bylaws must be passed by the directors. It is thought 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

23 

on co-operative principles, that all bylaws should be passed through the medium of shareholders. 

Another very great difference between it and an ordinary trust company is that the control is by 

membership rather than the control on the basis of shares. Another very great change in this one is the 

investment requirements by directors. Under the ordinary Trust Companies Act directors are required to 

have a personal investment of some $2,500 as a minimum. Where you have the directors elected on the 

basis of their ability rather than on the basis of investment, as you do in co-operatives, it is necessary to 

have that change made in this requirement. Another change which has to be made is that in an ordinary 

trust company the profits are distributed on the basis of shares. In a co-operative trust company it could 

not be done any other way than distributed on the basis of patronage or on the basis of use. Another 

change which you will note in this Bill is that the supervision of this comes under the Minister of 

Co-operatives, along with other co-operative associations. 

 

There are several other changes which will be noted in this Bill, but I think that they might be better 

discussed in the Committee of private bills, at which time we will have representatives of the proposed 

company, together with their solicitor, who will be better able to explain, in detail, the changes from the 

model Bill. 

 

I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill be now read a second time and referred to the Select 

Standing Committee on Private Bills. 

 

Hon. Member: — Might I ask the Speaker a question? Is this not an attempt to come into competition 

with credit unions? 

 

Mr. Brown: — Certainly not. If you will note on the petitioners of corporations we have the 

representative of credit union leagues as one of the petitioners and they definitely feel that there will be 

no conflict between the business which they are doing and the business which this co-operative trust 

company will be set up to do. This will be largely set up for the purpose of dealing with memberships 

within the co-operative trust company, who are the co-operatives, of which the credit union will be one. 

 

MOTION OF CONDOLENCE 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), seconded by Mr. Tucker: 

 

"Resolved, That this Assembly deeply regrets the passing of Colonel James Albert Cross, D.S.O., a 

former Attorney General of this Province and Member of this Assembly, and a former Chairman of 

the Board of Transport Commissioners, whose death at Ottawa, on March 1st, in his 76th year, ended 

a most distinguished career as lawyer, soldier and public servant in civic, provincial and national 

fields. 

 

"This Assembly, in paying tribute to the memory and services of the late Colonel Cross, extends its 

most sincere condolences to members of the bereaved family." 

 

(Carried Unanimously) 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

24 

Premier Douglas: — It is with great regret that we learned of the passing of Colonel Cross at Ottawa. 

The name of Colonel Cross has been associated with the public life of this province for a great many 

years and later was associated with the public life of Canada, when he acted as Chairman of the Board of 

Transport Commissioners. 

 

I have here a memorandum, in brief form, of the life of Colonel Cross. I think it would be an excellent 

thing to put it on the record. 

 

Colonel Cross was born December 11, 1876, near Caledonia Springs, Ontario. He received his early 

education at the Collegiate Institute in Vankleek Hill, Ontario. He came west in 1898 and put himself 

through Saskatchewan Law School by teaching school and working on a farm. Later he handled many of 

the province's biggest law cases as head of the Regina firm, Cross, Jonah, Hugg and Forbes. 

 

He entered public life in 1909 as a member of the Regina School Board, of which he was Chairman in 

1912. 

 

His military career began at the outbreak of the war, in 1914. He went overseas as a Major, served with 

the 28th and 27th battalions, winning the Distinguished Service Order at Vimy Ridge. He was invalided 

back to England and became Commandant of the Bramshott camp. He returned to Regina in 1918 to 

command military District No. 12 and quickly became active in veterans' affairs. In 1939 he was head of 

the Saskatchewan committee in connection with a national veteran's survey. 

 

Colonel Cross entered the Saskatchewan Legislature in 1917 as a soldiers' representative for the troops 

in Great Britain. After the 1921 election he was the member for Regina City. He became Attorney 

General on the formation of the Dunning administration in 1922, in which he served also, as Minister in 

charge of the Bureau of Child Protection. Later he represented the constituency of Willowbunch in this 

Assembly and, although offered a portfolio in the Gardiner cabinet of 1927, he decided to retire from 

active politics in that year, returning to his extensive law practice. 

 

In 1940 he was appointed chairman of the Board of Transport Commissioners, a position he retained 

until 1949, when ill health impelled his retirement. 

 

Colonel Cross is survived by his widow, one daughter, one son, two brothers and a sister. 

 

As I have said, the name of Colonel Cross has been associated for some 30 years with the public life of 

this province. It was not my privilege to know him while he was in the public life of the province, but I 

did meet him on a number of occasions when he was chairman of the Board of Transport 

Commissioners, when the Saskatchewan Government was making not infrequent representations to that 

Board of Transport Commission with regard to the matter of increased freight rates. I would like to say 

that I always found him courteous and found him extremely interested in the economic conditions of 

Western Canada, and particularly interested in the province of Saskatchewan, in which he had spent so 

many years and to which he had given so many years of service. 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

25 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I feel that I should say a few words in 

associating myself with what the Premier has just said. The words of the Resolution indicate what a 

varied life Colonel Cross led. He certainly was, in every respect, a Christian gentleman. Everybody that 

had anything to do with him was impressed with what a fine man he was and what a very kindly man he 

was. Of course, his name was very well known in Regina for many years on account of his close 

association with the many branches of civic work here. And then, when the war broke out, as has been 

mentioned, he took part in it and had a very distinguished record in that war. Coming back from it, he 

came into this House as a soldiers' representative and immediately made such a mark that he was asked 

to continue, and served in the government of the province for several years. 

 

During that time he was not only highly regarded for the work he did in the different branches of 

governmental work he was identified with, but he was also regarded as a man who held very closely to 

heart the interests of his comrades who served with him in the first war. And he certainly held a very 

high place in their affections during all the rest of his life. 

 

After Colonel Cross decided to drop out of provincial public life he, for some time, was engaged in the 

practice of his profession, where he held a very high place in the eyes of the public and in the eyes of the 

profession, as one of the outstanding lawyers in the province. I believe that he served for some years as a 

bencher of the Law Society, and certainly was most highly regarded by his fellow members of the 

profession. 

 

When he went on the Transport Board in 1940, it was thought at the time that a very strong 

representative of Western Canada had been appointed to that Board in the person of Colonel Cross, and 

anyone who had anything to do with the work he did on that Board of Transport Commissioners, I think, 

was always impressed with his desire to be very fair in every possible way in doing his duty as he saw it, 

absolutely, completely and fully. 

 

I feel that we have, in Colonel Cross' life, the example of a man who has served in almost every field 

that might have been open to him, the field as a citizen, the field as a man, as a husband and father. In 

the field of municipal affairs he gave his service unstintingly, as a lawyer he was most highly regarded 

by not only the members of his profession but by the public. In general, as a man in public life he was 

very highly regarded and esteemed, and when his country was in difficulty and at war he left the place 

that he had made, went into active service and went overseas. And there again he made a splendid record 

for himself and on his return he did not cease to be interested in the lot of his comrades but continued to 

give of his time to endeavour to make their position and that of their dependants and those who were 

suffering from injuries or disease, a little better. 

 

In the public life of the province he certainly was an outstanding public servant, both in provincial and 

in the broader national field. 

 

Saskatchewan has lost, in Colonel Cross, a most distinguished son. He was a splendid example of a 

person who devoted himself unstintingly to the service of the people. 



 

March 3, 1952 

 

 

26 

I am sure that his widow, and all the members of his family have every right to be proud of the 

distinguished record he made as a man, in his profession, in public life, and as a soldier. Our deepest 

sympathy must go out to them in their bereavement and I am sure that not only the whole province, but 

the whole Dominion of Canada, mourns a very distinguished public servant. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a word to what has 

already been said in connection with the death of the late Colonel Cross as I am, perhaps, the only one 

on either side of the House who knew him in the Army, in the first war — not personally perhaps, but I 

was in Bramshott Camp for some months he was in command. I have talked with a number of soldiers 

who were with him on active duty in France and they all spoke highly of him as a brave soldier and one 

who was always concerned with the welfare of those who were under him. 

 

I would just like to say that I subscribe to everything that has been said by both the Premier and the 

Leader of the Opposition, and do regret the passing of Colonel Cross. 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), seconded by Mr. Tucker: 

 

"That the resolution of regret and condolence on the death of Colonel James Albert Cross, D.S.O., 

together with transcripts of the oral tributes to his memory and services be communicated to members 

of the bereaved family, on behalf of this Assembly, by Mr. Speaker. 

 

(Carried Unanimously) 

 

The adjourned at 5.55 o'clock p.m. 


