



















































Hansard: February 23, 1953


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Twelfth Legislature 

8th Day 

 

Monday, February 23, 1953 

 

The House met at three o‘clock p.m. 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed, from Friday, February 21, 1953, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of 

Mrs. Cooper for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne, and the proposed amendment 

thereto by Mr. Tucker. 

 

Mr. D. Zipchen (Redberry):  Mr. Speaker, at the outset I would like to have you know what a great 

privilege I feel has been accorded me in being able to rise and speak in this Legislature, and it is with a 

feeling of deep humility that I do so. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity of expressing my congratulations to the junior member from Regina 

city (Mrs. Cooper) for her very fine address in reply to the Speech from the Throne, on Monday last. I 

also offer my congratulations to the member from Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. C.G. Willis) on his address 

seconding the reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

May I also at this time, offer my sincere congratulations to our Premier for his magnificent address. 

When I hear an address of this nature I feel most proud to belong to a group which offers so much for 

the good of mankind and which is doing something about it. My congratulations also to the hon. 

member from Cutknife and my colleagues from Cumberland, Kinistino, and Bengough. 

 

I would also like to mention the addresses given by the Leader of the Opposition and his colleagues. It 

seems that they are also thinking of the northern part of this province in which I am vitally interested, 

and I feel that they want something done to develop this part of our great province. I also feel sure that 

they know, deep down in their hearts, that there will be something done, because we are truly going 

forward, and there is no doubt about it with a government such as ours, striving for the betterment of 

each and every one of us, Saskatchewan will soon be at the ‗top of the class‘. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this moment may I take the opportunity to thank all the people of Redberry Constituency 

for the trust and confidence that they placed in me on June 11th last. It is indeed an honour and a 

privilege to sit in this House as a member of the Legislature and speak on behalf of the people of 

Redberry Constituency. The citizens of Saskatchewan had an opportunity to re-elect a C.C.F. 

Government for a third term of office and, at the same time, passed their judgment on the achievements 

and progress that the C.C.F. Government has made in the last eight years. 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

2 

For many years I have been closely associated with community affairs in my area, and I am happy to 

have been able to serve the people to the best of my knowledge and ability. It is my belief that the next 

four years will be an era of expansion and progress for Saskatchewan. 

 

The telephone system in the northern part of Redberry constituency should be expanded, as a telephone 

has become a necessity in the everyday life of human beings. 

 

There is a great demand for rural electrification in Redberry constituency; that is to bring the electric 

power to the rural areas and in this manner lighten the burden of the farmers and make life for them 

more pleasant. It would give them the opportunity to enjoy all the benefits of a city life. 

 

Roads are the arteries of trade and commerce, and I know it will be the policy of this Government to 

expand the road programme. I am well aware of the fact that the main arteries throughout the province 

cold be expanded to a greater extent than they are at the present time. This will be one of the things that 

will have to be done in the Redberry Constituency; that is, to see to it that the main market roads are 

built where they will serve the greatest number of people concerned. Also, connecting links should be 

made between Highways Nos. 55 and 40 and from No. 40 to No. 5, leading to Borden bridge. Now, we 

need these roads very badly in case of necessity or emergencies, such as sickness, accidents, etc. 

 

I have had the following briefs and petitions presented to me by the different rural municipalities, boards 

of trade, etc., within my constituency. These same briefs and petitions have been forwarded to the 

Department of Highways and all concern the construction of main market roads and highways. The 

following is a breakdown of the various requests made: — 

 

A letter dated December 6 from the R.M. of Redberry #435 for the improvement of main market road 

beginning at No. 40 Highway between sections 25 and 26, township 43, range 10 W3rd, thence north to 

the boundary of the municipality; between Hafford and Krydor, for better use in getting to and from 

community pasture. 

 

Letter received December 5, requesting linkage of road from Borden to Redberry, Highways No. 40 and 

55. 

 

A brief received in September from the Rabbit Lake Board of Trade for the linkage of Highways No. 40 

and 55. This brief was signed by several delegates who were unanimous in support of this proposed 

route. Also enclosed was a map of proposed road. 

 

A letter supporting the aforementioned brief was received in February of this year from the Redfield 

Board of Trade, also with attached map of proposed route. 

 

A brief in this connection was received by me in this morning‘s mail from the city of North Battleford. 

So you can how important this linkage is to the people of the north. 

 

Also supporting the construction of this route is the North Battleford Board of Trade, from whom I 

received a copy of their brief in September, 1952. 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

3 

In February of this year, I received a copy of a letter from North Battleford Junior Chamber of 

Commerce and Board of Trade reaffirming their stand in regards to this route, and endorsing the 

recommendation sent in by the Rabbit Lake Board of Trade, the original letter being sent to the Minister 

of Highways, the Hon. J.T. Douglas. 

 

Again on February 13, I received a further letter of confirmation regarding this route, signed by the 

Chairman of the Community Betterment Committee, North Battleford Junior Chamber of Commerce. 

 

I also received, in February of this year, two letters requesting the completion of the Alticane road to 

line with Highway No. 55. These letters were from the R.M. of Meeting Lake No. 466 and the Mayfair 

Board of Trade. 

 

I received a letter from the R.M. of Parkdale No. 498 requesting the linkage of Highways Nos. 4 and 26. 

This letter was received in July, 1952. 

 

I also received a copy of a letter which was forwarded to the Minister of Highways. This letter came 

from the R.M. of Meeting Lake No. 466 requesting a grant of $4,000 to open a road in the northeast of 

their municipality. 

 

I also have received correspondence from a meeting held in North Battleford concerning the closing of 

the road which now runs through the Indian Reserve and connects Rabbit Lake and No. 4 Highway. 

When this road is closed, it will cut off a number of farmers living north and east of the Indian Reserve 

and, therefore, this delegation is requesting that a road be constructed on the north side of the present 

reserve so that it will link Rabbit Lake and No. 4. 

 

I have also in my possession a copy of a resolution which was forwarded to the Minister of Highways 

from the Meota Board of Trade and the R.M. of Meota, concerning the construction of an all-weather 

road connecting the village of Meota and a point on No. 4 Highway. This road is to skirt the shores of 

Jackfish Lake, thus providing a scenic drive as well as a utilitarian one. 

 

I also have copies of correspondence from the Meota Rural Municipality No. 468 concerning the new 

road north of 20 to 20-48-16-W3rd, with map of proposed route attached. 

 

I have requests from Meeting Lake and Spiritwood in connection with a mile of road that they wish to 

have constructed near St. Elmo Lake. All these requests must be recognized. 

 

I received in today‘s mail a letter from the R.M. of Douglas No. 436, requesting a grant of $800 to assist 

in the construction of approximately 4 miles of road on the west side of sections 18, 19, 30 and 31 in 

township 45. 

 

I received a letter, dated December 8, requesting a road between Hafford and Borden to run along the 

west side of Redberry Lake. This road would be of untold assistance to farmers living south of Redberry 

Lake 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

4 

and the Great Deer district. It is a very productive district. Some farmers have to travel as far as twenty-

five miles to the closest town over very, very poor roads. The district is densely populated and situated 

in a recreational area which should be developed and which cannot be without first having good roads 

over which tourists can reach this centre, situated in the heart of Saskatchewan‘s park land. 

 

I would like to mention, too, that the R.M. of Round Hill are requesting a grant of $4,500 so that they 

may complete the building and gravelling of a main market road in their municipality, which was started 

last year, and they are without funds now to complete the project. 

 

Another resolution that was forwarded to me came from the Saskatchewan Farmers‘ Union, in which 

they endorsed a resolution that was passed at a mass meeting held in Rabbit Lake, last July, asking for a 

direct highway route from Richard to Bapaume, so that the cities of North Battleford, Saskatoon and 

Prince Albert may be accessible to the districts of Mayfair, Redfield, Mullinger, Meeting Lake, Rabbit 

Lake, Bournemouth and Glenbush, none of which are now served by a highway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that this Government will be able to do more for the Redberry Constituency during 

the third term of office than has been done in the past. 

 

I would, at this time, like to mention the approaches to the Petrofka Ferry which is situated in my 

constituency. Although the roads approaching the river from either side are in very good condition, the 

approaches to the ferry are not; as a matter of fact they are extremely dangerous and there has been more 

than one accident take place for this reason. Saskatchewan Farmers‘ Union request same, in a resolution 

sent to me, today. 

 

I would like to mention, before I continue further, that I have received a copy of a petition which was 

signed by a number of residents from the rural municipalities of Redberry, Great Bend and Douglas, as 

well as residents of the towns of Keatley, Alticane, Hafford and Radisson, requesting that, in view of the 

large amount of heavy traffic between Hafford and Radisson, the road between these two places be 

made an all-weather highway, and that, until such time as the road is built, it be kept passable during the 

winter months. 

 

We have a large community pasture, namely, the Royal, of which over 60,000 acres will be fenced, 

when completed. This pasture is located about 25 miles north of Hafford in the Redberry Constituency 

and is supervised and financed by the P.F.R.A. The farmers in the districts of Mayfair, Glenbush, 

Bournemouth, Mullinger, Rabbit Lake, Alticane, Hafford, Krydor, Tallman and Blaine Lake, have no 

access to this pasture whatsoever on account of poor roads. This pasture is of no use to the farmers if 

they are not able to take their cattle to it. 

 

Livestock is a national commodity and I hope that some officials from P.F.R.A. will give this matter 

their kind consideration and assist municipalities with special grants to build these roads. We all realize 

that it is impossible for the Provincial Government to do everything. We did our share; 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

5 

we turned over the land for these pastures to the P.F.R.A. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are three hospitals centrally located in the Redberry Constituency, far distant from 

the cities. The first is the Hafford Union Hospital, built in the year 1923, located in the village of 

Hafford; it is a 22-bed hospital. Patients admitted to this hospital for the years 1947 to 1951 inclusive, 

totalled 2,786. Total amount paid by the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan was over $152,000. 

 

The second hospital is the Lady Minto Union Hospital built in 1917, and located in the village of Edam; 

its accommodation rate is 8 beds. Patients admitted to this hospital for the years 1947 to 1951 inclusive, 

totalled 2,190. The amount paid by S.H.S.P. for this period was over $112,000. 

 

Third is the Rose Gill Hospital, built in 1927 and located in the village of Rabbit Lake. It is rated as a 

10-bed hospital. Patients admitted to this hospital for the years 1947 to 1951 inclusive, totalled 1,470. 

The amount paid by S.H.S.P. was $76,000. The total number of patients admitted to the aforementioned 

hospitals for the last five years was 6,446. The total amount paid to these three hospitals, during the past 

five years by S.H.S.P. was $341,431.10. I am well aware of the fact that there were many more patients 

from Redberry Constituency admitted to other hospitals, of which I have no record. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make mention of the recreational area at Redberry Lake. I understand 

that about four years ago some correspondence took place with the Department of Natural Resources 

and Industrial Development, with a view to purchasing a certain parcel of land in that area for 

recreational purposes. So far nothing has been done in this respect, and I would like to see this project 

given favourable consideration by this Government. 

 

There is also another recreational area at Jackfish Lake in the Redberry Constituency. This is a very 

attractive site and a beautiful resort, with activities for the pleasure of both young and old. This spot is 

known as Meota Beach. As well as this beach, there are several others, such as Lakeview Beach, Middle 

Beach CCYM Camp, and a Sea Cadet Camp. It would be very much appreciated if this Government 

could aid this wonderful resort country with financial assistance, so that these beaches could be 

improved for the pleasure of the general public. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity of congratulating and thanking this Government for a number of 

things they have done for the betterment of the general public. There is the power line which was built, 

in 1952, in the villages of Krydor and Vawn, and various other rural lines in the Redberry Constituency 

that are giving wonderful service to these country people. 

 

There is the heal programme that came into effect in 1947, and has been of untold benefit to many 

constituents; and the social security they have given to old people, as well as for the crippled, blind and 

indigent people. Thanks for these services cannot be tallied in dollars and cents. 

 

I might also mention the good service that the Department of Telephones has given us through the 

installation of new switchboards in different villages and towns in Redberry Constituency. 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

6 

Also the equalization and special additional grants for the municipalities; the removal of snow on 

highways and municipal roads, and the maintenance of these roads at all times. 

 

The improved educational programme has given us the Larger School Units, with special equalization 

grants and the building of new schools in the northern areas where they were badly needed. 

 

I might also make mention of the benefit that the Hospitalization Plan has brought to hundreds of 

people; also the advanced health programme for diseases which for many years were neglected. These, 

along with the humanitarian social welfare programme, the automobile insurance programme, and the 

fair manner in which labour is being taken care of, are only a few of the many great things this 

Government has done, and I know that the people in my constituency of Redberry are appreciative of it 

all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Teacher‘s Salary Negotiation Act provided, and I quote: 

 

―The Act provides for negotiating in good faith by the teachers or a committee of teaches, and school 

boards, the rate of salary and matters related to the amount of the salary to be paid to different classes 

of teachers. By this means, salaries paid are based on the level of certification and length of 

experience, and has insured proportionately highest salaries to well qualified and experienced teachers. 

Salary negotiations have also afforded an excellent means for an exchange of significant information 

between school boards and teaches. It is estimated that probably nearly ninety per cent of 

Saskatchewan teachers receive negotiated salaries. In the greater majority of cases, negotiations are 

completed successfully without resort to a Board of Conciliation. The number of Boards of 

Conciliation established to date are: 1950, 3; 1951, 5; 1952, 10.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Teacher‘s Tenure Act provides, and again I quote: 

 

―Like The Teacher‘s Salary Negotiations Act, there was a two-or three-year experimental period of 

voluntary negotiation of tenure problems with affected teachers who had served several years in the 

same position while holding a Permanent Certificate. The Teacher‘s Tenure Act, which came into 

effect July 1, 1952, has incorporated in it this experience. Although there have been no cases directly 

within the scope of the Act up to the present time, we have every reason to believe that under its 

provisions the rights of teachers who are entitled to be retained in their positions will be amply 

protected. This Act does not apply to any teacher with less than two years‘ experience in the same 

position, nor does it apply to teachers who, at any time hold an Interim Certificate.‖ 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

7 

Mr. Speaker, in regard to The Teacher‘s Superannuation Act: 

 

―The most important and significant contributions made to teachers through the provision of The 

Teachers‘ Superannuation Act might be listed in this way: 

 

(1) Provision for voluntary contributions of any amount to the annuity account of the fund to be used 
to increase the annuity portion of the teacher‘s allowance. These contributions earn interest at the 

rate of four per cent compounded semi-annually. 

 

(2) Increase in the service pension effective as of April 1, 1952, to provide for a service pension of 
$30 a year for service, at the age of sixty. This is an increase from $12 per year in 1944, $20 in 

1945, $25 in 1950. 

 

(3) Provision since 1949 for the payment of dependents‘ allowances with respect to teachers who 
continued teaching after they might have retired, and also to teachers with twenty or more years of 

service, who make the small contribution required by the Act.‖ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this morning I received a ‗phone call from the Secretary of the Blaine Lake Larger 

School Unit, wherein he stated that the board was concerned at the rising cost of education and the 

necessity to increase the mill rate which is already at a saturation point. 

 

It is remarkable thinking on the part of certain Opposition members, who continuously try to place a 

smoke screen against the fact that farmers are, today, an underprivileged group. What the Hon. Minister 

of Agriculture said in the House, on Thursday last, is true and must be recognized by every one. Farmers 

can no longer carry the burden of education, municipal and other local government costs, and the time is 

ripe for the Federal Government to consider making education grants to the provinces which, in turn, 

can assist the taxpayers to carry on with the services; and the other alternative is parity prices. 

 

Now, before I close, Mr. Speaker, I would like to illustrate Redberry Constituency which was built by 

settlement and colonization. It is densely populated and is predominantly agricultural. Quite a number of 

pioneers are still living in the district and have contributed much to the development of this great 

country of ours, and helped to make Canada the ‗bread-basket‘ of the world. 

 

Being a farmer myself, I am determined to stand for the farmers and protect their interests at all times. If 

only we, the farmers, would realize that we are producing the most essential product in the whole world 

– and that is food – and we are not recognized as we should be; but the day will come when we will be 

recognized, if we all stick together. Therefore, I pledge myself to support all measures that tend to 

improve the economic conditions of all sections of our society, and measures that make for progress and 

security. So, I will support the motion. 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

8 

Mr. A.P. Brown (Melville):  Mr. Speaker, I am proud of the honour which has been bestowed upon 

me by being elected to this Legislature. Melville constituency is one of those which has had its boundary 

lines shifted around somewhat in the last two years. There was a portion cut off in the west and in the 

east and we have had some territory added in the north. We lost some very fine and very friendly people 

from our constituency, but at the same time we still must have had some very friendly people left in the 

constituency or I would not have the privilege of being here today. 

 

In the short time that I have been a member of the Legislature I have found, of course, that it is a very 

responsible position. I have also found that, in this day and age, being an M.L.A. is practically a full-

time job. This Government, with its planned programmes from year to year – the $75 million road 

programme as outlined for its next term of office and its programme in regard to rural electrification of 

electrifying some 40,000 farms and all the towns and villages by the completion of its next term of 

office, along with all the other programmes that have been presented by this Government, means that 

there is never a day goes by when there is not a group of people in to see the M.L.A. regarding some 

project that is of vital concern to them in their particular part of the constituency. I think that is the way 

it should be. 

 

I would like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that some nine or ten years ago the job of an M.L.A. was not such 

a strenuous one, with the exception possibly of an election year when the usual highway programmes 

were brought out, and when all the other departments presented their various programmes. I can see 

where that year would be a very strenuous one for the M.L.A. This Government has made every year a 

very busy one for the M.L.A. and all the members of this Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should also like to extend my congratulations to the mover and seconder for the 

marvellous job they made on the motion for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. The 

material which they had to choose from, of course, was of the very highest order. In making a speech, 

the chief difficulty usually is in gathering enough material together, but I imagine they will both agree 

with me that their chief difficulty must have been in selecting the highlights of all the choice material 

that they had. The quality and the quantity was there, but the manner in which it was presented to this 

House should call for the highest compliments from both sides of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the House has been in session for a little over a week; we have had the ‗Programme for 

Progress‘ of this Government presented in the usual brilliant manner by the Premier of this province; we 

have had the constructive criticism of the Leader of the Opposition; we have had the Minister of 

Agriculture and all the other capable members of this House debating the pros and construction of the 

various programmes of this Government. For the next few weeks we will have all the other capable 

members 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

9 

discussing the various programmes of this Government. We have experts on the labour programme, on 

the problems of agriculture, and working on all of the other problems that we have in this province. I am 

very glad to be able to absorb some of the knowledge that these men have. 

 

I would just like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I have had and will continue to have the privilege of being 

very closely associated with a man who is now in the Federal House. He is from Melfort and will be 

running in our constituency, and when the House closes in the spring he will be down in our Melville 

constituency campaigning and he will, of course, after the Federal election be taking up permanent 

resident at Ottawa. If I can just absorb half the knowledge that this man has on the farm problems and all 

of the problems of this country, if for no other reason than for my own personal satisfaction, I will be 

very happy indeed. 

 

My category, along with some other members, is that of a small businessman. Naturally I associate with 

all the other businessmen in my community and belong to many organizations which they do and I am 

very proud to be a member of those organizations – the people in them are very fine. I have noticed one 

thing in the last few years, Mr. Speaker, and I think it is fairly important to this House and it is that there 

has been a decided change in the thinking of the average businessman in this province. He is gradually 

losing that mythical belief that he had that this Government was going to move in and saddle itself with 

a lot of the headaches that we have in business; that they were going to move in and take over 

everything from selling grapefruit to automobiles. He could never quite see the angle, but nevertheless 

there were a lot of the men I know even in our own community, who believed that. But these 

businessmen are now beginning to admire and respect this Government. They like the businesslike 

manner in which this Government administers its affairs. In particular, in my constituency or in my 

community, they like the big, high, wide, blacktop highways that run through the centre of my town 

which allows all of the people in the community surrounding that town to come in and do their shopping 

every day in the year if they so desire. They are not snowed-in four, five and six months out of the year, 

the way they used to be. That is a matter of material differences to the businessmen in my town. 

 

They also like the modernization of the rural districts around there in regard to rural electrification, and 

along with the rest of the people of this province, they admire the businesslike way in which the 

hospitalization plan is run – it is the finest on the North American continent – and also the Automobile 

Insurance, the only one of its kind in the World. They appreciate the fact that a decent standard of living 

has been maintained throughout the 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

10 

various levels of business. The overall picture is one that under ordinary times creates a good healthy 

atmosphere amongst the businessmen of this province. 

 

I will admit, Mr. Speaker, that there are still a large number of businessmen who will argue very 

strongly against this Government. Before coming in to attend the session I had a number of them stop 

me and say, ―I know that you have admired this Government for a long time but now that you are being 

admitted into the inner sanctum maybe you will find out that this Government should not do a lot of the 

things that it has been doing.‖ They point to a lot of our Crown Corporations – the fact that we have 

gone into box factories and woollen mills and brick plants and transportation systems. I do not try to 

argue very much with them; I have never been able to convince anybody of anything if I argue, but I 

have tried to point out to them that in this coming Federal election there will be an opportunity to argue 

this question of Crown Corporations. They cannot alter the fact that the Federal Liberal Government has 

23 Crown Corporations. They have a transportation system operating from coast to coast, for instance; 

they also have the C.B.C. broadcasting corporation spreading across the country; they have the El 

Dorado mine on which $17 million has been spent. There will be a yearly gross production at Beaver 

Lodge Lake uranium field of $250,000,000 per year. 

 

However, as I said before, I do not think we gain too much by arguing with these people, but I think the 

general trend, Mr. Speaker, is towards admiration for this Government. I believe that within the next few 

years we will have more businessmen getting into the mechanics of this Government, and I am sure they 

will be welcomed here the way all the other representatives of agriculture and teaching, etc., are 

welcomed into our C.C.F. organization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also at this time like to say a few words about my own constituency. As I said 

before, being a new member I have been studying the various programmes of this Government and as 

we go along I have found out a number of things that I think disproves a lot of the remarks that I have 

heard made by members of the Opposition that there has been discrimination between the various 

constituencies. As you all know, the Melville constituency for the past four years or more was 

represented by a Liberal member – a member of the Opposition; he was a good member, and I would be 

the last one to say that he was not a good member. After all, in the sport of boxing there is a lot more 

satisfaction in saying you knocked over a good man than a poor man! 

 

One thing that has been carried out is the road programme in my constituency. As I said before, we have 

this beautiful blacktop highway running right through the middle of it. At the same time I would like to 

align myself with some of the other members here – the members for Redberry and Cumberland – in 

saying that we have other highways in my constituency. I think the Minister of Highways will agree 

with me that he has heard plenty of our highways Nos. 47, 15 and the famous Bredenbury cut-off. I 

would like to say that I will align myself with the various groups in my constituency who are agitating 

for an improvement in these roads, and I would also like to say that the over-all highway programme in 

this province, as outlined by the Highway Minister, is one that I think is a marvellous 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

11 

programme; but at the same time I intend to see that our programme in our particular constituency is 

given its proper priority along with the over-all programme of the province. 

 

Another thing that compares very favourably in my constituency is that of power. The other day, at one 

of our meetings, when we had the big map of the over-all power project of this government, there were a 

number of members close to me who leaned over and said, ―How come Melville got so much with black 

lines showing the numerous power lines running through that constituency?‖ It is, of course, because the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation adopted that programme of putting power into places that meet their 

programme – of farmers in there, the mixed farming, etc.; all of that is taken into consideration. I would 

like to suggest also, however, that they are a very ambitious and progressive people in my constituency 

and I think they did get out and organize, got their maps in, got their money in, and made sure that they 

got power out there, especially the Killaly-Neudorf area where there is quite a lot of power, and there is 

a lot of credit coming to the people in that part of the constituency. 

 

Now there are a number of things I could point to in my constituency that I think compares and is even 

ahead of a lot of the other constituencies in this province. I think, as I said, it belies a lot of the remarks 

that have been made by members of the Opposition that discrimination is something that this 

Government plays in, and that it does not help a constituency that is represented by a member of the 

Opposition. I have found that that is not so. At the same time, with all of the programmes that are going 

to be carried on in my constituency during the next four years, I intend to do my best to see that my 

constituency remains in a favourable position. 

 

I am not going to take up much more of the time of this House. I have been sandwiched in between a 

couple of very capable members, and I have made a solemn vow that I would not take up too much of 

the airtime. There are a number of other things about my constituency that I would like to talk about – 

the town of Melville itself, for instance, a hustling booming railroad town where it is a privilege to have 

a business established; the hospitals in my constituency; we have a very fine hospital which was 

completed just a year ago in Balcarres. Dr. Steele there tells me that there have been various groups in to 

look over this particular hospital, with the intention of using it for a blueprint when building hospitals in 

other parts of Canada. 

 

Before taking my seat, Mr. Speaker, I would again like to thank the people of my constituency for a 

number of honours. They have given me the opportunity of being very closely associated with a group 

of men whom I have always admired very much – the Cabinet Ministers of this government – I have 

never yet come in with a delegation from my constituency that someone in the constituency has not 

remarked on the co-operation and the courtesy with which they have been received by the Cabinet 

Ministers of this government. I would also like to say that it has given me an opportunity to become very 

closely associated with a man who I think is recognized all over this continent as a man with one of the 

keenest minds and one of the most outstanding personalities in politics today, a man who I think will go 

down in history as one of the greatest humanitarians that this country has ever seen – and I refer to the 

Premier of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is an honour to support the motion. 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

12 

Mr. Arnold Feusi (Pelly):  Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to associate myself with the other 

members in offering congratulations to the previous speakers who have taken part in this debate, 

following the very fine lead given by the junior member for Regina (Mrs. Cooper), plus the dignity she 

has added to this House. Particularly notable is the great change in the Leader of the Opposition – a 

change for the better, may I say; and if the lady member for Regina is partly responsible for this vast 

improvement, than it marks the first time in history that a lady has been able to influence a man for the 

better, without marrying him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it will be the future responsibility of the Opposition to see to it that they elect a lady to 

their side of the House, preferably a good-looking one. At the present time, looking across at the 

opposition the faces we see there are not too much incentive towards better behaviour. Mr. Speaker, the 

age of chivalry is not dead and the mere presence of ladies in this Legislature would lend greater dignity 

to the proceedings. 

 

I would like to compliment the new members on the Opposition side. From the tone of their speeches I 

believe they are going to be an asset to this House, and they are well worth the many members that the 

Opposition lost during the last election. 

 

When the member for Melfort (Mr. C.G. Willis) so ably represented his constituency and his fine town, 

he gave its fame for agriculture. I, too, represent one of the finest agricultural constituencies in this 

province. I represent Pelly constituency, a very compact little constituency adjacent to the Manitoba 

border in the northeast part of this province — the northeast of the settled area. Pelly constituency is a 

very productive constituency; it has established the reputation for production, and has earned a title that 

is known far and wide – the title of the ―Garden of Saskatchewan.‖ Through this constituency of mine 

run three of the most fertile river valleys of Saskatchewan – the valley of the Assiniboine, the valley of 

the White Sand, and the valley of the Swan. These river valleys, very highly cultivated, produce great 

quantities of livestock and grain. The member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Dunfield) did mention that his 

constituency produces millions of bushels of grain. Pelly constituency has also the same reputation. 

These river valleys, while being very productive, are also a hazard, Mr. Speaker, and as a hazard I will 

dwell upon them later. They do cause greater hardship in the corners of the constituency. 

 

How the constituency of Pelly is serviced by a fairly fine number of highways. Highway No. 49, running 

from east to west, from the Manitoba border to the junction of No. 9 running to Canora, is a 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

13 

fairly old highway, one of the better highways, I think, built by a predecessor government. It has given 

good service to a series of four or five little towns, but it is in need of attention. I would like to call the 

attention of the Minister of Highways to the fact that, shortly, we will need a re-gravel job on Highway 

No. 49. 

 

Highway No. 8 is a major highway of the constituency and it runs north and south from the village of 

Pelly, a junction with No. 49, through the constituency, through the town of Kamsack, and to the town 

of Wroxton in the constituency of Yorkton. Half of that highway from Pelly to Kamsack is a very much-

used highway and is in need of rebuilding. It is an old highway. A portion of the highway from Kamsack 

south is a very well built highway and represents some of the work done by this G during the early years 

of its office. 

 

Highway No. 5 running from Canora to the Manitoba boundary is another old highway in need of 

rebuilding. It serves the town of Kamsack east and west. 

 

Highway No. 57, known as the shortest little highway in the province, takes the big trade from Kamsack 

and points west to our Duck Mountain Provincial Park and our fine little resort at Madge Lake. This 

little highway is very much travelled. We have anywhere from 5,000 to 10,000 people travelling to the 

lake and to the park on certain days, and the road is being very much used. It will need attention in the 

near future. 

 

To sum up the situation as far as highways are concerned in Pelly constituency, I would like to say that 

the Department has given us very good service; we have had excellent service given to us, but we are a 

little afraid that, should inclement weather set in, we would have a situation where all our road beds 

would go to pot at the same time, and I would like to call this to the attention of the Minister of 

Highways with the hope that consideration will be given to the rebuilding of some of the main roads. 

 

The constituency of Pelly is serviced by very fine little business communities – the main one, which 

probably should be called the capital of Pelly constituency, is the little city of Kamsack, famous 

probably for the tornado which devastated it some years ago. Mr. Speaker, in speaking of Kamsack I 

would like to mention that the population of this little city is some 2,500. Those of us who have watched 

it grow feel that there is a tremendous future for it in that area; it represents a business centre or market 

district for an arm of from 25 to 30 miles around that town. 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

14 

My predecessor in this House, a few years ago, did give an erroneous statement as to the feelings of the 

people of Kamsack about the great help given by this Government and the people of Saskatchewan and 

the people at large. We suffered greatly; it was a tremendous calamity to happen to a community like 

that, and going back in the history of Regina, I see that Regina suffered the same fate back in 1912. To 

those people who have had no such experience as we faced at that time, I would like to point out a few 

of the things that did happen. Not only were our main business streets and residential areas flattened, but 

the force of the storm was so great that for a stretch of countryside there wasn‘t a stook or bundle left; 

they just disappeared into the void. The force of the storm was so great that there were telegraph and 

telephone poles with particles of straw driven right into them; building materials – planks and 2x4‘s that 

speared right through houses. We were very fortunate indeed that we had only the loss of one life. It 

happened that, at the time of the destruction, a great many of our people were out at the lake and that, of 

course, prevented a greater loss of life. 

 

I would like to mention at this time a humorous incident that happened there. We had a bachelor – a 

very confirmed bachelor – and I believe that through the storm he was rendered partially unconscious. 

He was knocked out, and he just staggered to the door of this house when a stretcher party came by and 

they dropped in to see just how he was faring – this is about 15 or 20 minutes after the storm struck. 

They went in and administered a little first aid to him, and here they found that a lady had been blown 

into the house! Unfortunately, she was quite seriously hurt, but our friend the bachelor hasn‘t lived that 

down yet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the city of Kamsack and the people adjacent who suffered storm damage are very grateful 

for the help this province and the Government has given them. Out of the holocaust they rebuilt a very 

fine city. We have, today, a very strict building programme in the town and I can say that we are one 

urban centre that has very little slum problems. I believe that Kamsack has a record in this province of 

being a very clean little urban centre. 

 

There are immediate problems that beset Kamsack. Last year, the Department of Highways removed one 

of those problems by giving us a very fine approach from the west side of town. Highway No. 5 lading 

into Kamsack was a hazard as it made a sort of violent detour across the river across a narrow bridge. 

We have now a very fine wide cement bridge, and it gives a beautiful approach to the town. 

 

North of Kamsack we have a similar problem. We have had a series of accidents during years past, and 

the council has been approached by the Highway Traffic Board and it is a problem, I think, that the 

Department of Highways will be looking into, I hope, in the near future. There is a problem that will 

have to be rectified. If we go back into the history the highway was built by a Liberal Government and I 

would like to call to the attention of this Government that, in those days, they built highways in a 

peculiar manner. The approach into Kamsack was not made directly. The plans were all laid for it; but, 

evidently, just before the highway was nearing town a couple of prominent officials, members of the 

Liberal party, collared the highway engineer and talked him into a detour that 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

15 

would take the approach by some of the lots that they owned. It was not the best approach and, today, 

we are faced with the problem of having to rectify that. So much for the main urban centre. 

 

My main problem lies in two municipalities on the northern fringe of Pelly constituency, and I believe it 

is my responsibility to bring to this Government the problems that those people face. The two 

municipalities, Livingstone and Clayton, are unfortunate in that they have no highway running through 

them, neither do they have a railroad, and many of the people must travel 20, 25 and 30 miles across 

municipal roads to get their produce to the railroad or to the highway. The burden on these two 

municipalities has been great because the greatest amount of their budget has had to be used in the past 

to maintain the main market roads from the little hamlets, back 20 miles from the railroad, to the 

railroad, with the result that side roads have had to be neglected greatly. 

 

The building of roads in those two municipalities has not been an easy matter. The topography is not too 

serious, there are creeks and drainage systems running into the river that create problems, but the soil 

itself, comprised of peat and clay, does not lend itself to good road building. 

 

I would like to give you an example of a few of the problems which are facing those people. I should 

probably mention that these municipalities are fairly highly populated; Clayton municipality is the 

highest populated rural municipality in the province. We have one corner of it where people are residing 

on 40 acres, 80 acres and 160 acres, and raising families on small pieces of land like that. Now this 

problem that I mentioned about these people being on small blocks – it was peculiar to their type of 

living, and they came into that area years ago under a settlement programme by the previous 

Government. These people are sort of self-contained and very uncomplaining, and because they live in a 

community group they have not, probably, projected themselves upon the municipality. They have very 

poor roads out of the upper Swan River valley; buggy trails is about all they have today. We face a 

different situation with the younger element now, who are spreading out and taking a bigger part in the 

life of the community and I think, Mr. Speaker, it will be necessary that we bring some aid to that 

municipality on the grounds of aiding that little area alone. 

 

Recently these two municipalities have taken in another addition; their borders have been widened. To 

the north of these two municipalities were L.I.D.‘s which extended from the municipalities right into the 

Porcupine Forest. Probably the one L.I.D. is going to be an asset; the other L.I.D. is going to be far from 

an asset for some time to come, because it is a new area that has been newly surveyed. At the present 

time there are no roads, and if that problem falls upon the municipality it probably will not be able to do 

the job, and so I look forward to aid for those people. 

 

I would like to mention, at this time, one or two other problems. We had a school district that was 

isolated by a water hazard. Years ago, a roadway had run across this marsh. The school district is 

centred in the corner of four municipalities and the municipalities, in the past, 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

16 

have not had too happy relations with each other. They have had to neglect their fringes, and this school 

district of Prairie Valley that I am thinking of, was in dire straits this past year or two. It was very 

fortunate that we did get some aid from the Department of Highways, and one municipality came to bat 

and matched that aid. Today that school district has an outlet to the roadway and great credit must be 

paid to that municipality for taking the lead. 

 

I have another problem, Mr. Speaker, a problem also caused by a river and by the fact that we are faced 

with succeeding greater flood conditions year after year. As we denude nature by removal of trees we 

find that the water courses of our rivers and creeks must take care of the run-off in shorter and shorter 

time, with the result that our water courses cannot manage the great floods and the water spreads out 

over the countryside, removing and destroying bridges and existing roadways. I have one of my 

divisions that is in a peculiar situation. It is equally divided by a river. Their outlet is across a bridge 

built by, I believe, Federal authorities on an Indian reserve many years ago. To get to that bridge they 

must maintain a road of approximately four miles which goes across the Indian reserve. Now this 

municipality in question has built that road. As flooding conditions carried on during the past few years 

they have extended aid; the municipality itself has given a culvert and put it in across the river flats, but 

the flooding conditions are increasing and the culverts do not carry the water flow. The result is that the 

water washes away the roadway. We have taken this up with the Department, and I believe negotiations 

are on at the present time; but we will have to take a little firmer lead to overcome this difficulty, 

because again, this spring, these people are going to be isolated for a time when the flood conditions 

occur. 

 

I would like to mention that the Minister of Highways is probably taking a lambasting in regard to 

propositions brought forward by those of us in outlying constituencies. I would like to mention that our 

relationship with him has been very fine. He has been a hard man to deal with. There are times when I 

have come away from his office and I do not know whether I have pinned him down or not; but he has 

given me the understanding that he is looking into the situation, and we have had some of our major 

problems done away with by his co-operation. I feel, Mr. Speaker, that our highway funds are in very 

good hands. As long as he is going to take the approach that he has in the past, and being as careful as he 

has been, we are going to get the most for our money. I would like also to mention here that if anyone 

things some of that money was misspent, my municipalities did a wonderful job in co-operation; they 

matched more than dollar for dollar. The local people went to work and took down the fences and 

cleared the roadway of natural obstructions, such as bush: In one or two of the locations where road-

building under Department aid went apace, last year, they have the semblance of minor highways there. 

It is just the beginning of the picture that we must build upon. 

 

The reason I have stressed this northern area so much, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that shortly, I believe, that 

will be part of a new hospital district. We have two hospital districts – one in existence, today, that 

serves the major part of Pelly constituency. I refer to the Kamsack hospital district. It is a successful one 

and the fine hospital we have in Kamsack is a landmark. From Highway No. 49 and the northern 

railroad through the constituency to the northern boundary is an area of 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

17 

probably 20 to 30 miles, an area that is serviced only by municipal roads and a not too happy municipal 

road set-up. The success, I believe, of this new hospital district is going to depend considerably upon the 

help that we can give these people. I could bring to the attention of this House some unfortunate 

circumstances that occurred because people were unable to get to a hospital in time. They have an ample 

supply of rainfall up in that area and the clay and the peat does not make the best of roadbeds and there 

are times when the roads are nigh impassable – it occurred during the last election, Mr. Speaker. I 

probably had the foresight and the vision to trade a good car in for a high wheel truck; I got through – 

my opponent did not. Going across a corduroy road, one of the main roadways, he left his gas tank 

behind. 

 

That takes care of most of the road problems that we face, and I would like to mention in passing here, 

that I have had words with the Minister of Municipal Affairs, and I have obtained information from him 

pertinent to my municipalities. I have been quite happy to find out that they are fairly efficient 

municipalities; that they have been faced with problems that probably many of our municipalities in 

central Saskatchewan do not have to face, and I would be remiss in my duties if I did not bring these 

problems to the attention of this House. 

 

In the matter of education, Mr. Speaker, we have good service from two very fine Larger School Units 

in Pelly constituency. We have the Larger School Unit of Kamsack; it went to the vote, last year, and 

was endorsed. The northern half of the constituency is served by the Sturgis Larger Unit. I believe our 

education is in good hands, and I would like, at this time, to call attention to the fact that I am very 

proud of the type of men and women who have taken the time and the responsibility to give good 

leadership to our Units. 

 

We have had very good service in the way of new schools. We have had many new rural schools, but I 

would like to call attention to four new schools that are landmarks in the communities that they serve. In 

the little village of Arran, a new school was built over a year ago. Mr. Speaker, ten years from now, that 

little school is going to be a school that the people who see it will stand and admire. It is a very modern 

little school for a community that size. 

 

This last year, the village of Togo and the village of Norquay obtained similar schools, very beautify 

schools, and I believe they are a credit to the people and the educational organization of this province. 

 

Last year, Kamsack obtained, through their own efforts and the aid of this Government, one of the finest 

collegiates in this province. I had the privilege of attending the opening and, Mr. Speaker, very high 

praise was given our Minister of Education by all people who spoke at that opening. 

 

We obtained that school in rather a hurry. There was not too much planning or two much organization 

from the groundwork of our own people. They made a decision. There was a need; they looked into the 

future, and they approached the Government. Within a year‘s time, major construction 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

18 

was underway. We did run into bottlenecks; we ran into problems, and I was very pleased to hear the 

school board mention going to the Department of Education and the Minister of Education, on several 

occasions, and getting the needed advice and the needed assistance that made that school the success it is 

today. 

 

One problem that is bothering our rural people today – I was rather intrigued by the fact that my friend 

from Melville is getting so much power. Well, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the maps that our Power 

Corporation has, I look at an area there that is predominantly ‗brown‘ in my section of the country, and 

‗brown‘ to them is a priority area. We have the population; we have the resources; we have the wealth to 

make power a success. 

 

We have had a good start. Prior to last year, there were three villages that had the power. There are jobs 

that are just being completed at the present time, and four more villages obtained power, that took the 

power line to the Manitoba border at two points. There is one major undeveloped power area in Pelly 

constituency – two, I should say, but one which is immediate, and that is the territory that is the trading 

centre of the town of Kamsack. 

 

Our people are fairly well organized. They have sent in their money; they have also organized fine 

committees. We have had power meetings. The great problem, I believe, lies in the urban centres of 

Kamsack. They have a fairly fine municipal set-up and they are very loathe to part with it. I am happy 

that the Power Corporation and the town of Kamsack are on speaking terms, Mr. Speaker. They are 

making approaches at the present time, and I believe that, if we can integrate the Kamsack system with 

the provincial power set-up, we can get the fine service to our rural people that many other parts of the 

province of Saskatchewan enjoy. I would like to mention here, that my farmers are very much interested 

in the power problem, and I hope that we can get on the power map within the next year or two. 

 

A few of the Opposition speakers and our Government speakers have called the attention of this House 

to beauty spots that they have within their constituencies. Mr. Speaker, I have had the privilege of 

improving on one of those beauty spots, as a civil servant, a member of the Department of Natural 

Resources, and I would be probably not the best type of citizen if I did not speak of a park that is very 

close to me – a park, probably where I spent some of the better years of my life, and that is the Duck 

Mountain area and the resort of Madge Lake. 

 

Madge Lake is in the duck Mountains adjacent to the Manitoba border, some sixteen miles north and 

east of Kamsack. It is serviced by a very pretty little highway, a highway that I head a member of the 

military forces from Nova Scotia state that nowhere across this Dominion, other than in Nova Scotia, 

had he seen a similar, picturesque little roadway. It is known as the ‗Roller-Coaster‘ road. It is a good 

job we cannot travel too fast there, Mr. Speaker, because quite often you leave your stomach elsewhere 

than where it is. Driving fast in a good car these days makes it the type of a ride that you enjoy when 

you go to a carnival or a fair. 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

19 

Madge Lake has been famous in the past for its good fishing and its beach. It has been an excellent 

fishing grounds. Today, it still is good fishing, Mr. Speaker, but the pressure of fishing is very great. I 

believe the field officer there gets rid of a stack of fishing licences each year about a foot to a foot and 

one-half in height. 

 

My friend from Meadow Lake, the other day, mentioned 70 fish in a few hours. I would like to mention 

here that I am the Game Warden of this House, Mr. Speaker. It has been my post occupation, and I 

would like to hear a few more facts about those 70 fish in a few hours. Mr. Speaker, that did happen in 

the past, and I believe where the people are a bit lawless and not conservation-minded they still do those 

things – to the detriment of our wild life. 

 

I would like to mention here that conservation as practised by the Department of Natural Resources, has 

been a wonderful thing; several speakers have already mentioned it. It is such a tremendous field that I 

could spend hours on it, Mr. Speaker, because it has been part of my work, but at this time I shall not 

indulge in it. 

 

I should probably mention a very fine department of this Government, a junior department, and that is 

the department that handles the playgrounds of this province, the playgrounds that are in the hands of 

our Provincial Government. Nowhere across this dominion of ours do we find a provincial government 

interested directly in the health and the welfare of its people, directly in the line of playgrounds. The 

Dominion Government does. It does a beautiful job with a Dominion resort, I believe, in each province. 

But I believe Saskatchewan is the only provincial government that has a policy of development of 

beauty sites in the province itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the development that went on during the past half-dozen years that I was associated with 

the department, has been in the best interests of our people. I believe that that should have been carried 

on earlier. Our conservative people, during the early ‗thirties, who fathered this principle of resort 

development when they had untold quantities of manpower on hand, deserve compliments for the fine 

start they did make. We have carried on, but during that interval between the Conservative Government 

and the taking over by this Government in 1944, there was a tremendous gap where work should have 

been carried on. There was some, Mr. Speaker, but not sufficient. We had the manpower, we had the 

places to beautify in this province, and it could have been done at very little cost in those days. 

 

I would like to compliment the Government on its programme of aiding responsible bodies such as 

municipalities and various health councils, in their development of small resorts throughout the 

province, small resorts that are community efforts. There are some very fine ones. We have one at 

Crystal Lake in the constituency of Canora; another one in the constituency of Yorkton. 

 

Recently I have noticed that our church people are taking a hand and an interest in resorts. They are 

taking their young folks out to the resorts, in church camps. I think it a very fine thing. 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

20 

Mr. Speaker, I have spent much time covering my constituency. I have mentioned that it is one of the 

finest agricultural constituencies in this province. My farmers are very highly organized; they call me 

out to meetings and put me on the spot, rightly so. I believe that they would be very much disturbed if I 

did not speak on behalf of probably some of the major farm issues they are faced with, today. 

 

I would like to speak, at this time, on the freight rate problem as it affects our farmers of western 

Canada. In the early years of this great west, the government of the day realized that there were 

problems besetting the west, and that the west required tremendous aid, aid that would make the picture 

a promising one for settlers coming in to the west to make their new homes, aid that would help them in 

getting their produce to the world markets, with the result that the government made an agreement with 

the railroad companies at that time, an agreement that was an aid also to the railroad companies. This 

agreement was called the Crow‘s Nest Pass Agreement. I would like to read to this Assembly items 

pertinent to the freight rate problems of today, which show us the picture of how the benefits our 

farmers had in days gone by have slowly passed out of their hands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking on the Crow‘s Nest Pass Agreement of 1897, like every other agreement, the 

Crow‘s Nest Pass Agreement was a bargain. The C.P.R. undertook specific commitments for a 

consideration. The consideration was a Federal subsidy of $11,000 per mile to build the Crow‘s Nest 

Pass Railway from Lethbridge to Nelson. The subsidy cost the taxpayers $3,400,000. Because of this 

subsidy, the C.P.R. was able to buy in charters for this road granted by the British Columbia 

Government. These charters brought the C.P.R. land grants of 3,620,000 acres, including mineral rights 

and coal deposits and, of prime importance, ownership of the smelting company at Trail, B.C., the 

Consolidated Mining & Smelting Company. 

 

As it was, the agreement gave the C.P.R. a monopoly over a vast and abundantly wealthy territory. 

Smelters alone, over the past half-century have paid vast sums in profits to the coffers of the C.P.R., 

recently at the rate of approximately $15 million and more per year. The advantage derived by the 

C.P.R. from the Crow‘s Nest Agreement has been on a princely scale. Indeed, it is a matter of record 

that the agreement saved the C.P.R. from bankruptcy. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the C.P.R. had commitments. The C.P.R. not only gave its pledge to maintain certain 

rates on grain and flour at the stipulated level, the covenant also bound the company to maintain 

specified maximum rates on a long list of goods moving from eastern to western Canada. The list 

included agricultural implements – agricultural implements that cost so much today; all kinds of wire, 

iron, nails and spikes; binder twine, roofing and building paper, window glass, paints, oils and furniture. 

The reductions in the then prevailing rates on these items varied from 10 to 33 per cent, and the new low 

rates were to be fixed and unalterable – unchangeable – for all time to come. 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

21 

From the west‘s standpoint, these are essential gods, yet the C.P.R. has been relieved of this obligation. 

Parliament in 1925, under a Liberal Government, in confirming the agreement, maximum rates on grain 

and flour, wiped out these westbound rates. We lost the best half of our agreement there. In 1897, the 

C.P.R. voluntarily, indeed eagerly, entered into an agreement with the Federal Government. The Federal 

Government carried out its part of the agreement to the letter. Down the years, the C.P.R. has benefited 

enormously because of this agreement. In 1925, the C.P.R. got rid of part of the obligation, the 

westbound rates. Today it is true, as stated by the governments of the three prairie provinces to the 

Turgeon Commission, that during the past thirty years, the C.P.R. has succeeded in divesting itself of all 

but one of the original binding provisions of this contract. And further, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

western Canada pay the greater part of the increases in freight rates brought about by percentage 

increases. Since March, 1948, Mr. Speaker, and again under a Liberal Government, these increases have 

totalled 70 per cent and more, and are costing the public over $300 million per year. This is indeed a 

grievous burden to be placed largely upon the west. A few days ago the Minister of Agriculture pointed 

out where the farmers of this province alone lost to the tune of $50 million a year on exceeded freight 

rates. 

 

The traffic which bears the full weight of all the percentage increases is made up, largely, of local freight 

movements in western Canada, and the long-haul traffic to and from the east. The western people, of 

course, pay the freight rates on their own local traffic but they also pay the freight rates on their own 

exports to the east and their imports from the east. In shipping east, the western producers must meet 

severe and constant competition in every line. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the price the westerner receives is the eastern price less the cost of shipping. The 

westbound traffic consists largely of manufactured goods. Here the price is fixed at the factory, and the 

freight rate is added to it. It is thus clear that out of the C.P.R.‘s total traffic of ‗way over $350 million 

per year, one-third of it, almost entirely in the east is totally exempt from percentage increases, because 

it faces competition. Central Canada is cushioned from the impact of these percentage increases by 

highways, waterways and international traffic. The full weight of the increases falls upon the two-thirds 

of traffic costs which is either in western Canada, or chargeable to western consumers. Exactly the same 

conditions as I have mentioned apply to the Canadian National Railways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my farmers, in looking back over the past, are greatly worried. They feel that the farmers 

of western Canada should rear back on their haunches and take a look at this picture. In 1925 a fine 

programme was presented to the people of Canada. The core of that programme was old age pensions, 

but tied to it was something that the people were not aware of, but they realized it as soon as the election 

took place. They realized that they had lost the best part of the Crow‘s Nest Agreement. 

 

I believe some wag in the Government at Ottawa thought they could pull the same thing off (and they 

did) again in 1949. They had behind them the fine sympathy and feeling of our people in Canada, 

because of the bonus given out to families – family allowances. But tied to it, I believe, must have been 

some commitments given to these railroad companies to walk away with the freight rates. Our people in 

the west have paid 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

22 

the burden for those freight rate increases. Our people wonder if, should the Liberal government go back 

at Ottawa, we will lose the rest of the Crow‘s Nest Pass rates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I take my seat, I would like to reply to a few points made by the opposition in the 

fine addresses they made the other day. One point made, and I believe it was by the Leader of the 

Opposition: he stated that the C.C.F. over here are doing only that which a good Liberal would do. Mr. 

Speaker, there can only be two kinds of Liberals – a good one and a bad one. If we are good ones here, I 

do not know what they would be over there. I am also very much impressed with, and I think the 

members from the north gave a very good account of, the need for development in the north. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to call to your attention that the development that should have been made in the 

north, years before, was not made until this Government took over. I am going to take you to a part of 

the north. I had the privilege of flying over there at the cessation of the war. I was still in uniform and 

prior to taking on a job with the Department of Natural Resources, I took a flight up through the north. 

We landed on Lac La Ronge. 

 

There was a problem facing the fisheries Branch, at that time. There was a need to take a test of all our 

lakes throughout the north to find the degree of infestation. We found that the field officer there was 

negligent in his duties and it was necessary to step in and get him working. Well, we dropped down in 

there by ‗plane. There was no beautiful highway there then, Mr. Speaker; it was a wilderness. You could 

see the settlement of Lac La Ronge; it was wintertime. We flew fairly high and you could see the dog 

trains coming ten, fifteen miles, and they were somewhat like the spokes of a wheel leading to the 

centre, and then our eyes were drawn to the little, thin thread of smoke coming up from the settlement. 

 

We found our field officer there, living in a little tarpaper shack. He had a tremendous family of little 

papoose. He did not take Government orders very seriously, and we told him he would have to get busy 

and get his check of these lakes made – he was a month behind time, and he was rather sarcastic to us. 

We did have the then Minister of Natural Resources with us, and he had gone over to look at the 

foundations of the new fish filleting plant that had been started the previous fall. We said, ―You better 

get a hustle on, that is the Minister of Natural Resources.‖ ―Hm,― ―he said, ―if that is the Minister of 

natural Resources, I am Mae West. I have not seen a government minister in the north, and I have been 

here for fifteen years.‖ 

 

So that is the interest they took in the north previous to that, Mr. Speaker. I believe we have made 

tremendous strides in the north, and I believe we shall continue those strides. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I would like to mention again that I represent a very fine and a very beautiful 

part of this province. I would like to just take time off and mention some of the place names. There are 

many, many names that I could mention that are very beautiful, but as time is of the essence I would like 

to say, in closing, that it has been a privilege to represent the fine people that sent me here, and I hope 

that I can be of good service to them, with the aid of this Government. 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

23 

Mr. Speaker, because of the overall picture of improvement of the plans of this Government, and the 

future plans as presented by the Throne Speech, I have great pleasure in supporting the motion. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords):  Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of this Assembly to adjourn the Debate. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 6 – An Act to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act, 1952 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer):  I should like to summarize briefly the Act as it is at the 

present time, and outline some of the changes that we propose under the new amendments. 

 

In 1946, we introduced the first compulsory insurance plan in the Dominion of Canada. This plan 

originally made provision to compensate all victims of accidents caused by automobiles, irrespective of 

who was to blame. It made provision not only for persons in the automobile who were injured, but also 

for any pedestrian or any person driving along the highway who may be injured. It also provided 

compensation for the dependants of those persons who were killed as the result of an automobile 

accident. It also provided compensation benefits for anyone who was unable to work as the result of an 

injury caused by an automobile accident. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, was a revolutionary approach to the whole question of automobile insurance. I might 

say that at the time the Bill was introduced in 1946, less than one in seven automobiles in Saskatchewan 

were insured and then, suddenly on the first day of April, 1946, every car in the province carried 

insurance. There was criticism that this was compulsion, and I remember the editorials in the ‗Leader-

Post‘ at that time condemned the plan in most definite terms. I remember, too, the debate that took place 

in this House. I remember, for example, when the Bill was introduced, we had the member for 

Moosomin at the time refer to the Accident Insurance Bill as the ―greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the 

people of any province under the guise of an insurance measure‖, and then he condemned the Bill on 

eight counts. I remember, too, Mr. Speaker, that the ‗Star-Phoenix‘ in their editorial criticized it very 

severely. And yet, today, these same newspapers praise the idea of the original Bill and say now that we 

have gone away beyond that. They also claim the people of Saskatchewan undoubtedly were behind the 

original intentions, but were not behind the idea of insurance as it is today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why were these other changes added? Simply because of the demands of the people all 

over this province. The one complaint we got everywhere in 1946, was that while the plan was very 

good at providing these accident benefits, yet it did not do anything to provide payment to people to get 

their automobiles repaired after they had been smashed up. And so there was this demand which arose 

for the collision insurance. Consequently, one year later, in 1947, collision benefits were 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

24 

provided with the first $100 being paid by the motorist himself. 

 

Then in 1948 we went a step further and added public liability and property damage: public liability 

with limits of $5,000 and $10,000, and property damage with limits of a thousand dollars. Then, in 

1949, to round out the plan and to provide full five-point coverage, we added the fire and theft 

insurance. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, after that we had the most complete automobile insurance coverage to be found 

anywhere in the world. This is something that Saskatchewan definitely leads in. May I say at the outset 

that, when this Bill was introduced in 1946, the people of this province were given the assurance that 

this was not to be a plan under which the provincial treasury would be levying some hidden tax upon the 

motorist. It was stated by the Premier that not one dollar would come out of this plan into the coffers of 

this Government. Conversely, Mr. Speaker, we made the statement at the time that the insurance rates 

would have to take care of all the expenses of the plan. 

 

Well, what has been the effect? Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that these two pledges have been 

carried out: not one single five-cent piece has been taken from this fund and used for any government 

purpose whatsoever. Conversely, not one five-cent piece has been taken out of the government revenues 

to be used to subsidize this plan. In other words, it has from the beginning stood on its own feet. The 

first few years we actually had a surplus in the fund. If you go back, for example, to 1946-47, the first 

year we had a surplus of over three-quarters of a million dollars. The next year we had a surplus of over 

a quarter of a million dollars. The next year we had a surplus of $65,000, so that we then had a total 

surplus built up of almost $1,100,000. So, for the first three years the plan was in effect we had a 

surplus. Now, in 1949-50 there was a deficit of $85,000. The next year there was a deficit of $326,000, 

and the next year there was a deficit of $730,000, so that, by the end of the sixth year, the surplus which 

had been built up was gone. 

 

It is naturally a very difficult task to fix the rates that will exactly balance, each year, the revenues and 

expenditures. I think we have done pretty well. We have had six full years of operation now; three years 

we have had a surplus, three years we have had a deficit. What could be fairer than that? At the end of 

this year there will be a deficit in the fund. However, one thing I would like you to remember is that, 

before we reach the end of this fiscal year, we shall have received into the fund the revenues for this 

next year. Someone might ask me, ―Well, how have you managed to get along?‖ We will show at the 

end of the calendar year a deficit, and yet we have not had to borrow a single five-cent piece. We have 

been able to meet all the bills; just as fast as the adjustments have been made the bill has been paid. 

 

Some people have said that we should have raised the rates a year ago. I know the hospital. Leader of 

the Opposition is going to get up and chide me for a statement that I made, some time ago, about the fact 

that if we raised the rates $2 on each car that that would have looked after it. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want 

to stand by that statement. When I made that statement over a year ago, we were running into a deficit at 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

25 

that time at the rate of, roughly, $500,000 to $600,000 a year. At that time I told the people of this 

province, as clearly and as forcefully as I could, that they and they alone would determine what the rates 

would be. If they were going to continue to smash their cars up, if they were going to continue to have 

accidents, then the rates would have to go up. But, on the other hand, if the accident rate would fall off 

people would not have to pay as much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one thing I should like hon. members to realize, and it is plain mathematics, is the number 

of actual registrations for 1951. At that time we had 229,000 motor vehicles and we had 274,000 

operators, a total of 503,000. Multiplied by 2, Mr. Speaker, if we put $2 on each licence, there is over a 

million dollars a year, so that even today, if we put $2 on every licence across the board, we would still 

be on the right side of the ledger. So my statement made over a year ago, Mr. Speaker, was just about 

right. I want to stand by it. 

 

However, I pointed out in 1949, when I introduced amendments to this Act, that we were not sure if the 

rates that we were going to levy at that time were the proper rates. This was something that would only 

be determined after many years of experience. We have had now, since 1949, with this complete 

coverage, three full years of experience on which we can base our new rates. And so, after considerable 

study, it was decided not to levy a straight $2 across the board, which would have given us roughly a 

million dollars, but rather to charge rates in proportion to the accident experience which we had had in 

the three previous years. We found, for example, Mr. Speaker, that the motorists who were paying $4.50 

for their cars, and, may I say that this is a considerable number – 25,928, nearly 26,000 people that pay 

$4.50; we found that these people were actually paying all that they should. In other words, it would be 

grossly unfair to charge those people $2 extra when, for $4.50, we were getting sufficient to cover the 

cost of their insurance. Why should they pay for a man who drives a new 1952 or 1953 car? Then, too, 

we found that the 46,000 people who had cars in the 1933-1942 category were paying either $6 or $8 

and that these people did not have as heavy an accident ratio or (should I say) as heavy a cost ratio as the 

new cars. So, obviously, it was unfair to increase their premiums by as much as it would be to increase 

the rates for the newer cars. Therefore, we decided that we would work out the rates so as to be 

absolutely fair to all classes of people. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is why we have the different rate 

increases for the different categories. 

 

I would like to say here that I think we all are guilty – I am equally guilty; probably not equally, but 

certainly guilty of referring to our rates as $10, and now as $20, when actually that relates to only a 

small part of the cars. Many of our motorists have been paying $4.50, not $10 at all. Actually, over 50 

per cent of the motorists of this province are paying either $4.50 or $6 or $8, yet we constantly refer to 

the ―10 insurance‖. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the next thing we had to do after making a complete analysis of the experience, was 

to look over our benefits to see if they were sufficiently generous. Obviously, if in 1946 certain benefits 

were fair, they could not be fair today. This, of course, is 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

26 

something beyond our control. We have not been responsible for the change in the value of the dollar. I 

should like to remind all hon. members that in 1946, when I introduced the last major changes in the 

Bill, the value of the dollar in Canada was 81 cents. Today the value of the dollar is 54 cents. In other 

words, the value of the dollar today is just exactly two-thirds of what it was in 1946. Obviously, then, if, 

under the accident plan $3,000 was sufficient for the widow that was left behind, then that amount 

would not be sufficient today. Obviously, too, if a man is forced to discontinue his employment as a 

result of an accident caused by an automobile, if $20 a week was sufficient in 1946, it is not sufficient 

for him today. And the same, too, with the supplementary benefits. The same is true with repairs. 

 

May I mention, Mr. Speaker, before I leave this part, that today every motorist, even in his collision 

insurance, is getting a great deal more protection than he got in 1946. At that time a new medium-priced 

car sold at around $2,000; today that same car will sell from $2,500 to $2,700. So every motorist is 

getting that much more additional protection today. The same is true of repairs. A few years ago, we 

took a car in to get a little repair job done, let us say, at a cost of $100 in 1946. Today that same repair 

job will cost anything from $125 to $150, so the motorist is getting more protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been much talk throughout the province, particularly in our daily newspapers, 

about the fact that we set our rates too low in 1949. I want to deny that, and deny it most emphatically. 

In 1949 the rates were set correctly. All one has to do is to look at the experience and see. We fixed the 

rates in February and March of 1946 to go into effect the first of April. During that year we lost $85,568. 

Those rates that were set and went into effect the first of April, 1949, would actually have produced a 

surplus in the year 1949, if it had not been for the rising prices during that year. In other words, the rates 

we set at the time were the correct rates and would have shown us a surplus. 

 

I would like to point out, too, that our accident rate has been going up in this province in common with 

all parts of Canada. I am sure that all hon. members read with a great sense of pride, a few weeks ago, in 

the daily paper a report which was taken from the Dominion Bureau of Statistics to the effect that in 

Saskatchewan we had the best accident record in the Dominion of Canada for 1951. Mr. Speaker, the 

Dominion bureau of Statistics did something which is most unusual for them. Very seldom do they 

editorialize. Usually the Dominion Bureau of Statistics given you the cold facts and leaves it to the 

newspaper editors to write the editorials. But in this case they praised an intensive safety campaign in 

Saskatchewan which in 1951 resulted in fewer traffic fatalities than in 1950 – the only province in 

Canada to lower fatalities. And then it goes on to point out that the death rate in Saskatchewan per 

10,000 registrations was 4.32 compared with 4.55 the year before. Our neighbouring provinces – 

Manitoba had 5.96 and Alberta 7.08 – and we, in Saskatchewan had 4.32. Yet, Mr. Speaker, I regret to 

inform members of the Assembly today that that fine record of 1951 was not carried on in 1952. We did 

have more deaths in 1952 than we had in 1951. The number of fatalities jumped up from 73 in 1951 to 

103 in 1952. 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

27 

Mr. Speaker, what is the cause for this tremendous increase in accident rate? Some people blame it on 

the insurance. Well, I think the best answer to that is a cartoon which appeared the other day in the 

Toronto ‗Daily Star‘ which shows the accident automobile insurance rate in Saskatchewan down low 

and our accident rate remaining fairly constant, whereas in other provinces, where the insurance rates 

have been rising each year, the accident rate has been going up even faster. We are going to bring in a 

motion to set up a committee to study this whole question of accidents on our highways, and I do hope 

the committee will be able to bring us in some additional proposals to cut down the number of these 

accidents. I would like to point out that, in the last four years, our vehicles registrations have increased 

by 25 per cent. During the same time gasoline consumption has gone up in this province by 760 per 

cent. So that, even taking all other factors to be the same, there will be an increase in the number of 

accidents with so much more traffic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what are the proposals in this Bill? First of all, we propose to adjust the payment for the 

dependants of persons killed as the result of an automobile accident. All hon. members know that the 

rates have been adjusted: $4.50 will be changed to $5; the $10 on the either end of the scale will go up to 

$20. And for that $20 the motorist of Saskatchewan will receive, first of all, public liability and property 

damage. Originally we set the limits of $5,000 and $10,000, but today, because of the inflated dollar, 

many of the court judgments are for more than $5,000 for one person and $10,000 for one accident. So 

we propose, under the Bill, to change that to $10,000 and $20,000. Then, too, we propose to amend the 

Bill to provide for property damage to go up from $1,000 to $2,000. In other words, both these benefits 

will be doubled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition, the motorist will get collision insurance with $100 deductible. He will get the 

fire insurance; he will get the theft insurance, with the first $100 deductible. He will get collision, fire, 

theft, public liability, property damage and, in addition, he will get the accident coverage which you 

cannot find under any other automobile insurance policy anywhere in the Dominion of Canada. We will 

provide, for instance, that the primary dependant, she or he will receive benefits paid at the death of the 

owner of an automobile or an occupant of an automobile or a pedestrian – anybody killed as a result of 

an automobile accident – the primary dependant will receive $5,000 instead of the $3,000 as before. In 

other words, there is a $5,000 life insurance policy on the life of every breadwinner in the province 

today, the father of a family – a $5,000 insurance policy in case of death while he is in his car, or even if 

he is walking along the street. 

 

We propose to increase the payments to the secondary dependants, that is for the children of the family, 

from $625 each to $1,000. Now, Mr. Speaker, some people may say that this does not amount to 

anything. I would like to point out that, since the Act went into effect in 1946, we have had a total of 

10,838 claims under this and we have paid out total benefits of $1,837,000. I would like to say, too, that 

much of this money has been paid out at a time of greatest need, at a time, for instance, when a father of 

a large family driving home or driving to town should be killed; his widow would receive $3,000 plus 

$625 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

28 

for each child. Under similar circumstances under the amendment which I propose in this Bill today, she 

would receive $5,000 plus $1,000 for each child. In other words, a widow with five children under the 

old Act would receive $3,000 plus $3,125 or $6,125 whereas today she would receive $10,000. 

 

Then, too, Mr. Speaker, it is also proposed to increase the maximum amount of the supplementary 

allowance from $255 to $600. This supplementary allowance will look after doctor bills, extra hospital 

care, and such things as that. We find that in many cases $225 is no longer adequate, and so we propose 

to raise the maximum that can be paid there to $600. We also propose to increase the out-of-work 

benefits from $20 to $25 a week, and to raise the maximum of these benefits from $2,400 to $3,000. 

Then too, Mr. Speaker, we propose to double the dismemberment benefits so that, for example, a person 

losing both hands at the wrist as a result of an automobile accident would be entitled to $4,000 

compared with $2,000 previously. 

 

These are the principal changes that are being made in the Act at this time. Of course, one of the big 

changes is the doubling of public liability from $5,000 and $10,000 to $10,000 and $20,000. We feel 

that changes in economic conditions have made it necessary that we should make these changes in our 

insurance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is going to cost us more money to do this, but I am sure that the people of Saskatchewan 

will be glad to have the opportunity to get this insurance at such a low rate. I was very interested in an 

editorial which just came out in the Toronto ‗Star‘, February 15th. ―Cheap Auto Insurance‖ it is headed. 

What do they say about it? 

 

―Automobile insurance rates in Ontario are to be increased this year from 6 to 9 per cent, and 

motorists will be required to pay $1.00 instead of the usual 50 cents to the Provincial Government‘s 

Unsatisfied Judgments Fund.‖ 

 

You see, they have compulsion down in old Tory Ontario, Mr. Speaker: 

 

―In Saskatchewan, where compulsory auto accident insurance is sold by the C.C.F. Government rates 

have also been increased, but premiums there still are much the lowest in Canada. Because of the vast 

difference in the volume of highway traffic in Ontario and Saskatchewan, rate comparisons between 

the two provinces are not too meaningful, but it does seem significant that Saskatchewan claims to 

offer insurance at rates about 50 per cent lower than the other prairie provinces where driving 

conditions are similar.‖ 

 

Then it goes on to explain the benefits and then it says: 

 

―As these figures suggest, Saskatchewan certainly has cheap auto insurance. Nowhere in Canada, let 

along the prairies, where road and traffic conditions are comparable, can an insurance be purchased at 

rates nearly as low. The reason 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

29 

for these low rates, of course, is the compulsory feature which requires motorists to buy insurance 

when they purchase their auto licences. The cost of acquiring business is a major item in the cost of 

private insurance and runs to about 25 per cent. Saskatchewan, by making insurance compulsory, has 

been able to reduce this to less than 1 per cent.‖ 

 

And it goes on to say: 

 

―No doubt this is why New York State is considering compulsory insurance. It may also explain why 

the British Columbia Government has asked the companies to submit recommendations on how rates 

can be reduced. 

 

―With car insurance costs rising from year to year, some way must be found to reduce premiums.‖ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I need not say anything to hon. members about the rates. They all know what the 

effect of the new rates will be on the first of April. Instead of paying $1 with a licence, the rate will be 

$2. The old model cars will pay $5 instead of $4.50. They will, of course, be getting their benefits 

practically doubled because the old cars do not get the same amount of benefit out of the collision part. 

Their benefits will be chiefly in the accident and public liability part which is going to be doubled for 

them. The 1937-1945 models‘ premiums go up from $8 to $12; 1946-1948 from $10 to $16; while the 

1949-1953 models will go up from $10 to $20. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these will still be the lowest insurance rates on the North American continent. Many 

categories will receive no increase at all. Some of our farm trucks, for example, will not have any 

increase; others will have an increase of only a dollar or two. Whenever we have had a very bad 

experience then the rates will go up more, but the rates will be equitable and may I say that under these 

rates we will not have any one category of motorists subsidized by any other category. Each will pay its 

own share. 

 

We all know that private insurance companies have raised their rates every year for the last five or six 

years. We all know they lost $6 million in the Dominion of Canada, in 1951; and in 1952 they lost even 

more. We know that insurance companies are raising their rates from one end of Canada to the other at 

the present time, and these rates will be announced within the next few weeks. We know, too, that last 

year there was a very drastic increase put into effect, particularly for motorists who had driving their 

cars, young people under the age of 25 – if there was such a person in the family, one or more – the rates 

went up as much as 25 per cent. Mr. Speaker, remember, when a private company raises its rates by 

even as little as ten per cent, that means in most cases a much greater raise in actual dollars than we are 

providing here. Even where we have had to raise the rate 100 per cent it will be less in dollars than a ten 

per cent increase with private companies in most of the 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

30 

provinces of the Dominion. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to remind all hon. members today that the motorists of Saskatchewan will 

pay rates on their private automobiles from $5 to $20, depending upon the year, and they will be getting 

more protection for that $5 to $20 than motorists in other parts of Canada will be getting for a rate three 

to four times that amount. I am confident that the citizens of Saskatchewan will continue to support their 

own co-operative insurance plan. The people of Saskatchewan endorsed this automobile insurance plan 

a few weeks ago overwhelmingly. All one has to do is look across at the other side of the House to see 

that: the other side, where they were as thick as flies almost, now you could almost shoot a cannon ball 

across there and miss everybody, Mr. Speaker. I think one of the chief reasons is because the people 

want their automobile insurance plan. They did not want to see a Liberal Party back in again to put this 

out of existence, so they took no chances on it and returned this Government overwhelmingly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am confident the people will support these increased benefits and will gladly pay the 

additional premium required in order that they will continue to have the world‘s most advanced 

insurance plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Move second reading. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  I move that the Bill be now read the second time. 

 

Mr. J.A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition):  Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to say very much on it at 

this time; but I was very much amused at the Provincial Treasurer who was so anxious to put across his 

propaganda that he overlooked the purpose for which he rose to speak, and did not even move second 

reading of the Bill. The Provincial Treasurer had a very guilt mind about this matter, because he had to 

mention himself about how he had made out that this scheme was not going in the hole very much, not 

going behind, before the election. We were saying that these rates were not going to cover the cost o 

carrying the scheme, and I remember the Provincial Treasurer – he put on just as good an act then as he 

did today – said, ―Oh, there is nothing to this argument of the Opposition; why a couple of dollars, even 

one dollar, is going to cover this. What is the use of talking about how this scheme is not financially 

sound? And these rates are the cheapest in the whole Dominion, and we are going to tell the people 

about it and win the election on it‖ – and, of course, that was done. They went out and talked about the 

low rates which they knew were not covering the cost of the scheme at all, which they knew were 

putting them ‗in the education‘ on the thing; but was anything said before the election? The idea was 

made out that these rates were carrying the scheme, that actually what we had suggested was not correct, 

and that the rates were quite sound. As soon as the election was over, of course, as we expected, the rate 

had to go up. It was just the same in regard to hospitalization. It was the same sort of a story. Talk about 

the low cost when you know you are not covering the cost of the scheme and then, when the election is 

safely over, get up and gloat as the Provincial Treasurer did, ―Yes, we put it across; just look at how few 

we have in the Opposition. Aren‘t we smart fellows, Mr. Speaker?‖ 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

31 

Of course, when I thought the Provincial Treasurer was so happy over that thing, I thought to myself, 

―Well, if he really thinks that the people of Saskatchewan admire that sort of tactics, then I think he is 

misjudging our people.‖ That is what I think, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In regard to the value of a scheme like this, of protecting people who are injured as a result of an 

automobile being operated, I am satisfied that every province in Canada regards that as a proper 

government activity. They have taken different ways of doing it. We have taken the way of the 

Government entering the field of insurance. Others have taken the attitude that everybody has to provide 

insurance against people who might be injured as a result of their operation of their cars, and one would 

judge by the fate of the C.C.F. in British Columbia, in Alberta and in Ontario that they must not be 

impressed with the arguments that the Provincial Treasurer has put before them as he has made his 

propaganda speeches, and as they spent our money in sending the ―Saskatchewan News‖ all over the 

rest of the Dominion with all this propaganda in it; apparently they have not been impressed. 

 

As far as the Opposition is concerned, as is well know we took the attitude that, where this was a matter 

of protecting the public, protecting individuals, against damage done by motor cars, it was a justifiable 

activity of the government and, when the matter was last before us, the objection we took at that time 

was very clearly stated. We objected to forcing people to insure their cars against fire and theft. We said 

there was no more reason why you should force a person to insurance his car against fire and theft than 

there was to force him to insure his house against fire and theft. The house is more important to a man 

than theft, it might be taken as a step in the direction of forcing him to insure everything else that was of 

any value to him. We doubted very much whether it should be made part of the condition of his being 

able to operate a car that he should have to pay insurance to insure his car against fire and theft. We 

thought that that should be a matter to be put in the package policy, if he wanted that insurance, and it 

should not be a matter of compulsion. 

 

That was the objection we made to the Government‘s policy at that time, but, I recall that, in the election 

campaign, because we raised objections to that detail of that part of the Government‘s programme, the 

C.C.F. Party went out and tried to make out that if we were elected we would try to do away with the 

automobile insurance scheme. This was in spite of the fact that I had stated, and it was in our 

programme, that there was no such intention at all, that the people had indicated in Saskatchewan that it 

was now in force and that they were substantially satisfied with it, that it was a democracy and there was 

no idea of every time a government changes trying to turn the clock back and start all over again, and 

that was made as plain as it could possibly be. I did not hesitate to take that attitude and I think it is the 

right attitude to take in regard to any government that has been in office any length of time. They would 

need to be a particularly inefficient and blundering government not once in a while to do something 

good, and I would not say that the government opposite is entirely stupid and blind. 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

32 

In fact, on the other hand, they show a remarkable aptitude for being able to put a good light on what 

they do and covering up the mistakes they make and misrepresenting their position to the people. I 

would say that they have probably shown a cleverness and ability in that regard that is perhaps 

outstanding, and it is natural that they would do something good once in a while. But what I though was 

really under-called for was the attitude, I believe, that was taken by the Premier in his speeches. He 

pointed out that, I think, 20 per cent of our candidates were supposed to be insurance agents and, 

therefore, the people should watch out because these people could be relied upon to somehow sabotage 

this scheme. 

 

There was one speech made by one of our candidates in Regina which was seized on to give some 

colour to that allegation. If the gentlemen opposite take so much delight in being able to put that stuff 

across and arouse doubt about other people that, because they belong to an honourable and honest 

occupation, they cannot be relied upon to put the public interest ahead of any question of their private 

gain, I can assure the Premier that we did not see fit to try any tactics like that. If the Provincial 

Treasurer feels that this was a great thing to have done, well, I am glad to see people happy, and I wish 

him continued happiness as he contemplates the situation to which he has managed to reduce us. I can 

assure him that we are prepared to accept the situation. We did what we thought was right. We are 

prepared to carry on and do our duty by the people of this province, and we also have a pretty clear 

conscience, as I can tell the Provincial Treasurer, that we did not resort to some of these tactics to which 

I have just referred. 

 

In regard to the Bill, I must say that the propaganda put out by the Provincial Treasurer as he increased 

rates and made out he was reducing them, was something that I do not think anybody on the 

Government side could have done a more clever job than he in that regard. I saw the heading that these 

rates were being reduced, and then I read just how they were being reduced and saw that the effect of 

them was that they are really being increased, Mr. Speaker, and as a sheer – I am afraid in this regard to 

use the word to describe it for fear I will be called out of order; but anyway whatever he did was so 

clever in that regard that I thought ―Well, the Provincial Treasurer is getting better at these things as the 

years go by‖. And that is particularly true in regard to the package policy. Actually, the cost of that 

policy in effect is being raised to $25, but the Provincial Treasurer somehow managed to create the 

impression that he was reducing it. I can easily see that he has a right to be proud of how he can arrange 

figures in that way. 

 

In regard to what he said, today, in defending what is being done now, there is a great deal of the 

substance of what he said, leaving aside the frills and the propaganda, with which we are in agreement. 

The provision for increasing the payments that can be made to people who suffer the loss of the 

breadwinner in the family, in regard to the widows and the children, in the light of the fall in the value of 

the dollar, I think is very justified and we are in favour of it. I think the provision of increasing the 

payment to be made to people who think the provision of increasing the payment to be made to people 

who are injured again is justified on the same basis. I sort of wish, Mr. Speaker, that the Provincial 

Treasurer had just got up and said what 



 

February 23, 1953 
 

 

33 

They were going to din this Bill without making such a provocative speech, and then we could have had 

a great deal of pleasure in saying that we did support what the Government had in mind in increasing the 

benefits and, of course, we also know, we told the Government that they were going to have to raise the 

rates. Anybody could see that, and when now they have to raise the rates, we are not surprised. We 

realize these things have to be paid for; we always did say so. The only thing is we hoped that the 

Government would be quite outspoken and admit that they were going to have to raise the rates 

substantially; but they covered it up, as I have said, on the eve of the election. Now they are having to do 

what we said they would do and, of course, we have no alternative, Mr. Speaker, if we want these 

benefits, other than to support the increased rates, and so we will support the second reading of this Bill. 

 

The question being put it was agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6 o‘clock p.m. 


