



















































Hansard: April 09, 1953


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Twelfth Legislature 

38th Day 
 

Thursday, April 9, 1953 
 

The House met at three o'clock p.m. 

 

World Peace Resolution 
 

The Assembly resumed from April 7, 1953, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. 

Berezowsky (Cumberland): 

 

"That this Assembly, recognizing the critical situation that endangers the peace of the world and the 

need for governments to assess and reaffirm their position in regard to International Affairs, 

 

(1) Affirms its full support of the principles of the United Nations which, despite its shortcomings, 

remains an essential agency for building world peace; 

 

(2) re-affirms its belief that mankind's hope for lasting peace can be realized only through a 

comprehensive and spectacular programme of economic and social advance in every part of the world, 

since military preparedness, deemed necessary by U.N. in the present international situation, cannot 

take the place of positive action to end poverty and exploitation; 

 

(3) urges the Federal Government to press for world economic progress and world peace by: 

 

(a) allocating available raw material in accordance with need; 

 

(b) planning the development of world resources to the highest possible degree; 

 

(c) providing technical and capital assistance to underdeveloped areas on a scale many times greater 

than the amount now available for these purposes; 

 

(d) taking international action to achieve maximum production of food and providing for its 

equitable distribution; 

 

(e) establishing International Development Corporations for these various purposes, which would be 

free from control by private capitalism or by any one country; 

 

(f) increasing the scope and resources of the Colombo Plan; 



 

April 9, 1953 

 

2 

 

(g) planning an expansion of world trade based on consideration of world needs; 

 

(h) achieving greater equality, on a high level, of living standards everywhere; 

 

(i) resisting attempts by any nation to use the U.N. for selfish ends; 

 

(j) supporting the inclusion of all nations willing to abide by the U.N. Charter; 

 

(k) insisting that any action against aggression undertaken by the U.N. be completely under the 

control of the U.N.; 

 

(l) working toward the abolition of the veto in the United Nations." 

 

Mr. H. Gibbs (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to congratulate the hon. 

member from Cumberland on his wonderful address and disposition of the matter before us the other 

day. I think he did a most remarkable job. He covered a wide surface and pretty well went into every 

detail we could mention with regard to this motion. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in support of this motion, I think probably it is the first time in Canada that a 

resolution of this description and this nature has been brought before a Legislature and I think once 

again that we have got to be admired for taking such a stand as far as world peace is concerned and as 

far as the Korean war is concerned. I think that public opinion originally brought about the armistice 

talks in Korea and there is no doubt about it that with millions of people in this world of ours looking 

forward and wanting peace, I say once again I think it is a tribute to this Legislature that they have 

brought such a resolution before it. I believe that the experience in the Korean armistice talks has 

already proved that all questions can be settled by negotiation; 62 out of the 63 sections of the draft 

armistice agreement were agreed to by both sides sitting down around the table and negotiating. 

Therefore, the 63rd section dealing with prisoners of war can be agreed to in the same way, and I think 

all members will agree that at the present time we are starting to see a change because we can see now 

that repatriation is taking place of wounded and sick prisoners which is a very, very good sign indeed, 

and I think we are all glad to see that come about. 

 

I think you will agree that there is no need for the killing to go on in Korea while this matter is being 

discussed. Let the shooting be stopped. Let there be a cease-fire now on the basis of the agreed lines. 

Then it will be all the easier to solve the knotty prisoner-of-war problem. And I quite agree with that, 

too, Mr. Speaker, because we have never seen, I do not think, in the history of war before where this has 

been taking place where prisoners were held and they had to make some kind of agreement. In the wars I 

was in they always returned the prisoners of war after cessation and there was no difficulty in getting 

away once war had stopped. 

 

There are many proposals for settling the difference over the prisoners of war. Some favour the Geneva 

convention which was signed by nearly all countries and which laid down clear-cut international laws 

for dealing with 



 

April 9, 1953 

 

3 

 

prisoners. Others favoured the Indian plan and I quite agree — I believe I heard our Premier speak about 

the Indian plan which would be a good start in settling this kind of situation. Still another plan should be 

studied — but after the shooting has stopped. That is the first thing that must be done. I am firmly 

convinced that a strong stand by the Canadian Government for an immediate cease-fire would mean the 

accomplishment of a major step for world peace which would be most heartily welcomed by the people 

of Saskatchewan and of the world. 

 

And by the way, Mr. Speaker, I think Canada is most fortunate in the wars of the past and also in the 

present, because this country has never smelled gunfire. We don't know what it is to have property 

devastated by bombs and shellfire, and we don't know the slaughtering of women and children in this 

country, by warfare. When we look around and see what is taking place in other countries of the world it 

is most diabolical to think that men, women and children are being diabolically slaughtered through war 

— well, they say, it is a war. I wonder! None of us seem to know what it is all about. As our friend from 

Cumberland stated, the other day, when he was speaking, the desertions from the armed forces of both 

the American army and other armies is something to be alarmed about. Evidently they do not know; but 

this killing is still going on and will go on unless the 'powers-that-be' make a firm stand and say 

something has got to be done about it, and stop this raging war that is going on and get down to some 

intelligent sort of thinking. 

 

I think most of you will remember, especially those of you who come from the Old Country, how that 

land over there was devastated during the last world war; how Coventry was levelled to the ground; how 

it was levelled to the ground, and hundreds of thousands of men, women and children saw it. And they 

tell me, Mr. Speaker, that Coventry stunk from death years after. Now, I am glad to say that Coventry is 

being rebuilt like a lot more cities of those devastated countries. We do not want that in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, and each and every one of us in this House today would gladly embrace an armistice and a 

cease-fire taking place in Korea today. 

 

I must admit, and I am proud, that Canada and Canadians have turned out some of the best fighting men 

of the world. That is a great credit to Canada. But we have also lost some of the cream of our youth 

through these wars that go on from time to time, those lads who lie over in Europe, in Flanders and all 

these places — probably a lot of those boys would be alive today to work and live for Democracy. And 

this sort of thing is going on. We know it is going on, and it is about time the powers of the world started 

to do something about doing away with warfare and getting on with industrial production and building 

up a world of peace and plenty and comfort so that each and every one of us shall have that desire to 

work for this democracy we so love. 

 

I would just like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that is takes a lot of money to carry on warfare, and I would 

just like to quote from the 'Monetary Times' of April, this year, and it says: 

 

"The Cost of the Armed Services" 
 

"There is little comfort for the taxpayer in the knowledge that while his cost of living has risen only 50 

per cent since the war, the cost of supporting a member of Canada's armed forces has risen 250 per 

cent in that time. 



 

April 9, 1953 

 

4 

 

"But that is what the House of Commons was told the other day. In fact, Canada's soldiers, sailors and 

airmen cost the taxpayers $20,000 each per annum, the highest rate in the world. British taxpayers 

claim $5,100 per man and the U.S.A. costs are $12,000 per man." 

 

Now why is the cost so high? Canadian troops fare much better now than they did a few years ago, but 

nobody can say that they are better off than their U.S. brothers in arms, whose keep comes at $8,000 less 

per year. The discrepancy would seem to lie in some other direction than pay or luxurious quarters. 

There seems to be a general feeling that the answer might be found in at least nine reports on the Armed 

Services, similar to the Currie report, which have been made to the Government in the past four years. 

None of them have been made public, and it is only human to believe that the Government must have 

something to hide or the reports would have been published. Well, that is a matter of thought, Mr. 

Speaker. But I think myself, and I am firmly convinced, that this resolution from the Saskatchewan 

Legislature will have a profound effect on Canadian public opinion and will also hasten and strengthen 

the Federal Government's action as regards the Korean situation. 

 

And in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would say there is only one way to end it. We must stop the shooting 

in order to end the war, and a cease-fire would be in order that each and every one of us shall live in 

happiness and comfort in the years to come. I shall support the motion. 

 

Mr. Arnold Feusi (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend the member for Cumberland and 

the member for Swift Current on the stand taken on this question. 

 

At the present time there is a great optimism in the world that some of the affairs that are in a turmoil 

could be settled with a little courage. I believe in rough there must be billions of dollars spent by the 

different warring nations. A conservative figure would be some $50 billion spent yearly. To what 

purpose, Mr. Speaker, to what purpose? Should we be able to bring matters to a head to end the strife, 

then we should have a gradual breakdown of the present war-spending to a spending for dynamic peace, 

and I would like to list a few of the things that we should be spending money on: 

 

(1) Purchase of food instead of armaments to donate or trade with needy nations; 

 

(2) reclamation projects — dams, drainage, etc., so as to raise the food potential of the world; 

 

(3) technical assistance to backward nations; 

 

(4) interchange of scholars on an increased scale; 

 

(5) world-wide war on disease and ignorance with a real start made here in Canada through a national 

health scheme. 

 

Now is a very ripe time for such courageous action. Canada and Mr. Pearson enjoy a prominent and 

respected role in the United Nations. We stood a very close chance of a large share in the deliberations 

of that 



 

April 9, 1953 

 

5 

 

responsible body. I believe a Scandinavian, a Swede, has obtained the role to guide the United Nations 

for the coming year. Sweden deserves this high honour, Mr. Speaker, for the simple reason of her 

sincerity in the strifes of the past, and we can go quite a long way back. Sweden has always been in the 

forefront in bringing medical aid and succour to the nations that were in need. Probably we would have 

been recognized as Sweden was had we had such a reputation, Mr. Speaker. We hope that, with the lead 

that the Scandinavian countries have given us and the man who will chair the United Nations, Canada 

can take a very firm stand on peace matters. 

 

I would like to close here that man's inhumanity to man will have to give way to Christian ideals and 

practice. Canada because of its freedom and vision should be leading the nations of the world to better 

relations and, because of this I am happy to endorse the resolution for peace. 

 

(The question being put, it was agreed to unanimously.) 

 

The Assembly then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on several Bills. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10.00 o'clock p.m. 


