



















































Hansard: March 02, 1953


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Twelfth Legislature 

13th Day 

 

Monday, March 2, 1953 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

RE OIL DISCOVERY 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural Resources):  Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I 

announce there has been another successful oil strike in our province. It is SohioWapella No. 9-34, 

located on section 34, township 14, range 1, W 2nd, five miles southwest of Wapella. They have oil at 

three different zones: there is eight feet of pay zone in the Wapella sand, eight feet in the top of the 

jurasic, and 12 to 14 feet in the bottom of the jurasic. They have had good recoveries from each section 

on drill stem tests. They are now casing and coring, and will presently be moving the rig to another legal 

sub-division on the same section. 

 

This makes a total of nine wells that have been drilled in the Wapella field, eight of them are producers 

and one was a dry hole. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. LOPTSON RE VOTE 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats):  When the vote was taken on Friday I notice, according to the records, 

that several members are absent. Among them was myself and I want to make it clear to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that had I been here I would have voted for the amendment. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 44 – An Act respecting the Department of Mineral Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: Mr. Speaker, in moving second reading of Bill No. 44, which is an Act 

respecting the Department of Mineral Resources, I think it would be fitting if I gave some reasons why 

the present Department of Natural Resources should be divided and a new Department of Mineral 

Resources set up. I hope, in the few remarks that I have to make, that I will be able to show to the House 

very good reasons for the setting up of a new Department. 

 

The business of the Department of Natural Resources has grown, I believe, quite beyond the optimum 

size in not only the number and variety of activities which it undertakes, but also in the volume of 

business which it handles, to get the most economical and efficient administration 



 

March 2, 1953 
 

 

2 

That does not mean that it would not be possible to continue the administration of the Department as it 

is, but I think that, at this stage, we cold, by this division, get more economical and efficient 

administration by making the division. 

 

Fortunately, there is a very logical line of division in the Department. On the one hand we have now the 

Mineral Resources Branch. The Mineral Resources Branch, at the present time, deals with petroleum, all 

the permits and leases, the drilling licences, the supervision of the drilling, and the collecting of 

information. The Mineral Resources Branch also deals with industrial minerals, such as the mineral 

salts, clay of different kinds, coal, and we have also, of course, sand and gravel. In addition that Branch 

handles the quartz or hard rock minerals in the far north of the province. 

 

Then we have, also, the Resources Utilization Branch. This Branch is composed of some technical 

employees, scientists who make a study of certain of our resources, with a view to getting information as 

to the possibilities of their use. Their work is directed principally to those minerals classed as industrial 

miners – the clays, salts and coal. These two Branches are closely related and will form the new 

Department. 

 

On the other hand, we have the Forestry Branch (which has several divisions), the Fishery Branch, the 

Game and Fur Branch. Now these three Branches, Mr. Speaker, are what might be called „programme‟ 

branches. Their work is to gather information in regard to these resources of forest, fisheries and game 

and fur, and to work out programmes for the best management of these resources. The actual programme 

is put into effect by the field administration, and in the field administration we have five Natural 

Resources districts – the three across the centre of the province, at Hudson Bay, Prince Albert and 

Meadow Lake, the northern district, and, more recently, a southern district. So the field administration is 

practically all carried out by the district organizations, leaving the important work of basic study and 

designing of programme to the programme branches. 

 

The northern district also has the additional responsibility of giving the local government services in that 

area of the province. It takes similar responsibility to the responsibilities of the Local Improvement 

District Branch in regard to local improvement districts in the settled portion of the province. There has 

been a great deal of construction work. We have a Construction Branch that does work from buildings to 

road construction. We have a Surveys Branch, which surveys town sites where required, and does 

survey work for certain other departments of the Government. We have a Radio Branch, which supplies 

radio communication necessary between our offices for the purposes of administration and fire control, 

between our offices for the purposes of administration and fire control, and also supplies a system of 

communication over all the northern part of the province. There is also a Conservation Education 

Branch, which carries on the very important work of helping to make the public aware of the importance 

of proper conservation and management of these resources. 

 

Then we also have the Provincial Museum and the Parks Branch, so you can see, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Department, as it stands at the present time, has a great number and variety of activities. It 



 

March 2, 1953 
 

 

3 

goes all the way from fish to oil and from uranium and gold to forest and game. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the Deputy Minister and the Assistant Deputy 

Minister and to the Branch heads of the Department, as well as all of the staff. I think that, under 

circumstances which have been difficult, they have given their best service. They have been very loyal 

to their work; their efficiency and industriousness has certainly been good. I have tried to impress upon 

all of them the importance of the trust which is imposed in them: that is the protection, the care and 

management of the public domain in our resources. I think I have been successful, with the help of 

others, in impressing upon the staff the importance of the work that they are doing, and to what an extent 

they are serving the people of the province. 

 

It might be well also, to give to the House some other comparisons to show the growth of the 

Department of Natural Resources in recent years. One good measure, of course, is the budget. First, let 

us take the revenue from the Department of Natural Resources. In the fiscal year ending in 1941, the 

revenue was $907,000; four years later, in the fiscal year ending 1945, the revenue was $1,724,000 – 

almost twice as much as four years previously. Then we go on another four years to the fiscal year 

ending in 1949, and we find the revenue was $2,875,000, and coming to the current year of 1952-53, 

which will come to an end at the end of this month, we estimate that the revenue for this current year 

will be something in excess of $5 million. 

 

On the expenditure side of the picture, Mr. Speaker: in the fiscal year ending in 1941, the expenditure 

was $581,000; in 1945, $603,000; in the fiscal year ending in 1949 the expenditure was $1,965,000, and 

this year, our expenditure will be approximately $2,600,000. 

 

I would also like to make some staff comparisons. In 1941, the total permanent and temporary staff was 

189; in 1945, it was 184; in 1949 the staff was 252, and at the present time it is 349. 

 

Now these three comparisons that I have given to you when they are put together, themselves make an 

interesting comparison, because we find that the revenue has, since 1941, multiplied five times. We find 

that the expenditure has multiplied a little less than five times, and that the staff is less than double what 

it was in 1941, when we were getting less than one-fifth of the revenue and spending just over one-fifth 

of the expenditure. 

 

In administering resources, consisting of forests, fish and fur and game, it is necessary to have a large 

field staff, and on March 1 – well I can say today, Mr. Speaker, as this is March 2 – we have 83 field 

staff, consisting of field officers, game wardens and conservation officers. The districts administered by 

these field officers are, in many cases, very large indeed, even in the most concentrated area, across the 

central portion of the province. In the forest area, a field officer does have a very considerable district in 

which to administer the various matters that come under his responsibility, and I am sure that we have 

not got too many of them, and many times I believe that if we are gong to do the very best job in 

administration of our resources, we may probably need to have a few more field officers than we have at 

the present time. 



 

March 2, 1953 
 

 

4 

The Department of Natural Resources employs a large number of technical and scientific staff as well. 

They are a great variety of people: geologists, petroleum engineers, mining engineers some civil 

engineers and land surveyors; we have chemical engineers, biologists, forest engineers and assistant 

foresters – in total, 98 in the staff that are classed as technical and scientific, as at this date. 

 

I would like to make a comparison in regard to the Mineral Resources Branch itself, because probably in 

no other part of the Department has the growth and expansion been more outstanding. On March 1, 

1941, the Mineral Resources Branch had a staff of 6; in 1945, on the same date, the staff was 5; in 1949 

it had grown to 22 and, at the present time, we have a staff of 64. That growth has been rapid, 

particularly from 1946 or 1947 until the present time, and periods of rapid growth do bring their 

problems with them. We are interested in knowing what was the cause of that growth, what made it 

necessary for the staff to be increased. Now, I will try to give you some comparative figures in regard to 

the development that has been taking place in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

First, in connection with petroleum: Saskatchewan has always been quite a bit behind Alberta in the 

matter of exploration and development of petroleum resources. For example, in the years from 1934 to 

1943, inclusive – that is ten years – in Alberta 574 wells were drilled in those ten years, whereas in 

Saskatchewan, only 129 wells were drilled, and only five of those 129 wells were over 3,000 ft. deep, 

and only 32 of the 129 wells were over 1,000 ft. deep so I think we cannot but admit that we have been 

quite a bit behind Alberta in the exploration and development of oil. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think that we are catching up. In Saskatchewan, in the eight years from 1945 to 1952 

inclusive, there were 1,094 wells drilled in this province. In Alberta, not taking the same years, but 

taking eight years out of a similar period of their development – that is, from 1940 to 1947 inclusive, 

which takes in the discovery year of Leduc, as Leduc was discovered early in the year 1947; in those 

eight years in Alberta, 992 wells were drilled. In the eight years I gave you for Saskatchewan, ending 

with December, 1952, there were 102 more wells drilled here than in the eight years up to and including 

the year of the discovery of Leduc in Alberta. So I think it is reasonable to point out that we are very 

definitely catching up with Alberta, and there are a goodly number of people who express the opinion 

that it is only a matter of a few years until Saskatchewan will outdistance Alberta; that I do not know. 

 

The number of wells drilled for petroleum in Saskatchewan produces some interesting comparisons, 

also. In 1943, there were 25 wells drilled in the province; in 1947, four yeas later, there were 107 wells 

drilled; then in 1950, there were 124 wells drilled in Saskatchewan, and that is the first year for which I 

have the record of any core-hole drilling programme, or test holes; there were 26 test holes or core holes 

drilled that year. Then, in 1951, we had 148 wells drilled in the province and 253 core holes drilled that 

year. In 1952 – I think I heard someone saying we had 100 wells – actually we had, in 1952, 496 wells 

drilled, and 774 core holes drilled. I have not got any estimate of the number of shot holes for the 

seismic survey, but this number that I have 



 

March 2, 1953 
 

 

5 

given you, almost 500 wells and 774 core holes drilled in 1952, does indicate a very substantial 

progress. For 1953, the industry estimates, or parts of the industry estimate, that there will be from 1,000 

to 1,200 wells drilled in Saskatchewan. 

 

Drilling wells, of course, is only part of the oil exploration business. In 1952, there were 37 geophysical 

licences issued. Those licences covered 55 parties. Two of those parties worked in the pre-Cambrian 

shield, the balance in the sedimentary area, and, needless to state, that is the largest number of 

geophysical parties that Saskatchewan has ever had working in this province. 

 

Perhaps the House would be interested in a breakdown of the 1952 wells. There were 496 of them: 243 

of them were dry, 253 were producers, a ratio of better than one producer to one dry hole. Now, to break 

these wells down into the two classes of wildcat wells and development wells, will give us a further 

picture. For example, wildcat wells – there were 214 of which 189 were dry and 25 were producers; that 

is a ratio of one producer for approximately 7 ½ dry holes in the wildcat-drilling programme. I would 

like to point out that a ratio in wildcatting for oil, of one producer to 7 ½ dry is a very, very good ratio, 

and indicates that Saskatchewan is definitely recognized by all as one of the favourable places to 

prospect for oil. 

 

Now the development wells: there were 282 wells drilled to develop fields which had already been 

discovered; only 54 were dry, and 228 of these development wells were producers, or a ratio of a little 

better than 4 producers for one dry hole in the development programme. 

 

I said, a minute ago, that Saskatchewan has been behind Alberta in the programme of exploration 

development and production of oil, and here is another instance. Let us take the oil produced in 

Lloydminster field. In the four years, from 1940 to 1943, Saskatchewan only produced in that field (as a 

matter of fact, it was the total production in the province) 331 barrels. In the same four years, Alberta 

produced 15,741 barrels, which also is quite a small amount. But we are catching up, because in the six 

years from 1945 to 1950 inclusive, Saskatchewan produced in the Lloydminster field, 3,300,000 barrels, 

while the production in Alberta was 2,700,000 barrels in the Lloydminster field. 

 

Some figures from the oil production in Saskatchewan, to show the progress made: in 1943, the first 

recorded production, 331 barrels of oil; in 1948, 850,000 barrels produced; in 1952, approximately 

1,700,000 barrels produced, and in December of last year, production was at the rate of over 2,000,000 

barrels per year. I think it is being quite safe to estimate that in 1953, our production will not be less than 

2 ½ million and probably could be over 3 million barrels of oil. 

 

The December production of natural gas was at the rate of over 1-1 1/3 billion cu. ft. per year. The 

December production includes some new production for these towns of Brock and Kindersley, which 

shows that is going up, too. 

 

In the question of proven reserves – and this is very important, probably more indicative than the 

production itself, because 



 

March 2, 1953 
 

 

6 

when reserves are discovered there must, of necessity, be some lag in getting market facilities, pipelines, 

refineries, etc., before production can take place; so proven reserves are interesting. Ten years ago we 

had almost no proven reserves at all; today we have 250 million barrels or more of oil in proven reserves 

– I think we are safe in saying „more‟. The interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, is that that is ten times as 

much as the proven reserves of oil we had one year ago. In natural gas, we have proven now something 

over 225 billion cu. ft.; it may be very well over that. 

 

The wells actually producing oil, produce also some interesting comparative figures, showing the 

growth of this new industry in our province. In March, 1947, 22 wells were producing; March, 1950, 

111 wells were producing; and in December, 1952, 308 wells were producing, and we now have, at the 

present time, 516 wells capable of producing oil, and 35 wells capable of producing gas. Now those 

figures are approximate, Mr. Speaker, because I do not know whether they counted that one that I 

announced today, and there could be another one, today or tomorrow, too. This is, definitely, a changing 

figure. 

 

In the year 1952, we had 19 oil discoveries and 7 gas discoveries. One illustration of the speed with 

which this has taken place is the Wapella field. It is only a couple of months (I do not remember the 

exact date) since that field was discovered and with this well that I announced today that makes 8 

producers in the Wapella field and one dry hole. 

 

Now, I do not want to give all of my time to the oil question because there are other important activities 

of the Department, so let us, for a few minutes, turn to the development which is taking place in the pre-

Cambrian Shield. Our pre-Cambrian Shield, as most people know, is the very large area of 90,000 

square miles. It is the same kind of pre-Cambrian rock which is found in Manitoba, northern Ontario and 

in Quebec. It is the largest area of the pre-Cambrian that has had up to the present time the least 

exploration. I would say at least 75 per cent of that pre-Cambrian area is virgin territory. But that does 

not mean that we have not made some progress. In 1949, there were 1,051 claims staked. In 1952, three 

years later, that number became 4,151, and this year, in the first two months, there have been almost 

2,000 claims staked. In 1949, only 27 mining companies were licensed and active in Saskatchewan. In 

1952, there were 53 companies, licensed and active and, this year at the present time, 73. It will 

probably be 78 or 80 by tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, because they are really interested at the present time as 

shown by the following: the development of the new mine at Birch Lake near Flin Flon; the discovery 

last Fall on Crackingstone Point, about 15 or 20 miles from Beaverlodge, a completely new area, and the 

later discoveries near foster Lake in the middle of the province, in addition to the regular activity, quite 

strong activity, which has been going on around the older places like Lac la Ronge and Beaver Lake. 

 

Going now to some general activities carried on by the Department, I want to point out some that are 

either completely new in the last few years, or have been greatly expanded during recent years. First of 

all among these new activities I would mention the Prospectors‟ Assistance Plan. That plan has certainly 

met with general approval and 



 

March 2, 1953 
 

 

7 

has been of definite help in getting more prospectors into the north. 

 

Another new activity which was undertaken a few years ago is geological surveys. We have had from 

two to four parties each summer doing geological survey, geological mapping, and issuing reports. This 

year we hope not only to carry on the geological survey party, but also to have some aerial survey work 

done too. We started a new small programme of having prospectors‟ schools, which have definitely 

added to the interest of people in the province in regard to prospecting, and this year we propose to carry 

on and extend that work, provided our Budget Debate goes over and we get approval – I will probably 

tell you more about it later. We have had – and this, too, is new – resident geologists at certain points in 

the province, particularly at Flin Flon and at Goldfields or Uranium City. 

 

Then, of the other parts of the Department I would like specifically to mention the Radio Branch. Some 

radio work was carried on for quite a time in the Department, but it is only a few years ago since the 

Radio Branch as such was organized and given the job of supplying the communication services for the 

Department, for the field officers, for the „planes and also to rent out sets to various mining and fishing 

companies in the north. Communication is one of the necessary things in the north. Over 300 sets are 

now available. There are a number of key sets, large sets, at Meadow Lake, province of Saskatchewan, 

Hudson Bay, Lac la Ronge, and Stony Rapids. 

 

In construction, we have done a job on two mining roads now, one at Black Lake and one from Black 

Bay on Lake Athabasca to Eldorado Mining and Refining Company site. I might mention, also, that our 

Constituency Branch did a good deal of work for the Eldorado Mining and Refining Company last 

summer, and for private individuals in that area, mining companies and others, who wanted work done. 

There was nobody else there to do it, and we were able to help with the development by doing this work 

for the companies and the individuals. 

 

The Construction Branch has built large mileages of forest roads and fireguards. The most recent forest 

road is the one built from Candle lake up the east side to the White Swan Lakes, not yet completed, but a 

road touching anew area with timber in it and other resources as well. And fireguards – I might point out 

that, during the past year, and I hope during the coming year, we are proceeding with the reclamation of 

the Bronson Provincial Forest which had been very badly burned over in past yeas. The land is not good 

for agriculture; it is a natural area for growing trees, but trees won‟t grow unless the fire protection is 

supplied. 

 

A branch new branch, organized a couple of years ago, is the Forest Fire Control Branch, and this is 

comparable to a fire department in a city or a town. It is true that, in a city, everybody is interested in 

preventing and subduing fires. The same is true in the Department and we have organized a Fire Control 

Branch whose responsibility it is to see that the equipment is in order, to keep a check on the hazards 

and to take necessary steps to prevent fires or to subdue them when they break out. The smokejumpers 

are, of course, attached to the Forest Fire Control Branch. We have now about twice as many 

observation towers to man; a great deal more 



 

March 2, 1953 
 

 

8 

of aerial patrol in fire protection work. 

 

A new Forest Inventory Division was set up a few years ago, and is now well advanced with the 

inventory of our forest in the accessible area. The Forestry Management Division of the Forestry Branch 

was also set up, and they are working out plans for the forest industry so as to avoid the old method of 

cutting out a district and having to get out, but to organize as near as possible a perpetual operation on 

forest products. 

 

We have, as I mentioned before, a Conservation Education Division. You could have all the best reasons 

in the world for protecting your forests from fires, you can have all the best equipment, and the best staff 

to do the job, but unless you get the public to realize the importance of protecting our forests from fires 

you cannot do too much about it. It is the job of this Conservation Education Branch to spearhead the 

programme of public information on conservation, protection and utilization of our resources. 

 

Two new districts in recent years have been set up – northern districts and southern districts – which I 

commented on a few minutes ago. 

 

Other new activities: the biological surveys, in fish. Several lakes have had biological surveys carried 

out in them. We also have biologists attached to our Game Branch to carry on biological surveys with 

regard to various kinds of game and fur. The programmes of game, fur and fish management are 

certainly important to us. Predator control is one that might be mentioned: first, in co-operation with the 

Saskatchewan Fish and Game League, control of magpies and crows, secondly, in co-operation with the 

municipalities, the very effective programme which has been carried out to control coyotes, and now, 

moving into the north, the predator control programme to see if we cannot have some influence on the 

timber wolf in the north. 

 

I would like to emphasize to this House, Mr. Speaker, the importance of the ownership and the rights 

and privileges of the people of Saskatchewan in this public domain in natural resources. It is our heritage 

and our wealth. It must be protected and developed by getting the basic information. That means all the 

way from forest inventory to Biological surveys, geological surveys, and a great deal more. Managing 

the various resources after we get the basic information is necessary, so that we can get the maximum 

utilization and benefit from our resources, and on the best terms possible. 

 

The problem of enforcement of laws and regulations in regard to our resources is an important one, too, 

that cannot be neglected. It takes quite a bit of attention. By protection and conservation, Mr. Speaker, of 

our resources we can leave to our grandchildren and they to their grandchildren this rich heritage in 

resources which we enjoy today. So I think it is very fitting that we should be, today, giving second 

reading to a Bill to provide for the greater care, management and utilization of our resources and I move 

second reading of the Bill. 

 

The Debate was, on motion of Mineral Resources. McCormack, adjourned. 



 

March 2, 1953 
 

 

9 

Bill No. 43 – An Act respecting the Department of Natural Resources 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  Bill No. 43, which is an Act respecting the Department of Natural 

Resources, is a companion Bill to the one I just spoke on, because, when we are setting up a new 

Department of Mineral Resources, it is then necessary to go through The Department of Natural 

Resources Act and to delete from it all references to minerals, to the subjects that are going to be under 

the new Department. There will be remaining in this Department of Natural Resources (I may just 

review it briefly) the following Branches: forestry, fisheries, game and fur, and the administration of the 

five districts – southern district with headquarters in Regina, Hudson Bay District, Prince Albert 

District, Meadow Lake District, and the northern district which has its headquarters in Prince Albert as 

well. And in that Department there will also be the Construction Branch, Surveys Branch, Radio Branch, 

Conservation Education and the Provincial Museum. Those are being left in the old Department. 

 

There are certain other minor amendments in the Bill which I think can very well be discussed in 

Committee of the Whole. I would therefore move that the Bill respecting the Department of Natural 

Resources be now read a second time. 

 

(Motion agreed to.) 

 

Bill No. 45 – An Act to amend The Mineral Resources Act 

  

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  The Bill to amend The Mineral Resources Act contains only a couple of 

minor amendments and I do not think we would need to discuss them at all at this stage. We can very 

well discuss them in Committee and I would move second reading of the Bill. 

 

(Motion agreed to.) 

 

Bill No. 46 – An Act to amend The Fisheries Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  Mr. Speaker, this is an Act to amend The Fisheries Act. The principal 

amendment in the Bill is to provide a means whereby better control of bootlegging of fish from one 

province to another can be arrived at. We have had meetings with the fishery officials of other 

provinces, with the Dominion fishery officials, and this has been one of the difficult problems because it 

is very important to see that a community such as fish, which is a very perishable commodity, is 

marketed under close supervision and control so as to ensure to the consumer not only a product that is 

fit for human consumption but that is a good product. The principal amendment here is to enable us to 

have better control on shipments that are coming into the province from Manitoba, and I would move 

the second reading of the Bill. 

 

(Motion agreed to.) 



 

March 2, 1953 
 

 

10 

Bill No. 47 – an Act to repeal an Act respecting the Village of Goldfields 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  This bill, which is an Act to repeal An Act, respecting the Village of 

Goldfields, is at least for the time being writing „finis‟ to a story of northern Saskatchewan. In the 

„thirties, the discovery of gold ore in the Goldfields area was made. After considerable exploration the 

Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company decided that they had a mine. They put some millions of 

dollars into the mine and smelter at Goldfields. They put a lot of money into the development of the 

power plant, located about 7 or 8 miles away. They went into operation. Probably because of two things, 

one that the ore was certainly not any better than they expected, maybe not quite so good, and that costs 

of operation at the beginning of the war began to go up (they went into operation about 1939) it became 

uneconomic to mine that gold. But in the period during which the mine was built, and in the period 

during which it was operating, quite a large number of people of necessity moved into the area and the 

settlement organized as a village, the village of Goldfields. It carried on for a short time. 

 

When the mine closed down people left the village, in a great many cases taking nothing with them 

except their clothing and probably some of their linen and dishes; houses were left with furniture, the 

theatre was left with all its furniture in it. The first time I made a trip to Goldfields (it is now a few years 

ago), the poolroom still had a pool table in it. It was really a „deserted village‟. There was no Council 

and so, back in the early „40‟s, an administrator for the village was appointed and his job was to pay up 

the bills by collecting some of the back taxes. Needless to state most of the people cased to pay taxes on 

their property in Goldfields. Then came the discovery of the uranium ore in the Goldfields area. A great 

deal of work was done on the Nicholson mine which is just a mile or so away from Goldfields. 

Unfortunately that has not turned out and they have cased working there for the time being. when the 

discoveries by Eldorado on Beaver lodge Lake came along, but this was too far from the Village of 

Goldfields. With the discoveries there was a temporary comeback for the village. 

 

We passed, a couple of years ago, an Act to provide for the dissolution of the Village of Goldfields, it 

going back as a part of northern administration district. It was provided in that Bill that the money we 

collected in this winding-up from arrears of taxes, and they were settled on a compromise basis, or 

arrears of payments on the lots, was to be spent in improvements in the Village of Goldfields. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, with the establishment of Uranium City, which is only a few miles away, located on this 

mining road between Black Bay and Beaverlodge Lake where Eldorado is located, Goldfields has 

become again completely deserted. 

 

There is a small amount of money to the credit of that fund which was set up by the previous Act, and 

this Act does two things: it repeals the former Act, wipes out all trace of the Village of Goldfields from 

our statutes, and gives authority to spend that small amount of money in the northern District for 

improvements. I would move second reading of this Bill with some degree of regret to see a mining 

town come to its end. 

 

(Motion agreed to.) 



 

March 2, 1953 
 

 

11 

Bill No. 48 – An Act to amend The Prairie and Forest Fires Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  This is an Act to amend The Prairie and Forest Fires Act. These 

amendments are necessary to bring the Act up to modern times. Needless to state it was first drafted in 

the days when horses were much more important than tractors and aeroplanes were not much heard of. 

This provides for authority to commandeer and use this modern machinery in checking fires, along with 

another minor amendment or two. I would move that this Bill be now read a second time. 

 

(Motion agreed to.) 

 

Bill No. 40 – An Act to amend The Department of Education Act, 1945 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Minister of Education):  Mr. Speaker, in moving Second Reading of this Bill 

which is an Act to amend The Department of Education Act, I think I might well take a minute of the 

House‟s time to refer to a pamphlet which was left on the desks of all the members, earlier this 

afternoon. It is the pamphlet announcing „Education Week‟ which is being observed throughout Canada 

during this week – that is from March 1 to March 7. The activities of Education Week are widely 

sponsored, and I hope members of the Assembly have the opportunity to peruse not only the pamphlet 

but the other material that will be appearing in the press from time to time during the week, some of the 

addresses on the radio and perhaps some of the activities in various communities throughout the 

province. 

 

One of the important aspects of an educational system which the activities of the week will draw to the 

attention of the people generally is, of course, that activity which provides for the training of teachers. 

The training of teachers in the province of Saskatchewan for many yeas has been carried on in part in 

our Provincial Normal Schools as we call them, and in part in the College of Education which is a part 

of the University of Saskatchewan at Saskatoon. 

 

The amendment which stands before us in Bill No. 40 and also the amendments provided in Bill Nos. 41 

and 42, is to change the name of the teacher-training institutions to another name which is considered a 

more apt and appropriate description for those institutions. As I mentioned earlier, we have called them 

Normal Schools. The origin of the name Normal School is one which goes back, if I remember my 

history of education properly, to some time and some place in the development of education in France. 

Actually it is not a name which has any particular significance as the name of an institution which trains 

teachers. We are proposing, in these Bills, to which I have made reference, to change the name of our 

provincial training institutions from Normal Schools to Saskatchewan Teachers‟ College or Colleges. 

That is, we will have a Saskatchewan Teachers‟ College at Moose Jaw, operated by the Department of 

Education; we will have a Saskatchewan Teachers‟ College in Saskatoon, operated by the Department of 

Education as well. 

 

I should give just a few reasons as to why we think this change is desirable. The suggestion came, I 

believe originally, from 



 

March 2, 1953 
 

 

12 

members of my own staff, the superintendents of schools and the members of the staff at Normal 

Schools. It was then discussed at several of the meetings of the advisory committee to the Normal 

Schools. This advisory committee is made up of representatives of teachers, of trustees and of the 

College of Education. After these discussions, all were agreed that the institutions cold be more properly 

called “Teachers‟ Colleges” than the old name of Normal Schools. 

 

Each of the institutions does have a staff of a reasonable size, a staff of very well-trained, effective 

educationalists. I may say, too, that the work of the Normal Schools or Teachers‟ Colleges (as they will 

be known in the future) is recognized by the University as the equivalent of first year in the college of 

Education. In other words, the students who attend the normal school course go, not into the first-year 

work at the College of Education, but into the second-year work at that College, and, therefore, it is 

evident that they are doing work which is accepted as being of that college level. 

 

The name is more descriptive and more fitting, and we think it will give to these very important 

institutions some additional and some well-deserved prestige. We think the fact of gong to a college has 

some small additional attraction or appeal to students, rather than going to an institution which is called 

just another school. 

 

I could add that it is, of course, in keeping with something of a trend. I believe that the Province of 

Ontario, for example, is moving in a similar direction this year, or has moved in that direction, with 

regard to its normal schools also. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I move Second Reading to Bill No. 40, An Act to amend The Department of 

Education Act, 1945. 

 

(Motion agreed to.) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:00 p.m. 


