



















































Hansard: February 13, 1953


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Twelfth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, February 13, 1953 

 

The House met at three o’clock p.m. 

 

MOTIONS OF CONDOLENCE 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier):  It has always been the custom the first day after the official opening 

of each Session of the Assembly to pause before we being the business before us to pay tribute to former 

members of the Legislature who have passed away since the Legislative Assembly last met. 

 

I am sorry that the list is growing longer each year, as many of the old-timers depart from our midst, and 

today I am asking the Assembly to join in paying tribute to six former members: Mr. Charles McGill 

Hamilton, Mr. Olin Drake Hill, Q.C., Mr. Duncan Morris Robertson, Mr. John Edward Gryde, Mr. 

James Bidwell Smith and Dr. George L. Crane. 

 

With the permission of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I should like to lace on the record just a brief 

biography of each in order that the House may have in mind the accomplishments of these various ex-

members and the part which they played in helping to build our province in order that we might better 

pay tribute to their memory. 

 

MR. CHARLES McGILL HAMILTON was born at Whitechurch, Bruce County, Ontario, in 1878 

and was thus 74 years of age when he died in a Winnipeg hospital on May 3, 1953. He was educated in 

the public schools of Ontario and Saskatchewan, at the Regina Normal School and Manitoba College. 

He went to Indian Head in 1892 and taught for some time in rural schools. From teaching he turned to 

farming and set the course to which his life was to be dedicated. homesteading in the Weyburn district 

from 1901, he rose quickly to prominence in municipal affairs, serving as Reeve of R.M. No. 97 for ten 

years and as president of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities for seven years. He was 

equally interested in farm problems and activities. Mr. Hamilton was president of the McTaggart Grain 

Growers’ Association for ten years and was a director of the Saskatchewan Municipal Hail Association. 

He was appointed a director of the Canadian National Railways in 1918, but resigned, a year later, 

having been elected in a by-election in 1919 to represent the Weyburn constituency in this Assembly. 

He continued to represent Weyburn until 1939 in which year he was appointed a member of the 

reorganized Board of Grain Commissioners, on which he served until his retirement in 1948. As a 

member of the Board he was instrumental in introducing Thatcher wheat to Europe. 

 

While a member of this Assembly, Mr. Hamilton was Minister of Agriculture from 1920 to 1929, under 

Premiers Martin, Dunning and Gardiner. He served also as Minister of Highway and as Minister of 

Municipal Affairs and, from 1929 to 1929, as Minister in charge of The Child Welfare Act. 



 

February 13, 1953 

 

 

2 

He thus served this province in many capacities in one of the creative periods in the development of 

Saskatchewan, and contributed greatly to the enlargement of the activities of each of the departments 

with which, in the course of his legislative and executive career, he was entrusted. He is survived by a 

daughter, three sons and one brother. 

 

I would just like to say a word before leaving Mr. Hamilton’s biography. He represented a constituency 

which I now have the honour to represent. I knew Mr. Hamilton quite well in the early days when I first 

came to that area, and have met him frequently on the visits which he made back to the Weyburn 

constituency. I know how highly regarded he was by the people in the Weyburn constituency, and I am 

sure that his death will be a sad loss to the many old-timers who had come to regard him as a good 

neighbour and a fine friend. 

 

Later in the year, on September 8
th

, another former member for Weyburn, DR. GEORGE L. CRANE, 

died in a Regina hospital at the age of 61 years. 

 

Dr. Crane was born in Wisconsin in 1891, coming to Canada in 1903, and to the Weyburn district the 

following year. He farmed, and later taught school, until 1914, in which year he enlisted with the 

P.P.C.L.I. in Regina for service in the first World War. Wounded in 1917, he was returned to Canada 

and studied medicine at Manitoba University, from which he was graduated with the degree of M.D. in 

1923. Starting practice at Plenty, Saskatchewan, he later moved to Colgate and then to Radville. 

 

Elected to represent the Constituency of Weyburn in the general election of 1938, he served until 1942, 

when he again enlisted for war service, this time in the Army Medical Corps. Retiring in 1945, with the 

rank of major, Dr. Crane joined the Department of Veterans Affairs as medical examiner, and was 

appointed Chief Pensions Examiner in 1948, a position he continued to occupy until his death. 

 

A member of the Masonic Order and the I.O.O.F., Dr. Crane is survived by his widow, one son and two 

daughters. 

 

I should also like to pay my own personal tribute to Dr. Crane with whom I was closely connected in a 

number of projects in the Weyburn constituency, both before he became a member of this Assembly and 

after he was the M.L.A. for Weyburn. He was one of the best types of country practitioner who was 

highly regarded by the people of that district as is attested to by the fine support which he received when 

he ran as a candidate in 1938. I know that his many friends, particularly in Radville where he served as a 

doctor for so many years, were brought a feeling of sadness by the news of his death. 

 

MR. OLIN DRAKE HILL was born at Ship Harbour, N.S. on May 28, 1882, and thus was 

approaching his 70
th

 birthday when he died in a Regina hospital on April 23, 1952. 

 

Educated at Truro, Pictou Academy and Dalhousie University in his native province, he came west in 

1902 to Melfort, where he taught school in the summer months and studied law at Osgoode Hall, 

Toronto, during the winters. Following his graduation, he opened a law office at Melfort. 



 

February 13, 1953 

 

3 

He served for a number of years on the town council and was mayor of Melfort 1919 to 1920. For many 

years he was an active member of the Saskatchewan Associated Boards of Trade, being one of the 

founders of north-eastern Saskatchewan District Boards. 

 

Elected to this Assembly in 1925 to represent the constituency of Melfort, Mr. Hill served until 1929. 

During these years, he emerged as one of the strongest advocates of the Hudson Bay Railway, a town on 

the line being named in his honour. Unsuccessful in the general election of 1929, Mr. Hill then devoted 

himself to his law practice until 1935, in which year ill-health forced him to suspend active work as a 

barrister. In 1943, the family moved to Regina, and for the next seven years Mr. Hill was employed in 

the Land Titles Office here, retiring in 1950. 

 

Surviving him are his widow and two daughters, and also four sons by his first marriage. 

 

DUNCAN MORRIS ROBERTSON, member for Morse constituency from 1927 to 1929, was 68 years 

old at the time of his death, June 15, 1952. 

 

A native of Arnprior, Ontario, he came west as a young man in 1905, settling on a farm in the Lawson 

district. Elected by acclamation in a by-election in 1927, Mr. Robertson was unsuccessful in the general 

election of 1929, and thus served through only one full Session of the Assembly. About 17 years ago, he 

joined the staff of the Canadian Farm Loan Board as an appraiser, which position he held until his death. 

 

He is survived by his widow, two sons, four daughters and eleven grandchildren. Three brothers and two 

sisters also survive to mourn his loss. 

 

Fatally injured in an automobile accident on December 3, 1952, JOHN EDWARD GRYDE, former 

member for the constituency of Cypress (roughly corresponding with the present constituency of 

Shaunavon), died three days later while being transported by ambulance plane to hospital. He was 70 

years of age at his death. 

 

Born in North Dakota of Norwegian parentage on April 17, 1882, Mr. Gryde came to Saskatchewan in 

1910 and, after homesteading for a time, started business as a merchant at Waldville, north of Climax, 

where he was postmaster from 1916 to 1923. In the latter year, when the village of Climax was founded, 

he moved his business to the new centre just one month to the day before the railway reached the 

village. He continued in business there until the time of his death. 

 

Mr. Gryde, throughout his residence in the district, took an active interest in church, Masonic and 

municipal affairs, serving as councillor for fifteen years and also as overseer of the village. He was 

elected to this Assembly in the general election of 1929, and faithfully supported the Anderson 

Government throughout its term of office. As a member, Mr. Gryde made his mark in committee work 

rather than in debate on the floor of the House, and won the respect of all members, irrespective of party. 

 

Mr. Gryde is survived by his widow, two sons and a daughter, and three brothers. 



 

February 13, 1953 

 

 

4 

MR. JAMES BIDWELL SMITH, member for Bengough from 1934 to 1938, died at Assiniboia on 

May 9, 1952, where he was operator of one of the oldest garage businesses in Saskatchewan. 

 

Born at Hilton, Ontario, November 8, 1880, Mr. Smith came to Assiniboia forty years ago, and opened 

the first real estate and insurance office in the district. Some four years later he started the garage and 

farm implement business with which his name was to be long associated, and which he continued to 

operate until his death. 

 

Devoting himself to community affairs, Mr. Smith served as mayor of the town of Assiniboia for three 

years and for twenty-one years was associated with Assiniboia School District as secretary-treasurer and 

as a trustee, remaining on the board until 1933. Mr. Smith was responsible for securing Assiniboia’s 

water supply, the reservoir for which is named in his honour. Organizer of the United Church A.O.T.S. 

Service Club, he was a Mason, and a member of the Mystic Shrine from 1913. 

 

Elected to this Assembly in 1934 as representative of Bengough constituency, Mr. Smith was a 

respected member of the Eighth Legislature, being particularly active in committee work. 

 

He is survived by his widow, two daughters, four grandchildren and five sisters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think all members will want to join in paying tribute to these six former members of the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, who, in their day and generation, gave leadership to the 

communities which they represented in this Legislature. As we see more and more of these old-timers 

disappearing from the scene, I am sure we come to appreciate more the part which they played and the 

vision which they had for the great future of Saskatchewan. I am sure we all feel humble to think that 

they have passed on to us a great task and a great challenge. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I should like to move, seconded by Mr. Tucker: 

 

“THAT this Assembly records its profound regrets at the passing, since last Session, of the undernoted 

former Members and expresses its sincere gratitude for, and appreciation of, the services each 

rendered to his community, to this Province and to this House: 

 

MR. CHARLES McGILL HAMILTON, a Member of the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Legislatures of 

Saskatchewan, a former Minister of Agriculture, of Highways and of Municipal  

Affairs, having represented the Constituency of Weyburn from 1919 to 1929; 

 

MR. OLIN DRAKE HILL, G.C., a Member of the Sixth Legislature, 1925 to 1929, as representatives 

of Melfort Constituency; 



 

February 13, 1953 

 

5 

MR. DUNCAN MORRIS ROBERTSON, a Member of the Sixth Legislature, representing the 

Constituency of Morse from 1927 to 1929; 

 

MR. JOHN EDWARD GRYDE, a Member of the Seventh Legislature, `1929, to 1934, representing 

the Constituency of Cypress; 

 

MR. JAMES BIDWELL SMITH, a Member of the Eight Legislature, 1934 to 1938, representing 

Bengough Constituency; and 

 

DR. GEORGE L. CRANE, a Member of the Ninth Legislature, 1938 to 1944, in which he represented 

the Constituency of Weyburn. 

 

Further, in paying tribute to the memory and mourning the loss of these greatly respected citizens, this 

Assembly extends its deepest sympathies to the bereaved families.” 

 

(CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY) 

 

Mr. Speaker:  some of us had personal contact with these honoured gentlemen who have passed on, 

and I am sure we would all like to pause one moment in respect to their memories. 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition):  Mr. Speaker, at a time like this, when one is 

contemplating the end of a life of service, and we are doing it in the case of six men who were elected to 

this Legislature, one wishes one could more adequately do justice to the work that they did for our 

province and for their fellow-citizens, and also express sympathy for those they loved, whom they have 

left behind. 

 

I had the privilege of knowing several of these gentlemen. I knew Mr. Hamilton fairly well, and I think 

all who knew him will agree with me that he was a very kindly man, a friendly man, and most devoted 

to the service of our province and our country. He was certainly a real pioneer, as I see that he came to 

this province before it was organized, coming to Indian Head in 1892, over sixty years ago, and at that 

time he started to teach school in a rural area. From there he entered farming and later it became clear 

what a confidence he had established in himself in that he was elected to service as head of the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities for around seven years. He served in this Legislature 

for ten years during almost all of which time he was Minister of Agriculture, and so won the support and 

affection of the Liberals of this province that he was one of those very prominently mentioned to be 

elected leader of our party, which would have led to his being Premier. He followed that by a long 

period of service on the Board of Grain Commissioners, I believe almost twenty years and, during that 

time, he did a very good job for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 



 

February 13, 1953 

 

 

6 

I did not have the privilege of knowing Dr. Crane, but I notice that he had a typically varied career, 

starting out by teaching school and then farming, and then later serving overseas and then, after coming 

back from overseas, taking training as a doctor, and then serving the last years in the Department of 

Veterans’ Affairs, serving his comrades in the services. 

 

Mr. O.D. Hill was already established as a lawyer when I came to Saskatchewan myself. He started to 

teach school in what was then Hudson’s Bay Junction, and he was taking a very prominent part already, 

in public affairs at that time, that is, in 1919. I came to know him very well indeed, and admired him 

very greatly in regard to his devotion to the service of his fellow-citizens and particularly in regard to his 

determined support of the development of the northern and particularly the north-eastern part of our 

province. 

 

I had not the privilege of knowing Mr. Robertson. I note that he is also one of the pioneers, coming to 

this area the year of the formation of the province. 

 

I did not have the privilege of knowing Mr. Gryde either, but I note that he was also one of the early 

settlers in this area. 

 

Mr. Smith was a very typical westerner, known to all his friends as “J.B.” I saw him not long before he 

died, and I thought it was typical  the thing he was most proud of was some of the work that he had 

done for his fellow-citizens in that community. Knowing how faithfully he had worked for his 

community, I was glad to hear that they had named a dam to provide water for Assiniboia after him, and 

I thought to myself, at that time, that it was very fine that they had given him some intimation during his 

lifetime that they appreciated his work. I sometimes think, particularly in public affairs, we are inclined 

to heap flowers upon the casket of the departed, when a word of appreciation during his lifetime would 

not only be of some real benefit to him, in encouraging him to carry on with his work, but also would be 

a source of comfort to his family when he did go, that some recognition had been given to him when he 

could really appreciate it. I thought that in regard to “J.B.” I was so glad that his community had shown 

this appreciation of him and I realize that he did appreciate it so very much. He certainly was a devoted 

servant of this province and his fellow-citizens. 

 

In regard to all of these gentlemen, the reason we are mentioning them here, today, is because they 

served in the Legislature here. Many other people have served their province and their fellowman in this 

part of our country, faithfully and well, who have passed from our midst, during the last year; but these 

are typical pioneers who were elected to the Legislature, and it is quite fitting and proper that we should 

express appreciation of their services, and sympathy for those that they have left behind. 

 

They knew the satisfaction of having demonstrated to them that they had the confidence and support of 

their fellowmen by being elected to the Legislature here. They doubtless knew all, or something, of what 

goes with public life besides the satisfaction of knowing that you have some faith placed in you by your 

fellowmen; but through it all, I think, of 



 

February 13, 1953 

 

7 

all of them it may be said that they had faith in their fellowman, faith in their province, faith in their 

country. As I contemplate the list of those who have come to this country as pioneers and served us so 

well and have gone from our midst, I feel that Canada, and Saskatchewan in this particular instance, has 

been well served by all her pioneers who laid the foundation of the great province we have here today, 

not only by those who served their fellowmen without receiving the recognition of being elected to the 

Legislature or Parliament, but they have been well served in all fields by those who have been elected to 

this Legislature in times past. 

 

We do well I think, to contemplate at times the work of service of those who have gone before, and 

contemplate what a splendid job they have done. At that time perhaps we may be given the strength to 

resolve, in some measure as far as it within us lies, to be worthy of the great heritage that has been 

passed on to us by those who laid the foundation and established the great province which we are 

privileged to live in today. 

 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough):  I wish to associate myself with the remarks that have just been 

made, particularly with reference to Mr. Smith, who represented the constituency of Bengough from 

1934 to 1938. 

 

Mr. Smith was a personal friend of mine and I had been associated with him in some of his many 

community and public activities. I have been closely associated with some of the organization in that 

area who owe their beginning to the efforts of Mr. Smith. It is difficult to assess the contribution that any 

one individual either makes to an economy, to a community or to a province, but I do feel that Mr. 

Smith personified characteristics of many of those people who answered the call, in the young days, of 

“Go west young man and grow up with the country.” 

 

Mr. Smith personified these characteristics in his community activities, in his business affairs, in both of 

which he made a great contribution to the economy of this province, and it does seem to me that, at 

times when we have the sorrowful responsibility of attending their funerals, our generation should 

rededicate ourselves to the same principles which encouraged people such as Mr. Smith and others to 

come out west and pioneer on that frontier with the same courage, the same vision and the same 

sincerity that was personified by an individual such as Mr. Smith. 

 

Hon. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Public Health):  I should like to join with the Premier in his words 

about the gentleman who came from a part of the country which is possibly not as well known as the rest 

of Saskatchewan is generally. 

 

Mr. Gryde was one of the folks who came from ‘south of the line’, settling in the southwest part of 

Saskatchewan and making a great contribution down there in the days of the hectic early settlement, in 

the organization of the necessary public services. Private business, during that time, went through the 

very serious years which that part of the country has suffered from time to time and, generally, Mr. 

Gryde comported himself as an excellent and loyal Canadian citizen. 

 

Apart from the fact that he was a member of this Legislature, history will show that he has been a great 

factor in that part of the country, 



 

February 13, 1953 

 

 

8 

in his position as a merchant, in carrying much of the load of credit that was required and of assistance 

during some very bad years in that area of the province. Mr. Gryde did it without complaining, did it 

without running away from the trouble. He stayed there until the time of his death and gave good service 

in his particular line of business. He was highly respected and liked by all who knew him. 

 

Mr. Gryde served in the Legislature probably at a time when the province was facing some of its 

greatest crises  in the years 1929 to 1934. Those were the years we were experiencing the change 

from a condition of prosperity to one of very serious depression. He came into the Legislature at that 

time with the support of his constituents to lend his voice and his wisdom to the attempts to shape a new 

policy to deal with the new conditions, and he did an excellent job. The sad way in which he had to be 

taken from us, I think, again, should commemorate his memory. He was not ready, as far as health was 

concerned, to go, but unfortunately a very serious accident resulted in his death. I am sure all members 

of the Legislature and all other people will be very sorry to know that Mr. Gryde is no longer with us, 

and will all wish to pay honour to his memory. 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), seconded by Mr. Tucker: 

 

“Ordered, That the Resolution of regret and condolence just passed, together with transcripts of the 

order tributes in memory of the Honoured Dead, be communicated to members of the bereaved 

families, on behalf of this Assembly, by Mr. Speaker,.” 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:40 o’clock p.m. 

 

 

 

 

 


