



















































Hansard: March 19, 1953


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Twelfth Legislature 

25th Day 

 

Thursday, March 19, 1953 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

CANADIAN WHEAT BOARD ACT 
 

Moved by Mr. Wahl, seconded by Mr. Feusi: 

 

“That this Assembly request the Federal Government to amend the Canadian Wheat Board Act 

making provision for the voluntary requisition of payments of annual dues by farmers to the three 

prairie Farm Unions.” 

 

Mr. W.H. Wahl (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the honour of speaking in this 

Legislature on a motion that could help farm organizations. There have been many heart-breaking 

experiences in promoting farm organizations, but the results obtained have justified the effort. 

 

When some of the Farmer‟s Union Lodges in the Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley constituency asked me to bring 

their resolution to the attention of this House, it seemed proper to do this, as the Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley 

constituency, which instructed me to represent it, depends almost entirely on the fortunes of the farmer. 

In order to justify the existence of the Farmers‟ Union and the reason for this motion, I must review 

some of the history of the farm movement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I am sure you are familiar with all the history of the farm movement. In my 

constituency, about fifty miles east of Regina on No. 1 Highway on the main line of the C.P.R. lies the 

town of Sintaluta. If you stroll down the main street mingling with the Indians from the reserve south of 

town and the farmers and the townspeople, you little realize that in a small shack north of the town, 

where the only dry place when it rained was under the bed, lived a man by the name of E. A. Partridge, 

who with the help of his neighbours fathered the first step towards co-operative trading in grain by the 

farmers of western Canada in the early 1900‟s. These men no doubt in their wildest dreams could not 

visualize that the powerful United Grain Growers Company Limited would be the result of their 

deliberations and work. 

 

The knowledge and benefits the farmer has received through this company cannot be assessed, but the 

fact that it has spanned the prairie provinces and its research and elevator facilities are still expanding, 

speaks for itself. The outgrowth of the Grain Growers was the Saskatchewan Pool Elevators, a 

revolutionary movement designed to pool the farmers‟ grain through their own elevator systems, and the 

first Pool contract signer was a man named A.E. Wilson, Indian Head. I am proud to say I signed the 

Pool contract in 1923, and I understand that today in the mail there are the earnings of last year‟s crop. 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

2 

 

Sintaluta is also able to boast that one of its citizens is on the five-man executive board of the 

Saskatchewan Pool Elevators, namely, Warden Burgess. 

 

The prairie Pools, through their membership, have brought about sound marketing principles, and 

through their efforts have prevailed on the Federal Government to bring into being the Canadian Wheat 

Board. Now this is the farmer‟s dream come true. He at last has a marketing agency that returns to him 

all the money it receives, less handling charges, according to the bushels he has sold. 

 

About five years ago I noticed the farmers flocking in to join the Farmers‟ Union, and being a 

businessman and realizing my fortunes were linked up with the farmers, I started to assess the situation. 

I was told by the farmers that in fields outside of marketing grain, they had no one to represent them, 

and in view of the fact of the widening gap between the price of what he sells and what he buys, he was 

forced to organize — one very good reason for bringing into being the Farmers‟ Union. There are many 

others. 

 

Now the motion asks for the voluntary check-off system. I am told by other unions that this greatly helps 

a union, as it gives members time to do necessary work instead of spending most of their time collecting 

dues. The farm unions are a non-political movement, made up of people of all political beliefs, so I am 

asking all members in this House to support the motion. 

 

Farmers, through their efforts, have attained a standard of living in the Canadian prairies that can only 

be maintained and improved on if they work together. The Farmers‟ Union gives this leadership. They 

are not trying to force, but to suggest methods that, as our history evolves, we will be able to work out 

our many problems to sane conclusions. 

 

This morning, on all our desks I imagine, is a submission to the Government of Canada by the Farmers‟ 

Union of Alberta and B.C. block, Saskatchewan Farmers‟ Union, and Manitoba Farmers‟ Union, that is 

to be presented at Ottawa on March 16, 1953, and I notice one of the things they are asking for is a 

voluntary requisition, and I am going to read how it is worded. It is very similar to this, only more 

lengthy: 

 

Voluntary Requisition 

 

“Once again we ask for favourable consideration of our former request for adoption of the voluntary 

requisition as a means of payment of the annual fees of the three prairie farm unions. This deduction 

would only be made by the Canadian Wheat Board upon direct and personal order of the individual 

farmer concerned. 

 

“Realizing this is a privilege which has been enjoyed by most labour groups in Canada for some 

considerable time, we cannot see any good and sufficient reason why the Government should longer 

defer action on this matter. Actually it is an administrative detail of Government, but it is an important 

matter to many farmers. 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

3 

 

“On occasion some Government members have argued that to adopt such a course would be a 

dangerous principle. Our reply is that the principle has already been established and has been 

operating for many years, wherein deductions are made by the Government itself for paying of 

assessments under the P.F.A.A., and on other occasions provision was made to make these payments 

attachable as collateral to certain types of bank loans. 

 

“These instances seem to us proof that any argument for a further delay in adopting the principle is 

invalid. We again urge you to grant our request.” 

 

Now I am moving the motion, and it is seconded by my deskmate, the hon. member for Pelly (Mr. 

Feusi). 

 

Mr. Arnold Feusi (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, I am happy to associate myself with my deskmate on this 

resolution. His constituency of Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley is the historical cradle of our western farm 

movements. It is fitting that he should move this resolution. It is also a tribute to him that as a 

businessman he should take such a direct and keen interest in our farm organizations. It is also just and 

fitting that I second this resolution. 

 

Pool District No. 8 leads all other districts in farm organization in this province. My constituency of 

Pelly is probably the highest organized area in District No. 8. The Kamsack Farmers‟ Union Lodge, of 

which I am a member, is the largest and possibly the most aggressive lodge in Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to mention some of the work done by our farm union lodges to probably give our city 

people an idea of what the activities of the farm union lodges are. I have in mind one small lodge that is 

in an isolated area situated between a series of Indian reserves and the Game Preserve, which is 

wilderness area. A year ago they undertook the task of circumventing some of this isolation that they 

were subjected to, and they undertook the task of organizing and building a telephone line, and today 

that is a task that is completed, and the telephone system is serving the community well. 

 

Another farm union lodge has undertaken the study of the co-operative way of life. I believe they have 

had meetings, probably once a week or once every two weeks. They have also undertaken the study of 

some of the problems facing the rural population of Saskatchewan today, and it is rather interesting to 

note that they have found that if our system of habitation on our farms were altered whereby we could 

live in small communities some three to four miles apart, we would probably eliminate much of the cost 

of the services that this Government is trying to bring to the people today, for instance, power. The 

centre of that little farm area and the proposed site of this group, the core of the group, is some three and 

half to four miles from a present power line. Now that would mean three and a half to four miles of 

power line that would serve some fifteen or sixteen farm homes if they were in one centre. As it is, 

today, it would probably take some twenty-five miles to serve that area. We can say the same things for 

rural roads 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

4 

 

and telephones. That is just one of the researches that they have made. 

 

Another fine chore that the large union, the Kamsack lodge, has undertaken was a check into a 

proposition whereby one of our farmers had suffered through probably neglect by the railroad firm and 

an elevator firm, and by the lodge taking up his problem a happy solution was worked out. I believe that 

that farmer, had he undertaken it on his own, would have met obstructions that probably he would never 

have been able to surmount. Today he is happily satisfied; he has obtained restitution — a very fine and 

worthwhile effort on the part of the Kamsack Union lodge. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a need for concentration, time and thought to marketing problems these days. 

We have had a resolution before this House. Our farmers are greatly interested in it. There is a challenge 

to farmers today to solve their problems. Farmers are ready to take it up. Lack of funds prevents them 

from doing this. They need funds to hire the best bruins in the country to present the farmers‟ case. Too 

much time today is needed at present to keep solvent, and hence this detracts from the time they could 

give to practical work. 

 

As an educational institution alone our farm unions warrant financial aid from all Government levels, 

but this resolution asks only for the right of the farmers to aid themselves. The farm movement is an 

expansion of the democratic principles. Farmers desire to aid in moulding their own destinies. There is 

great need in Canada for active farm organizations to take the lead in and operate with government 

branches on all levels in the solution of agricultural problems. All Canada, and particularly the west, Mr. 

Speaker, can stand to gain if the farmer gains or improves his position. We must never lose sight of this 

fact. Every political group, every labour group and every business group should support our farm 

requests. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say just a word further to what my 

colleagues, Mr. Wahl and Mr. Feusi, have said. 

 

As the past Vice-President of the Saskatchewan Farmers‟ Union I realize how imperative it is that some 

consistent form of dues collection be set up. I think that our Saskatchewan Farm Union is doing a job, as 

is the Manitoba and Alberta Farm Unions. Their history has proven that they are an effective, 

progressive and a needed farm organization. 

 

Now, these arguments that have been put up against the voluntary requisition, I do not think are too 

sound, and I would like to see all members of this Assembly endorse this motion. 

 

I want to point out as a member of the Registered Hereford Association that we already have that 

principle in force in that field. I do not know whether any of the gentlemen opposite or on this side of 

the House are members of a registered breed association, but we know — in fact I have a copy in my 

pocket of an application form for registration. Before we can make an application or get an animal 

registered today, we must be paid-up members of the Registered Hereford or any other Breed 

Association. That is a must. It is a compulsory membership before we can have the service of the 

registration department at Ottawa, and it is a good idea. 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

5 

 

This is again just a follow-up of the same principle, but it is not compulsory and I would like everyone 

to give a lot of serious though to this motion and endorse it and thus do our best to persuade the Federal 

Government to introduce this voluntary requisition plan. It would be very workable. The Saskatchewan 

Farmers‟ Union and other prairie farm unions have agreed to pay any costs that might be incurred 

through the extra book work. I foresee no difficulty in this whatever, and I know that it would certainly 

be of great assistance to the organized farm movement. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to unanimously. 

 

Conference re Labour Problems 

 

Moved by Mr. Tucker, seconded by Mr. McDonald: 

 

“That this Assembly, recognizing the right of the worker to organize and decide to withhold his labour 

and the right of management to decide to cease operations and that there are certain fields of activity 

where the unlimited exercise of these rights to promote the economic interests of either labour or 

management may be most detrimental to the public welfare, urges the Federal Government to call a 

conference of representatives of the Canadian Government and of Provincial Governments and of 

organized labour and management with a view to considering this problem and, if possible, 

establishing a process whereby, when the public welfare would be jeopardized by a strike or walkout, 

the dispute would be settled by such legally prescribed process.” 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, the reason for my decision to bring this 

before the Legislative Assembly was prompted by three recent events. One of them was the threatened 

railway strike which it was realized would do a tremendous amount of harm to the country, and which 

was settled fortunately without it coming to the point of another strike occurring; and the second matter 

was the resolution of the Canadian Federation of Agriculture passed at their meeting recently in 

Victoria, which they passed fearing that a railroad strike was about to take place. It reads as follows: 

 

“Whereas the principles of agricultural conservation in the broadest sense, that is, utilisation of land 

and the products therefrom, is in the national interest, 

 

“And whereas the fundamental principle on which our democratic civilization is founded is that of law 

and order, that the supreme governing body shall be that of government legally elected to administer 

the law, 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

6 

 

“And whereas we recognize the right of the worker to organize and decide to withhold his labour, and 

the right of management to decide to cease operations, 

 

“And whereas it is our belief that even with the best of intentions on both sides these work stoppages 

by strike or walkout are inevitable where a clash of economic incident occurs and where no scientific 

system or democratic law is provided to protect the innocent bystander of society, it is our opinion that 

individual and collective freedom ends when the freedom and wellbeing of society is challenged or 

violated, 

 

“Therefore we respectfully submit that, just as laws were made in the interest of society to make 

illegal settlement by force of disputes between individuals, that now at least, where the public welfare 

is jeopardized, laws should be made to settle by legal process disputes between organized sections of 

our economy.” 

 

I am advised by the President of the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture that that resolution was 

passed at the annual meeting of the Canadian Federation of Agriculture and has been sent to the 

Government at Ottawa for its consideration. 

 

Then recently, and in fact at present, there is a strike of grain handlers going on at Vancouver, and it has 

been going on for some time, stopping the shipment of grain out of Alberta. I have here the statement, or 

rather part of the statement — I will not read it all — issued on behalf of the Alberta Wheat Pool, which 

is one of the employers. This was reported in the „Western Producer‟ of February 26, 1953: 

 

“This crop year Canada has at least half a billion bushels of grain available for export. It is of urgent 

importance not only to the farmers, but to every businessman and to every individual in Canada, that 

export sales should proceed at the highest possible level. If the Wheat Board cannot fulfil its 

commitments, other countries will likely take over the markets. Wheat will pile up in Canada, and 

general unemployment and depressed conditions will prevail. 

 

“To our way of thinking, it is a serious situation when two hundred and fifty relatively well-paid men 

have the power to tie up the grain export business in great seaports and to cut off the vital exports of 

grain which mean so much to the welfare of Canada.” 

 

The statement goes on to deal with the actual terms of employment which are being struck against. I will 

not bother going into that part of it. I thought on reading it that, if that situation could be created on the 

Pacific Coast, if a similar strike were to take place at the height of the 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

7 

 

shipment of grain also at the Great Lakes, what a terrific effect it would have on our whole economy, 

and it seemed to me that the time had come to give some consideration to that situation. 

 

I thought there was a very good editorial in the „Western Producer‟ on the question, dated February 26, 

1953. It was the leading editorial, headed “Dangerous Strikes,” and reads as follows: 

 

“However, it is becoming more apparent as time passes that industrial stoppages which pose threats to 

the national economy or to important sectors of it, are recurring at very short intervals. In addition to 

the railway crisis, there was only last fall the action of the grain handlers at Lakehead, which, had the 

contemplated strike not been avoided at the last moment, would have brought the movement of grain 

eastward to a standstill, with disastrous consequences for western farmers. As this is written, the strike 

of elevator employees at the west coast has halted Pacific shipments which had been fully booked to 

the end of the crop year. At the same time it has disrupted railway traffic and tied up thousands of 

boxcars in transit. 

 

“It is time that this problem was faced squarely and its true nature recognized. It is folly simply to wait 

for each separate crisis to mature, and then under pressure of impending catastrophe, feverishly try on 

almost any terms to settle it. That is bad for the country no less than for the blood pressure of the 

negotiators. 

 

“The proposal of the Canadian Federation of Agriculture that a legal process be devised to deal with 

all such contingencies which will make it quite clear that in certain specified industries at any rate, no 

stoppage in operations occasioned by either party to a dispute will be tolerated, is what is needed. 

 

“Labour no doubt will protest any denial of the right to strike. This is understandable. Management 

would be equally reluctant to accept limitations on its full freedom of action; but both parties must be 

brought to realize that the interest of the community is transcendent, and neither the right to strike nor 

walkout can be allowed to cripple the economy of the nation or the ordered life of the community.” 

 

Now then, as has been stated, the attitude that labour has taken — I would like to put that before the 

Assembly. I think I can do it best by reading a statement given out by all four labour organizations at the 

time of the proposed settlement of the railway strike in 1950, when it was proposed that Parliament pass 

a law ending the strike. This is cited in the publication for Autumn, 1950, of „Public Affairs‟, which is 

put out 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

8 

 

by the Institute of Public Affairs at Dalhousie University. This is from the statement given out by the 

Canadian Catholic Confederation of Labour, the Joint Legislative Committee of the Railway Running 

Trades, the Trades and Labour Council and the Canadian Congress of Labour. This is what they stated 

in that regard: 

 

“We are unalterably and unequivocally opposed to compulsory arbitration for the following reasons: 

 

“1. Compulsory arbitration removes the sense of responsibility which both unions and management 

have developed, but it is collective bargaining which has developed this sense of responsibility. 

Compulsory arbitration means the end of collective bargaining, and neither management nor unions 

will bargain in earnest when they know that the decision will ultimately be taken out of their hands. 

Responsibility will be shifted from the parties to a Government-appointed tribunal, and both parties 

will be encouraged to make extravagant demands accordingly. 

 

“2. Compulsory arbitration is no use unless the awards can be enforced. This might require substantial 

police action to make the workers remain on the job and work. Who will do the enforcing? We will 

not accept the „police state‟ even in this embryo form. 

 

“3. Compulsory arbitration would in most cases require the appointment of arbitrators by the 

Government. Experience suggests this would generally mean judges. Our judges are eminently 

qualified for their normal work, but with few exceptions they are not equipped to deal with the 

complicated matters involved in most industrial disputes. They are usually drawn from the section of 

our population which has little or no knowledge of workers‟ problems. Those who are appointed to sit 

in judgement of such matters ought to have knowledge and understanding of labour-management 

problems. 

 

“4. Compulsory arbitration would lead to illegal and wildcat strikes. Negotiated settlements are 

accepted because they reflect the will of the rank and file. Imposed settlements involve submission, 

not acceptance. This would lead inevitably to industrial unrest. 

 

“5. Compulsory arbitration puts industrial relations into the arena of politics. 

 

“6. Compulsory arbitration will not work. Australia has had it for 46 years. Australia has a smaller 

population than Canada, but in 1948, the last year for which complete returns are available, the 

number of strikes and walkouts in Australia was 1141; in Canada it was only 154. The number of 

persons directly affected 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

9 

 

in Australia was 301,025, while in Canada it was only 42,820. In Canada, in 1949, the total number of 

strikes and walkouts was 137, the total number directly affected was 51,347. Australia, in the first nine 

months alone, had over 600 stoppages, with more than 227,000 persons directly affected. 

 

“These are the reasons why we oppose all legislation seeking to establish compulsory arbitration as a 

basis for settling industrial disputes. Our present labour laws have brought a wide measure of 

industrial harmony. We want that further improved. Until now we have never experienced a 

nation-wide tie-up of our railways. This is the first. Crises call for cool heads. Government and 

Parliament should not allow this one case to drive them in panic into drastic, repressive legislation 

from which all, labour, management and ordinary citizens, will suffer for generations to come.” 

 

That is the quotation from the statement of the Labour Unions in regard to the proposed compulsory 

settlement of the railway strike. The difficulty was that it was necessary somehow to bring the strike to 

an end, and it was finally found necessary for Parliament to pass a law settling the strike, in spite of the 

attitude of the Labour Unions. 

 

The situation is recognized by labour that there are some fields where a strike would be so disastrous to 

public welfare that it is not to be thought of, and they have been considering that particular problem. For 

example, it is well understood that you cannot have a strike of your Armed Forces in the middle of war, 

you cannot have a strike of the police force, you cannot have strikes of people who are looking after the 

sick in hospitals, and there are different fields like that. The question is, what is to be done to protect the 

people who are working in those fields? They definitely have no right to strike. Obviously their rights 

should be fully protected so that they do not suffer from the fact that they are in a field where it would 

not be regarded as right to strike. 

 

That has been recognized, I understand, because since I put this resolution on the Order Paper I got a 

letter dated March 14 of this year, from the Trades and Labour Congress of Canada by the chairman of 

the Provincial Executive Committee, and he says in this letter, and I am quoting from part of it: 

 

“I think it is but right that I ought to advise you of labour‟s stand in connection with such matters. This 

matter was thoroughly discussed several times at meetings of our Provincial Executive, and advice 

sought from our Congress headquarters. The decision of our Provincial Executive, confirmed by 

Congress headquarters, that they would only agree to city firefighters and policemen, as they have a 

no-strike clause in their constitution. 

 

“Hoping that this information may be of some guidance to you in presenting your motion,” 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

10 

 

and he states that he is forwarding a copy of the brief which they presented to the Government on 

December 17 last. I see that, in this brief, in the item headed “Saskatchewan Fire-fighters” it states that 

the Saskatchewan Executive of the Trades and Labour Congress of Canada strongly endorse the actions 

of the Saskatchewan Fire-fighters‟ Association and the Police Association in asking for compulsory 

arbitration: 

 

“We respectfully request that the Saskatchewan Government pass the necessary legislation which 

applies to these associations only. No other class of workers are affected in any way by the suggested 

legislation, and we see no reason why the request should not be granted. 

 

“This request is endorsed by our parent body, the Trades and Labour Congress of Canada, of which 

we are a part; the American Federation of Labour and all the individual trade councils of this Province. 

It is also in operation in some of the States across the international boundary and some provinces in 

the Dominion of Canada.” 

 

I read these items, Mr. Speaker, to show that the farmers of this province, which is the basic industry of 

the country, feel that this is a very serious matter and that while the general attitude of labour is against 

compulsory arbitration, they realize that in certain fields where a strike is not to be thought of, then there 

should be (in fact they advocate) compulsory arbitration. 

 

The more one looks into this matter, the more difficult it appears, because as stated in the item I have 

already read, where they tried compulsory arbitration in Australia, the situation has not worked out as 

well here. I believe they tried compulsory arbitration in New Zealand, the first of any of the present free 

countries in the world. They passed such a law in 1894. It was repealed by other than a Labour 

Government and re-enacted later by a Labour Government in 1936, the Compulsory Arbitration Law, 

and as has already been indicated, Australia has a compulsory arbitration law. Great Britain had one 

right through most of the war, and has recently repealed her compulsory arbitration law. 

 

Canada, I think it might be fairly said, pioneered in the field of compulsory investigation, the idea being 

that there could not be a strike until the matter was thoroughly investigated, and then a report would be 

made where public opinion could be apprised of the exact issues in dispute, and that that would be 

brought to bear on the parties to the dispute, and they would be likely then to settle on a fair basis. That 

was known, I believe, as the Lemieux Act, passed in 1907. 

 

Now I was under the impression I must say, Mr. Speaker, that our compulsory investigation law, giving 

a time for investigation, time for cooling off as they say, was actually very satisfactory; but since I have 

looked into this matter, I find that there are some people now who say that it is no longer as effective as 

it used to be; that, as in the railway strike, all it means is that the settlement of the matter, its final 

coming to a head, is delayed and delayed, and in the meantime perhaps the situation changes; then by 

the time it comes to the final report of the commission looking into the matter, it is not satisfactory to the 

parties, and by that time, instead of having cooled off, they have been, as they say, „hotted up‟. 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

11 

 

I have seen it suggested by very great students that that law should be re-examined in regard to its 

effectiveness. In our country here we, of course, have the added difficulty that certain disputes are 

within the jurisdiction of the Provinces and others within the jurisdiction of the Dominion, and that 

certainly makes the whole problem even more difficult. 

 

If one grants that there are certain fields where a strike would be most disastrous to society as a whole, 

then, as I suggested, even the labour unions say that they realize that strikes cannot go on indefinitely in 

such fields, there must be provisions made for the public intervening and settling the thing on terms that 

are fair to both sides. If that is recognized in such fields as the fire-fighters and policemen, then, when 

you come to the question, for example, of handling our grain at the seacoast, where in a dispute there, if 

both sides took a completely adamant attitude whereby shipment of our grain out of this country might 

be held up in the fall of the year when there is a real congestion of boxcars, and they need to load ships 

at the Head of the Lakes just as fast as they can, one can just imagine, with no machinery at all to settle 

it (as apparently seems to be the case) what a disastrous effect that could have on our whole economy in 

western Canada and in the rest of Canada. 

 

It seems to me that it is time we began to look into this most important problem, and as the editorial in 

the „Western Producer‟ suggests, not wait until we are caught in some terrible crisis like that and have to 

act on the spur of the moment. 

 

That is the reason why I am bringing forward this resolution, because undoubtedly there are such fields. 

We know that a railroad strike if it is protracted in our country, especially if it happens in the winter, can 

have a very disastrous effect upon human life and health in our country, which depends upon the 

railroads often for their supplies of fuel and food, and for other necessary supplies. Today, if a railroad 

strike takes place, there is no provision in law for settling it, and today we have to rely entirely on the 

sense of responsibility of the management and labour. If that is true in regard to the railroad, it is true in 

regard to the people who handle grain and other such items as that. 

 

If you are going to suggest that the time might come when these proposed strikes shall be settled by 

government action, then, as suggested in regard to fire-fighters, there must be some provision whereby 

in our free state of society the rights of those workers shall be fully protected by some sort of a labour 

court or something that will decide on these problems and without society being injured by a long and 

protracted strike. 

 

I was very interested in an article by the editor of the Institute of Public Affairs at Dalhousie, in regard 

to this problem, in the Autumn issue of 1950. I think perhaps he takes an unduly pessimistic view of the 

situation, but it is interesting anyway, because this is entirely a non-partisan publication, and by a 

student obviously of this great problem. He says: 

 

“Ibanez Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse pale into insignificance alongside the dread quartet which 

today rise unrestrained across the face of a quaking and uncertain world, for instead of the Four 

Freedoms promised by Roosevelt and Churchill in the Atlantic Charter, the Four 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

12 

 

Fears of Totalitarianism, War, Inflation and Industrial Strife once again haunt the human race ad 

mid-century.” 

 

He goes on later in this article to indicate what his suggestion would be. He says: 

 

“What is needed is not an economic policy to go with the new era of industrialism in Canada. That we 

already have. Rather, the most urgent requirement is a set of political and social concepts as a 

foundation for industrial self-government. The consequences of failure to provide such a foundation 

are ominously foreshadowed in the railway dispute. Compulsory arbitration in that dispute sets a 

precedent which in the last analysis means that both management and labour have been deprived of 

their economic freedom as punishment for conduct detrimental to the national interest. Such 

development fairly bristles with danger signals to a free society such as ours.” 

 

Now then, Mr. Speaker, I am quite conscious that this brings into conflict two of the great problems of 

our democracy, two competing principles involved: (1) to preserve the hardly-won freedom of our 

citizens to strike and withhold their labour if they feel that they should and (2) to protect the public 

interest against strikes and walkouts which do irreparable harm to the country. It cannot only apply to 

the leaders of labour but it can apply to the owners of industries necessary to the welfare and protection 

of our country; that in a dispute the fault might lie largely on their side, that they would deny the use of 

their plant to labour when they felt they were not satisfied. 

 

Then on the other hand there is the preservation of our basic freedom in regard to these matters, and that 

is recognized in the resolution which I propose to move, as you, Mr. Speaker, will have noticed. It is set 

out in it that the right of the people to withhold their labour is recognized, and then recognizing the 

rights of society itself. It seems to me that this is a most difficult problem. It is one that it is recognized 

by everybody as a real problem of democracy, and it would be far from my intention to suggest any 

solution to it now because it is too complicated and too difficult. But I do suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the 

proper thing to do in our federal system is first of all to have a conference at which organized labour will 

be represented, at which organized employers will be represented, at which the public interest will be 

represented, perhaps by some real expert in these problems who has studied them in other countries as 

well as our own, and particularly in the United States where they have a federal system; and also where 

the Provinces will be represented. They will have in mind the difficulties that, for example, are faced 

today by the farmers of Alberta, and that might well be faced by our farmers if a protracted strike took 

place on the Great Lakes. 

 

I do not think that a conference like this could be expected to give the careful study to a problem like 

this, as to some solution, as to how far steps should be taken in saying that in any particular area it s so 

vital to the public welfare that there should not be protracted strikes or 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

13 

 

walkouts, how far should be gone in the light of present economic conditions, and then what should be 

done to amply protect the right of the working man who happens to go into that line of work. It seems to 

me that a conference might lay down the terms of reference of a Royal Commission which could be set 

up to fully study this problem, and on which would be represented organized labour, the organized 

employer, the Federal Government and the Provincial Governments, and which would have the right to 

examine the situation in the light of our conditions and what has been done in other parts of the world, 

and try to deal with this most important problem. 

 

I feel that in the light of what happened in connection with the railroad strike, when as stated the matter 

had to be settled by legislation which many people thought was a very bad precedent, but it was felt 

there was no other way out because that strike could not be permitted to continue; when I think, seeing 

what is happening today with the tie-up of grain on the Pacific Coast, what could happen if there was a 

real tie-up of grain in regard to the Great Lakes, and then consider other fields where we are saying on 

the one hand that it is wrong for labour to strike and on the other hand saying to them if they do strike, 

finding fault with them, and in the next breath telling them that there is no provision made for seeing to 

it that their rights are protected just the same as if they had the right to strike, we are letting a situation 

drag on which one of these days will land us in the position where we will again have to take some 

sudden and drastic action. 

 

It seems to me that this Legislature might very well call this matter to the attention of the Federal 

Government with a view to calling a conference, and the purpose of that conference would be to lay the 

foundation for a Royal Commission to look into this matter to protect the public interest, to protect the 

rights of our producers particularly in provinces like ours, and to protect the rights of labour as they 

should be protected in democracy. 

 

I move the resolution standing in my name on the Order Paper, seconded by Mr. McDonald. 

 

Mr. D.H.R. Heming (Moose Jaw City): — It is true there might be need of some type of compulsory 

legislation governing the strike weapon of labour, but the strike weapon of labour has been a long while 

in effect, and it was hard fought for. As you will recollect, the Todpuddle Martyrs were the first 

originally; they were debarred from recognition and were sent to Australia and elsewhere for organizing. 

Since those days all men who belong to organized labour have sought to retain the strike weapon as an 

ultimate weapon in event of the bargaining feature falling through. 

 

Not for myself alone do I speak, Mr. Speaker. When this motion came on the Order Paper, I contacted 

the three major provincial groups of organized labour within the province, and asked them what they 

thought of the motion, and as the Hon. Leader of the Opposition has said, the head of the Trades and 

Labour Council of Saskatchewan informs me that they are against any proposed compulsory legislation, 

but under their charters they do have policemen and firemen on the international charter to which they 

belong, that is Trades and Labour. These two classes are not permitted to strike. 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

14 

 

Personally I think possibly some other method could be arrived at whereby the same results could be 

achieved by not letting them strike, by resorting to some type of proxy action whereby they could get 

equal treatment with other civic employees. That is my own personal idea. 

 

The Trades and Labour Council are against compulsory arbitration except in those two instances. The 

Canadian Congress of Labour are opposed to it in its entirety for all unions, and it might possible be that 

that Trades and Labour Council would legislate for the firemen and for the policemen. If it should so 

happen that the Canadian Congress of Labour set up an organization to deal for these men, it would be 

on the basis of not having compulsory legislation. That is as it might be some day. 

 

I would like to quote from the Executive Secretary of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, C.C.L.: 

 

“You will know that our Federation has consistently opposed moves towards compulsory arbitration. 

This attitude has been expressed in our annual legislative briefs to your Government over the past four 

years. This stand is in conformity with that or our parent organization, the Canadian Congress of 

Labour. 

 

“One resolution begins by conceding the rights of workers to organize, and if need be strike. It ends by 

proposing the consideration of a legally prescribed process which to our mind is a nice way for 

compulsory arbitration which would deny the rights to strike. 

 

“We hope this resolution is not a part of the numerous attempts being made across this country to 

introduce this method as a universal means of settling labour dispute. 

 

“It is noted that the resolution speaks about the application of this process where the public welfare 

would be jeopardized by a strike. This kind of term could be employed to cover the whole, or virtually 

the whole, field of collective bargaining. What was the public welfare and how was it jeopardized 

would be presumably determined by government or its agency. Labour, not unnaturally, recognizes the 

dangers in that sort of a situation and opposes the overwhelming powers which government would 

have. 

 

“The principle of collective bargaining calls for agreement by negotiation between labour and 

management. This would suffer a great and damaging blow of incalculable effect on the nation, were 

legal arbitration to be legislated. Good employee-employer relations grow out of the give-and-take at 

the bargaining table. The presence of a compulsory settlement will result inevitably in the rapid 

by-passing of tried bargaining usages to the business of arbitration. 

 

“From 1946 to 1951, according to D.B.S. figures, only one-tenth of one per cent of working time in 

Canada was lost on account of strikes of walkouts. This figure could 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

15 

 

be compared to the estimated 86 per cent of all lost time which is lost because of illness in industry. 

More time, in the same vein, was lost because of unemployment in the first six months of 1950 than 

was lost because of strikes in the first fifty years of this century. 

 

“In Saskatchewan where time lost from strikes is perhaps lower than the average, there are like 

comparisons. In 1950, 236 days were lost because of accidents reported to the Compensation Board 

for every one day lost because of strikes. In Saskatchewan, in January 1953, days lost due to 

unemployment in that month were triple those due to strikes in the whole preceding seven-year period, 

1946-52.” 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, was the Canadian Congress of Labour. The Chairman of the Running Trades 

Committee of Saskatchewan, too, expressed an opinion. I would like to quote that opinion also: 

 

“In my opinion the resolution is worded in quite innocent language designed to accomplish a noble 

purpose, but the sponsor of the resolution is bound to be more concerned towards injecting a 

Taft-Hartley curb on our unions. 

 

“It may be that some industries are of such vital importance to the welfare of the nation that a tie-up is 

out of the question, and government intervention is necessary such as has been experienced with our 

transportation wage disputes. However, it should be carefully set out, the industries which it could be 

claimed are essential to the life of a nation, but labour must most certainly be on their guard lest the 

choice of those which might be classified as essential are too much on the employers‟ side.” 

 

The general contention of the thing is that the labour of Saskatchewan, and mind you we are a small 

group in comparison with the organized labour of Canada, we have a little over 15,000 T. and L. men, 

10,000 C.C.L. men, and the balance of the 30,000 are running trade and independent unions, out of over 

a million in the Dominion of Canada. It would seem somewhat presumptuous for us, a small group in 

Saskatchewan, to ask the Dominion of Canada to take certain action without consultation, as is 

suggested in the resolution. 

 

There was one phase, and the hon. Leader of the Opposition did quote too the brief and exact extracts in 

connection with compulsory arbitration in Australia and where in the last year they had a report on 

(1948 I understand) that phase and there were about ten times the number of strikes in Australia that 

there were in Canada, with Canada having about twice as many organized labour, or more, than 

Australia. 

 

It is true that the Dominion of Canada, in 1950, passed special legislation of a compulsory nature in 

connection with the railroad strike, but it was the first time that that was done in Canadian history, and I 

submit, Sir, that they still have that power any time they wish for the good and welfare of Canada, that 

the Canadian Government at Ottawa can pass any legislation they so desire in a national emergency. 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

16 

 

In Canada, as I say, at the present time we have five and a half million (or close thereto) of a labour 

force, and about four million of them are paid wage-earners and a little over a million are organized 

labourers. Our percentage of organized labourers in Canada, in comparison with the United States of 

America or with Great Britain, is slightly down, but our record in connection with dealing with our 

employers in Canada, I think, fares as well in Canada as any other country in the world. 

 

The thing that I seem to sense, Mr. Speaker, is that the things which were promised the working man 

(and that is the low-paid wage-earner) during the war, the absence of fear and the absence of want, these 

things are basic and should be given consideration and held in the minds of all legislators when they 

enact basic labour legislation, and I would like to read a few paragraphs of the Universal Bill of Rights 

of which Canada, being a member of the United Nations, sat and agreed to, but which to date they have 

not put into legislation. I would read three paragraphs of the preamble, which mean a lot: 

 

“Whereas the condition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members 

of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world, 

 

“Whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have 

outraged the conscience of mankind and the advent of a world in which human beings should enjoy 

freedom of speech and belief and freedom from fear and want have been proclaimed as the highest 

aspirations of the common people, 

 

“Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion 

against tyranny and oppression, that human rights should be protected by the rule of law.” 

 

And a few of the articles of the Declaration itself, Mr. Speaker: 

 

“Every one has the right to life, liberty and security of person. No one should be held in slavery or 

servitude. Slavery and slave trade shall be prohibited in all forms. 

 

“Every one has the right to freedom of movement and resident within the borders of each state. Every 

one has the right to leave any country, including his own, and return to his country. 

 

“Article (20) Every one has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and association. No one may be 

compelled to belong to an association. 

 

“Article (22) Every one, as a member of society, has the right to social security and is entitled to 

realization through national effort and international co-operation and in accordance with the 

organization and rulings of each state of the economic, social and economic rights indispensable for 

his dignity and the right . . .” 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

17 

 

“Article (23) Everybody has the right to work, to free choice of employment, to just and favourable 

conditions of work, and to protection against unemployment. Everyone, without any discrimination, 

has the right to equal pay for equal work. Everyone who works has the right to just and favourable 

remuneration, insuring for himself and his family an existence worthy of human dignity, and 

supplemented, if necessary, by other means of social protection. Everyone has the right to form and 

join trade unions for the protection of his interests. Everyone has the right to rest and leisure, including 

a reasonable limitation of working hours, and periodical holidays with pay. 

 

“Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and wellbeing of himself and 

family, including food, clothing, housing, medical care and necessary social services, and the right to 

security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age and other lack of 

livelihood in circumstances beyond his control.” 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is behind the move or organized labour in these days. They are desirous of assuring a 

better living and in bargaining with employers, they can and are achieving that. But I will admit that 

there is a great fear, both here and in the United States of America, that the organized labour movement 

has gone too far too fast, and that an attempt is being made now to restrict its growth, restrict its 

movements, and I submit, Sir, that it is not right. 

 

The power of legislation, and the recognition of the obligation that Canada has assumed by virtue of 

being a member of the United Nations, I think show that now, although the Committee that was 

requested by the Dominion Government to amend the B.N.A. rights some while ago and which all 

boiled down to the idea of changing our own Dominion Act for the first time after the Treaty of 

Westminster that we had an opportunity so to do, they failed to reach, and I sometimes think, Sir, that 

something like this resolution calls for it may also fail to reach; but I contend that the Federal 

Government itself has the jurisdiction, if they so wish, to enact legislation for the good and welfare of 

Canadians in Canada, especially by so virtue of the fact that they have agreed to this Universal Bill of 

Rights which guarantees certain things to all people. 

 

You recollect, Mr. Speaker, in 1867, when they first formed our Confederation of five provinces into 

one Confederation, the idea those days was that the Federal Government had all power within its own 

self, and the legislators of the provinces would only be minor small governments acting within very 

limited powers of jurisdiction. In fact, I will quote what Sir John A. MacDonald said: 

 

“We thereby strengthen the central Parliament and make the Confederation one people and one 

government instead of five people and five governments, one united province with their local 

governments and legislators subordinate to the general government and legislature.” 

 

In those days, Mr. Speaker, and still today the Federal Government maintains the right of appointing 

lieutenant-governors. A province cannot touch this. They still demand the right not to assent to a Bill; 

the 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

18 

 

Dominion Government can yet, a year after legislation has been passed here, declare it ultra vires. They 

claimed in 1867 that they would have power over property and civil rights, they would have power even 

to go within provincial jurisdiction, and have certain educational powers and privileges of religious 

minorities rights. In treaties with other countries they also claimed the rights on behalf of the Provinces 

as well as themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the one thing that seemed to strike me most was that in 1867, and I believe they still have 

the power — the power to bring any work under exclusive jurisdiction by declaring it to be a work for 

the general advantage of Canada or for the advantage of two or more provinces. I think, Sir, that they 

still have that power, and any particular work means anything and everything because they did in those 

days attach to themselves the power of commerce, the power of trade, and the power of taxation, and 

originally intended that they should maintain this. 

 

But from those days down to these days, with Lords Haldane and Watson and the various interpretations 

that have been placed upon the British North America Act, have divided authority so much that the 

B.N.A. Act, today, is a shambles. 

 

As I said before, they are unable to amend our own Act — the British North America Act — today, and 

it looks like they never will amend it because the Provinces cannot agree; but I still think that if it 

became a question of emergency, any emergent legislation, the Federal Government can if they so desire 

call it to the advantage of the Dominion of Canada, which they did with the railroad strike; and although, 

Mr. Speaker, I am somewhat concerned with the actions of the Federal Government indirectly and aside 

from this, I understand at the present time there are some amendments before the House of Commons in 

connection with amendments to the Criminal Code. There are one or two of those which labour on the 

Federal scale are somewhat afraid would interfere with the rights of labour and would tie their hands 

down in Section 509A whereby if they impeded any movement of any ship or any engine or any car, 

why they could be sent to gaol. 

 

I notice, too, Mr. Speaker, that on the other side of the line they have a Bill before the Congress down 

there, too, which makes it seem as though certain high men in this country have joined hands with 

certain high men in the country to the south, whereby labour shall be attacked as a whole at one and the 

same time. There is a Bill down there (HR7647) which wants the Congress to give power to an 

employer to demand an injunction against anybody who goes on a strike. The injunction will be in force 

for 80 days, after which time receivers will be appointed for the management and receivers for the 

union, which means that as long as they wish to have receivership they will be there without any chance 

of bargaining. I would submit too, Sir, that on account of the difference of opinion which has existed 

between labour and management it has made management smarter and they have used their brains to 

more advantage. I think that has contributed in no small amount to our great national production here 

and in the United States of America, by virtue of the fact that the men who are affected had to be smart 

in order to survive. I think that is one of our main avenues of advancement in the future. If they want to 

establish a legislation whereby there will not be any incentive to do anything but lay down and let the 

Government do it all, why then, Sir, I think we are barking, for the time being at least, on the wrong 

trail. 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

19 

 

I am prepared, Mr. Speaker, looking over the motion very conscientiously, to move an amendment to the 

motion, seconded by Mr. Stone: 

 

“(1) That all the words after the word „operations‟ in the third line to the word „welfare‟ in the sixth 

line be deleted, and 

 

“(2) that the last three lines be deleted and the following substituted therefor: „setting forth basic 

national rights of labour, management and public under a National Labour Code‟.” 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The debate is now on the proposed amendment. 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the Leader of the Opposition bringing 

an important matter like this before this Legislature, and in my opinion it is one of the most constructive 

things he has done since he has been in this House. 

 

I do not agree with his narrow terms of reference in the motion, but I do not blame him for coming to 

that conclusion, because there are thousands like him — and he mentioned some farmers. After all 

people are very busy; they cannot go into all the ramifications of all the problems before us, and we are 

apt to rely on high-paid research workers and statisticians and journalists and correspondents to bring to 

us, in very brief form, the solutions of all our problems, and sometimes they are tinted according to the 

way in which these workers are paid. We have heard quite a lot of rumblings recently about a 

Taft-Hartley Bill in Canada and compulsory arbitration for the workers of this country; but I want to 

traverse a few years, Mr. Speaker, so that we can come up to date, and I want to try and point out the 

reasons of our problems today. 

 

I think if you remember, during the war there were restrictions. Some of the restrictions labour did not 

like, and certainly there were some restrictions that management and industry did not like. But I think 

you will agree, and I think all members will agree, there was wonderful teamwork during those years. 

The Government of that day had to be commended for the job it did. There had to be teamwork because 

we had a big job to do, and I think you all agree that all of us were more or less secure at that time. I 

think the management were not doing too badly; labour was doing pretty good, and I think the farmer 

was doing pretty good. I think I remember one of the farmer members mentioning, the other day, that 

they were nearly parity prices during the war than at any time during our history. The price of their 

products was closer in relation to the cost of production. So we had wonderful teamwork during that 

period, Mr. Speaker, and the Government played its part in keeping labour in line and keeping 

management in line. 

 

The ink was hardly dry on cessation of war, and certainly the war plants had not had time to re-tool for 

peacetime production, before there was a clamour for these restrictions to be removed, and they became 

quite prominent even during 1945. In 1945, of course, we had an election, and our Liberal Party 

promised to retain these restrictions. I think you will remember some of the advertisements that went out 

at that particular time. But it was some time in 1946 when they in their wisdom, and abetted by the 

Progressive-Conservative Party, decided that the restrictions had to go. 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

20 

 

Now all the labour organizations mentioned — the Trades and Labour Congress of Canada, Canadian 

Congress of Labour, Canadian Catholic Federation of Labour, and the Dominion Joint Legislative 

Committee — went together and warned the Government at that time just what would happen if they 

removed these controls or restrictions, and they pleaded with the Government, along with other public 

organizations, farm organizations, not to remove those restrictions but to continue on during the 

post-war period. They also warned the Government at that time that, if they did remove controls then 

organized labour would not stand idly by and see their standard of living depressed; they would have to 

fight if the laws of the jungle were brought back once more in this country. 

 

That brings us up to date, Mr. Speaker, and I suggest to you that industry have got everything they have 

asked for without any fight whatever. Organized labour has had to fight for everything to retain that 

decent standard of living, and just exactly what has happened is what those labour organizations told 

them would happen at that time. The low-income worker, the worker with fixed income, the man with a 

small pension, small earnings, these were the ones that would suffer. 

 

Now, I want to say that labour would not be satisfied with the terms laid down in the motion. They are 

far too narrow, because we feel that we are not getting our fair share of the national income. I think the 

national income, last year, was pretty close to $23 billion and, after all, labour — and when I speak of 

labour I do not just mean industrial workers, I mean workers of the soil, too — are mainly responsible 

for that national income; and when you think of $22 billion odd produced by a small group of people of 

some 14 million, it is a pretty tremendous undertaking, and I say we are not satisfied that we are getting 

a fair share of that national income, when we look and see the kind of houses that our people have to 

contend with today — our workers and our low-income workers. We are not satisfied that our children 

have the benefit of equal educational opportunities. We still contend that there are not the proper 

medical care services today in this country of ours. And speaking of medical care, Mr. Speaker, it is 

interesting to note that whereas only 10 per cent of the days lost in industry are through strikes, yet some 

86 per cent of the time is lost through sickness and ill-health. We are going to pay a lot of attention to 

strikes which cause 10 per cent of the stoppage in production, and we are going to close our eyes to this 

very important matter. 

 

You will remember that, during the war, the majority of the best of our man-power and woman-power 

was in the Armed Forces, leaving behind a corps of people who either could not comply with the 

medical requirements or the age limits. These were left behind to perform a very important job, and I 

think they did a wonderful job. It is interesting to note that many of the big industries during the war 

were concerned about the production-time lost through sickness and illness. They did have clinics set 

up. They had a full-time doctor and a nurse. They tackled common ailments such as colds, headaches, 

eyestrain — yes, and they realized too that men do come to work sometimes with a hang-over, and they 

did encourage men to get some relief so that they could produce better after a hang-over. It was realized 

even during the war the time that could be lost through sickness and illness, and it is always a surprise to 

me that those who oppose a national health insurance scheme will always look on one side of the ledger 

and look at the tremendous costs, and close their eyes to the other side and fail to see the dividends that 

could come from such a scheme. 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

21 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I pointed out the benefits that accrued during the war from a sane system of some 

kind of teamwork between management and labour. I pointed out the results today and who had 

benefited. I looked at the last budget brought down at Ottawa, and was hoping that there might be some 

solution in that budget to solve the unrest there is today amongst the workers. But in spite of the fact that 

industry has got everything that it has asked for, without any trouble at all, yet in that budget again it has 

been handed a nice, big, juicy steak once more. 

 

I say that workers have had to fight for everything they have had, and, in my opinion, this is just a move 

to get one more thing. Industry, I say, has got everything they wanted — not quite. There are just the 

large labour groups; they are the big, bad wolves; we must chop their heads off. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition mentioned the railroad workers, and everybody knows that the railroad 

workers, of course, are a big organization and a powerful organization, and that I suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, holds up my idea that this is a last move on the part of management and industry to get the last 

piece they can out of our economy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do feel that the amendment offers more. I am satisfied that labour at any time are 

willing to sit with any group and discuss their problems; but if we are to be given the responsibility — 

and we have a responsibility because we do produce most, practically all of the wealth of this nation; if 

we are to accept those responsibilities, then we must be given a good share in the affairs of our nation. I 

suggest that, if any attempt is made to bring about compulsory arbitration, rather than reduce the power 

of the labour organization you are going to make them more militant, and I think you are going to drive 

them faster towards political action and do something along that line. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, for those few reasons I am going to support the amendment. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, speaking in support of the amendment, 

may I first congratulate the junior members for Moose Jaw and Saskatoon on their very able 

presentation of the case for a National Code in preference to what we have in the original motion. 

 

It is a fact, Mr. Speaker, that strikes usually get front-page publicity with comparatively little publicity 

for the settlements that come some time afterwards. According to the Federal Minister of Labour, the 

Hon. Milton Gregg, V.C., in a report to the Senate Committee, 39,000,000 man-days were lost during 

the first fifty years of this century, which does sound like a tremendous figure. However, that is less than 

time lost in unemployment in Canada during the first six months of 1950. Furthermore, there were 4,862 

union agreements in effect in Canada in 1950, and only 1.1 per cent of those were affected by strikes. I 

think that is an excellent record, Mr. Speaker — approximately one strike in every hundred agreements. 

 

I have some further comparative figures here, Mr. Speaker, in regard to time lost through accidents, 

unemployment and sickness, and it is a fact — let us look at the figures for Saskatchewan: In the year 

1950, 1,200 man-days were lost because of strikes in this province; yet 283,360 man-days were lost 

because of reported accidents only. See the tremendous difference there. 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

22 

 

Now as far as percentage is concerned, strike time lost, in 1950, in this province was two-fifths of one 

per cent of the total time lost because of accidents reported to the Compensation Board; and putting it 

another way, 236 days were lost by accidents for every one day lost in strikes, which merely bears out 

what I say, that strikes do get undue front-page publicity in our press. 

 

I have in my hand a booklet got out by the United States Department of Labour, Maurice J. Tobin, 

Secretary. In other words, Mr. Tobin is the American counterpart of the Hon. Milton Gregg in Ottawa, 

or at least he was up until a few weeks ago when the Eisenhower Government came in — I do not 

imagine he is there any more; in fact, I know he is not, because Mr. Durkin, who was one of the top 

officials in the Plumbers‟ Union in the United States, is now the Federal Secretary of Labour. They call 

them Secretaries down there; we call them Ministers here. 

 

There is a good deal of interesting information in this booklet, and for the benefit of the House I am 

going to read some brief extracts from it which — I do not want to take up too much time of the House, 

Mr. Speaker, — will explain or illustrate the rise of labour for the past century and a half. The first item 

I want to make reference to, is a cut. Apparently it has been an advertisement, a photograph in this 

booklet, a trial — the trial of twenty-four journeymen tailors charged with a conspiracy before the 

Mayor‟s Court of the City of Philadelphia, September sessions, 1827. It shows labour was having a 

pretty difficult time during that period, and ran afoul of the courts on a good many occasions. 

 

We go up then another decade or a decade and a half, to the late 1840‟s. Industry had revived, labour 

was in great demand, prices were climbing, trade unions once more showed signs of activity. As 

industry spread new locals were formed. By 1854 most important trades showed some degree of 

organization in the larger centres. Many of these unions collapsed only to be promptly revived and 

crushed again in 1857 in another downward sweep of the business cycle. I mention that particularly to 

show that the trade union movement met with great opposition as the decades went along. 

 

We come up to 1860. There was a definite trend towards higher wages and shorter hours for workers. 

 

Here is something of interest. The work-day, often from sunrise to sunset early in the century, was 

shortened to ten hours for most skilled artisans in the large cities by 1850. At this time factory workers 

were beginning to work from eleven to twelve hours a day. By 1860 the average work-day for 

non-agricultural employees was estimated at eleven hours, while building trades averaged about ten. 

 

Wages in 1820, which ranged from 75 cents to $1.25 a day for common labour depending upon the 

locality and season, were from $1.00 to $1.25 a day in 1850. Wages of more skilled artisans and 

mechanics in the cities advanced from $1.25 and $1.50 a day to between $1.50 and $2.00 by 1860. 

 

Here is something entitled “Industrial Strife,” which takes on another feature: 

 

“In 1873, and again in 1876, several of the leading craft unions attempted unsuccessfully to revive 

interest 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

23 

 

in a federation based on a strictly trade union programme. Trade union membership meanwhile was 

being seriously reduced by a new economic depression. In 1877 the railroad strikes”. . . 

 

and we have heard quite a bit about that recently, and some more this afternoon — 

 

“. . . the railroad strikes which originated in Pittsburgh but spread throughout the country brought in 

their wake riots, martial law, intervention of State and Federal troops, and some fatalities. A notorious 

secret association know as the „Molly Maguires‟ gained control of lodges of the Ancient Order of 

Hibernians”. . . 

 

My seatmate may know something about them; yesterday was a famous day — 

 

“. . . in the anthracite regions of Pennsylvania, the product of the distress and poverty of this period. 

The „Molly Maguires‟ used terroristic methods against employers and strike-breakers. The group was 

finally broken up by State authorities with the arrest and conviction of several ringleaders who were 

charged with a series of murders.” 

 

Violence, of course, throughout that period, was quite common. Here again is another example of it. 

This refers to as recently as up in the 1890‟s: 

 

“Large corporations which had appeared on the economic scene vigorously fought the efforts to 

unionize their employees. At times, these clashes resulted in violence, injuries and even death. For 

example, the unsuccessful struggle of the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers against 

the Carnegie Steel Company at Homestead, Pennsylvania, in 1892, was climaxed by a pitched battle 

between company-imported Pinkerton detectives and strikers, which resulted in ten deaths before the 

intervention of the National Guard restored order. 

 

“The strike of the American Railway Union, led by Eugene B. Debs, of the Pullman Parlour Car 

Company of Pullman, Illinois, in 1894, provoked sympathetic walkouts on many railroads serving the 

Chicago area. Federal and State troops were used and court injunctions were obtained against the 

union. Twenty-five persons were killed and sixty were injured during this controversy. Elsewhere in 

the country industrial disputes flared into open violence.” 

 

There are quite a number of other excerpts here that would be of interest to this House, but I am only 

going to take three or four more. Here is one that comes into comparatively recent times (1935) and I 

quote: 

 

“The National Labour Relations Act, the Wagner Act, passed July 5, 1935, guaranteed the right of 

workers to organize and bargain collectively with their employers. It also prohibited 

employer-dominated or -financed company unions.” 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

24 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the act on which the Saskatchewan Trade Union Act was largely patterned — the 

Wagner Act of the United States passed in 1935. 

 

I might just say in passing that we set up a Labour Relations Board in this province (and I have 

mentioned it here before, Mr. Speaker) consisting of two representatives of employers, two of the 

employees, and two representatives of the general public. We felt when we did that eight years ago, it 

was only fair. Quite often in labour disputes the general public has been the innocent bystander and has 

suffered to some extent. I think the hon. Leader of the Opposition made some reference to that earlier 

this afternoon. We felt that with representatives of the public on the Board, it would be a good thing and 

they would look after the interests of the public. I might say both were women, one representing the 

farm and the other the urban centres. 

 

Just before I put this booklet down, Mr. Speaker, there are three or four other dates here that are quite 

famous in the history of labour, and it may be surprising to know that we can go away back as far as 

1791 to record that the Philadelphia carpenters struck, unsuccessfully, in May for a ten-hour day and 

additional pay for overtime. This was the first recorded strike of workers in the building trades. 

 

In 1806 — just to show you the feeling at that time against unions — I refer to members of the 

Philadelphia Journeymen Cordwinders who were tried for criminal conspiracy after striking for higher 

wages. The charges were: (1) Combination to raise wages, and (2) combination to injure others. The 

union was found guilty and fined. Bankrupt, as a result, the union disbanded. This was the first of 

several to be tried for conspiracy. 

 

Something interesting here: Just over a hundred years ago, in 1842, Massachusetts and Connecticut 

passed laws prohibiting children from working more than ten hours a day. 

 

1877 — we will skip the other dates — the first recorded instance of the use of Federal Troops in a 

labour dispute during peacetime occurred during a strike of railroad workers against a 10 per cent cut in 

pay. Railroads operating east of the Mississippi river were involved. This strike was marked by violence 

and property damage. More than one hundred were reported killed and two hundred injured. 1882 marks 

the setting aside of one day a year for Labour Day. 

 

1886 refers to the Chicago Haymarket riot in which one policeman was killed and several others 

wounded, “aroused public opinion against unionism and radicalism, and for several years stopped the 

movement for the eight-hour day. The meeting in the Haymarket Square had been called as a peaceful 

protest against the killing of four strikers and wounding of others during a strike for the eight-hour day 

at the McCormick Reaper Works.” 

 

None of us in this House, of course, can remember back that far, but it is in the not-too-distant past that 

there was a great deal of violence in the United States and to a lesser degree in Canada, of course. 

 

Then I refer again to the Homestead strike, 1892-1894, to the strike of the American railways. In 1902, 

the United Mine Workers ended a five-months‟ strike against anthracite operators, agreeing to 

arbitration by a presidential commission. 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

25 

 

“The Anthracite Coal Strike Commission appointed in 1903 recommended a 10 per cent wage increase 

in conciliation, but was denied recognition.” 

 

We will skip over to 1914, which will be the last reference I will make: 

 

“December 1, the President appointed the Colorado Coal Commission which investigated the Ludlaw 

massacre and labour conditions in Colorado coal mines, following an unsuccessful strike by the 

United Mine Workers.” 

 

There is a good deal more interesting information here, Mr. Speaker, but time does not permit me to go 

into it to any great extent. However, I hope I have given some background to the history of strikes in the 

United States and the violence with which some of them were met even to the extent of using the 

Pinkerton Detective Agency, Federal troops, police and so forth. 

 

Now, it is a fact, Mr. Speaker, that strikes may be inconvenient — they usually are to a good many 

people — and even expensive; but I think the figures and dates I quoted prove that, in latter years, this 

has tended to be reduced to a great extent, and I cannot think in this country, or in eastern Canada either, 

of them getting to the state as to where they might be considered dangerous. The quotation the hon. 

Leader of the Opposition gave — a joint statement of four groups in Dalhousie — by the Canadian 

Catholic Congress of Labour, C.C.L., Trades and Labour, the Railway Running Trades, stated definitely 

that two organizations were opposed to compulsory arbitration, and further that it meant an end to 

collective bargaining; for obviously, the parties concerned cannot bargain properly and in good faith 

knowing that the final settlement is going to be made by somebody else. The suggestion was made that 

judges could be appointed by Governments to act as arbitrators, but they have not the knowledge of 

labour matters. They may be very fine gentlemen but labour does not want to have boards of this kind 

set up, and they feel just as strongly about it now as they did back in 1950. 

 

Some reference was made to the possibility of strikes in hospitals, and I think we would all agree that 

that would be a terrible thing; but up until now I have never heard of a strike in a hospital in the United 

States or Canada, or anywhere else as far as that is concerned. Employees are not unreasonable and are 

not going to expose the general public to undue hardship or undue dangers, as would be the case if such 

a thing as a strike in a hospital ever did take place. 

 

Reference was also made, Mr. Speaker, to the fact that the Saskatchewan Firefighters and the Police 

were requesting legislation that where (now this is very important) they have a „no-strike clause‟ in their 

agreement, in the event of a dispute that the two parties cannot agree on, then it should be referred to a 

Board of Arbitration. Now it is quite correct that the Trades and Labour Congress of Saskatchewan did 

approve of that request to this Government, but at the same time they did definitely state that they would 

go no further. That was as far as they would go — with the firefighters or the police, and would not 

recommend any other industry at all. 

 

Now, as I stated a few moments ago, labour is opposed to the resolution as it is on the Order Paper, but I 

know is favourable to the 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

26 

 

amendment which has been requested for a good many years, requesting a National Code. It is only 

reasonable, Mr. Speaker, that all provinces should operate under similar legislation. We would of course 

— and I say this just in closing — expect that the National Code, if and when it ever does come about, 

would be at least the equivalent of the legislation in this province. We are very proud of the labour 

legislation here, and would not want to take a retrograde step by accepting something inferior. 

 

With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that I will support the amendment. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — I am not a labour specialist, or anything like that; I am just a 

farmer, and I have a few thoughts that I would like to contribute on this occasion. They will be very 

brief. 

 

I find, however, that the general producer back on the farm suffers most from any strike. I do not care 

whether it is a packing-house strike or a terminal strike or a strike on the lake, shippers or anything else. 

It is always the natural producers, the farmers, who get the short end of the stick. We had an example of 

it, last fall. I am not critical of labour at all, but what I cannot understand in my limited way is why a 

thing which affects not only the labour and the management or the employer, but affects the whole 

national economy, should be allowed to happen in a wheat producing country as we are, where we pile 

up our wheat in the fall by the millions and hundreds of millions of bushels. We have a navigation 

season here which is very limited, and it is to our interest to get every bushel of grain that we can from 

our farms down to the terminals, then across the Lakes to seaports so that they can be available for 

shipment during the season over the oceans, because there is where we must unload 80 per cent of our 

production. No group no matter how powerful they are (and I apply this both to labour and management) 

should by their obstinacy, or by their unreasonable attitude to each other, be permitted to tie up the 

transportation system of this country and jeopardize not only the 500,000 farmers in this country who 

are dependent on the markets for their living — not only them, but the national life as a whole, because 

we have been told in this House quite often that now, this last year at least, the wheat production of 

western Canada is the greatest productive part of our whole economy. It exceeded the paper or pulp 

industry by a considerable margin during the last year. 

 

That is one instance. I remember in 1947, I think it was, though the year is not so material; it was the last 

big packinghouse strike we had. And what happened then? Well, the Minister of Agriculture is looking 

at me very intently, and he may be able to give us some inside track of that; but we find that just in the 

fall of that year, when the heavy marketing season of hogs and livestock was in full swing, this strike 

was brought on, and we know what happened. If I remember correctly that was called a „wildcat‟ strike 

or something like that; but we were the ones who suffered, and there were thousands and thousands of 

hogs that had to be kept back on the farm for the reason that there was no way of shipping them out to 

the markets where they could be processed and taken care of. 

 

Again last fall, what happened? Just at the height of the shipping season of our grain — as matter of fact 

I happened to be in the Pool office here in Regina the very morning that the President of the 

Saskatchewan 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

27 

 

Wheat Pool stepped off the train from Winnipeg after having been helpful in finally settling the strike, 

and I have a vivid recollection of his impression of the great money and effort and disaster that pretty 

nearly overtook western Canada just through that one strike. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I am not speaking for either labour or management; I am speaking just for the 

farmer who is always the victim, no matter what happens, when these two powerful elements clash, and 

I say to you that I do not know how to remedy this thing. It is immaterial to me how it is done, but it is 

not showing business ability, and there is certainly lack of honesty of purpose, if the people of Canada 

cannot get together on a problem as vital to all of us as this is. 

 

We are not living today in a jungle; we do not carry a club or a gun or a rock to put the other fellow out 

of business. We have gone past those days a long, long time ago, and I say to you that this amendment 

— as a matter of fact I see nothing wrong with it, only that it is weakening the resolution — sort of 

nullifies any attempt at all to do something that would have been for the benefit of everybody concerned. 

 

I am sure there is no man in this House who would do anything in the world to weaken the ground and 

the position that labour occupies today; but I would point out that, because of those responsibilities (and 

that applies to labour and management alike) it might be well that we take a second thought and a 

second look at this picture. I have not got here, but I wish I had, the statement made by Mr. Mosher not 

long ago, to the effect that he thinks perhaps the time has come when the demands by labour can no 

longer be met by management, and he points out that there might be other ways of getting the thing 

adjusted in some way. The consequences of anything like that I am not going to go into; but these are 

things that we should seriously consider, and when we look at British Columbia now, what do we find? 

Here is the terminal elevators full of wheat and boats come in there at great expense — I think I saw in 

the press where it costs some boats about a thousand dollars a day to lie idle at that port without any 

grain. All that is involved is 250 men, and I think it is a month or more that this strike has carried on. 

Surely to goodness, commonsense and business acumen can fix this thing up. There is no question about 

that; all we need is the machinery. I am surprised that the labour unions in this county — they are 

powerful, they are well organized, they are well led — should be afraid to sit down with the employers 

and with the Government, under the watchful eyes of the Provincial and Federal Governments, and work 

out some certain rules through which strikes of this kind could be settled without having to spend 

months and sometimes more, while the national economy and certain people in the country who are 

dependent on these services, suffer. 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — I was not going to make any comments at all, but since 

the hon. member for Arm River purported to speak the farm viewpoint I would like very briefly to 

express my own viewpoint as a farmer, too, on this question of labour. 

 

I can recall very well, Mr. Speaker, the time when wages were very low — as a matter of fact when boys 

were being farmed out to the farms at $5 a month. This was a time when we experienced the greatest 

economic difficulties in agriculture. I learned very early on in the farm movement, and in my very close 

association with the working people, that if labour got better 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

28 

 

wages and enjoyed better living standards, similarly the farmers could expect to receive more for the 

product of their labours. 

 

I quite agree with the hon. member for Arm River that these very sharp economic conflicts are not 

desirable; but surely this proposal contained in the resolution proposed by the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition is not going to find a solution to the inherent conflict that takes place between employer and 

employee. I regret that the hon. Leader of the Opposition and again the hon. member for Arm River 

confused the issue by presupposing that the farmer was the only one who suffered as a result of strikes. 

We know that industry suffers similarly. We know that labour itself suffers as a consequence of delays; 

but the strike is the only weapon they have. It is part of the kind of economy and the kind of society 

under which we live, which is a competitive society, just referred to by the hon. member for Arm River 

as being the „law of the jungle‟, and which seems to be the rule of the day. I have always thought, Mr. 

Speaker, that by building a proper economic system, a co-operative type of economy, we could remove 

many of these inherent conflicts, and I suggest that that is the only way they are going to be resolved. 

They are not going to be removed by legislation, and you cannot expect the lion and the lamb to lie 

down together, or compel them to lie down together by law. We are not going to stop labour, if they are 

driven to desperation, from finally resorting to strike action, no matter what we do. 

 

So in the proposed amendment it seems to me that a National Labour Code, if it were implemented, if 

we had a code of that nature which would apply across the country, it would at least afford in some 

degree a formula under which labour and management could get together. 

 

The hon. member for Arm River referred to the strike that took place at the time when we were 

transporting our grain to the seaports. I would like to draw his attention to the fact that one shipping firm 

has a monopoly on the shipping on the Great Lakes and diverted their boats to the shipment of ore which 

was more remunerative, and we finally had to appoint a Transport Controller to get those boats back to 

haul grain again. I would like to suggest to him, too, that on many occasions the packinghouse people 

and the machine company people have victimized the farmers by raising their prices at a time when 

there was no strike in the offing, and when no increase in wages had actually taken place at all. 

 

I would suggest to him then, if his criterion is correct, there should have been a strike in the huge 

fertilizer plant at Calgary, since the price of fertilizer has gone up in recent years from $65 to $106 a ton. 

There was no labour problem involved there at all, and I suggest to him that inherently the farmer is less 

victimized by labour than he is by capitalism. As a matter of fact, when one scrutinizes the record you 

find the exploitation taking place as a result of the same type of employer endeavouring also to ride on 

the back of the farmer by increasing the price of everything that goes into farm operation costs. 

 

I suggest, too, that if labour and farmer will work closely together, they can reconcile many of these 

differences by building a co-operative commonwealth in which such inherent conflicts between human 

beings will be removed. 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats): — I beg to move the adjournment of the debate. 

 

(Adjournment agreed to) 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

29 

 

MOTION RE GRAIN STORAGE 
 

Moved by Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg), seconded by Mr. Dewhurst: 

 

“That, in view of the fact present public grain storage and transpiration facilities seriously fail to meet 

present day conditions arising in part from farm mechanization and inequalities in the quota system, 

this Assembly urges that, in the interests of orderly marketing and the stabilizing of farm income, the 

Federal Government make immediate provision for: 

 

(a) storage payments comparable to elevator storage charges on grain suitably stored by farmers; 

 

(b) substantial advance payments on grain stored in approved bins.” 

 

Mr. E.H. Walker (Gravelbourg): Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw a few important points to your 

attention before moving this motion. 

 

We all know the desperate need of the farmers, this last two or three years, for storage payments for the 

wheat which they have had to hold on their farms for quite long periods of time, as well as for the 

advance payments on the grain which they must hold. In the first place, I think we all realize, as we 

drive throughout Saskatchewan, the tremendous need for proper storage. We can see on farm after farm 

old and dilapidated bins which are not fit to keep a cat in on a good day, and yet we have to store 

thousands of bushels of grain in those same bins for periods up to a year, through some of the most 

adverse weather conditions possible. 

 

We know also that the space at the various delivery points throughout Saskatchewan is not anywhere 

near adequate. With the present high mechanization of Saskatchewan farms we find the crop being taken 

off, in good weather at least, in a matter of a few weeks. All of that grain could be hauled in. The 

machinery is there so that all of that grain could be hauled in if space was available, and yet we find that 

the total elevator storage space at those points have increased not very much in the last five or ten years. 

 

We also know that the storage space at these small towns throughout Saskatchewan varies quite 

considerably. We know that the storage space is not in proportion to the wheat acreage of that area. We 

find tremendous variations in the yields per acre in different areas, and all of this goes to make for very 

serious inequalities under the quota system as it operates at present. 

 

I know that the Canadian Wheat Board has done a very excellent job in improving their methods of 

establishing their quotas for different points over the past few years, but I do not think any system can be 

devised where they are going to keep the quotas strictly equal as between delivery points and according 

to need. 

 

I want to just point out, Mr. Speaker, that, in Hansard of February 17, the Minister, Mr. Howe, in 

answering some questions, pointed out 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

30 

 

that as of November, 24, 1952 (just last fall) out of 329 delivery points on a 15-bushel quota there were 

264 delivery points on a 5-bushel quota. I think we as farmers can readily remember that situation. We 

found areas that were thrown open on a 15-bushel quota. The farmers in those areas could deliver up to 

15 bushels per seeded acre immediately, or almost immediately, that the crop year started. We found 

other areas where month after month would go by when the farmers could not deliver a bushel of grain, 

although a 5-bushel quota was established. The elevators were plugged, and there were only possibly 

one or two farmers who were able to get in a few loads of grain to plug that available space, and after 

that there was simply no wheat moved in that delivery point for sometimes months. 

 

Those conditions are very serious indeed because the farmer who might happen to get his work 

custom-combined, who might happen to have an early crop, would get all of his crop off within the 

matter of a few days, and, if he were lucky, he might even get all of his wheat into the elevator within a 

few days, whereas the other farmer who had to wait for the custom combiner, or who had to wait for his 

crop to get ready, simply could not get any wheat in because the elevators were plugged, and they 

remained plugged for periods of three and four months. 

 

We also find that, as of December 9, 1952, delivery quotas in Manitoba were 15 bushels per acre all 

over the province. In Alberta it was not raised to the 15-bushel per acre until January 30, almost two 

months later; but on January 30, 1953, Saskatchewan still had 929 out of a total of 1100 delivery points, 

on less than a 15-bushel quota. Saskatchewan still had 929 points on less than a 15-bushel quota on 

January 30. 

 

I think these figures clearly indicate, Mr. Speaker, the very serious inequality as between provinces. We 

do not for one minute complain about the fact that the Canadian Wheat Board is taking wheat from areas 

in Manitoba and even in Alberta, for they have a short haul, where they can rush that wheat to the 

seaboard to get rid of overseas and to supply available markets. We do not criticize that, Mr. Speaker, 

but we think that the farmer in Saskatchewan, who has to make storage space available for all of his 

wheat so that the farmer in Manitoba can deliver his, should be compensated at least in part for that. 

 

We all recognize that there is a certain amount of storage needed in Saskatchewan, but under the present 

highly-mechanized wheat farms it would be quite impossible for the transportation companies or the 

elevator companies to handle the necessary wheat fast enough, and we think that the farmer should have 

some good and proper storage on his farm. I think the storage payments would certainly tend to 

encourage the farmers to build a certain amount of proper storage on his farm. 

 

One other very important advantage of making storage payments available to farmers (as I said it would 

encourage the farmers to build storage) it would tend to lessen the terrific glut on the market during 

harvest time. The farmer who was not interested in getting some cash immediately could hold his wheat 

back and allow farmers who needed the cash to sell some wheat. That in itself, Mr. Speaker, would 

lesson some of the congestion in the local elevators, and it would allow the farmers to have a little better 

choice, or at least a little more opportunity to have a choice, to deliver the grain to his own elevator if he 

wished. 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

31 

 

I know of a good many points in my constituency where the Saskatchewan Pool elevators handled well 

over 50 per cent of the crop in that area, but the last few years, because the farmers have to take the 

space as it comes available in whichever elevator it becomes available, that percentage has dropped 

quite considerably, probably down to a third where it previously had been one-half. 

 

There would not be any unnecessary administrative problems. The Canadian Wheat Board has in the 

past (and I think it can again in the future) made it possible for storage payments to paid on wheat. All 

they would have to do would be to simply increase the initial price of the wheat by a half-cent or a cent 

or two cents a bushel, depending on the amount of time that it was held by the farmer at the time that he 

delivered his grain. It would not cost anything to do that — or at least not very much; and yet it would 

give the farmer the privilege of getting storage payments on the particular wheat which he held for the 

Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

It would not take any money out of the Federal treasury. We are simply asking for a redistribution of the 

present grain storage charges. We are simply asking that the farmer should be treated as the elevator 

companies are now treated. We are asking that the farmer, when he has to store grain, should receive 

payment for it, as the elevator companies now who have to store grain for the Canadian Wheat Board 

are receiving payment for it. 

 

The Wheat Board would have the decision to make as to the length of time that the farmers should 

receive storage payments on their wheat, and they would also have the opportunity of deciding when 

that storage should be available. There might be some years when the transportation companies and the 

elevator companies could handle the wheat fast enough so that no farmer would be forced to store 

wheat. Under those conditions I do not think the farmer would rightfully expect that he should receive 

storage for his wheat, but under conditions as we have now, where we have had two or three of the 

largest crops in history . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the hon. member a question. I think what he says is 

correct; but has he thought of including in his resolution that these payments should be made only until 

such time as the Wheat Board is able to take delivery of the grain? Before we pass it, I think that should 

be put in it — if we are going to pass it. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Your suggestion was that the payments should be made available only 

until such time as the Canadian Wheat Board could accept the wheat. Well, that was my understanding, 

that that was what the resolution was asking for, and I would be quite willing to put that right into the 

resolution. The only thing is we are getting so many things into the resolution, and we did not want to 

make it too long, but if anybody cared to move the amendment I would certainly support it. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — That is what happened before. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Yes, that is what happened, I think, during the war years, when we had 

that condition before . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I had in mind that it might be put in at the end. I just wondered if the hon. member 

would accept it — that these payments, storage and advance payments should be made until the Wheat 

Board was able and prepared to take delivery of such grain or something of the sort. 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

32 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Yes, I would certainly support that. I do not know the procedure of 

getting it in there now. 

 

Mr. Tucker: — That could be put right at the end. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — For the crop year ending July 31, 1952, it was pointed out in the annual 

report of the Canadian Wheat Board that some $15,300,000 had been paid out to the elevator companies 

for storage for that year. The storage capacity for western Canada has increased slightly over the past 

two or three years, which I think is all to the good, up to a point. The storage capacity in 1949 was 

approximately 262½ million bushels. The storage capacity in 1952 was some 305 million bushels. In 

that three-year period it increased approximately 42½ bushels; that is, the licensed storage capacity in 

the local elevators. That increase of 42½ million bushels is costing the prairie wheat growers 

approximately $425,000 a month, or in the neighbourhood of $5 million a year. 

 

As I said, I do not altogether criticize the elevator companies for increasing their storage because, 

certainly, in certain delivery points that increased storage was necessary. But $5 million a year would go 

a long way to improving and providing proper storage facilities throughout the farms of western Canada. 

 

The other very important thing which we are asking for in this resolution is the advance payments on 

grain stored in approved bins. The United States has had this for a number of years under the 

Commodity Credit Corporation, and apparently it works very well. There has been no suggestion that it 

should be withdrawn — at least not as far as I know. I talked to a number of wheat-growers in the 

United States, across the border, and they tell me that, in the fall of the year, they put their wheat in their 

own bin. They apply for an advance payment on that wheat, the bin is inspected by an inspector for the 

corporation, I presume, and if the bin meets their approval the farmer can borrow up to 90 per cent of the 

total value of that wheat. Then in the spring of the year (I believe it is the end of April), the farmer is 

notified that he must deliver that wheat to his local elevator and take settlement; or he can return the 

money which he has already received, and he can take his chances on selling the wheat at any time that 

he wants. And obviously, if the farmer sees that the price of wheat is higher, then he will return the 

advance payment and he will sell his wheat on the market; but if he sees that the market has gone down, 

or is liable to go down, he will quite probably take settlement for the wheat at that time and deliver his 

grain to a local elevator company. 

 

There is one other thing which I want to draw to your attention. As we all know, the small farmer who 

probably operates at a very minimum amount of capital, probably does not have very much money in the 

bank. By the time the harvest season comes around he has spent most of his available cash, and it is then 

necessary for him to either sell some wheat or borrow some more money. It is those farmers of whom I 

am thinking when I ask for this substantial advance payment on grain stored, because it is the farmer 

who cannot get his wheat in to the elevator who needs this advance money. 

 

We know that, in the last year, Saskatchewan has probably experienced one of the worst conditions for 

credit buying that we have ever seen, not only with the implement companies — or rather through the 

Farm Improvement Loans, through the banks, and through all the storekeepers and co-ops throughout 

Saskatchewan. The people of Saskatchewan have built up one of the largest 

  



 

March 19, 1953 

 

33 

 

amounts of credit that probably has ever existed, and I think it would be much more sensible, Mr. 

Speaker, if the credit which these farmers got was based on the amount of wheat that they had in their 

bins rather than on how they got along with their local banker. We all know that the banks will loan 

money to the farmer who does not need it, to the farmer who has lots of wheat and no credit out. But it is 

not those farmers whom we are thinking of; it is the farmer who probably has a small store bill, a small 

bill with his Co-op, and possibly some money borrowed on his machinery. It is those people who need 

money, and who should be able to borrow money on the wheat which they have in their bins to pay off 

these local debts. We all recall that, in 1952, the Federal Government guaranteed to the banks that they 

would back up 25 per cent of the aggregate loans made to the farmers of that year by the banks. 

 

The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, I am told, at that time offered to the Federal Government that they 

would advance money to the farmers if the Federal Government would guarantee 2½ per cent of the 

loans made. The Federal Government said they would not do that, but they would back loans made by 

the banks to the extent of 25 per cent. We all know how difficult it is to get money from a bank when we 

need it. We all know how easy it is to get it when we do not need it. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that I will draw my remarks to a close and ask for the unanimous support of this 

resolution since it is so desperately needed now. It is a tremendously serious problem throughout all of 

Saskatchewan, and I will move, Mr. Speaker, the resolution standing in my name. 

 

Premier Douglas: — May I rise just on a question of procedure for a moment, Mr. Speaker. The Leader 

of the Opposition has just suggested that this might be clarified by having an amendment added to it, 

and I wondered if the members who are going to speak on this resolution would like to adjourn the 

debate and prepare that amendment. The reason I do so is that we are in a bit of a problem. There are 

two Bills on the Order Paper in the Committee of the Whole — the Department of Telephones and the 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones Acts, which ought to be given assent to this week, because of 

the financing arrangements that are going on. If it were possible we would like to get to them this 

afternoon, and deal with them in Committee of the Whole — there may be some House amendments and 

one thing and another — and get assent tomorrow. It would help our position materially, and I just 

wondered if the members who wanted to speak on this would mind very much postponing their remarks 

until a later date. It would also give those who are interested in putting in that amendment, the chance to 

prepare it. 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I would like at this time to adjourn the debate, and I 

will discuss it with the Clerk of the Assembly. It may be possible that I, as the seconder, can incorporate 

this amendment, but if not, we will see that steps are taken. I would like to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Agreed) 

 

After some time in Committee of the Whole, the Assembly adjourned at 6.05 p.m. 


