



















































Hansard: March 25, 1953


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Twelfth Legislature 

29th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 25, 1953 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

Before the Orders of the Day: 

 

DEATH OF QUEEN MARY 
 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all members of the House and all the constituents 

whom they represent were saddened, yesterday, by the news of the death of the Dowager Queen Mary. 

Her death at 85 years of age brings to an end a period and an era in the history of the people of the 

British Commonwealth of Nations. 

 

I am sure that as we pause at this time to pay tribute to her, our minds are bound to go back over the 

many years during which she and her late husband King George V, were associated with the people of 

the Commonwealth and the people of Canada. I remember myself as a boy going to school in the city of 

Glasgow and seeing the Queen Mother and King George V visiting the bombed areas that had been 

destroyed by the zeppelin raids that took place during the first World War; and during those years of the 

first World War, and during the economic recession and later the economic depression that followed the 

war, the steadiness and the courage which she and her husband displayed, and the leadership which they 

gave to the people of the Commonwealth, impressed itself on the minds of their subjects. And through 

those years the people in all parts of the Commonwealth came to admire and to respect both the King 

and his Queen. When, in 1936, King George V died and the great Lady whom we now honour in 

passing, her sons, first King Edward VIII for less than a year and later King George VI, ascended the 

Throne, most of us felt that her influence for good, her interest in the people of the Commonwealth, the 

exemplary family life which she and her family had represented, was a steadying influence throughout 

those troubled years. 

 

Throughout the years of the second World War, even though she was advanced in years, she continued 

to assist in many ways, the people of the United Kingdom, and particularly the people of blitzed 

London. 

 

In 1949, when it was my privilege to represent this Legislature at the Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Conference, I think one of the most memorable evenings of my life was when the delegation were 

invited to Buckingham Palace to be received by King George VI and his Queen and there was in 

attendance also at the reception and the supper, the Dowager Queen Mary. I had the privilege of talking 

to her, and she seemed to be so delighted with the reception her son and his Queen had had during their 

visit to Canada and to Saskatchewan. I found her a most delightful person, 

  



 

March 25, 1953 

 

2 

 

with a quiet dignity, with a gentleness, with a manner that put one instantly at one‟s ease, and I was most 

impressed with her knowledge of Canada. She had read a great many Canadian authors; she asked many 

pertinent questions about Canada, about its geography, about its trade, about its people, about their 

customs. I found her making inquiries about Canadian painters and Canadian artists and Canadian 

writers — many question which I practically couldn‟t answer; but I was amazed that one who was in 

advanced years (then over 80) and living in the city of London, should know so much about the 

far-flung corners of the British Commonwealth of Nations. And that interview impressed itself upon my 

mind. Here was one who, throughout her life, not only when she sat on the Throne with her husband, in 

the later years when most people wouldn‟t be spending very much time except thinking about their own 

immediate family and their own immediate problems, she was concerned and she was interested in what 

was going on in all parts of the Commonwealth, and her heart was always open to the problems of the 

people whom she loved and who, through the years, had grown to love her. 

 

While her death now is not unexpected — no one‟s death is unexpected when they reach 85 years of age 

— nevertheless I am sure all of us will have a little feeling of sadness that this brings to an end a period 

that, for all of us, has many memories, because she has been associated with a period in our history, a 

period of two great wars, when we all stood together against tyranny and oppression and injustice, 

during periods of economic stress and strain, during periods that might well have broken the 

Commonwealth asunder, and through it all she has been associated with us, and the period she 

represents is a period that is filled with memories, some of them happy and some of them anxious. 

 

I am sure that all members would want to pay tribute to her memory, to express to Her Majesty the 

Queen our sympathy at the loss which she has sustained, and to express our condolences at the loss 

which has come to all members in the Royal Family. 

 

I would like, therefore, by leave of the Assembly, to move, seconded by Mr. Tucker: 

 

“That a humble Message of Condolence be sent to Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II, in the following 

words: 

 

„TO THE QUEEN‟S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY: 

 

Most Gracious Sovereign, 

 

We, Your Majesty‟s dutiful and loyal subjects, members of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

in Session assembled, humbly extend to Your Majesty and to All Members of the Royal Family, our 

heartfelt sympathy on the death of our beloved Queen Mary. 

 

Knowing we express the sentiments of all the people we represent, we are deeply conscious of a vivid 

sense of personal loss, of sorrow and bereavement, in the passing of a Great Lady revered here and 

throughout the Commonwealth as in the United Kingdom itself with whose people and fortunes She 

has been identified closely throughout Her long and exemplary life. A mirror of all that is best in 

family life, adorning with lustre and a quiet dignity all to which She set her hand, She shall remain in 

our memories as the embodiment of the 

  



 

March 25, 1953 

 

3 

 

virtues and graces which, throughout her lifetime, have been associated with our First Family. 

 

We humbly pray that Divine Providence will sustain and comfort Your Majesty and All Members of 

the Royal Family in this hour of great sorrow and bereavement.‟ ” 

 

Mr. W.A. Tucker (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, we of the Opposition wholeheartedly 

endorse the sentiments expressed by the Premier in moving this resolution, and the terms of the 

resolution itself. 

 

Queen Mary undoubtedly has set a great example in many fields as a devoted wife and mother, and as a 

great Queen in serving the people of the Commonwealth and Empire, both while her husband was King 

and later after he passed away. 

 

We join most sincerely in expressing our deepest sympathy to Her Majesty the Queen and the other 

members of the Royal Family in their bereavement and wholeheartedly support the resolution. 

 

(Carried unanimously) 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), seconded by Mr. Tucker: 

 

That the Message contained in the Resolution just passed be transmitted by cable to Her Majesty 

forthwith. 

 

(Carried unanimously) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6.00 o‟clock p.m. 


