



















































Hansard: March 13, 1953


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Twelfth Legislature 

22nd Day 

 

Friday, March 13, 1953 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

Before the Orders of the Day: 

 

Question re Woollen Mill 
 

Mr. J.E. McCormack (Souris Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded 

with I would like to make reference to a news story — a very short one — which appeared in some of 

the back pages of the „Leader-Post‟ yesterday. It deals with reports that the Government-owned woollen 

mill in Moose Jaw may close, and it goes on to quote the financial situation with respect to the woollen 

mill. I would like to ask the Government if there is any truth in the report. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I would hardly be responsible for the reports in the „Leader-Post‟. I 

think they had the sodium-sulphate plant closed at one time, and two or three other Government plants 

closed at various times, and I think the matter of the operation of the woollen mill or any other Crown 

Corporation will be made known in due course, and there will be an excellent opportunity for asking 

questions about it when the Crown Corporations Committee gets to that particular item. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Do I take it from the Premier‟s statement that the report is not true? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Any statement with regard to it will be made in due course and in the proper 

manner. 

 

Correction 
 

Hon. J.H. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wish 

to make a correction on a report appearing in the „Leader-Post‟ which may give rise to some 

misunderstanding: 

 

“Municipalities undertaking these projects will be required to pay the capital cost over 40 years . . .” 

 

followed by: 

 

“The project could be assigned to churches or charitable organizations.” 

 

It is not the intention to have the projects assigned to churches or other organizations, except to operate. 

Churches or other organizations might, at the request of the municipalities concerned, be assigned to 

operate such projects. 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

2 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed from Thursday, March 12, 1953, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of 

the Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): That Mr. Speaker do now leave the chair. (The Assembly to 

go into Committee of Supply). 

 

Hon. J.W. Burton (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, on rising to speak in support of the motion, 

I realize that it is rather late in the Session to offer congratulations; but this being the first time that I 

have availed myself of an opportunity to take part in any debate, I should like to take advantage of the 

occasion to congratulate you on once again being elected to fill the high position of Speaker of this 

Assembly. I am sure that you will continue to bring honour to yourself and our democratic institution of 

government. I fully realize that with any honour there also go duties and responsibilities, and I sincerely 

hope that I shall never by word or action be the cause of adding to your burden of responsibility. 

 

While I intend to deal with the work of the Department of Provincial Secretary later, permit me to say 

that the activities of this Department are being greatly expanded. This will require considerable 

reorganization; but it is hoped that this can be done without any increase in the number of the over-all 

staff. I wish to express my appreciation to all members of the staffs in the various branches and bureaux 

for the co-operation they have given in this task of reorganization, and for carrying on their regular 

duties during this transition period. 

 

I should like, also, to make a few observations of a general nature. First, I want to thank the good people 

of Humboldt constituency for giving me this opportunity to again represent them in this Assembly, and I 

want to assure all of them, regardless of whether they voted for me or not, that I shall endeavour at all 

times to keep the interests of our constituency, which is one of the best mixed-farming areas in the 

province, constantly in my mind. 

 

Also, I wish to express my appreciation to the hon. Premier for the opportunity he has given me to be of 

service to all the people of the province in my present position. Permit me to say that, in all humility, the 

honour conferred on me by the Premier of the province and the people of Humboldt constituency will be 

an incentive to me to try to deserve it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in dealing with the budget, I should like to add my voice to the many, in congratulating the 

hon. Provincial Treasurer for the able manner in which he presented his ninth annual report on the 

affairs of the province, and the provisions made to meet the rapidly expanding activities of our people. 

When he so adeptly quoted from the Speech from the Throne, which was read at the opening of the first 

Session of the first Legislature, forty-seven years ago, I could not help but recall the harvests referred to, 

namely, 1904-1905 and that I, as a barefoot boy, had in a small way helped to garner those crops. To the 

pioneers, the rewards of their labour not only gave them sustenance but also gave them hope for the 

future. Most of them realized that this was not a land flowing with milk and honey, yet they knew by 

those returns that the land was good. And indeed it was good, because, during the next thirty-five years, 

this soil with the industrious labours of 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

3 

 

our hard-working fathers produced billions of dollars of new wealth, and it became known as the 

„Breadbasket of the World‟. 

 

But the greater part of that wealth was being siphoned-off into the coffers of those far removed from the 

scene of production. The rich promises of the early days at the turn of the century, turned out to be ashes 

in the form of unbearable burdens of debt on the shoulders of the people, on municipalities and their 

Provincial Government. I need not remind you, Mr. Speaker, that there was a Liberal Government in 

office in this province during 30 of those 35 years, and for the greater period of that time, also, a Liberal 

Government at Ottawa. Ah, but some will say that we had the big drought of the early „thirties; but 

permit me to remind them that in those sections of the province where we were able to produce from fair 

to good crops during those years, we were not able to receive enough in return for those crops to meet 

the expenses. Others will say — „but we had a world-wide depression, during the dirty „thirties‟; but 

they fail to mention that we had 25 years or more before the dirty „thirties came along. It is my opinion 

that owing to the policies of the Liberal Party at Ottawa, neither the people nor their Provincial 

Government could ride out the first storm that came along. 

 

In the state of Kansas where I was born, Mr. Speaker, every farmer had a cyclone cellar in his yard, and 

whenever one of those black, ominous-looking clouds appeared with their tail dragging, the first one to 

see it would raise the alarm and every one would make a dash for the cyclone cellar. If it veered or 

lifted, we all came out again feeling thankful that it had passed on by; but remember, no one dared to 

call the ones that raised the alarm a „Calamity Jane‟ as the financial critic of the Opposition referred to 

members on this side of the House, representing farmer constituencies, who tried to warn the 

Government at Ottawa that there were dark clouds appearing on the horizon, and that in many lines of 

agricultural activities, the tails of those clouds were twisting in a menacing manner. 

 

Some of the Opposition speakers, as well as some of the press, find it difficult to reconcile the sunny 

atmosphere of the Provincial Treasurer‟s report on the affairs of the province, and the speeches by 

members representing rural constituencies; but the fact remains that our agricultural economy is in for a 

rough time unless something is done about it soon, and the hon. Provincial Treasurer made that amply 

clear. Yet the Liberals, up to their usual tactics, will take a few words here and a sentence there and 

patch them together to meet their own ends of trying to discredit something that they want to discredit. 

 

If anyone only stops to realize it, even now the only phase of agriculture that can pay its own way is that 

of wheat mining. If you stop to think, Mr. Speaker, during the past year we had a bountiful harvest that 

made it possible for that branch of agriculture to carry some of the burden of the non-paying 

propositions — but how long can we carry on wheat mining? Nor can anyone foretell that we will have 

a „repeat‟ in the production such as we had last year. Furthermore, it is my opinion that were it not for 

the millions of dollars that are being poured into this province to carry on exploration and development 

work fostered and encouraged by this Government, even now the picture would not be as rosy as it 

appears. 

 

For fifty years or more, the farmers of western Canada have fought step by step, trying to obtain a 

measure of security and a semblance of 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

4 

 

stability in agricultural prices; yet after all those years, we are still faced with the same old problem in 

that the farmer is the first that must bear the brunt of a recession in prices, and be the last to benefit from 

any upswing. For a short period of time, during the latter part of the second World War, we did have 

stability, and for the first time almost parity prices; and when the Federal Government entered into the 

International Wheat Agreement, on the basis of the prices as they were at that time, our C.C.F. group at 

Ottawa made it amply clear that those prices would be fair only so long as the cost of production was 

kept at the same level. But every one knows what happened. The ink had hardly become dry on that 

document when the Liberal Government started to remove price ceilings. The farm machinery 

companies, who were already making a good profit, were allowed to „jack-up‟ their prices, and there has 

been a steady rise in the prices ever since. For example, a combine that was then well paid for at $3,200 

or $3,300, now costs at least $2,000 more. The same holds true of almost every implement or tool that a 

farmer needs, while the implement companies are making still more and bigger profits. 

 

Now speaking of the budget delivered by the hon. Provincial Treasurer and the criticism offered thereto 

by the official financial critic of the Opposition, did it not seem strange to you, Mr. Speaker, that when 

the House first met and we had the Throne Speech Debate, the Opposition moved an amendment to the 

Throne Speech, which was a „want of confidence‟ in the Government? I cannot see how they could 

visualize that the people of the province would take kindly to them, the Opposition, telling them that this 

Government did not have the people‟s confidence, in spite of the fact that they just, so recently, had 

come back with a clear and emphatic and decisive mandate from the people. 

 

They did that; but then along comes the budget, Mr. Speaker, and they criticized the budget. They do not 

like it, and they let the opportunity go by without moving an amendment to show where we were at fault 

in raising either too much money, or not enough; where we should spend more money or spend less. 

They, in their criticism of the budget, did not take the one step that they should have taken, this Session, 

but they had the audacity to tell the people out in the country that they did not know what they were 

doing when they returned this Government to office. 

 

When the hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) undertook to criticize the budget a week ago, he 

spent considerable time trying to show how much better the Liberals in Ottawa were doing. Well now, if 

he likes to look at other budgets so much, I should like to draw to his attention, one that his own Party 

presented in this House, the first year, Mr. Speaker, when you, the hon. Minister of Natural Resources, 

the hon. member for Kelvington and I had the pleasure and honour of being members of this Assembly. 

I would say, Mr. Speaker, that I have that budget right here in my possession. I have the estimates also, 

and you will recall that the total sum voted amounted to $14,030,649. Oh yes! He had an additional 

$8,725,214 as Statutory appropriation, making a little more than $22¾ million. I can just imagine, Mr. 

Speaker, how many people would be disappointed if our Minister of Highways only had that total vote 

of $14 million to spend on highways this year. There would be more members than the hon. member 

from Wilkie complaining that there was not anything done in his constituency. I wonder how far our 

Minister of Public Works would be able to get with his power and gas and public building programme, 

if he could only have the total vote that we had that year, Mr. Speaker. 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

5 

 

For agriculture the friends of agriculture to your left, Mr. Speaker, had $400,000; Highways, 

$1,097,110, and so it goes on down the line. And I also found this item, Mr. Speaker, an item for the 

Bureau of Publications, $46,000. Did I hear correctly, at a Public Accounts Committee meeting some 

time ago, where our friends of the Opposition were criticizing it as a „propaganda agency‟? Well, here 

back in 1939 they voted $46,000 for it. On the other side of the ledger they estimated a possible total 

revenue of $20,783,299, leaving an estimated deficit of almost $2 million, and their „propaganda 

agency‟, as they are pleased to call it now, brought in the handsome sum of $450 listed as Casual 

Revenue. So, in spite of a deficit budget, they spent $46,000 on what they now call propaganda. Their 

Minister of Highways — he was a nice chap, but he had so little to do that they made him Minister in 

charge of Old-Age Pensions and Mothers‟ Allowance. If you went to him for help for a municipality or 

to have a bad stretch of road of their so-called highway system fixed up, he acted like a mother on his 

pension list. But if you pleased with him on behalf of a widow on mothers‟ allowance, or that should be 

on mothers‟ allowance, you were dealing with a highway man, and just about the only highways work 

that you could see was that which went on the few miles that they did every time, in the Humboldt 

constituency, when we had one of our frequent elections there. 

 

No doubt some will raise their old excuses that the Government and the people had gone through a 

trying time. I agree — but even then, I contend, Mr. Speaker, that they did not use good business 

management. 

 

But let us look at the 1943 budget, which I also have here, Mr. Speaker. That budget had gone up less 

than $4½ million and they barely managed to balance it at that — and you can go up and down the list 

of details covering that budget and you will find the same meagre provisions made as listed in the 1939 

budget. My hon. friends will recall that, at this time, we had had several years of so-called wartime 

prosperity, and that brings out the two points that I wanted to emphasize: first, as budgeteers, the 

Liberals were not so hot, and second, it proved what we have always contended — that we were correct 

when we have said that the farmers were the last to benefit from any upswing of prices, and that 

experience in the early war days proved it, and as I mentioned before, were the first to get it „in the 

neck‟ on the downward beat. You will recall the special trips to Ottawa by farmer delegations and, even 

then, the Liberal Government at Ottawa did not come to its senses until after the by-elections in Selkirk 

and Humboldt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the hon. Premier invited me to become a member of the Executive Council, he listed 

a number of problems that required special attention. One of them was to examine the possibilities of 

giving a greater measure of protection to farmers who owned the mineral rights on any of their land. 

Many people took that to mean that I was to prepare a different method of paying compensation for 

surface rights; in fact quite a number of people wrote to me along those lines. Some did not know 

whether they owned the mineral rights or not, and others wanted action taken to prevent any form of 

exploration work going on, on their property. To all of them I had to explain that compensation for the 

use of surface rights still comes under the regulations of the Department of Natural Resources, or, as it 

soon will be known, the Department of Mineral Resources. I may also add that the hon. Minister of 

Natural Resources has had a committee working for some time trying to prepare a better formula for the 

payment of compensation for the use of surface rights. No doubt the hon. Minister will be making an 

announcement on that question as soon as he and his committee have worked out a better formula. 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

6 

 

On the other hand, the trading in free-hold mineral rights comes under The Securities Act and, as hon. 

members know, this is, even now, in the stage of being transferred over from the Department of the 

Attorney-General to my jurisdiction. 

 

In the meantime, my officials and I have given considerable study to this matter in an endeavour to find 

ways and means to give the owners of free-hold mineral rights a greater measure of protection from 

so-called „slick operators‟ and yet not unnecessarily interfering with the legitimate activities of the 

representatives of bona fide oil companies and promoters. I want to say here and now, that there are any 

number of reliable and responsible oil companies working in the province, and they deplore the methods 

used by a few slick operators just as much as we do. 

 

The greater part of the mineral rights in Saskatchewan are vested in the Crown, yet, as hon. members 

will know, free-hold mineral rights covering a considerable acreage are held by certain corporations, 

granted to them, rightly or wrongly, by the Government at Ottawa, years ago, and also, to a lesser extent, 

there are many parcels of free-hold being held by private individuals. In the case of these rights, some of 

them came to private individuals by obtaining title to the homesteads where the mineral rights went 

along; in other cases, by purchase of land from the aforementioned companies. Regardless how these 

people have acquired these free-hold rights, either from the Federal Government of from corporations, 

the fact remains that they have the ownership thereof, and I am sure that the majority of the people in 

this province would not tolerate this or any other government unnecessarily interfering with the freedom 

of such owners in disposing of that property as they saw fit. 

 

In other words, if I were the owner of a parcel of land, and the title thereof carried the free-hold rights, 

who would be justified to tell me that I could not give that away, if I so desired, either to a charitable 

organization, another individual or a corporation? Or, if I wished to throw my holdings into a pool with 

others holding similar rights, or to sell them outright either in whole or in part, permit me to repeat — 

who has a right to stop me from doing so? On the other hand, it must be remembered that no one could 

force me, or anyone else, to dispose of such rights or property. If I want to dispose of them for a certain 

price or for other considerations, I have the right to see that everything agreed on between me and the 

agent is included in the lease or contract before I sign it. If I do not understand that contract, then there is 

nothing to prevent me from going to any good lawyer — and I think that there still are quite a few of 

them around — or anyone else that I have confidence in, and have the whole thing explained to me. 

 

My advice to all interested people (and in this I implore the help of all hon. members in helping to pass 

it around) is that no one should sign a contract or lease unless he is satisfied that all the conditions and 

the prices are included in the document; also, that any who do not understand such papers should make 

it a point to have them fully explained by someone they know and can trust. I fail to see how anyone in 

his right senses can listen to a sales talk from a complete stranger and then sign a contract in blank. 

 

Here is just an example of the different things that come to my desk. Back in 1949, a certain person sold 

his mineral rights to an oil company 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

7 

 

and the agreement carried with it the usual 12½ per cent royalty. Two and one-half years later, an agent 

called at his place and offered to pay him $100 for his half-interest in the 12½. Now, over a year later, 

this farmer claims that he has been gypped, because he signed the papers in blank, and to use his words, 

and I quote: 

 

“But as I noticed a heading „partial lease, etc.‟ I thought it was okay, and as Christmas was not far 

away, I was glad to get the $100.” 

 

In checking this over, I find that in spite of the farmer‟s foolish actions in signing a lease in blank, the 

agent evidently filled in the proper amount, and there is no doubt that the farmer had a good time with 

his $100. But what appears to be the main reason for the complaint is that while there was little or no 

hope of oil being discovered in that vicinity at the time those two contracts were signed, some years ago, 

now oil has been discovered much nearer home, and another company has offered to pay $100 for just 2 

per cent of his royalties. 

 

Then another example, Mr. Speaker. Another farmer allowed himself to be persuaded to place his 

free-hold holdings into a sort of a pool . . . 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, will the Minister permit a question? I was 

wondering if you were quoting from a letter there, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Burton: — I just quoted a sentence from a letter dealing with that problem. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I wonder if you would table the letter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Burton: — I am just quoting a part from the letter . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — What I wanted, Mr. Speaker, was to know where the letter was from. 

 

Hon. Mr. Burton: — I can assure the hon. member that the letter is actually in my possession, but I do 

not believe in passing people‟s names around like that. I am just bringing it to your attention and to the 

attention of this House, that people should not sign that kind of contract. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I agree with the Minister, but he should have warned us five years ago instead of 

now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Burton: — Here is this other one that I wanted to give you as an example. Another farmer 

allowed himself to be persuaded to enter into this pool on a mutual sort of an arrangement, whereby all 

were supposed to share in the benefits according to the number of acres that they had put into the pool. 

Now he wrote to me, too, and I can assure my hon. friend that I have that letter in my possession; but I 

shall just quote him a sentence from it, and when he finished explaining to me what had happened, he 

said: “Since then, I have been trying to hire someone to kick me around . . .” meaning for having done 

such a foolish thing. 

 

Now I could give you a brief resume of what is being done to try and help clear up this matter. On April 

29, 1952, an Order in Council was 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

8 

 

passed making it clear that trading in mineral rights definitely comes under The Securities Act, and the 

same Order in Council authorized the setting up of a Board to advise and assist in the better carrying out 

of the provisions of The Securities Act, and a more efficient administration thereof. The said Board was 

especially charged and authorized to carry out the following regulations: 

 

(a) Examine the problems in the administration of The Securities Act arising out of the greatly 

increased activity in petroleum and mineral exploration and development, and the consequent 

increased activity in the promotion of companies and organizations offering securities to the public, 

and in the trading of free-hold mineral rights; 

 

(b) consult with and make recommendations to the Registrar under the Act on any matter relating to 

the administration of the Act; 

 

(c) inquire into any matter which in the opinion of the Board is pertinent to the carrying out of the 

provisions of The Securities Act; 

 

(d) to make recommendations to the Minister in respect of any matter mentioned in Clauses (a), (b) 

and (c). 

 

On the following May 27, 1952, an Order in Council was passed, appointing the Board referred to in the 

previous Order. Now this Board has studied the matters. They have made various recommendations. 

Some of the recommendations have been acted on, and they are continuing to keep it under advisement. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I had hoped to be able to cover much more ground. There is the work of the Bureau 

of Publications, all of which I am sure would be interesting, and I hope, during the time that the 

estimates are being dealt with, that I shall have the opportunity to go into it more fully with you then. 

 

I wanted to say, in this respect, that our Tourist Branch of the Bureau of Publications is a very important 

branch and, in view of the fact that in 1955 we will be celebrating the Golden Jubilee Year of this 

Province, we are going to need to bend every effort to having the Bureau of Publications, the Tourist 

Bureau and Parks (which is also being transferred to this Department) work together to make it possible 

for us to accommodate the many people that we expect will be coming into the province on that 

occasion. Parks would also be a very interesting subject to speak upon. 

 

Then we have the Superintendent of Insurance and we have the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies; but, 

as I say, Mr. Speaker, I hope that during the estimates I may be able to deal with them a little longer. I 

have made arrangements with the hon. Minister of Telephones that he was to share part of the time, this 

afternoon, so I think I had better close and give way to him. But before doing so, I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that I have neither the time nor the inclination to delve into the complex diplomacy of 

international affairs, but permit me to say that in my humble opinion, our first 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

9 

 

duty is to put our own national house in order. In addition to that, I believe that this quotation from the 

„Prairie Messenger‟, which is printed at Muenster, in my constituency, can express my sentiments better 

than I could find words to do, and here is what it says in that paper on March 5, 1953: 

 

“There is no such a thing as an American bloc. There is no such thing as a Russian bloc. What does 

exist is either truth or evil. What exists is either the right to live, the right to liberty, the right to bring 

up one‟s children in the love and fear of God, or the denial of those rights. These are the things that 

matter in the world today.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are also my sentiments. 

 

Hon. A.G. Kuziak (Minister of Telephones): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate and 

particularly for the first time this Session, I want to extend my appreciation to the good people of Canora 

for the confidence accorded me for the second time. I want to also express my appreciation and the 

appreciation of my people for the confidence and the honour accorded me by the Premier. I can only say 

that I hope that the future may prove me worthy of that confidence. 

 

I am going right on into the Budget Debate, and the next one that I want to congratulate is the Provincial 

Treasurer. I want to congratulate him on bringing down an expanding budget again, and, may I point 

out, one that has within it more tax cuts than the Federal Government‟s budget brought in the other day, 

and which the press throughout the Dominion and the province of Saskatchewan and even American 

played up so effectively. 

 

I want to point out that bringing down the budget, that as of January 1, 1953, we wiped out the Public 

Revenue Tax, and if you multiply the assessments of the properties in the province of Saskatchewan, 

you will note that this would have brought us in a revenue of $1,800,000. The Committee on the 

Provincial-Municipal Relations brought in a recommendation that, if we do away with the Public 

Revenue Tax, we were to put two cents on a gallon of gasoline. Now in bringing down the budget, the 

increase on gasoline has only been one cent. That one cent will be bringing in $1 million to the revenue 

of the province of Saskatchewan. In other words, we cut our taxes to the people of Saskatchewan by a 

sum of $1,800,000 and put on a one-cent gas tax that will bring us in approximately $1 million. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, a cut in the taxation of Saskatchewan, this year, of $800,000. Mr. Speaker, on 

an estimated budget of $70 million, this $800,000 cut is 11.4 per cent of the budget. 

 

Now let us look at the Federal cut in the budget, one that has been played very efficiently in the „dailies‟ 

of this province and Canada; and as I have always warned — I gave that warning in this House and to 

my people in the province of Saskatchewan — anything the „dailies‟ play up in this province or 

anywhere else — look out! Do the opposite, and you will be right. And so when this terrific play went 

on, I noticed that the „Leader-Post‟, I believe, even went up and down the streets of Regina and snapped 

pictures or photos of people, and I supposed that they mentioned to them 3-cent reduction in the 

cigarette tax and, of course, they threw a smile and, immediately — a flash! And so everybody was 

happy; but I did not see that 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

10 

 

play in the daily press of Saskatchewan when our taxes were actually cut by $800,000, or greater in 

proportion than the cut by the Federal budget. 

 

Now, the total reduction in Federal taxes, as announced, amounts to approximately $350 million on a 

budget of $4,751,000,000, or a cut of 7.3 per cent. Our cut in the province of Saskatchewan is 4.1 per 

cent greater than that of the Federal Government, and yet the „hullabaloo‟ over the air and in the press of 

Saskatchewan and of America — and in this House is right. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — . . . for re-election. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Yes, that is one thing we have to keep in mind. In the one case it is a pre-election 

cut in the budget — bait to the voters of Canada; in the second place, our cut is a post-election cut, one 

that is an honest cut and one that was not looking to buy votes from the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now let us see who benefitted from these taxation cuts. In the first place, in the province of 

Saskatchewan the 2-mill Public Revenue cut affected, I believe, practically every citizen in the province 

of Saskatchewan. Who benefitted from the tax cut of the Federal Government? Well, I am going to tell 

you that if you looked at the press immediately after that cut — the play that they made in the headlines 

of the paper then, as I stated a while ago, look cut! There will only be certain boys that will get the 

benefit of the cut, and the crumbs may fall to the common people of the Dominion of Canada. Checking 

over this reduction in the budget, I find that, for example, a company that is making $20,000 a year — 

their cut is going to be $3,400 annually, $266 monthly, or $9 per day. That is the bigger boys and now, 

mind you, that is not really the „big shots‟ — it is the mediocre corporations. But let us take the 

Canadian „Joe boy‟ — the average Canadian. The average Canadian who draws a salary of $3,000 and 

has two children, his cut in that budget was $4 a year, 33 cents a month, one cent per day. Mr. Speaker, a 

very juicy dish for the big boys — crumbs and leftovers to the Canadian „Joe boy‟. No wonder that the 

press of Saskatchewan, the press of Canada, and then, as my hon. friend from Maple Creek pointed out, 

even the big daily press of America applauded the reduction of that budget. 

 

I want to point out that, for example, International Nickel, one of the bigger boys, is going to get a tax 

cut amounting to $3 million, or $10,000 a day. Now why? The only reason that I can see is that they are 

paying more attention to the big boys who will cough up the campaign funds in the next election than 

they pay attention to the average voter of Canada. 

 

Going back again to the total budget cut amounting to $350 million by the Federal Government, 70 per 

cent of this cut, or $248,500,000, will go to companies and corporations — a few of the bigger boys in 

Canada; 30 per cent of that cut, or $118, 500, 000, will go to the balance of the millions of Canadians. 

 

The Opposition in this House have always claimed that they are “a friend” of the farmer, and I am going 

to check now into the farm income tax collections of the Dominion Government. I would like to point 

out that Saskatchewan farmers paid $3½ million in income taxes; Ontario farmers paid $2 million; all 

the farmers of Quebec paid $50,000. The Dominion Bureau of Statistics, in 1950, shows that the average 

farmer‟s income in Saskatchewan was $2,367; the average income tax paid by the farmer in 

Saskatchewan 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

11 

 

is $31. We go down to the Ontario farmer, whose average income is $3,065, or $700 more than the 

Saskatchewan farmer, and he only paid an income tax of $12.60, or considerably less than 50 per cent of 

what the Saskatchewan farmer paid, although the Saskatchewan farmer received, on the average, $700 

less than did the farmer of Ontario. Now let us go down to the Quebec farmer. The average income of 

the Quebec farmer is $1900, some $467 less than the Saskatchewan farmer, and the average income tax 

collected off the Quebec farmer was 37 cents. Going to British Columbia, the average income of the 

farmer there is $1,600, or $300 less than the Quebec farmer, and almost only one-half of the average 

income of the Ontario farmer, yet the British Columbia farmer, on average, paid $27. The Quebec 

farmer who had an income — I want to repeat that again — $300 more, instead of paying more, he paid 

37 cents. In other words, the British Columbia farmer with $300 net income less than the Quebec 

farmer, paid 70 times the amount the Quebec farmer paid. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, representing a rural area, I want to use everything at my command to protest against 

such diabolical discrimination against certain sections of Canada. I am again wondering, Mr. Speaker. In 

1949 we had a Federal election in this province. I remember that the hon. Leader of the Opposition and 

„Jimmie‟ Gardiner, throughout the province were continuously asking people to send them more Liberal 

champions to fight the cause of the western farmer and the farmer of Saskatchewan. I would like to find 

out where the 13 champions that we sent from Saskatchewan were: why have they not protested this 

unreasonable discrimination in Ottawa? Some of the boys representing Saskatchewan did, and I 

understand that the answer came back. Dr. McCann, Minister of National Revenue, in the House of 

Commons, made a statement that “it is easier to collect from the western people. Due to the Canadian 

Wheat Board, and the different boards in western Canada, it is very easy to collect the income tax.” 

 

Mr. Tucker: — May I ask a question, Mr. Speaker. I have heard the statement made, and I wonder if 

the Minister could give us the reference from Hansard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — You know the references yourself. I have got the air and . . . 

 

Mr. Tucker: — I heard the statement made. When the Minister of the Crown makes a statement, he 

should be able to tell us where it could be found. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — I made the statement that “I understand”; you can check. But let us check. If it is 

easier to collect off the farmers of Saskatchewan, then they probably only have a few inspectors 

collecting the taxes; but while in Quebec and Ontario they have that tremendous difficulty, they must 

have quite a mob of inspectors to do it more efficiently. But, Mr. Speaker, if you check you see that the 

opposite is the truth. In the province of Saskatchewan, where it is so easy to collect the income tax from 

the farmer, they have 60 inspectors making those collections. In Quebec, where it is more difficult, they 

have 22 inspectors. The 22 inspectors collected $50,000. If I am right at all at figuring, they did not even 

earn their salt. But, Mr. Speaker, I am going to make the statement that you can tell the state of the 

Liberal Party from the amount of income tax that they collect from the farmers throughout Canada. If we 

look at Alberta, where the Liberal Party is non-existent, income tax inspectors are just as efficient 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

12 

 

as they are in Saskatchewan and Manitoba. In British Columbia, where they have suffered a similar fate, 

the story is the same. When you go over to Ontario, where they hold some 75 per cent of the Federal 

seats, the collections are mediocre. When you go over to Quebec, and see that practically all the 

constituencies are Liberal, 37 cents is collected from the farmer. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — You do not believe that, yourself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Looking over the budget as a whole, taking into consideration . . . 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask a question? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — May the hon. member ask a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — No, Mr. Speaker. Taking the Federal budget as a whole, taking into consideration 

the collection of income tax, according to my opinion this is the attitude of the Federal authorities: we, 

in Ottawa, intend to give the cream of the budget to eastern Canada‟ we intend to give it to the rich man. 

If, for example, you, Mr. Speaker, receive up to $10,000 in corporation dividends, we of Ottawa are 

prepared to wipe it out entirely. But if you live in the west, and particularly a farmer, we will charge you 

the highest tax possible and we will see to it that you pay every cent of it. I believe it is my duty to 

expose it, representing a rural area. I believe that this kind of discrimination brings disunity to our 

country. I have not anything against the collection of income tax, but we believe that it should be 

collected fairly. 

 

Leaving that, I want to say a few words on Crown Corporations. I am going to go through the 14 smaller 

Crown Corporations that we are operating at the present time, starting with the Saskatchewan 

Government Airways. I want to point out again that, at the commencement of the Saskatchewan 

Government Airways, the Opposition was very bitter and very critical. I want to point out that this is one 

Crown Corporation that has done more than anything else to bring the industrial boom to our northern 

area of the province of Saskatchewan. This was organized mainly to open up the north, to be able to take 

in the prospectors, the fish operators and so on, to bring out the natural resources of the produce from 

the north to the markets of the south, and to take people and equipment to the north. This is one Crown 

Corporation that we commenced definitely as a service. The Opposition had always, in the past, 

criticized it. I want to point out that it was particularly criticized when it made a certain loss, and I want 

to bring to the attention of the House that, in the last number of years, this Saskatchewan Government 

Airways has not only given good service to the people of the north, but it has produced a profit, year by 

year. I want to point out that, this year, this same Corporation produced a profit of $19,978. 

 

Going down to the next Corporation or group of Corporations, Saskatchewan Forest Products, which 

takes in the Timber Board, the Box Factory and the Big River Mill. The Timber Board, the Box Factory, 

the Big River Mill, I want to point out, have brought efficiency and conservation of our forest products. 

The Timber Board, this last year, made a profit of $609,453, plus spending some $60,000 out of profits 

on roads that were required in the north. The Box Factory: I want to point out that we built a new Box 

Factory in Prince Albert, completely modern, and due to the change that was made, there was a loss, this 

year. The loss was $22,134, and I may say that in 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

13 

 

1951 there was a profit of approximately $30,000. The Big River Mill is one of the new Crown 

Corporations and, as experience has shown not only in the province but in the Crown Corporations that 

are operated by the Dominion Government, it is usual that in the first two or three years, there are 

certain difficulties, and so this year the Big River Mill is showing a loss of $64,793. 

 

Taking the three together, the Saskatchewan Forest Products showed an over-all profit, deducting the 

losses, of over one-half million dollars. 

 

Going on to the next Crown Corporation — Saskatchewan Government Insurance, Mr. Speaker, this is 

the „bonanza‟; it is a gold mine. I am going to delve a little bit into figures of the Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance Office. Many of us do not appreciate the benefits that this Office has given to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. I am not going to point only to the profits, but the over-all 

benefits given to the people of the province of Saskatchewan since this Crown Corporation commenced 

business in 1945. I used to be, for a number of years, a Government insurance agent. I remember that 

back prior to the organization of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, for example, the farm 

rates used to be $2.50 per 100 for three years; now the rate is 85 cents per 100 for three years, or a 

reduction of from $1 to approximately 33 cents. In percentage we have been able, by commencing the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, through our competition to bring down the farm rates by 

70 per cent of what they used to be prior to 1945, and I am going to make the statement that had not that 

Crown Corporation started, the rates would have been higher today than they were in 1945. 

 

As an agent, I remember that schools were written up from a minimum of $1 per 100 for three years, to 

a maximum of $2.50 per 100 for three years. The school rate now, not only by the Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance Office, but I believe even by the line companies, has gone down to 70 cents. In 

other words, an average reduction of 50 per cent from what they used to be back in 1945. And I want to 

drive this point home that, had we not commenced the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, 

those rates would have gone up, as the price of any commodity or any service you buy today is 

considerably higher than it used to be, prior to 1945. 

 

I am going to go to the dwellings, and I will take for example, the dwellings in the town of Canora. I 

remember that, prior to 1945, we used to write the dwellings in the town of Canora at $1.40 per 100 for 

three years; now in the town of Canora, the rates have been reduced to 70 cents per 100 for three years. 

In other words, on the dwellings and the business insurance within the towns, the reduction in premiums 

is 50 per cent. 

 

I want to go to automobile insurance. Automobile insurance, I remember even myself having a $50 

deductible automobile insurance policy, a five-point policy, back in 1940. On an automobile valued at 

$1, 048, I paid $59.95 automobile insurance. Our comparison to that policy in 1951 — the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office was actually charging, including the compulsory portion, 

some $19.50 on an automobile worth from two and one-half to three times as much. So I am safe in 

saying that the automobile rates in the province of Saskatchewan have been reduced by at least two 

times; but I am going to leave it at the figure of 50 per cent down. 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

14 

 

Taking those different percentages, and again taking the average of those percentages, the people of 

Saskatchewan, today, due to the competition of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, their 

premiums, the amount they spend on the purchase of fire, marine and the general insurance line that the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance operates, has gone down from $1 to 50 cents. Calculating all the 

50 per cents this past year, the people of Saskatchewan paid to the Insurance companies, including our 

own insurance company, premiums of $10 million. I say, Mr. Speaker, that had we not commenced 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, our rates would have been at least the same as they were in 

1945, or in other words, today the people of Saskatchewan would have been paying for this service $20 

million instead of $10 million. 

 

I want to go on to the compulsory portion, the one that has been criticized to a considerable extent here 

in the House and outside of the House, and I want to point out that on the compulsory portion — the 

$4.50 to the $10 compulsory insurance that you paid in the province of Saskatchewan — we took in, last 

year, in premium money, $2,719,493. That $10 bought more insurance for the car owner than $42.50 

would buy in Alberta, in Manitoba or British Columbia. Somebody will say, “Oh yes, but you have a 

compulsory feature in it.” Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that they have a compulsory insurance in 

Manitoba, in Alberta and in British Columbia. I noticed a report from the Superintendent of Insurance in 

Manitoba making a statement that 98 per cent of the people of Manitoba bought insurance; or in other 

words, were forced to buy automobile insurance. And so I say that if you multiply the insurance 

premium that we received in 1951 by four times, that would be the amount that the people of 

Saskatchewan, today, would be paying if we had private enterprise — if we had a „Liberal‟ insurance 

scheme in this province such as they have in Manitoba, Alberta or British Columbia. And so I say that, 

within this compulsory portion, the benefits going to the people of Saskatchewan, by the fact that we are 

in the business, amount to another $7 million. In other words, the Saskatchewan Government Insurance 

Office have in the past year, and every year, given benefits, unseen benefits, to the people amounting to 

from $15 million to $17 million a year. That is one of the reasons that, particularly, this Crown 

Corporation was criticized very effectively at its commencement. 

 

Now I want to go down to the profits. This Corporation, this year, turned in a profit of $353,377; last 

year, the profit turned in was approximately $305,000. Since the commencement of this Crown 

Corporation, it has turned in somewhere over $1¼ million to the general revenue of the province. 

 

I go on to the next one — Saskatchewan Guarantee and Fidelity Company, another branch of the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office. There again we have, this year, chalked up $67,883 in 

profits, and I would like to point out that this profit is greater than the profit of that company when it 

was operated under free enterprise for over a period of some twenty or thirty years. 

 

Going on to the next group of Crown Corporations — Saskatchewan Marketing Services. These 

corporations give a service to the north. The Fish Marketing Board gave a service to our people of the 

north; gave the fishermen the protection of co-operative marketing, and shows a profit of $881. The Fur 

Marketing, considerably more important than any of these services, turned in a profit, last year, of 

$19,906; Government Trading, $2,431. 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

15 

 

Going on — we go to Saskatchewan Minerals, which consists of Clay Products or the Brick Plant at 

Estevan, and the Sodium Plant at Chaplin. Taking the Sodium Plant, Mr. Speaker, I really should have 

saved the story written about the Sodium Plant at Chaplin, by the „Free Press‟. This is one time that I 

want to congratulate them, in that they wrote up a fine and true story about this industry in Chaplin, and 

I want to point out that at Chaplin, sodium-sulphate again produced a profit of $50,881. There has been 

some difficulty in the operation of this particular plant due to excessive moisture, but it certainly has 

realized a fine profit again for this year. 

 

Clay Products: the plant itself has been rebuilt. This is one of the Crown Corporations with which we 

have had a certain amount of difficulty; but I want to point out that it is climbing out of the „red‟, Mr. 

Speaker, a lot faster than the Power Corporation climbed out of the red, over a fifteen-year period under 

the Opposition. And so this group, Saskatchewan Minerals, taking in clay products and sodium-sulphate, 

showed an over-all profit of close to $30,000. Going on to Saskatchewan Government Printing — a 

Crown Corporation that is doing the printing business for the Government of Saskatchewan. I want to 

point out that the rates charged or paid by the Saskatchewan Government to these printers are the same 

rates that used to be paid back in the „hungry „thirties‟, yet this Crown Corporation has, year by year, 

shown a profit and this year we are glad to report again that they made a profit of $33,891. 

 

Leaving that one, and going on to Saskatchewan Transportation Company — our bus lines throughout 

the province of Saskatchewan. This is one that we have particularly watched for service. This is a Crown 

Corporation that has given transportation service to the people of Saskatchewan and at the same time it 

has shown a good return on the investment made. 

 

I go down to the last one — Saskatchewan Wool Products: another one, an industry that is marginal . . . 

 

Mr. McCormack: — You are off the air. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Well, I was hoping that I would be on the air. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — You are off. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — I know they are happy, Mr. Speaker. I want to point out that the Opposition 

would love to smile and see that every one of these Corporations made a loss, and I want to say again 

that I do not intend to apologize for any Crown Corporation that we commenced in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Certainly, any reasonable individuals or the people of Saskatchewan whom we know are 

reasonable, know, for example, that of the 14 small Crown Corporations that we have started, 10 of 

them have shown a profit this year, and 4 made a loss. I would like to inform the Opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, that I would like to, myself, be in the position of commencing fourteen businesses in 

Saskatchewan and make a success of ten of them. I want to point out — and I am not going to bring in 

Power and Telephones; they have always been afraid and have always criticized us in bringing these into 

the profits of the Crown Corporations. But I want to point out that out of those 14 Crown Corporations, 

taking the profits this year and deducting the losses that we have had in wool, in clay products, in the 

Big River Mill, and in the Box Factory, we still have made an over-all net profit of $1, 003,000, or in 

other words, are turning in a net percentage of 10.1 per cent on the capital investment within these 

Crown Corporations. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

16 

 

say that I am proud to make this report, and I do not intend to apologize for anything. They are 

wonderful, and they are conveying to the people, as a whole, a wonderful investment. 

 

I want to go on to Telephones, and probably say a word or two about Telephones. I hope that the 

Opposition noticed that we did not bring the other two Crown Corporations into the picture at all; in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, if we did, the profits would drop. The story of Saskatchewan Government 

Telephones, I want to point out, is a story similar to any Department of the Government under this 

administration. It is a story of steady progress and expansion since 1944. I want to say that in the 

Department of Telephones, 1952 has been the greatest year of progress. It is a record year. For example, 

we have installed more new telephones this last year than any other particular year in the history of 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones. This year we installed some 8,670 new telephones. I want to 

mention here too, in connection with the rural lines, that the rural lines, too, have expanded, not to the 

extent that the Saskatchewan Government Telephones has, but they have gone on ahead too. 

 

I want to point out some of the difficulties. In spite of what the Opposition told the people of 

Saskatchewan, especially prior to the election, of stagnation and everything going rotten, I want to say 

that we had in Saskatchewan Government Telephones, as in every other thing, the greatest year in 

history. Yet, we have had terrific demands for service too. In 1951, we had some 4,500 people waiting 

to obtain telephones, and although we installed close to 9,000 new telephones in the province of 

Saskatchewan, last year, and had one of the greatest records in the history, we still, on December 31, 

1952, had some 4,187 people waiting. In other words, we decreased the waiting list by only some 239 

telephones, the demand for service was so terrific, showing the tremendous expansion in industry and 

everything else within the province of Saskatchewan. We are planning for the year 1953 to bring down 

another record greater than that of 1952. In all branches of the expansion of telephone service in the 

province of Saskatchewan, we expect that it will be surpassed in 1953. 

 

I am going to give a few more figures. From 1910, for example, to 1944, over a period of 34 years in 

which the free enterprise parties administered the province of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan 

Government service had installed some 46,900 telephones. In the next eight years, 1944 to 1952, this 

jumped to 94,125 telephones, or more than double the 34-year record of the previous administration. 

 

The rural telephone companies, last year, added some 1,352 new telephones to their over-all service. 

The total of all rural and provincial telephones jumped from 131,000 to 141,516 in 1952, or an over-all 

increase in the number of telephones (that is both provincial and rural) of 10,000. During 1952, we 

added almost 9,000 circuit miles to our long distance service, and may I point out again, in that 

particular line, another record year. Over 700,000 more long distance calls were put through in 1952 

than in 1951. The total operating revenue of Saskatchewan Government Telephones jumped from 

$7,373,000 (and I am quoting here only round figures) to $8,349,000 in 1952, an increase in total 

revenue of approximately $1 million. But I want to point out that the costs of materials, during the year, 

went up even faster than the increase in revenues, and so by the end of the year we ended up with a 

profit of some $70,000 less in 1952 than we did in 1951. 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

17 

 

In conclusion, I want to extend my appreciation, and the appreciation of the Board of Saskatchewan 

Government Telephones, to the management, to the staff and the workers of Saskatchewan Government 

Telephones, in bringing 1952 as the greatest year in the history of Saskatchewan Government 

Telephones. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I fully intend to support this budget. 

 

Hon. W. S. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, to begin with, I think it is now evident that 

if any justification was needed for the appointment of our two recent additions to the Cabinet, that 

justification has been amply supplied in the address we have just heard, this afternoon. I am sure it is a 

matter of encouragement to all of the members on this side of the House, encouragement to all of the 

people throughout the province who have listened to them, to know of the calibre and ability of those 

men who now join us in the Cabinet. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, I think, is the ninth time that it has been my privilege and pleasure to rise in this 

Legislature and to compliment the Provincial Treasurer on his budget speech, and I do so each year with 

a greater enthusiasm for his outlook, and a greater confidence in his ability; and again I am sure that that 

is an enthusiasm and confidence that is shared by the people in Saskatchewan as a whole. 

 

There is not much that needs to be said in reply to the addresses which we have had from the members 

of the Opposition with regard to the budget. In general, the comments which they have made have been 

quite effectively answered. I am sure there is one thing that pleased all of us with regard to the address 

of the hon. member from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron). You know, Mr. Speaker, we had been convinced 

on this side of the House that the hon. member had only one speech, and he had made that three or four 

times. He did, at least, indicate that he had at least one somewhat different from the one he had been 

making for the past three or four years here in the House. However, it seems to me he made the same 

general sort of criticism which the financial critics of the Opposition have made of our budgets in 

previous years. He regretted there had not been a reduction in the debt, plus at the same time increased 

reserves, plus at the same time some better provision of services for the people of the province. That I 

say, has been the same general note of criticism which has been put forward over the years. 

 

I noticed that, on one or two occasions, the hon. member asked himself questions which he then did not 

answer. I should have been interested in hearing his answers, but he did not supply us with them. He 

said, I believe, on one occasion: “The Government will ask me what services I would discontinue or 

reduce”; but he did not answer that particular question. He did, at one stage of his address, proceed to 

quarrel, or disagree, with the Provincial Treasurer‟s interpretation of the term “net debt” or condition of 

the net debt in the province. He went on to point out that this was prepared for the people outside the 

province. It seems to me that he really thought that, then he should not be too much concerned about it, 

as undoubtedly the people outside of the province who read this from a financial point of view, because 

they are interested, or will become interested in Saskatchewan, they will rely on the ability and integrity 

of the Provincial Treasurer, but they will also study the books of the province, and probably have a 

reasonably good idea as to what our position actually is. 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

18 

 

But in that regard, Mr. Speaker, and just to emphasize the improvement in the position of the Province 

of Saskatchewan and the correctness of the interpretation of the Provincial Treasurer in regard to that 

position, I should like to read some excerpts made from surveys made by the companies who appraise 

the financial standing of the province, and who, as previously reported in the Legislature, this year, have 

seen fit to give the province an improved rating. My first quotation that I would like to make is from 

„Moodies‟s Bond Survey‟, dated November 14, 1949. In 1949 they had this to say, among other things 

(they had been talking about investment possibilities in Saskatchewan): 

 

“On the other hand they who are looking for new investment opportunities would do well, in our 

opinion, to preserve a cautious attitude towards Saskatchewan issues at this juncture, despite their 

appreciably higher yields than those obtainable on other Canadian provincial issues.” 

 

That, I say, was on November 14, 1949. The same company produced another statement on December 

29, 1952, about two or three years later, which was entitled: “Saskatchewan‟s Bond Raised to an A.” In 

that, they went on to point out that Saskatchewan once had a heavy debt load, and pointed out a variety 

of ways in which that debt load had been whittled down. They had reference to the story with regard to 

sinking funds which the Provincial Treasurer has already told. They went on to say this: 

 

“The gross funded debt has been rising almost steadily over the past twenty-five years, but this is far 

from the whole story.” 

 

They went on to comment on the great reduction on this debt, and then they made this extremely 

significant statement: 

 

“The self-supporting debts incurred for development of provincially-owned electric and telephone 

utilities gradually became an increasing portion of the whole debt structure. When these are deducted, 

the present net tax-supported debt is $123 per capita.” 

 

That seems to me to be the exact interpretation which the Provincial Treasurer placed on that portion of 

our debt. They went on to comment: 

 

“In view of the prospects of Saskatchewan, its improved debt and fiscal position, their rating has been 

raised to an „A‟.” 

 

That is something, of course, which is gratifying to all of us. 

 

The second report of a similar nature to that which I just read is one taken from an excerpt from 

„Standard & Poore‟s Report‟. They reported in 1951 this statement — they had reference to the gross 

debt of the province declining to the point where it was in 1950. They reported an even greater increase 

in the net debt than there was in the gross debt, and they went on to say that the per capita debt at that 

time was „moderate‟, and they quoted 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

19 

 

their rating. Then, for the sake of comparison I read also what they said on January 3, 1953: 

 

“Per capita debt is among the lowest of the provinces, and further improvement is indicated.” 

 

They mention this, Mr. Speaker: 

 

“Since 1948, more than $1,600,000,000 have been spent in the province.” (that is, with regard to 

capital expenditure). 

 

“Public and private investments totalled $241,000,000 in 1948, and by 1950 the annual outlay had 

risen from $241,000,000 to $346,000,000. In 1951 to $362,000,000, and in 1952 to $380,000,000.” 

 

Now, I just wanted to read those few excerpts, as I said, to reinforce the statements which have been 

made as to the position of the provinces of Saskatchewan at the present time. 

 

I also wish to comment on some of the remarks which the hon. member from Maple Creek made about 

the teacher situation, and some of the statistics which he gave in his address, the other day. He quoted, 

for example, in part, an answer to a question on the reports of the Assembly given just a week or two 

before, with regard to the average salary of rural teachers. He pointed out that that average salary in 

1952 was $1814. What he omitted to quote, Mr. Speaker, was that that was the figure for 1951-52; in 

other words, for the first part of 1952 only, consequently, a salary level that was arrived at by 

negotiations about two years ago now. I had subsequently given the information to the Assembly which 

he might have used, that between the spring of 1952 and the fall of 1952, the salaries of rural teachers in 

the province did increase by some $283 per year. 

 

I am not going, at this time, to repeat the information which I gave in a previous debate with regard to 

salary levels, or comparative salary levels. I have, I may say for the information of the House, seen some 

of the new schedules which have been recently negotiated, which will come into effect in the fall of 

1953, and I note that in each case, they indicate a fairly substantial increase in the salaries for teachers. 

 

Now will I repeat at this time, except to mention it, the analysis which I attempted at that time with 

regard to the teacher shortage situation in the province, and some of the means which, in my opinion we 

had to invoke in order to meet that shortage. I do, however, wish to substantiate what I did say at that 

time, by reading to the House the opinions of some other provinces. This paper, Mr. Speaker, is a paper 

called „The Forum‟, which is printed by the New Brunswick Department of Education, and it, in the 

February issue, contains an article by the Minister of Education and Municipal Affairs in that province. 

Just again to emphasize the situation, may I read a few extracts from it. He starts out by saying: “In the 

whole of Canada, education today is facing a crisis.” He comments, from New Brunswick, on the 

problem of obtaining trained teaching personnel. There is more to the article, but I shall not read more of 

it at this time. 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

20 

 

Then, to read again from a report of a committee which was set up in the province of Alberta. Actually, I 

think it was a special committee set up by what they call there, their Board of Teacher Education and 

Certification, which is made up of representatives of the University and Department of Education, the 

teachers and the trustees. This report was summarized in a recent issue of an Alberta School Trustee 

magazine, and they state there a number of reasons that they think there is a teacher shortage in Alberta 

and other parts of Canada. The shortage of teachers, they say, is not peculiar to the province of Alberta; 

it is common throughout Canada and the United States. It is due to a number of causes, among which the 

following can be included: 

 

“(a) Prosperous state of the economy. 

 

“(b) Teachers‟ Salaries. (I gather they mean the not so prosperous state of teachers‟ salaries). 

 

“(c) An increase in the number, variety and attractiveness of occupations available to young people. 

 

“(d) The changing attitude of young people towards living conditions. 

 

“(e) The nature of teaching that requires thorough preparation, and its demands are exacting. 

 

“(f) The profession‟s lack of prestige and status. 

 

“(g) The fact that the majority who enter teaching are women who later will leave to be married.” 

 

I read those to indicate the similarity of the problem which exists throughout Canada. 

 

Now then, the member from Maple Creek also had some criticisms to make with regard to the use of the 

Education Fund in the province of Saskatchewan. I said a few minutes ago, Mr. Speaker, that he had a 

new speech; but when I got to considering this point I wasn‟t so certain whether it was a new speech or 

not. I went back to the address which I made in this House a year ago on the budget debate at that time, 

in which I was addressing some remarks to the hon. member from Arm River (Mr. Danielson), who was 

at that time the financial critic on behalf of the Opposition, and I notice that I at that time, said this: 

 

“I notice again that the financial critic of the Opposition dragged out a somewhat hoary argument that 

the Education Tax should not be spent on University Buildings.” 

 

So perhaps the member for Maple Creek did not have such a new speech in whole after all. 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

21 

 

Since the criticism is the same, I suppose that I may be entitled to use something of the same arguments 

that I used in commenting on that comment in other years. The Education Tax, as members of the 

Legislature will know, was inaugurated in this province in the year 1937-38. From that time until April 

30, 1944, which was a most significant date in the life of the history of this province, the Education Tax 

fund accumulated a surplus of over $3 million. The point I want to make is, Mr. Speaker, that the other 

day the member for Maple Creek criticized us for not spending adequately or properly the Education 

Tax fund. The point I now make is that during the period of the last Liberal Government in 

Saskatchewan the Education Fund accumulated a surplus at a time when teachers‟ average salaries ran 

like this: in 1938, $663; in 1939, $693; in 1940, $806; 1941, $847; 1942, $941; 1943, $1035; 1944, 

$1167. 

 

Now, while that was happening there was not use being made of all the money in the Education Fund, 

but they were following, I suppose, the line of thinking which he presented in his criticism, 

„accumulating a surplus‟. During that whole period, Mr. Speaker, they increased school grants twice, 

and shall we please note the dates of those increases. One came into effect in the fall of 1938. That is, 

the legislation was passed in the spring Session of 1938, and if my memory serves me correctly, there 

was an election in 1938. Well, there was a long time between elections in those years, and so there was a 

long time between the increase in school grants, because the next increase in school grants went into 

effect in the year 1944, this time in the spring of the year, and that was the sum and total of what 

happened during that time. I am going, at a later point in my address, Mr. Speaker, to contrast the use of 

the Education Fund money then and the use that has been made of it, since. 

 

Reference was made, I say again, to the old criticism of using this money for university buildings. I want 

to comment on that. I am not going to apologize for it. I think again it is entirely logical that if you are 

going to use the education funds to pay the salaries of professors at the university, to pay for the cost of 

research at the university, it is just as logical to use it to pay for the cost of buildings at the university, 

rather than borrowing money, or using money from other source. I fail to see the distinction between the 

two usages. 

 

Now since 1944-45, the Education Fund has been used to support the cost of these buildings at the 

University. The Medical Building — it is a part of the university which will contribute to the facilities 

for teaching at the university; it is a part of the university which, together with the hospital up there, is 

going to provide this province with a medical service, in addition to its teaching facilities, which is 

going to be of extreme benefit to the people of this province. The Engineering Building — which 

extension provided for the greater amount, increased classrooms. The Soils and Dairy Laboratory — the 

hon. member from Maple Creek seemed to think it exceedingly funny that money should be spent out of 

the Education Fund for a soils and dairy lab. Well, if he had thought a little bit, he might have come to 

the conclusion that in the teaching of certain procedures at the university, you need a soils lab and you 

need a dairy lab. He might have come to the conclusion that the people who are trained in those labs go 

out and make an extremely important contribution to the development of this province, and other 

provinces of Canada as well. He might have come to the conclusion that the work done in those makes 

an extremely important contribution outside of teaching work to the economic 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

22 

 

base of this province of Saskatchewan. The School for Agriculture, which accommodates young men 

who are not going through, likely, for a university degree, who come there for a short course during the 

winter months — a project for which after a very considerable amount of argument (we finally had to 

appeal to the Prime Minister of Canada) we did get some assistance from the Federal Government under 

the Dominion-Provincial Vocational Education Plan. Well then, there are power houses and items of that 

kind, tunnels and so on, which admittedly are not directly a part of the teaching institution but which are 

essential if you are going to have the facilities for teaching there. I could go on and mention the 

gymnasium, the Betatron building, the plans for the library — I shall not continue with details. The total 

amount spent on those University buildings, from 1944-45 to the end of the present fiscal year, will be 

$4,473,471, and I think we have no apology to make for the use of the money to build up, here in 

Saskatchewan, one of the finest universities to be found any place in the Dominion of Canada. I need not 

mention again, the reference to the Boys‟ School. That was entirely and adequately dealt with by my 

colleague, the Minister of Social Welfare, yesterday — some $397,211 there. Some money was spent on 

the School for the Deaf in Saskatoon — also charged to that Fund. 

 

Then I want to make some comment on the other uses to which the moneys collected and accumulated 

in the Education Fund have been put. For the purpose of assisting school districts in the building of 

composite schools and technical classrooms, and equipping those rooms, we have, over the same period 

of time, spent $1,341,000. For the purpose of assisting school districts and school units, in the 

construction of schools other than the ones I have just mentioned, we have expended over the period, 

some $3,275,000. For Student Aid, we have established as the hon. members will remember, a revolving 

fund with capital at $1 million. Into that fund has gone $1,115,000. That money is of course still intact; 

that is the capital sum — it is there as a revolving fund. We provided, in loans to school districts, over 

$3 million; that money is, of course, also returnable. So that, all in all, for those purposes, we spent some 

$8,867,314.78 between the years 1946-47 and 1952-53 inclusive. 

 

Then I turn to the increase in ordinary grants which were paid out of this Education Fund also. May I, 

just as a basis of comparison, point out again, that the total amount spent for school grants in the 

province of Saskatchewan, in 1943-44, were $2,765,693 or $2-¾ million roughly, and I am not going 

back to talk about that, at any great length. There will be members on the other side of the House who 

will suggest, perhaps, that we should not go back that far and talk about it. I want to relate one incident 

which happened to me, just a little bit before the year 1943-44. The incident was an occasion on which, 

together with two other teachers (one from Ontario and one from Alberta) I was sent to Ottawa by the 

Canadian Teachers‟ Federation to discuss there the matter of Federal aid for education. We met several 

of the Ministers and finally we had a talk with the late Dr. Clark who was Deputy Finance Minister in 

Ottawa at that time. I recall his statement to me, so very well. He said: “There is not any use in you 

people coming down here and talking to the Federal Government financial federal aid for education, so 

long as our provincial governments back home are piling up very large and substantial subsidies. Go 

back and talk to them.” 

 

Well, we went back and talked to them, Mr. Speaker, but as you will realize from the figures I have just 

given, without too much success. 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

23 

 

We were not a poverty-stricken province in 1943-44, but our grant support of education was $2-¾ 

millions. May I say that we had, at that time, about 179,000 students; in other words, the grant was 

approximately $15.42 per student per year. To again illustrate how we have used the Education Tax 

Fund money, that grant was increased in 1945 (not the year before the election); it was increased again 

in 1947; it was increase in 1950; and it was increased in 1952. 

 

In addition to those increases under formula, there were increases for capital purposes which I have 

already discussed, in 1947-48 and in 1948-49. Those increases, today, are at the position indicated in the 

estimates: for ordinary grants, $8,903,600; for building grants under the Dominion-Provincial 

Vocational Assistance Agreement, our contribution, $125,000; for northern education, $173,590 — all 

of which are grants except for the salary of one person and the stenographer. That makes, in total, for 

school grants this year, over $9 million — some $9,202,190. May I say that for the last year for which 

we have figures, there were 172, 785 students in our schools. If that is the number in 1953-54, the grant 

will now be $53.45 per student, per year, as opposed to $15.42 per student, per year in 1943-44. 

 

In addition to that, in 1943-44 there was no money available to loan to school districts; there is provided 

in this year‟s estimates, $600,000. In 1943-44, there was no money available for free texts; there is this 

year provided $155,280. I want, even after mentioning that rather considerable increase in grants, Mr. 

Speaker, to restate my position as I stated it during the Throne Speech Debate, that I am not satisfied 

with that, that I am convinced the Government is not satisfied; but I am convinced that the people of 

Saskatchewan will look at that record and realize the direction in which we are going. 

 

The member from Maple Creek also had some comments to make about the rate of school taxation, and 

he used, as one would expect him to use, naturally and properly, the example of a school unit in his own 

area — the Maple Creek school unit. So may I have some time to comment on those comments, as well. 

The rural rate in that school unit, in its first year of operation 1945, was 12 mills. The rural rate of 

taxation in 1952, in that unit, was 20 mills, and the hon. member stated that he had word that it was 

increased another 3 mills, this year. That is, from 1945 to 1953 it increased from 12 mills to 23 mills, or 

it increased 11 mills during that time. 

 

Now the question which I want to raise very sincerely and seriously with members of the Legislature, is 

this — is that mill rate too high? Is the increase too much? Is it out of relationship when you compare it 

with the increase in the cost of other goods and services? When my hon. friend, the Minister of 

Telephones and the Minister in charge of Crown Corporations was speaking, he gave to the Assembly 

some very meaningful figures with regard to the savings which the people of Saskatchewan had been 

able to effect as a result of the operation of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Company. He 

calculated some $15 million to $17 million savings there because of the operation of that one 

government organization. I do not think the members of the Opposition are going to argue very strongly 

— certainly not successfully — against those statements. May I say that the fact that this Government 

has gone into that one type of activity has saved the people in that unit enough to take care of that total 

increase in their 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

24 

 

school taxes during that period. A few days ago, the Minister of Health spoke and pointed out some of 

the benefits of the hospitalization plan in this Province, and I would say again, that there will be many 

families in that school unit who, by virtue of the fact that we have a Saskatchewan Hospital Services 

Plan, will have saved enough to meet that increase in school taxes. 

 

Let us consider it, too, from another point of view. Let us consider it from the position of a farmer, who 

has a farm assessed at some $5000. Now on that farm, 1 mill will be $5 and 11 mills increase (which is 

the increase in the area we are talking about) will be to $55. One suit of clothes purchased in 1953, as 

compared to the cost of that suit in 1945, will probably take up that entire cost. Remember, I said I was 

going to talk about some comparisons as between other things in 1953 and in 1945. The clothing index, 

according to the Dominion Bureau of Statistics, for the city of Saskatoon, in 1953, was 215; in 1945, it 

stood at 119.4. Now, applying a little simple arithmetic, $100 worth of clothing in 1953 could have been 

purchased for $55 in 1945 — an increase of $45 there. So that $100 worth of clothing — there has been 

sufficient increase in the cost of that since 1945, to make up most of that $55. 

 

Let us remember, too, that in 1945, the average salary of a teacher in that area was approximately $1000 

per year, and that the average salary in 1952, in that area was over $2000, and in 1953 will be more than 

that. The increase in the taxes (using the example again of the Maple Creek unit) from 1945 to 1952, 

amounted to approximately $92,000. If you take the taxes levied in 1945 and you take the taxes levied in 

1952, and find the differences, it comes to about $92,000. 

 

May I say, again talking of these relative increases in costs, that if the farmers in the Maple Creek unit 

purchase this year, about 20 self-propelled combines, the increase in the cost of those combines as 

compared to the cost in 1945, would equal the increase which all of the taxpayers in that unit are going 

to have to bear on behalf of some 1,180 children in that area. 

 

I know the hon. member from Cannington is smiling a bit — I should not be talking about this, Mr. 

Speaker, because the last time I talked about farm prices, one of the gentlemen of the press by inference 

stated that a mere school teacher did not have any right or any knowledge of farm costs or farm 

economics. I had always thought that school teachers could probably read and study a few statistics, and 

find out a few things about those too. Let us look at some of this machinery cost, and I bear in mind that 

some of the members of the Opposition have recently said they are not too sure about whether the costs 

of farm machinery are too high or not. But, going back to the Report of the Special Committee of this 

Legislature last year, and bring that Committee up-to-date in terms of 1953 selling prices of farm 

machinery, F.O.B. Regina, take three types of 12-foot self-propelled combines. The increase in those 

combines (this is 1953 compared to 1946, not 1945) range from $1871 to $2394. I have taken three 

types, and the least increase was $1871, the greatest $2394. 

 

Let us take that in terms of mill rate, Mr. Speaker, and see something about the comparative increases in 

cost. Take the least one, the 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

25 

 

$1871 increase. Take again our farmer with an assessment of $5000; 1 mill increase is going to cost $5 

— 11 mills, $55. But, to meet the increase in the cost of one of these machines, if he buys it, will take 

$1871, or 374 mills. That is the taxation which the increase in the cost of one kind of machinery, from 

1946 to 1953, puts on his farm with an assessment of $5000. Spread it over ten years if you like, even 

though during the period of ten years you have to meet the increased cost of repairs along with it, it is 

still 37 mills a year. Or consider the farm with an assessment of $10,000, Mr. Speaker, and the increase 

in the cost of that one piece of equipment is still 187 mills, and I say again, it is not reasonable to expect 

that education costs will remain where they are when other costs go up. The thing that I want to 

emphasize is that we need to compare education costs and we need to ask ourselves, very clearly, what it 

is that is imposing the burden on the farmers of Saskatchewan, The answer, Mr. Speaker, will come out 

to be that there are many items in excess, in addition to the cost of education. 

 

I want to take one other type of farm equipment — a tractor; and again I have here two types of tractors. 

The figures show that the retail price, F.O.B. Regina, increased from 1946 to 1953. $1916 in one case, 

$1467 in another case. I say, again, that on the $5000 assessment, the one which increased the least, the 

increase in cost would tax the land 383 mills in order to purchase it. Or on a $10,000 assessment, it 

would take 146 mills in order to pay for the increase in cost. And those are facts, Mr. Speaker, which 

cannot be laughed off. Those are facts which I should like to see the hon. member from Cannington get 

up on his feet and talk about in this House and out in the country. 

 

Let me take one other set of figures, Mr. Speaker. The retail value of farm machinery sold in 

Saskatchewan in 1951. The retail value of that machinery was $75 million. The price index of farm 

machinery in 1951 stood at 187.4; the price index in 1945 stood at 112.4. Now, if 1951 farm machinery 

could have been bought at 1945 prices, the savings to the farmers of Saskatchewan would have been $31 

million — and I again say we need to carefully consider what it is that is taking the purchasing power 

out of the pockets of Saskatchewan farmers. I am not suggesting that any one would be so optimistic as 

to hope, or to have reason to hope, that 1945 prices should have remained; but surely, Mr. Speaker, we 

need to look at all the increases in the costs. The 1951 farm machinery purchased in Saskatchewan, if 

bought at 1945 prices, would have brought savings of $31 million to the farmers of Saskatchewan, and it 

was up some 8.8 per cent in 1952, and it is up again in 1953. The school taxes in that same year, 1951, 

Mr. Speaker, in all of the school units in the province, plus all of the rural districts not organized as 

school units, amounted to $11,100,000. The increase in the cost of farm machinery purchased in 

Saskatchewan from 1945 to 1951, was sufficient to pay all of the rural taxes three times. The total 

school taxes in 1951 in units, non-units, cities, towns and villages, amounted to $17,750,000, and as my 

hon. friend, the Minister of Telephones pointed out, the savings effected for the people of Saskatchewan 

by the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Company amounted to approximately that much. Total 

school taxes collected in 1951 amounted to some $17,750,000, and I say again, that the increase in the 

cost of machinery from 1945 to 1951 would have, in 1951, paid all the school taxes for everybody in 

Saskatchewan and left $14 million open. Now that does not include the cost of repairs. The increase 

there would be another six or seven million dollars. 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

26 

 

I want to say a word, too, about those people who tend to give constantly the impression that the 

increase in the cost of our farm machinery and so on, may be entirely attributed to increased labour 

costs. I quote for that purpose, from the report of the Farm Implements Committee of this Legislature, 

last year. Some of the figures which are given in Table II on page 40, are worth studying. Those figures 

indicate that the salaries and wages of the employees (and that includes the executives‟ salaries as well) 

in our farm implement industry in Canada, in 1945, amounted to 42.4 per cent of the gross selling value, 

at works. In 1950, the salaries and wages amounted to only 28.9 per cent of the gross selling value, at 

works. In other words, the relative labour costs had decreased by some 14.5 per cent over that period of 

years. During the same period, labour productivity, as shown by the same table, increased. The net value 

of production per worker, in 1945, was $2,223; the net value of production per worker, in 1950, was 

$4,218, which represents an increase of 89.6 per cent. Now that increased production is, of course, due 

to many things. It is due to better workers, it is due to better machines, to a greater investment of money, 

capital and, undoubtedly, in many cases, due to better management. But regardless of that it stands as a 

fact that 13,554 employees in our farm machinery industry in Canada, in 1945, produced $57¼ million 

worth of gross selling, at the works. In 1950, 16,223 employees produced $149½ million measured in 

the same way. In other words, less than 3,000 additional employees produced more than $92 million 

more than 13,500 did, in 1945. 

 

And of course we must not forget, Mr. Speaker, that the people who invested capital in those industries 

did not do too badly. I want to refer the members to Table 12, which has to do with the information 

supplied by the Cockshutt Farm Equipment Company. It shows that, in 1945, the return, before taxes, on 

invested capital, was 8.1 per cent; in 1951, the return on invested capital, before taxes, was 22 per cent. 

The return, after taxes, in 1945 was 3 per cent; in 1951 11.8 per cent. The same table shows that 

stockholders‟ investment, before taxes, was at 8.1 per cent in 1945; and 13.6 per cent in 1951. So we do 

not need to shed too many tears about the people at that end of the line. 

 

I think it is worth while reading, too, the comment of that same Selection Special Committee, and they 

said: “The manufacturing companies made very high profits. Present high prices of farm implements are 

probably a direct outcome of this condition.” This statement, of course, agrees with that of the Ottawa 

inquiry of 1936-37 which said: “Over the period of 1891-1936 the retail prices of farm implements have 

been maintained at too high a level as shown by the financial returns of the companies engaged in 

industry.” 

 

Now I want to give one more example, Mr. Speaker, of the disadvantage of Saskatchewan, I suggest, in 

financing a service like education as compared to some of the other provinces. Members will know, of 

course, of the quite considerable income which this province receives as a result of our agreement with 

the Federal Government. Members will also know that that income in no sense is a gift to the people of 

Saskatchewan, that it comes to us as a result of the rental of some of our taxation sources, and it comes 

to us as a result of partial recognition, and partial only, of the fact that many companies make large 

amounts of money in Saskatchewan which cannot be taxed here. But I want to take the money which we 

and other provinces receive in terms of statutory subsidies and payments under the tax rental 

agreements, and relate those amounts to education costs as those costs are indicated by the number of 

teachers which we employ. In other words, I want to take the total 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

27 

 

amounts which the provinces receive from those sources, and divide it by the number of teachers 

employed in each province, and see what kind of an indication that presents. 

 

It is estimated that, in 1952-53, the amounts to be received will be, in Saskatchewan, some $25.6 

million; in Manitoba, some $24.8 million; in Alberta, some $29.4 million; in British Columbia, some 

$41.6 million. In Saskatchewan that works out to $3,500 per teacher, in Alberta it works out to $4,200 

per teacher — approximately one-fifth better; in Manitoba it works out to $4,800 per teacher — 

approximately 50 per cent better than ours; and in British Columbia, it works out to $6,700 per teacher, 

which is not quite double the amount per teacher, when you count ours in that way. Now that, it seems 

to me, Mr. Speaker, is a rough indication, but a reasonably accurate one too, of the relative loads and 

ability to pay in this province, as compared to the others, as measured by that one source of revenue. 

And I want to add that it is, I think, an indication of the need for the application of the principles of the 

Rowell-Sirois report when it comes to Provincial-Federal relationships, principles which I gather from 

Mr. Abbott‟s budget speech, have now gone „out the window‟, entirely. It indicates also, Mr. Speaker, 

the case for Federal aid for education, or of recognition of educational needs in determining Federal 

grants. 

 

Each year when I have spoken in this debate, I have tried to outline one or two things that have 

happened in the field of education which, to me at least, are particularly interesting. I want to give to the 

House, this year, the story of what is happening in one of our units in co-operation with another unit, in 

trying to extend educational opportunities to more youngsters and particularly to enrich educational 

opportunities to youngsters in smaller schools. I speak of a project which has been undertaken by the 

Milestone school unit and, in part, in co-operation with the Radville school unit. They operate a 

programme of vocational education (if you like) an itinerant shop and home economics programme in a 

number of the centres in those two units. In one arrangement, they have some four towns: Wilcox, 

Milestone, Lang and Avonlea, and then in another part of the unit, in co-operation with the Radville 

unit, they have the towns of Radville, Ceylon, Pangman and Ogema taking part. This makes it possible 

to bring shop work and home economics to the youngsters in these smaller schools who would not 

otherwise have this opportunity. Some 199 students, altogether take the course in one of those schemes 

and 207 in the other, or a total of something over 400 youngsters get these advantages in that way. They 

assist the senior students from the neighbouring rural schools to come in, during the days when the 

itinerant shop teacher or the itinerant home economics teacher is there. They pay for it. They tell me of 

one girl, for example, who comes 15 miles in order to take advantage of this work in home economics. 

The course consists chiefly of woodwork for the boys. This year their project has been the construction 

of granaries which, when completed, have been sold by tender, and funds go back into their shop 

facilities. The girls, each year, put on a fashion show and demonstrate that, and prepare graduation 

banquets. It is a programme which is being copied in other parts of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have talked on other occasions of the composite high school programme. It is not possible to have 

composite high schools in every unit, but it is possible in many of them where you cannot have them, to 

bring some of these facilities to the doors of many of the youngsters in our smaller schools. 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

28 

 

May I report on one or two others aspects of the Department of Education. The Student Aid Fund: 

according to a report tabled a few weeks ago, this fund assisted in 1951-52, some 202 university 

students, 197 normal school students, 29 nurses and two students taking a course in library, expending in 

total $116,830. I may say that up to date this year, commitments have been made to spend more than 

that amount already. This is a plan which has been mentioned many times before, and which again it 

seems that many students do not know of, in spite of the fact that they are notified when they get a 

Grade 12 certificate, and the notices are posted up. I would ask members of the Assembly to have 

students who need money to attend normal school or university or a school of nursing, contact the 

Department with regard to this financial aid plan 

 

We mentioned in the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, that this year we were going to put on at 

least some of our short courses in northern Saskatchewan. This is under the Dominion-Provincial Youth 

Training Programme, and the short courses will be those important to the people in the kind of 

occupation that they have in those communities. 

 

I am not going to again go into the details of the programme, which is taking place in the province, of 

consolidation or centralization of our school population. I do want again to urge members of the 

Assembly to give every reasonable support to reasonable projects of that kind. It is one way in which we 

can save teachers, or use teachers more effectively. It is one way in which we can provide better 

facilities for hundreds of youngsters. It is one way in which we can hold more youngsters in our schools 

to get more educational training, and it is one thing that will make a contribution to keeping farmers on 

the land. 

 

It has been mentioned already that we had five votes in larger unit areas, during the year 1952. Each of 

those votes, I am pleased to report again, was successful. It is proposed that, on request, we will hold 

some votes at least, in some of the remaining six unorganized areas during 1953. The most important 

thing that is done in education is, of course, in the field of determination, not of the kind of school 

building that we have, but in the field of determining what it is that goes on inside the school — the 

content, the procedure of study. We have been trying, with gratifying success, to get more and more 

people interested in studying what goes on in schools, and assisting in development of a curriculum for 

those schools. A number of organizations in the province are intensely interested in promoting study and 

discussion among their own members. I cannot emphasize again too much, and there is nothing which is 

more worthy to appeal to members of the Assembly on — that they encourage more people to study just 

what does go on, and to express themselves as to what they think ought to go on in the schools. 

 

There are many questions being asked about education, today. Many of the questions that are being 

asked are critical questions, and that, I hasten to say, Mr. Speaker, is good. We need it. If the criticism is 

followed up with an intelligent interest and an active effort to do something about those criticisms. 

Education must never allow itself to run away from the criticism or to discourage criticism in any way. 

This is always true — that the community is going to get, in large measure, the kind of school which the 

people in that community really want to have. The answer to „what‟ and „how‟ do not lie entirely or 

even majorally with experts. The answer to those questions will come out of the people, and the more 

that they come from the people, the better the kind of an educational system we will have. And so I 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

29 

 

say that we must welcome criticism, encourage it and take advantage from it to stimulate more thinking, 

more discussion about the problems of education. There is not anything more important that any of us 

can do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that concludes what I want to say at this time about the budget. I will, of course, support it. 

 

Mr. J.E. McCormack (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, this is Friday the thirteenth, and it is rather 

late, but with your permission, I will just make a few comments. I know the members have been very 

busy the last few days, and it is getting toward the end of the week and when we have a night off, I 

know they do not want to be sitting around here too long. 

 

Mr. Wahl: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McCormack: — If the gentleman opposite wishes to leave, I do not think I will regret his leaving 

at all, Mr. Speaker — the gentleman that interrupted just at that time. I would like to say that I welcome 

to this Chamber the junior member for Regina. It is certainly a pleasure to look forward in that direction 

and not have to look into the sour „down-with-capitalism‟ faces that we see on some of the other 

members opposite. 

 

I have had a hard job to try and figure out, Mr. Speaker, just who is a Socialist and who is not. 

According to the Provincial Treasurer‟s Budget Speech, I think the average income in the province of 

Saskatchewan was somewhere around $1,450. Now if you listen to some of those gentlemen opposite, I 

think they would want to totally confiscate everything that anybody had over $1,450. Well, I can 

probably sympathize with my friend that is in the legal profession — we would probably get along a lot 

better if they were socialized and had a little bit of distribution of income. I hope he puts some of those 

problems before some of his fellow members and possibly he can advise some of the members on that 

side as to the run of the financial position of the legal profession. I think he has probably had a change of 

heart himself to what he thought and prattled about five or six years ago. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we hear a lot about this „soaking the rich‟, and there was a speech made by a Mr. 

Ross Thatcher — I think he is a C.C.F. member for the city of Moose Jaw. According to Hansard, page 

2534, March 2, he had this to say: 

 

“I think Canadians should realize that such a sum is not and cannot be raised simply by „soaking the 

rich‟ because there are not enough right people in Canada. As a matter of fact, official statistics show 

that, in the year 1950, the total income of all taxpayers making $10,000 a year or more was only $807 

million. If the Minister of Finance should confiscate that total sum, he would only have about 17 per 

cent of his Federal budget.” 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker: — Don‟t you agree with that? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — And yet we had a speech which I referred to in the House, last year . . . 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

30 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the gentleman a question? Who was it made the statement 

you quoted? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Oh, I am quoting from Mr. Ross Thatcher, C.C.F. member of Parliament for 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — C.C.F.? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Yes, I also quoted, last year . . . 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker: — Some straight man you are. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — . . . from a speech by Hugh Gaitskill. He was Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer 

in the Old Country, and he said practically the same thing. He said: “It would have meant a reduction, if 

they took all the income of everybody who was getting more than £2,000 a year in England; if they took 

all of it, it would have meant a reduction of fourpence a year to the whole population.” 

 

Now I was rather surprised at the new Provincial Secretary. He was chastising the Opposition for having 

the audacity to move a vote of no confidence. Imagine! Now I think if he had been here — I think he 

was — our amendment to the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne was that „we regretted 

that Her Majesty‟s advisers had, as their ultimate objective, the socialization of our economy, as set 

forth in the Regina Manifesto‟. I still regret that they have it in their platform, and I think there are some 

members on the other side that regret that they ever did dig up the Regina Manifesto. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker: — Such as? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — With all the silly questions and answers that go in that handbook, signed by the 

Hon. C. M. Fines . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. McCormack: — If it was any audacity for us to move that amendment, with 11 against 42, I 

wonder how much more so it would have been for the C.C.F. down in Ottawa, with their 13 against 262; 

and yet they have been moving these motions of „no confidence‟ ever since they got down there. Even 

when there were only 5 of them down there, they used to do the same thing. However, if some of those 

C.C.F. members who were down there, when they had to vote on $65 million that was going to be added 

to the Wheat Board payment, had stayed in their seats instead of wanting to get back to Saskatchewan, 

there might have been more assurance of that thing going through. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Now I thought that the new Provincial Secretary would have had more sense than 

to chastise the Opposition for moving a vote of „no confidence‟ in the Government. Of course he was on 

the air at the time, Mr. Speaker, and I suppose it sounded pretty good out in the Humboldt constituency. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker: — It was good! He made a good speech! 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

31 

 

Mr. McCormack: — I would recommend to him that some time he should read over the air, this: 

 

“Moved by Mr. Johnston, seconded by Mr. Brockelbank” (this was on February 9, 1939): 

 

“That this Assembly recommends to the Government that The Public Service Act be so amended as 

to provide no one in the employ of the Government, or any of its departments, Boards or 

Commissions, who resigns from Government services at any time within three months previous to 

an election shall, if should to be engaged in partisan political activities subsequent to his resignation 

and prior to the date of said election, be taken back into the employment of the Government for a 

period of two years following said election.” 

 

It all depends where you sit, what you accomplish in a lot of these things. 

 

And then he brought out the mineral regulations, which were passed in July of last year. Well, isn‟t it a 

wonderful protection to the farmer that, in July 1952, the Government eventually gets around to passing 

some regulations for the protection of the farmer against these people who have been running around 

„gypping‟ farmers out of their mineral rights? In 1952 — imagine! They certainly did a wonderful piece 

of work for the farmer! If they had done it in about 1945, it would have been a little better — or 1946 or 

1947. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, might I ask the hon. member a question? I am serious about 

this. I have heard a good deal about it, but I would like to know just what the hon. member might 

suggest as to regulations to prevent people dealing with their property as they want to. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Certainly! I could tell the Minister of Natural Resources, and I have suggested 

this now for about four years in this Legislature, that there be some protection. You have protection for 

the farmers under The Farm Implement Act, and if you go through the statutes you will see, for years, 

the farmers have been protected against certain things — at times, without interfering. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Tell us what you would . . . 

 

Mr. McCormack: — You are the Minister of Natural Resources, and if you had the interests of the 

farmers of this province at heart, you would have done something about it before 1952, because you 

were certainly told about it enough. You have to investigate some of these people who were going 

around picking up leases — Freeholders‟ Company and all that bunch of gentlemen that were picking up 

a lot of this stuff. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker: — Is that the one Harry Mang is in? Is that one of them? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — He was in one of them; and you let Mr. Riddell come in here, and he certainly 

took the farmers of this province for a cool million dollars. He was in — what was the name of that 

thing they tried to get . . . 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

32 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker: — What authority have you got for saying that? 

 

Mr. McCormack: — . . . the Farmers‟ Mutual. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker: — What is your authority? You just dreamed that. 

 

Mr. McCormack: — I could tell my hon. friend that Riddell got 2½ per cent of everything that went in, 

and if you add up the number of acres that went in there you will see. I will also bring a Judgment in 

here, some day, and tell you about this other company. It is a Judgment that shows the amount of money 

that was made out of it by a couple of gentlemen who were parading around on the floor here today, 

earlier, and who got over a million dollars; it went into their holding company, and Mr. Havard sued this 

company for his commissions. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, we heard the hon. Minister of Telephones, this afternoon, and I must apologize 

if I got a bit of a „kick‟ out of his remarks — I always do. After all, it was very similar — I could just 

see him „storming the Bastille‟. He was really taking off to save the common people. 

 

Government Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McCormack: — He was talking about averages here and there. Well, there used to be a story about 

the fellow who said, „the average amount of money that the people on our street have is $1 million. 

There was one millionaire and five other people who did not have anything and if he had $6 million and 

you averaged it out, they each had a million‟. But the type of nonsense that the Minister of Telephones 

was putting across today is something like the member from Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley was talking about the 

other day. He was discussing the income tax regulations too, and when I tried to point out to him that I 

did not think he was trying to mislead the House but that he should check up on it a little more, he said 

that I should look up the law and make sure what I was talking about. Well, „Clarence Darrow‟ over 

there knows all the law, and has enviously eyed that front seat next to where the Premier sits ever since I 

came into this House. I tested out some of the seats over there, but I have not been jumping into that 

front seat the way you have, all the time. And if there was ever one gentleman that stood up in this 

House and knew everything, and had everything to say about it, it is the member from Hanley. One of 

these days he will get something to back it up, but I would refer the hon. gentleman — I do not think he 

is deliberately trying to mislead anybody, but he has heard this from some C.C.F.er and he will prattle it 

all over the country, whether it is true or false; but I would refer him to Section 59 (2c) of the Income 

Tax Act, or he can go down to the Income Tax office and find out before he stands up in this House and 

makes statements about things like that. I would seriously suggest that to him. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have had three Cabinet Ministers today — three of the fourteen; and I thought 

that possibly there was so little (according to the gentlemen opposite) in the budget criticism of the hon. 

member from Maple Creek, that these gentlemen would not have to answer it. But they certainly put up 

a „slew‟ of Cabinet Ministers today in trying to discredit it, and al this week they have had — of course 

with fourteen it is pretty hard to work them all in, and let some of these backbenchers get in 

occasionally, as well. However, Mr. Speaker . . . 

  



 

March 13, 1953 

 

33 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker: — Oh, don‟t stop now — we are just enjoying it! 

 

Mr. McCormack: — Are you? Well that is very fine, I will have to speak more often. But, with the 

permission of the House, Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Agreed) 

 

CORRECTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Mr. Speaker, I want to admit that I made an error in my calculation. I made a 

statement this afternoon and I used the figure of, I believe, 11.4 per cent — it should have been 1.14. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 6.00 o‟clock p.m. 


