



















































Hansard: March 09, 1953


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Twelfth Legislature 

18th Day 

 

Monday, March 9, 1953 

 

The House met at three o‘clock p.m. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed from Friday, March 6, 1953, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): That Mr. Speaker, do now leave the chair. (The Assembly to go 

into Committee of Supply). 

 

Mr. M.J. Willis (Elrose):  Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak to the motion, I do not know whether it is 

by accident or not, this afternoon, to give me the proper setting, but I welcome from our galleries several 

students here and, being a teacher by profession, I feel right at home, and I hope that the students who 

are visiting the Legislature, possibly for the first time, will enjoy their time spent here, this afternoon; 

not in what I have to say – possibly it might be better for me to say it than someone from the other side. 

 

When I adjourned the debate, Mr. Speaker, I hastily made certain criticisms which I shall leave until a 

little later on, this afternoon. 

 

I was glad to hear the hon. member for Nipawin (Mr. MacNutt) say he had a fairly good hockey team. 

We, in my part of the western part of the province, have a good hockey team. We, in my part of the 

province, have a midget hockey team now that is waiting on the winners of Swift Current and Yorkton 

to play off. We have won everything people to date, so I advise the hon. member for Nipawin that, in a 

few years we will have an intermediate team, too. 

 

We in the Elrose constituency were very disheartened, about one year ago, when due to unseasonably 

spring weather, we lost several spans of the Saskatchewan Bridge; but I am glad to report, this 

afternoon, that as soon as that unfortunate incident happened this Government immediately got busy and 

under the guidance of the Minister of Highways (Hon. J.T. Douglas) due to his energy, steel was ordered 

to replace the bridge. Today, the steel is in its place and within two weeks all the riveting will be 

finished, and all that remains to be finished on the bridge are the guardrails and the cement flooring. We 

in the Elrose constituency – and I believe I am voicing the sentiments of all the people in that area – 

offer our sincere thanks to the Minister of Highways, who is held in the very highest esteem in that area, 

for doing a magnificent job. 

 

The going out of the bridge dashed cherished hopes of many of the pioneers. We have suffered, like the 

rest of the province, with several crop failures, but we always said, ‗well, next year would bring a good 

crop‘. When the bridge was built it was a cherished dream of over 40 years, and then to see the bridge 

built and taken out less than a year after it was built, certainly dashed the hopes of those pioneers. So, 

today, the replacement of that bridge has once again meant that the dreams of those 



 

March 9, 1953 

 

 

2 

pioneers has come true, because we have, on this side of the House, a Government that does things. 

 

For 35 to 40 years, in that area, the members on the opposite side have made promises that they were 

going to build a dam. What do we find in 1953? We have found a report brought down that there is no 

intention of building the dam – that is the long and the short of it. Why it is even said now that it hadn‘t 

had the consideration of the Federal Cabinet! Some of us said right along that it would only be built 

when the C.C.F. would built it, as they built the bridge. 

 

We on this side, this year, have an ambitious road programme. We will spend, altogether, in the 

Department of Highways, over $18 million. Now I want to clear up a misapprehension or a 

misunderstanding of Friday, because it was stated that the gasoline tax had gone up 10 per cent – or the 

price of the gasoline had gone up 10 per cent. I checked the records, and I find the reporter for the ‗Star-

Phoenix‘ understood it as I had – that there was a 10 per cent increase in gasoline. Now what I want to 

make clear to all is that the tax on gasoline has gone up from 10 to 11 cents, but that does not mean that 

the over-all cost has gone up 10 per cent, because if gasoline cost 40 cents, it will now cost 41 and the 

one cent on 40 cents certainly does not make 10 per cent; so that I wanted to clear that up, this 

afternoon, at the beginning of my address. 

 

Now we will say that the $18 million highway programme is a large figure. That is quite true; but the 

people of this province were presented with that programme on June 11 – a $75 million programme – 

and their answer was in the affirmative, to go ahead with it, and we, on this side, believe in fulfilling our 

promises and this is the first step in the fulfilment of that promise. Moreover, in the past, the 

municipalities in my area have been pleased with the means by which the Minister of Highways worked 

out his formula of grants to the municipality on the base of the low assessed getting the larger grant. 

Now when he, in turn, will give his programme some time this afternoon, I am quite sure that he may 

have something to say about those grants. But in the past the formula, to my mind, and to the people in 

my area, was a fair formula – that the low assessed areas got the larger grants and I think that is a good 

principle. 

 

Another reason that I think this Government was endorsed on June 11th was not on the programme, 

entirely, of promises, but on our efforts in the past, from 1944 to 1948. It was strange, during the 

campaign, the promises that were made by the Opposition. I have here a paid advertisement in my area 

where No. 42 Highway was to be finished in 1952 – June 11 to the end of 1952, a highway was to be 

finished. Now that is a strange promise made by the Opposition. They were going to become road 

builders in six months, where, on the other hand, in 30 years they did not do anything. 

 

That, I say, is one of the reasons that many of us are back on this side of the House. The people have 

confidence in this Government and I am sure, this afternoon, before the Minister of Highways is 

finished, he, in turn, will give to the people of the Elrose constituency some knowledge of what 

highways will be built, and we know, from past experiences, that those highways will be built. And so I 

feel sure and have confidence in the Minister of Highways, that Highway No. 42 will be built in 1953-

54, as we said we would as soon as funds were available. We believe in living up to our promises. 



 

March 9, 1953 
 

 

3 

We are often criticized that the money we obtain from gasoline tax and from licences is not put back 

into highways, but I want to say, for the sake of the records, it is estimated, for 1953, the gasoline tax 

will amount to $12 million, licence fees will be $4,800,000, giving a total of $16,800,000, and yet from 

the Department of Highways over $18 million will be spent, so that an additional $1,200,000 will have 

to be taken from the Consolidated Fund. I want to make that quite clear because it has been said, time 

and time again, that we are not putting back into our highway programme the moneys that the gasoline 

tax, licence and other fees total. 

 

Now, like all constituencies, one of the most important things to the people of Elrose constituency is the 

development of power, the bringing of power to our towns and villages and hamlets and to the rural 

sections. This Government recognizes the need of electricity for all people in this province. During the 

election campaign, of course, there were the promises that they would bring it to the farmer at no cost to 

the farmer – just like they did in Manitoba. The people of this province knew that it could not be done, 

because in the province of Manitoba you have a concentration of the population in the centre; you know 

that half your population has electricity before the government has to step in. Take the city of Winnipeg 

and the city of Brandon; the cities of Dauphin and Portage la Prairie – half your population has 

electricity before you start any type of plan. Consequently, we put it up to the people: this is our plan; 

we will subsidize rural electrification up to 50 per cent, or approximately 50 per cent of it. In the past we 

have been able to bring electricity to a large number of farmers in this province. On the other hand, the 

farmers of this province do not want anything for nothing. They want electricity and they want to pay 

for it. They know that action counts more than words, and that is the reason that the rural electrification 

plan, as submitted on June 11, was endorsed on behalf of this Government by the people of this 

province. 

 

Last year, 4,300 farms obtained electricity in this province. In the province of Manitoba, about whose 

rural electrification plan we have heard so much from the Opposition, 5,319 farms obtained electricity, 

but, due to concentration of population, the Power Commission in this province built more miles of lines 

to accommodate the 4,300 farms in this province than did the province of Manitoba in bringing 

electricity to 5,319 farms. So this year, in following out our programme to bring electricity to 5,500 

farms and to another 1,600 urban customers, we will spend a total of $10 million. It is an ambitious 

programme, but we in this province look forward to that programme to bring electricity to the farms just 

as quickly as we can. 

 

Elrose constituency, I think, has had the signal honour of having the first village in the province of 

Saskatchewan with natural gas brought to the users in that village. I refer to the village of Brock. I agree 

with the policy of this Government that this Government should control the distribution of gas in this 

province and not let us get in the mess we were when we came into office in regard to the former Power 

Commission. What did we find in those days? – in the larger centres you had private companies 

operating; no idea of expansion whatsoever. The first thing we had to do was to purchase them and then 

we had to set up a grid system to bring electricity, and that has taken time. So I say the policy of this 

Government in the distribution of natural gas should be to have it under the control of the provincial 

government. Otherwise, what is going to happen? – small villages, even though they are nearer the gas 

fields, or small towns near the gas fields, under private enterprise would never get gas as long as that 

system 



 

March 9, 1953 

 

 

4 

under private enterprise is operated, and there is no hope in the future. I say to the Government this 

afternoon, that in 1953 I hope they give consideration to bringing gas to the town of Eston, and I can 

guarantee to the Government, that they will not be asked for a regulatory body at all when prices are 

sought. The people of Eston will accept this Government at face value. 

 

So this year, when we spend an estimated $7 million to take gas to the city of Saskatoon, I hope that in 

that $7 million there will be sufficient to take it to the town of Eston. I know that if we cannot do it this 

year, we will do it very shortly. I know the people in that area, if the Government says, ―Well, we cannot 

do it this year, we will do it next year‘, will accept that, but like everything else, every town likes to get 

the natural gas as soon as possible. 

 

Now, of course, I noticed as soon as Saskatoon was asking for gas, there was a lot of trouble, and what 

did they do? They went to the town of Kindersley and a few said, ‗Well, the costs are so high now; we 

got the gas but the costs are too high.‘ So, I took my pencil and I took some of the figures that were 

given in the press at that time, and I compared them with a six-room house; compared what the costs of 

electricity and oil together would be, and gas at the present rate, and they are getting a good deal at 

Kindersley right now from this Government, and you do not find very many complaints from the village 

of Brock – they are satisfied. And I say to the Government, in their policy of controlling the distribution 

of natural gas, they have the faith of the people that they will do the right thing, and that is why we are 

back here after June 11th with the numbers on this side of the House. 

 

Government Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Willis:  Now, in regards to education, I think possibly there was a slight mistake made by the 

critic on the other side. None of us are happy that we have to have supervisors in our schools at the 

present time, but this province is not the only province that has supervisors. At the present time, across 

Canada, there are about 6,500 teachers short to man our schools; in all provinces in the west there is a 

teacher shortage. But I think the inference that was possibly left, that these supervisors in our schools are 

unqualified entirely, is not quite true. In the group of supervisors that we have at the present time, 556 

supervisors have Grade 11, Grade 12 or university training; we have 47 with Grade 10 standing; one 

with Grade 9 and one with Grade 8, at the present time. The one with Grade 8 standing is a married 

woman and a mother of two children. Now I say we are not happy about that situation – no one can be 

happy; but what is being done in this province is being done in other provinces. We must remember, too 

that while we have supervisors in those classrooms, those supervisors have the Correspondence Courses 

for the students there. These courses are provided both for the teacher and for the pupils. 

 

Under the guidance of the Minister of Education, we have 54 units set up in this province; 45 of them at 

the present time are on a permanent basis and 9 are on a 5½-year trial period. When we came into office 

there were no units. I do not say that the units are the answer to the educational problem and I do not 

think anyone else will; but I say it is a step in the right direction to equalize educational costs. 



 

March 9, 1953 
 

 

5 

Under this plan of larger units, the low assessed areas are helped financially by the Government, with 

large grants, and I have taken the trouble to look up what some of the units under $6 million of 

assessment received. I have taken the unit of Meadow Lake. In the 1952 budget, Meadow Lake had an 

assessment of $5½ million, approximately; $252,000 – grants to the amount of $252,000 were given, 

while their own taxes amounted to $167,000; or in other words, the Government put up more money 

than the local area for taxes. We come to Hudson Bay: in 1952, $179,000 of grants from the provincial 

Government; taxes in the Hudson Bay area, which is low assessed ($5½ million), $126,000 — $179,000 

to $126,0000. Medstead, not quite $5 million assessment; Government grants, in 1952, were $189,000, 

the taxes, $91,000 – almost 2½ times the grants of the Province were to what the taxes were in that area. 

Now I have taken the low assessed areas. I could take Turtleford, which is just over the $5 million, and I 

find $160,000 to $118,000. In every case, the grants by the Government surpassed the total of the taxes 

that were raised in that area, and I say that is a fundamental, sound principle to help those low-assessed 

districts. Now I could take the years 1950 and 1951 and the same thing would be applicable, that our 

Government grants to the low-assessed areas were greater than the taxes that were raised in those areas. 

 

The critic on the Opposition side said all school taxes are going up – but what is not going up? The 

Government has no control of what the local unit board levies for taxes. If they go on a building 

programme, that is up to the local school unit board, the same as the municipalities. Municipality taxes 

have been going up; if they have road programmes, naturally taxes are going to go up. This Government 

does not set the levies of what the larger units are to levy in this province. And in addition to what we 

have done in regard to the low-assessed units, in the northern part of this province – the part of this 

province that was forgotten under the previous regimes – in 1947, we spent $92,000 on education in the 

north; $83,000 in 1948; $85,000 in 1949; in 1950-51, $97,000; in 1952, $112,000 and the estimated 

expenditure this year is $173,000. The significant thing of it all is that in 1946, there were only 31 

teachers in that area; today there are 47 – 44 paid by the provincial Government and 3 in private 

institutions. 

 

But of greater significance is the fact that, in 1946, there were 1,052 students; in 1951-52, there are 

16,088 students in the schools in the north. This was only made possible by this Government in paying 

for teachers and the building of teacherages, and encouragement to those pupils in the north, and when 

that opportunity was extended to them they took it. And so, last June, — now the fruits are beginning to 

become ripened, and we have 63 students now, in the northern part of the province, in our highway 

schools; before, there were none. I think it is a commendable record, and I believe that those persons in 

the northland are appreciative of what this Government has done to help to give them some of the 

educational facilities that other people in this province have had access to. 

 

Then, the critic on the Opposition side said, the other day, ―Why, they are only spending 15.8 per cent of 

their budget on grants,‖ so I looked at our expenditures. But if you take into account 



 

March 9, 1953 

 

 

6 

$173,000 that we are going to spend in the northern areas next year, another $125,000 for buildings and 

equipment under provincial Government agreement, and add those two figures, we are going to spend 

$9,200,000 on education, and when we look at that in relation to the budget, we find that it is much more 

than 15.8 per cent. Our budget for education has kept pace, as our whole budget has increased. I am not 

arguing that we have enough there yet, but I am saying it has kept pace, because I have the figures – and 

I have taken the good years: in 1941 (I did not go back into 1935 and 1934), the percentage was 14.9 per 

cent; 1942 – 14.6 per cent; 1943 – 13.5 per cent; 1944 – 14.3 per cent; 1942 – 14.6 per cent; 1943 – 13.5 

per cent; 1944 – 14.3 per cent. I have taken the good years. I consider those good years in this province: 

the crops were good, revenues were buoyant, and this was under the former Government. So, when they 

criticize and say we are not spending a fair proportion, I say why did they not spend more when they 

were in office? So I commend the Department for the initiative they have shown in the establishment of 

larger units. There are only six areas now that have not the larger unit set-up, and before another year, I 

hope the remaining six are included. 

 

Now we have heard, for the last three years at least: ―You will never find oil in the province of 

Saskatchewan as long as you have a C.C.F. Government.‖ I was quite amused when the member for 

Maple Creek was in the Elrose area during the election, — fortunately he was not there enough times, 

because if he had been a few more times, the Government would have had a deposit. ―Why, we are 

giving away the natural resources of this province – we are not going to have any oil.‖ What do we find 

today? In 1952, our oil production was 1,600,000 barrels. Did we drive capital away? Why is Imperial 

Oil building a refinery of $17 million coming into this province. Did we drive capital out? It is amusing, 

and I am sure the people of this province must smile when they hear that story of how capital was driven 

out of this province. No, my friends, the people in this province are not frightened. They have faith in 

this province; they have faith in this Government. Today we have over 307 producing wells in this 

province. That is the record of this Government, and that is how they have driven out capital. It takes 

capital to drill wells, and they have drilled them under a C.C.F. Government. This oil did not gush in 

here overnight; it has been here since the province was formed and prior to that. And so I say we, in this 

province, although we have a large budget, face with every confidence the future, because I think we are 

on the threshold of great expansion, and when money is spent for certain social services in the field of 

health and social welfare, and an extended road programme, I think the people will accept it as they did 

on June 11th. 

 

Just in closing, of course, I heard that we are spending too much on our health programme, and that 

other plans were better. I ran into the Blue Cross in the province of Manitoba, last summer, where they 

had a little hospital in the town of Stonewall. In order to operate that small hospital – it was only 8 beds 

and many of the people, prior to the opening of the hospital, belonged to the Blue Cross plan; now this is 

the situation they have run into. In order to operate that hospital, it was costing the patients $7 a day. All 

those that held Blue Cross cards were allowed to pay was $4.85 and the hospital board, 



 

March 9, 1953 
 

 

7 

of course, would not take that as full payment. I have seen several letters in the press, even in the 

―Winnipeg Free Press‖, regarding the Blue Cross programme. Because the Blue Cross programme is 

limited in its scope, there is no question about it, it does not measure up in any detail, and they are 

having difficulties in the province of Manitoba with the Blue Cross. I just brought that before you, Mr. 

Speaker, because that is what a little hospital has run into with the Blue Cross already; they will not pay 

the cost in a small hospital. And so I say, this afternoon, in closing, that with a Government that spends 

money for social services and for health, you do have a healthy people; you have a people with potential 

large earning capacity. That money is well spent, and I am sure I do not need to state, in closing, where I 

am standing in supporting the motion. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways and Transportation):  Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in 

this debate today, I should like at the outset to extend my congratulations to the Provincial Treasurer for 

the very excellent manner in which he brought down a very excellent budget. This has become rather 

commonplace, Mr. Speaker, because, as the years go on, we expect the Provincial Treasurer to keep 

increasing the budget and to bring down budgets that are more popular with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

There is something else that I want to say about that budget. People in this province will recall that, in 

June of last year, we made certain very definite commitments, and this budget is ample proof that we 

intend to fulfil the commitments which we made last June. I might say, Mr. Speaker, that prior to 1944, 

election promises were not taken too seriously in this province; but from that day on we have set a 

record of taking our election promises seriously, accepting them as a sacred obligations which we have 

always undertaken to immediately commence to fulfil. I know that when the election was over and we 

were returned with a very comfortable majority, a lot of people though that we would possibly ease up a 

little on the work; take things a little more leisurely than we had done in the past. Well, I want to say that 

this budget should set at rest the minds of anyone who held those opinions, because this budget 

demonstrates that we intend in a forthright manner to fulfil the promises we made last June. 

 

On March 4th, the Provincial Treasurer placed before you an overall plan of what we intend to do during 

the coming year, and this afternoon I hope to spend a little time and deal a little more fully with the 

matters which pertain to my own Department. But before doing so, I would like to say a word or two 

about the rather critical situation that faces the agricultural industry of this province, and I want to say 

that I do not share the views of the Opposition. I am not at all alarmed about the situation, but I want to 

say that the very excellent crop which we harvested, last year, under almost ideal conditions last Fall, 

has helped to obscure the very uncertain situation that lies before the agriculturists in Saskatchewan, and 

I certainly want to disagree with a statement which was made that the farmers of Saskatchewan can put a 

bushel of wheat in their granaries cheaper today than at any time in our history. That, in my opinion, Mr. 

Speaker, is not the case. In fact I know it is not the case. If it had been said that we could put a bushel of 

wheat in our granaries with fewer manpower at work I would 



 

March 9, 1953 

 

 

8 

agree; but that is not what the Liberal speaker said. 

 

I want to point out that, with the cost of farm equipment as it is today, with the cost of labour, with the 

cost of all the things which the farmer must use in the production of wheat, it is impossible to produce 

wheat as cheaply today as you could a short time ago. I think it would be closer to the mark if we said 

that many of the smaller farmers are today finding it impossible to purchase modern up-to-date 

equipment at its present price and stay on the farm. The result is that many of the smaller farmers are 

today selling out to the larger operators who are in a position to purchase this modern up-to-date 

equipment to completely mechanize their farms. By so doing throughout the last two years, when 

conditions have been a little better than usual in the province, these people have kept fairly well abreast 

with prices but for the small operator it is becoming almost a hopeless task to attempt to produce wheat 

under present farming conditions, with present prices as they are. 

 

Another alarming thing to me is the amount of farm equipment that is being bought today on credit. I 

remember, two years ago, staying in a hotel in one of the small towns in the northern part of this 

province, in a very good crop area, and I noticed in the little group which met me that evening there was 

a banker and, I believe, two equipment dealers – it was just before harvest time and equipment was 

going out – and the topic drifted on to the amount of farm equipment which was being sold. I remember 

this banker telling me: ―You may be surprised to know that the greater pat of this equipment is being 

bought on credit.‖ Farmers were borrowing under the Farm Improvement Loans Act to pay for this 

equipment. Now I find that since 1945, there was $834,498 borrowed under that Act by the farmers; and 

by 1951 (the last year on which I have figures) there was $27,876,000 borrowed, and I find that 94 per 

cent of that money has gone in the purchase of farm equipment. I say it is rather a critical situation when 

we find farmers who are supposed to be as prosperous as they are today purchasing so much equipment 

on credit. It certainly gives the lie to the people who are trying to tell us that the price we are now 

getting for our wheat is paying the farmer well for his labours. It may be true that in some of the more 

favoured areas of this province farmers are prospering; but if you will take the province as a whole you 

will find that the capitalization which the average farmer must have in order to farm today is greater than 

it should be, greater because of the excessive prices which he is paying for machinery and for repairs. 

 

Another thing I want to point out to this Assembly is that the dollar which the farmer is borrowing today 

is an inflationary 50-cent dollar, a dollar which represents about a quarter of a bushel of wheat. The 

thing that I am afraid of is that when the farmers comes to repay these dollars, he may be forced to pay 

back the dollar that will represent anything from a half-bushel to a bushel of wheat, and that is what 

really counts. If the situation on the international front should brighten a bit and the demand for tanks 

and guns and jets, yes, and for even keeping horses on the payroll, should cease, why we might find the 

value of the dollar rising again, which would mean the value of farm products would be going down. 

That is a thing that the 



 

March 9, 1953 
 

 

9 

farmer must watch and watch very carefully. 

 

Another thing that is giving us some worry is the fact that there is a very determined effort being made 

on the part of some financial interests to scrap the International Wheat Agreement. I want to say that if 

our Federal Government should succumb to this campaign they will be selling out the farmers of 

western Canada to a much greater extent than was done when we were sold out to the railway companies 

in the freight rates and by the failure of the Federal Government to proceed with the construction of the 

south Saskatchewan dam. 

 

Now, on Friday, the member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) termed as ―sheer nonsense‖ the statement 

that there was a possibility of the depression of agricultural prices in the midst of an industrial boom. I 

just wondered what the ranchers in the Maple Creek district thought when they picked up Saturday 

morning‘s paper and read that, and also found that American cattle were not being shipped into the 

Montreal market. I am wondering if he agreed with the other statement made across the floor of this 

House that the farmers cold today produce beef at 22 cents a pound and make good money from it. 

However, that is his baby and I will leave him with it, and he can make his own peace with the people in 

Maple Creek constituency. 

 

I want now to say a word about my own Department. Before I do so, I should also state that the budget 

which we are now discussing will do more for this province than any other budget that has ever been 

brought down in this Assembly. We have made provision in this budget for an extended power and 

telephone programme; for an extended highways and road programme; for increased development of our 

educational, social service and health programmes, and we have also made provision for the extension 

and development of the natural resources in this province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there is not a single 

segment of the economy of this province that has been forgotten in this budget. 

 

I was rather amused the other afternoon when the member for Maple Creek undertook to defend Mr. 

Abbott‘s budget. In fact I think he spent as much or possibly more time in trying to defend that budget 

than in discussing this one – and I don‘t blame him because, after the remarks of the member for Elrose 

(Mr. M.J. Willis) when his arithmetic showed that a one-cent raise in gasoline tax amounted to a 10 per 

cent raise, I expect the rest of his figures were on about the same plane, and I do not blame him for 

turning his attention to the Federal budget. But I want to say that Liberal speakers are going to have a 

difficult time to convince the farmers of this province that that budget which was brought down in 

Ottawa a short time ago, is going to be of any benefit to this province. That budget failed to give the 

farmers of this province any guarantee – not only this province, but the entire Dominion of Canada any 

guarantee for the products which we have to sell, and it also failed, as I said a moment ago, to make 

provisions for the construction of the South Saskatchewan Dam. So our Liberal friends across the way 

are going to have a difficult time to sell that budget to the farmers of western Canada, and they are going 

to have just as difficult a time to sell it to the workers of this province or any other part of Canada, 

because that budget made a very small reduction 



 

March 9, 1953 

 

 

10 

in the income tax of the low bracket earner in this country. But it did make provision for those who hold 

ample stocks of the companies of this country, whereby they can deduct 20 per cent of the earnings from 

Canadian corporations and deduct that from their taxable income. Mr. Speaker, the present Federal 

budget will go down in history as the ‗rich man‘s budget‘, and it places the Liberal Party exactly where 

they belong, right in the midst of ‗big business‘. 

 

Now, I want to say a word or two about my own Department, as I said a moment ago, and point out that 

during the year which is just closing there have been a number of very significant changes that have 

taken place. First, I would like to mention the fact that Mr. McKenzie, who had been Deputy Minister in 

this province for some 13 years, had retired on superannuation, and retiring as he did after being in the 

service of the province since May, 1912, he left behind him a very excellent record. During those years 

he gave to the people of Saskatchewan a long and valued service. I want to say that his experience and 

his intimate knowledge of the Department was of inestimable value to me, and I want to pay tribute to 

him for his loyal and devoted service. 

 

Fortunately for the Department and the province, we had in the Department a very worthy successor in 

Mr. Stewart who is now the Deputy Minister. In the short time that Mr. Stewart has been in that office 

he has proven himself to be a very capable administrator and is doing an excellent job, and proving that 

he is capable of filling that very exacting office. During the same year, we had Mr. Patton who was the 

chief bridge engineer, retire after a very long period of service, some 36 years. Mr. Patton, too, has left 

behind him a very fine record as an engineer. 

 

The various positions that have been created and have become vacant because of these changes has 

proven the value of the policy adopted by this Government when we assumed office in 1944. At that 

time, Mr. Speaker, we undertook to replace the road inspectors and the political organizers in the 

Department with trained engineers. As I said, that policy has paid off now because we have been able to 

fill these various positions with men with engineering training. I should point out that Mr. L.T. Holmes, 

who now becomes Chief Engineer, and Mr. Larmour who has been raised to the position of Section 

Engineer, were both 1945 graduates of the University of Saskatchewan. Mr. Winnitoy who now heads 

the branch of Materials and Research is also a graduate of our University, and Mr. Pearce who followed 

Mr. Patton as Chief Bridge Engineer, is another student of the University of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Swanson who takes over the new duties as supervisor of Government construction crews comes with an 

exceptionally fine record from the R.C.A.F. and also as the District Engineer of the Department since 

1945. So I say, Mr. Speaker, that the change in our policy has proven to be wise, and we now find 

ourselves in the fortunate position of being able to fill from within our own ranks the various positions 

such as those mentioned as they arise from time to time. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is rather a far cry from the days that I can remember when an 

engineering student from the University of Saskatchewan almost invariably had to leave the province if 

he were to follow the profession of his choice. Today that picture is completely changed, and we have 

not been able to bring to the Department 



 

March 9, 1953 
 

 

11 

enough engineers as the years go on. However, we will continue to use as many of the engineers as 

possible and by so doing give encouragement to our own boys to proceed with work of this type. 

 

A moment ago the member for Elrose spoke of the disaster of the bridge at Saskatchewan Landing, and I 

want to say that it was rather a bad start for the fiscal year 1952-53 and while that was a serious loss to 

the province that loss was not nearly as great as the aggregate losses which we sustained in the south-

west and west central part of this province because of flood damage. The aggregate there of losses to 

smaller bridges and to roads and highways was much greater than the loss sustained at Saskatchewan 

landing. However, I am glad to confirm what the member for Elrose stated, that the bridge is now well 

under way and within a few weeks only the laying of the floor remains to be done and that, of course, 

will have to wait until warmer weather. But I can assure this House that the work on this structure will 

proceed to completion just as rapidly as weather conditions allow. 

 

I should point out also, Mr. Speaker, that the conditions which prevailed last spring in the south-west 

and the west central part of this province, had they been experienced in 1944, a very serious situation 

would have developed because at one time, last spring, the town of Kindersley was completely cut off 

both by rail and highways. I want to say that anyone who was familiar with that country four or five 

years ago just could not believe the situation that existed there last Spring. Some of those old dry lake 

beds, or possibly river beds at one time – most of them were under cultivation a few years ago. When I 

visited that area with the member for Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. Wellbelove) last Spring, and we drove 

over those roads it was unbelievable, because from No. 44 Highway just east of the town of Glidden in 

the old Cutbank Lakes I am told there was 35 feet of water in that lake. In 1947, that was all farm land 

and that lake extended from just east of Glidden almost to Kindersley and then turned west to within half 

a mile of Fairmont. There was a half-mile break there, and then continued from there to Pinkham – 

bodies of water ranging from a mile to half a mile in width. From Fairmont north you could follow 

another of these old coulees; water running to Teo Lake and from Teo Lake west to Dewar Lake. Both 

of those I have mentioned were bodies of water over 20 miles in length. And a few years ago, as I have 

said, most of that area was farm land. When that condition existed, last Spring, we took the Government 

outfit which was stationed at Rosetown to commence work on No. 4 Highway and shift into that area 

and give those people immediate relief. And I want to assure you that had that happened in 1944, those 

people would have been in a mighty serious predicament. 

 

While we had a bad start last Spring, the season as a whole has been a favourable one and we were able 

to complete one of the most extensive highway programmes ever undertaken in this province. We 

completed the grading of 676 miles of road. This mileage represents 17,000,859 cubic yards of material, 

and I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that while that may not seem very much it represents over 50 per 

cent of the amount of material that would be required to build the dam on the South Saskatchewan 

River; and if you take into consideration the amount of earth which we removed in repair work, such as I 

mentioned a moment ago, and the gravel used for gravelling highways, and for blacktop and for base 

course, that 



 

March 9, 1953 

 

 

12 

would add fully another 3 million yards, bringing the total amount of yardage moved in this province to 

approximately five-sevenths of the amount of earth required to build the South Saskatchewan Dam. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy:  Guess you will have to build the dam, Jack. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas:  I‘m afraid we will. Now, if you take that mileage in length, it represents the 

distance from Winnipeg all the way across Saskatchewan on No. 1 Highway to 50 miles in the province 

of Alberta. During the same period, we gravelled 1,707 miles and that represents the distance from 

Vancouver to approximately 100 miles east of Winnipeg via the Crow‘s Nest Pass route. That gives you 

some idea of the amount of work that has been accomplished last year. 

 

I am not going to weary this House with too much detail of last year‘s work, but I want to mention a few 

of the projects we completed. No. 11 Highway, which connects the cities of Saskatoon and Regina was, 

as we are all aware completed last year and is an excellent illustration of the savings that have been 

made in this province first by shortening our highway by taking it along the shortest route and also the 

savings made to the travelling public by blacktopping these roads. I find that the savings to the public on 

the basis of 500 cars a day, and that is low – I am quite sure, Mr. Speaker, that even on the central part 

of the road that is a low estimate of the daily average of cars; but on the basis of 500 cars per day the 

saving to the travelling public per year is $865,000. The maintenance savings per year on that same road 

is $11,200, and the saving in construction costs is $560,000. We figure that the savings to the public will 

pay for the road in some three to four years. 

 

The next project of great importance in this province was the work on the trans-Canada highway and, on 

the whole, work proceeded very well on this project. We were disappointed in the blacktopping work 

carried on between Moose Jaw and Swift Current, but the blacktopping project from MacLean to 

Oakshella was completed, last year, and all of the grading from the Manitoba border to Regina was 

completed. The overpass at Broadview was not quite finished, and that was because the railway 

company insisted on a change in our specifications after we were ready to proceed with the work. This 

delayed the work somewhat. On the western part of the province, however, the grading from Swift 

current west proceeded fairly well. One of the contractors completed his work; the other not quite. But 

on the whole we have made good progress on the trans-Canada. At the end of this year‘s work I find that 

we have 207 miles completed to standard, almost 67 miles of base course laid, and 76.1 miles of 

bituminous surface completed. On the basis of this work to date we will be able to complete the trans-

Canada highway within the terms of the agreement. I know fear has been expressed in some quarters 

that should we complete our agreement in time – and it is quite evident that some of the other provinces 

will not – there is the danger that the Federal Government might give these other provinces better 

conditions than we have in Saskatchewan. Well, I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the agreement 

which we have signed with the Federal Government is such that should they give better terms to any 

other province then the rest of the provinces that signed that agreement are entitled to the same terms, so 

there is nothing to fear from that angle. 

 

I only want to mention two other projects. One, from Qu‘Appelle to Balcarres, already is completed thus 

giving us a high-class 



 

March 9, 1953 
 

 

13 

road from Hudson Bay right to the city of Regina and of that area from Canora to Fort Qu‘Appelle all is 

blacktop but 35 miles; No. 4 Highway, Kyle to Elrose, Rosetown to Biggar and the construction of the 

10-mile gap at Battleford gives us a very high-class road the greater part of the way from the 

international border right through to Meadow Lake. 

 

Before I proceed with the other work, I think I should spend a little time and give you the programme 

which we have arranged for the present year. I shall deal with the trans-Canada Highway – No. 1 

Highway. As I said a moment ago, much of the work, last year, was completed between here and the 

Manitoba border. During the present year we intend to complete the blacktopping of No. 1 Highway 

from the city of Regina to the Manitoba border. We will also complete the overpass at Broadview. We 

will also do the location and the preliminary survey for the by-pass for the city of Regina. We will 

blacktop and base course from Ernfold west, that is the section from Ernfold to – I have forgotten the 

little town just close to Swift Current; but that section will be completed this year. It was under contract 

last year. And we will complete the grading from east of Gull Lake to the junction of 21 Highway. As I 

said a moment ago, that will give you complete blacktop from the city of Regina right through to the city 

of Swift Current. Some of that, of course, is the old standard, not up to trans-Canada Highway standard, 

but the section from the Manitoba border to Regina will be up to trans-Canada standard. 

 

On No. 2 Highway we will complete the grading and the gravelling from Buffalo Pound Lake to the 

junction of No. 11. We will blacktop from Watrous to Young. We will grade and gravel from the 

junction of No. 14 to the end of last year‘s construction, north of the junction of No. 5. We will blacktop 

from Hoey to Wakaw. With the completion of this year‘s work on Highway No. 2, there will only be 

small sections left in need of rebuilding. that section from Lac la Ronge to the north side of Montreal 

Lake has been rebuilt since this Government has been in office. The section from there to Waskesiu will 

still need rebuilding. From Waskesiu No. 2 will be entirely blacktopped to Wakaw; it will be constructed 

from Wakaw to Young, standard grade, and from young to Watrous will be blacktopped; from Watrous 

to No. 15 Highway, standard grade, leaving only that small section from the junction of No. 15 to 

Penzance in need of reconstruction. Then again, of course, there will be blacktop from north of Moose 

Jaw a distance of 14 miles down to some 30 miles south, leaving only a small section north of 

Assiniboia to be reconstructed. 

 

No. 3 Highway – grade and gravel from Mistatim to Prairie River; grade and gravel from Tisdale to 

Melfort and grade and gravel from Meadow Lake east, at the present time, is not on the provincial 

highway system as part of No. 3, but in the new map which will be issued this year, we will extend No. 

3 Highway as far west as Meadow Lake. 

 

On No. 4 Highway, we will grade and gravel from Swift Current north. Again that puts No. 4 Highway, 

as I said a moment ago, in very good condition from the international border right through to Meadow 

Lake. 

 

On No. 5 Highway, we will grade and gravel from Buchanan east and west. We will grade and gravel 10 

miles east of Sutherland 



 

March 9, 1953 

 

 

14 

to 4 miles south of Bruno. We will grade and gravel from Denholm east. We will grade and gravel from 

Maidstone east and we will blacktop from Lloydminster to Maidstone. With this year‘s work it will 

mean that from Canora to the city of Saskatoon, there will only remain a short stretch of a few miles 

between Muenster and Humboldt that has not been rebuilt since this Government has been in office. 

There will still remain a short section – at least I am afraid there will remain a short section – between 

Saskatoon and North Battleford that will not be completed this year, and then only a short distance form 

North Battleford west to this year‘s construction that will remain to be constructed on No. 5 Highway. 

So you will realize that we have made a lot of progress on that artery which is one of the main east-west 

arteries of the province. 

 

On No. 6 Highway we will grade and gravel from the U.S. border north, to connect with the 1952 

construction. We will grade and blacktop from Regina to junction of No. 11. We will grade and gravel 

from Dafoe south, and will grade and gravel from Silver Park to Lac Vert. Again, this year‘s work will 

bring No. 6 Highway close to the point where we can complete the reconstruction of that road in a very 

short time. I should like to point out that this year‘s work will give complete reconstruction from the 

international border to north of Southey. 

 

No. 7 Highway – we will grade and gravel from Fisk to Netherhills. 

 

No. 11 Highway will be resurfaced from the junction of No. 6 west. 

 

No. 13 Highway – we will grade and gravel from Arcola west and from Eastend west. 

 

On No. 14 Highway, we will grade and gravel from Foam Lake east. 

 

On No. 18 Highway, we will grade and gravel from Hirsch to Bienfait. 

 

On No. 20 Highway, we will do the location and the preliminary survey work from St. Benedict north to 

the Forty-four trail. 

 

No. 21 Highway we will grade and gravel from Leader south. 

 

No. 30 Highway – we will grade and gravel from Kindersley north. 

 

No. 35 Highway – we will grade and gravel from Flin Flon to Denare Beach. I might say that 

negotiations are at present under way with the Federal Government on this project. You will recall that, 

a year ago, Mr. Winters sent a telegram to the Board of Trade in Flin Flon advising them that they were 

interested in this work, and at the moment I have been corresponding with Mr. Winters on this matter. 

 

No. 39 Highway – we will resurface from Milestone to Lang. 



 

March 9, 1953 
 

 

15 

No. 40 Highway we will grade and gravel, continuing the 1952 construction. 

 

No. 42 Highway – we will grade and gravel from Lucky Lake west and north. 

 

No. 43 Highway – location and investigation work from the junction of No. 19 west. 

 

No. 47 Highway – grade and gravel from Estevan to the Airport. 

 

No. 51 Highway – we will gravel from Major to the Alberta border. I might say, Mr. Speaker, that 

would have been gravelled, this year, but we were unable to locate a gravel deposit to do the necessary 

work. 

 

No. 56 Highway – we will grade and gravel the hill of the Qu‘Appelle Valley. 

 

Major projects not on the provincial highway system will be gravelling from the U.S. border to 

Coronach. This road was grade, last year, by one of the Government crews. We will grade and gravel 

from Paradise Hill to Frenchman Butte, and we will grade and gravel from Pierceland east to No. 26 

Highway. 

 

Now that, Mr. Speaker, is the programme which we have mapped out for the coming year. It is one of 

the largest programmes that the Department has ever undertaken. While the mileage Is slightly less than 

last year‘s mileage, the yardage to be moved is almost identical and, of course, the blacktop work is 

slightly greater than last year, so that all told the programme which we have outlined for this coming 

year is the greatest we have yet undertaken. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  And there is no election! 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas:  And there is no election. I should also point out that in the Estimates will be a 

considerable sum for the re-gravelling of other parts of the highway system not under constituency. 

During these last several years of heavy precipitation and heavy spring run-off, the gravel on most of our 

highway system has taken a very severe beating and, in this year‘s Estimates, we are providing for a 

very extensive campaign of re-gravelling to keep those highways that we are not immediately able to 

rebuild in condition to carry the load until be can rebuild them. 

 

When I started to deal with the programme I believe I had not quite finished dealing with the 

possibilities and the requirements of the Department with regard to financing. I should like to point out 

to this Assembly that while we have, throughout the years, been spending (as the member for Elrose 

said) a very fair amount of money equal to the money that has been raised by the gasoline tax and by car 

licences, it is questionable if this amount of money is enough to do the work that is required to be done. 



 

March 9, 1953 

 

 

16 

I find that, from 1945 to 1951, the gas tax and the licence increased by 110 per cent, but during that 

same period highway expenditures increased by 235 per cent, and the estimated expenditures for 1952-

53 were 500 per cent higher than the expenditures on highways for 1952-53 were 500 per cent higher 

than the expenditures on highways in 1944. In the present fiscal year, that is 1952-53, we expect 

expenditures on highways will be $3,300,000 higher than was raised by what we call the ‗highway-

users‘ tax‘ – that is the tax for gasoline and the car licences – for the year 1951, so it is quite true that we 

are spending more money on our highways than we are receiving from this tax. 

 

Another thing that may be of interest to this Assembly is that the amount of money spent in United 

States for road purposes is $22 per capita, in Canada, it is $20, and in Saskatchewan, for 1952-53, it will 

be $29, and that does not include urban streets. 

 

Now the programme which I have just outlined to you is the first phase of the five-year plan of highway 

progress which we outlined to the people of this province, this year, and that includes a programme 

calling for 625 miles of grading and 211 miles of blacktopping. As I said a moment ago, it is one of the 

heaviest programmes that we have yet undertaken. 

 

Now in addition to this programme of highway work we have provided in this budget for very generous 

assistance to the rural municipalities. You will find in the budget an amount equal to $1½ million that 

will be expended on road projects other than the provincial highway system. I want to point out, in 

addition to this, that at the commencement of this year, we turned back to the rural municipalities the 2 

mills Public Revenue Tax. In other words, we have left the rural municipalities the whole rights of land 

taxation and that means, Mr. Speaker, that the rural municipalities can benefit to the extent of 

approximately $1,300,000 without in any way raising their levies from last year. In studying the effects 

of that upon the municipalities, I find that, unfortunately, those municipalities that require assistance the 

most are receiving the least because of the return of the Public Revenue Tax, and because of this feature 

we are finding it necessary to make a very close survey of how grants should be made this year. I want 

to say that this matter is now under advisement both by the Department of Highways and the 

Department of Municipal Affairs. But I do want to assure this House that the assistance we are giving is 

certainly going to be a very great assistance to the rural municipalities. 

 

I should also point out that, despite the feeling abroad in many municipalities, this Government is not 

throwing back upon the municipalities costs which were formerly borne by the Provincial Government. I 

have been told on a number of occasions that we are not assuming the full share of bridge construction 

in this province; I have been told that the former Government paid all of the cost of bridge construction. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that statement is absolutely ridiculous. If that has been the case we would not have 

found the condition, in 1944 when we took office, where there were over 1,200 timber bridges in this 

province declared worn out and dangerous. So it is very evident that the bridge policy followed by the 

Provincial Government in former years was not meeting the requirements of this province. 



 

March 9, 1953 
 

 

17 

From 1944 to 1949, we did undertake to build as many bridges as we possibly could for the rural 

municipalities, with the limited amount of material available. In 1949, when material did become 

available in quantity, I asked the Department to prepare a plan whereby we could hope to rebuild these 

bridges in a reasonable length of time. I placed that plan before the Municipal convention in March, 

1951, and later on in the year I discussed the plan with the Executive of the Rural Municipalities‘ 

Association. At that time I asked them if they would be prepared to have us make our contribution to 

this plan on an equalization basis, and they asked for the opportunity to discuss it with their 

municipalities during the summer months, when the various district conventions were held. This was a 

reasonable request and we agreed to it. Now the plan that I submitted at that time, as I have mentioned to 

this House before, was that we were prepared to pay 50 per cent of all the bridge cost in the province of 

bridges from 20 to 100 feet in length, and to assume full responsibility for those bridges over 100 feet. 

We carried on under that plan for one year. In 1952, I again met with the Executive of the Rural 

Municipalities‘ Association and discussed with them the bridge formula which we had worked out, 

paying for these bridges on an equalization basis. That plan was one whereby we would pay not less 

than 20 per cent and not more than 80 per cent of any bridges and we would work out a formula on the 

basis of the assessment of the municipality and the number of 20 ft. spans within the municipality. I 

want to say that it worked out very successfully. We have had a few complaints but not many, and I do 

find that in this first year of operation we are paying considerably more than 50 per cent of the entire 

cost. Now I think that may be caused because more of the municipalities who are paying a smaller share 

of the cost are asking for reconstruction of bridges, but I think on the over-all picture it will work out 

fairly well and we will pay a full 50 per cent of the cost of bridges. 

 

Now I think it might not hurt if I took a moment to explain to this Assembly the history of assistance to 

municipalities from the time this province was formed in 1905. At that time the municipalities were 

responsible for all the roads and all the bridges in the province. By 106, it was realized that the burden 

was possibly a little heavy for many of these municipalities to carry and by 1909, the Government paid 

grants to various municipalities. In 1912, the Board of Highway Commissioners was established and 

they undertook to pay to municipalities 50 per cent of the cost of some of the main roads in the province, 

with a limit of $5,000 per municipality, with the understanding that when the road was built the 

municipality would assume full responsibility for that road. This did not work any too well and, as the 

demand for roads and bridges increased, I find the Department of Highways was established in 1917, 

with very definite responsibilities designated to that Department. By 1920, the Department of Highways 

had worked out a system of roads which would be designated as the ‗Provincial Highway System‘ and 

for which they would assume full responsibility. 

 

That took a terrific load off the shoulders of the municipalities and when this was done, I find that, in 

1923, grants to rural municipalities were discontinued altogether, and that policy was followed until the 

relief years when they again began to pay periodic grants to rural municipalities. There was no system to 

it; there were usually more grants just before an election and where I think they would count for the 

most votes. Certainly there was no system to it; but in 1944, when this 



 

March 9, 1953 

 

 

18 

Government took office, we established a policy of making grants to all municipalities every year, with 

a minimum of $500. I did try to work out plans whereby we could get several municipalities to work 

together in the building of some main roads. That might work for about two years and then the councils 

changed and we had to start all over again; so by 1948 we had developed the system which we have 

been following ever since, of paying these grants on an equalization basis. It is not necessary for me to 

go over that formula, particularly when this Assembly is familiar with it, but that is the system we 

followed throughout those years and I say it worked out very well indeed. 

 

I find that, since 1944, including the money that we have in the estimates for R.M.‘s this year, we will 

have paid over a total of $10½ million for assistance to municipalities on roads other than the provincial 

highway system and, of course, we have turned back the Public Revenue Tax by which they will benefit, 

as I said a moment ago, by the amount of $1,300,000. I find, that over the last number of years, we have 

been paying out from 20 to 24 per cent of the entire revenue budget in the Department of Highways and 

in my opinion I think this is a very fair amount. 

 

Now I realize that the municipalities and the Provincial Government have a very heavy job to do in this 

province in the building and the maintaining of our extensive highway and road systems. We have, Mr. 

Speaker, the most extensive highway system of any province in Canada – 8,300 miles. The provincial 

road system of improved roads is in the neighbourhood of 100,000 miles. If we take in unimproved 

roads of course it would be a great deal higher than that; but I understand there is about 100,000 miles of 

improved roads. 

 

I have noticed from the speeches made in this chamber by the rural members and from the discussions 

that have been held in the country where the Commission on Agriculture and Rural Life has been 

holding hearings, that a lot of the discussions have been around the need of better transportation 

facilities in this province. As I said a moment ago, about the only tax which we have in this province for 

this purpose is the highway users‘ tax, and while we have been able to do a lot of work and while we 

have been able to spend all the money which the Department of Highways could spend to advantage 

with the personnel and equipment available, as the years go on we have been able to demonstrate that 

we can continue to increase that expenditure, and I am hoping the Provincial Treasurer will be able to 

keep up the fine work he has done in the past years in providing us with more money. That is required 

because, in Saskatchewan, as I said at the outset, our farm economy is becoming almost entirely 

mechanized, which calls for the building of roads which will give all-year travel. I find that in the 

province of Saskatchewan we have more motor vehicles per person than any other province in Canada – 

as a matter of fact, we have a motor vehicle for every 3.3 people in Saskatchewan; and one of the 

disturbing things in it is that we have a greater percentage of trucks among those motor vehicles than 

any other province in Canada, and that means that the cost of maintenance is much higher than for just 

cars. 



 

March 9, 1953 
 

 

19 

I have maintained for some time, of course, that we should be receiving a considerable amount of aid 

from the Federal Government for road purposes. I have maintained that the amount of money which 

they are paying for the trans-Canada Highway is not sufficient; I have always maintained that the trans-

Canada Highway should be wholly the responsibility of the Federal Government. However, we are 

thankful for the 40 per cent we are receiving, but I still maintain that we will never be able to do the job 

on roads in this province until such time as our Federal Government assumes some responsibility. 

 

Now there is one source of taxation which should be used for this purpose, and, unfortunately, the 

province does not have the power of levying those taxes. We have the power to tax the highway users, 

but we do not have the power to tax those who benefit because of the highways – that is the 

manufacturers of cars, trucks and so forth. I find that, in 1951, the manufacturers of motor vehicles – 

that class alone – paid to the Dominion of Canada in sales tax and excise tax a total of $144,251,080. 

Yet, in the same period, Mr. Speaker, in 1951, the Dominion of Canada paid, on account of the trans-

Canada Highway, $12,800,000 – less than one-tenth of the amount that was collected from this one 

group alone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are never going to get the type of roads in this province until we have, in Canada, the 

type of Federal assistance similar to what they have in the United States. I notice that, in 1952, the 

Public Roads Administration was voted $548 million for assistance to States in building up their 

highways. It was broken down into three groups: one for those roads which are called ‗State primary 

highways‘; the second group was for those arteries which are part of the highway system leading to the 

urban centres, and the third portion was for what they call their ‗farm-to-market‘ roads, similar to our 

main market roads in this country. 

 

On the basis of population, the Dominion of Canada should not have been paying $12,800,000; they 

should have been paying $58 million to the provinces to help them in the construction of their highway 

problems. 

 

I said, a moment ago, that we were having difficulty because of the increased number of trucks, 

compared to the number of cars in use in this province. I have always maintained that the trucks do a lot 

of damage to our roads, but it was difficult to make a definite assertion on this until after the conclusion 

of what is known as the ‗Maryland test‘. The Maryland test was a test made by the Public roads 

Administration in the United States on a section of paved road in Maryland, and on that paved road they 

made checks to see the damage that would result from the use of vehicles with an 18,000 lb. axle load 

against other vehicles using 22,400 lb. axle load. And then they had another test where they checked 

with a 32,000 lb. tandem axle load as against a 44,800 tandem axle load. Now I do not mean to go into 

that test at any length, today, but I want to point out that, on the basis of the Maryland test, the 22,400 lb. 

axle load over the 18,000 lb. axle load showed about four times the amount of cracking, with two-thirds 

times the number of passes, and if you took into consideration then the 32,000 



 

March 9, 1953 

 

 

20 

lb. tandem axle load and the 44,800 tandem axle load, the difference was still greater. 

 

I had the opportunity of studying this test with Mr. Johnson, who was with the Highway Research 

Bureau at Washington – and by the way they did the actual test. He told me very definitely that the 

matter than counted most was the total weight limit, to determine the damage to highways. Just the other 

day, we had three very excellent films in the Department here, prepared by the Public Roads 

Administration of the United States, showing not only the test in action, but showing the results that 

were obtained after the test was completed. I want to say that, after seeing those pictures, there can be 

absolutely no question but that we, in this province, cannot hope to increase the load limit of our trucks 

without doing more damage to our highways than we can hope to pay for. As a matter of fact, I am a 

little afraid that we may be over the load limit, rather than below it. We shall have to be very careful that 

we do not increase this load limit because, with our sparse population and our extensive mileage, we just 

cannot afford to build the type of road that will carry loads over our present limit, which is 18,000 lbs. 

single axle load and 32,000 tandem, with a 40,000 lb. maximum where a trailer is used. 

 

I should like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that while we have been developing our highways to take care of 

as heavy loads as possible to give to the people of this province the type of road that will give them all-

year travel, and to incorporate in our roads as many safety factors as we possibly can, we have still been 

faced with a lot of road accidents, many of which I think could be avoided. I am glad to note that this 

Legislature has seen fit to set up a Committee to deal with this very important phase of highway work. I 

want to advise that Committee that any member of my staff who can be of assistance to them is 

available any time they require them to give evidence at their meetings. We have already arranged for a 

brief to be prepared which will be presented at one of the sittings. 

 

Some of the factors that I think I should bring to the attention of this House, some of the factors which 

we are using in the building of our highways that leads to safer measures, are as follows: first, on the 

more heavily travelled roads we are providing for shoulders sufficient in with to allow a car to drive 

completely off the pavement, and on all of our provincial highways we are providing sight lines so that 

it will be possible for oncoming cars to have a perfect view, in time to allow them to stop if there should 

be an obstruction on the highway. We are also eliminating all sharp curves and improving sight lines 

generally, and as you may have noticed we are providing flat sides and back slopes to out ditches. the 

ditches themselves are wide, enabling a car to drive off the highway at 50 and even at 60 miles an hour 

without upsetting. 

 

The standard width of our bridges has been increased and the centre-striping of the pavement is now 

standard practice. At crossings of railways no curves are used in the approach, and where traffic and 

costs permit we are providing underpasses or overpasses, or failing that, we are providing for some sort 

of railway signal. 



 

March 9, 1953 
 

 

21 

Those are some of the precautionary measures which we are taking. As I said a moment ago, while we 

can build a lot of those measures into our highway system, we cannot provide the drivers with the 

necessary sense to take care of safe driving. The other thing that we are doing, this year (we have 

commenced it now) is to provide signs at the various curves, showing the speed which can be safely 

used to negotiate those curves. that is becoming necessary I have found, and I expect other people have 

found the same trouble, that after you have been driving over 700 miles of our new roads where the 

curves have been flattened out and then you suddenly come upon one of the older roads where the 

curves run around 8 degrees and less, there is a very great tendency to overdrive those curves. For that 

reason we are, this year, undertaking to place a notice on the curve signs at the sharp curves, giving the 

safe speed of travel. 

 

Those are some of the things we have done this year, Mr. Speaker. I do not intend to weary the House 

any longer, but I do believe that the programme which I have placed before you today will meet with the 

approval of this Assembly. I believe that it will meet with the approval of this province, and in 

conclusion, of course, Mr. Speaker, it is not necessary for me to say that I am going to support the 

motion. 

 

Mr. Niles L. Buchanan (Notukeu-Willow Bunch):  Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to say very much 

today; in fact I do not know whether I will be able to. For the past month or so, whenever I decided to 

talk I did not know whether any words were going to come out or not. I have been struggling with a 

cold, and it has been very difficult for me to know beforehand whether I should prepare a speech or not 

for fear I would not be able to give it; but I do want to make a few preliminary remarks before asking 

your indulgence to adjourn this debate. 

 

I would like, first of all, this being the first occasion I have spoken in this House in the new Legislature 

on a major debate, to extend to various members of this House my congratulations for their being here, 

and it might seem peculiar to you, Mr. Speaker, and to hon. members on this side of the House, but I 

want to extend my heartiest congratulations to my commanding Officer while in the army, Ltd. –Col. 

T.R. MacNutt, who represents the Nipawin constituency. It is more or less a great grievance of mine that 

he did not follow out the traditions of his ancestor who occupied your exalted position in this House in 

years gone by, in carrying out the traditions of the Liberal Party, because if he had he would have been 

sitting on this side of the House. However, he has been a man who has always followed his own 

conscience and possibly his conscience has erred during the past few years, and therefore he happens to 

sit on the other side. However, after being mixed up in politics as we all are for a few years to come, I 

hope that he will eventually see the error of his ways and come over here and join his former adjutant 

and his former platoon officer, and we will make one big happy family again. 

 

I have not quite as happy a thought in connection with the election campaign, last summer, as I have in 

my associations with the present member from Nipawin. I do not know why the Liberal Party in 

Saskatchewan particularly placed Notukeu-Willow Bunch in the Liberal columns, but 



 

March 9, 1953 

 

 

22 

they did; in fact the member for Souris-Estevan advised me, in the last Session, that I should enjoy 

myself just as much as I could while I was here, because I would not be sitting in the Notukeu-Willow 

Bunch seat in the next Legislature. Well, I happened to compare the majority of the member for Souris-

Estevan with my own, and I find that my majority was twice the size of his, and I want to assure him 

that, as long as the C.C.F. is interested in Notukeu-Willow Bunch, it will remain in the C.C.F. column, 

and there is a little more doubt concerning the Souris-Estevan Constituency as far as the Liberals are 

concerned. 

 

Government Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Buchanan:  However, I have contested some four election campaigns now, Mr. Speaker, as a 

candidate, and in the past I have had nothing to say but good about the people and the organization that 

ran against me. This, however, is not true of the last election campaign. I want to say that the young man 

who ran on the Liberal ticket in Notukeu-Willow Bunch was an excellent young man, and, as far as I am 

concerned, he conducted, personally, a fine campaign, but I cannot say that about his supporters. I 

cannot even say that about the Leader of the Opposition, who found occasion to hold a couple of 

meetings in my constituency, particularly in Rockglen and in Willow Bunch. There is one thing my 

executive decided after the election, when we found out that I had the biggest majority that I had ever 

received in Rockglen, and we cut down the Liberal majority the greatest we had ever cut it down in 

Willow Bunch and it is this: any time the Leader of the Opposition wants to hold a meeting in the 

Notukeu-Willow Bunch constituency, we are quite prepared to pay his expenses to come there. 

 

However, I want to say one thing about those meetings. We were in the midst of organizing a rural 

electrification project right around Rockglen; in fact construction did not take place until some time after 

the election. The Leader of the Opposition begged those people not to put their faith in the C.C.F. 

because, if the Liberals were elected in Saskatchewan, we would get free power in the province – or 

something to that effect. I am not quoting from a newspaper and I am not presuming to quote the Leader 

of the Opposition. I am merely giving the consensus of public opinion that resulted from his speech 

there. As a result of that, there are people in the Rockglen project, people who jeopardized the success of 

that project, because we have a very sparse population, and in order to get a project through we must 

have an almost 100 per cent sign-up, and yet there are people there who listened to the hon. Leader of 

the Opposition. 

 

As I said, I am merely interpreting what happened as a result of the meeting he held in Rockglen. I am 

not presuming to put words in his mouth. I am interpreting the ideas of the people who came out of that 

meeting, and the results of that meeting, and I am saying that, as a result of his meeting, there are people 

there who did not receive power. I am saying that, as a result of his meeting, there are people there who 

decided not to become a part of the power project around the Rockglen area, thereby jeopardizing the 

success of the project for everybody else. In fact there is one person there who has a power line pole 

right in the centre of his yard, and he is not able to receive electricity because he believed that, if the 

Liberals got in, he would get free power. So he has got a power line pole in his yard, and he has not got 

electricity; and he was a person who would have been an asset to establishing that project. But because 

of the result of that meeting of the Leader of the Opposition, he withdrew from it, refused to co-

operation, and there is the situation. However, we were able 



 

March 9, 1953 
 

 

23 

to establish confidence in a sufficient number of people that we got the project and, eventually, this poor 

benighted person will get electricity also. 

 

There is something else about the tactics of the last election campaign in the Notukeu-Willow Bunch 

Constituency, regarding the Leader of the Opposition‘s meetings there, and that was the 

misrepresentation established by the ‗Leader-Post‘ reporter who travelled with him. I do not mind if they 

exaggerate by 100 per cent; that is not too bad, but in Rockglen, the Leader of the Opposition had some 

500 of an audience and the ‗Leader-Post‘ came out with only 800, which was not too bad; but I did 

delegate three people to attend the Leader of the Opposition‘s meeting in Willow Bunch on Sunday 

afternoon, with the express purpose of counting the audience in that meeting. So, after the meeting was 

over, they reported to me and they told me they were prepared to take their individual, separate 

affidavits as to the number of people that were in that hall. The exact number, according to them, was 

330 people; yet the ‗Leader-Post‘ comes out the next day with headlines: ―OVER ONE THOUSAND 

PEOPLE LISTEN TO THE HON. LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE PICTURESQUE 

VILLAGE OF WILLOW BUNCH.‖ Well, of course, the people of Willow Bunch took that with their 

tongues in their cheeks. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  That is propaganda. 

 

Mr. Buchanan:  Yes, that could be called ―propaganda‖, but you can imagine the effect it was 

intended to have upon people in other parts of the province. 

 

Then too, there were quite a few other things thrown in from outside ors and outside sources. I 

remember going to a little village and discussing the political problems with one of my supporters who 

happened to be an oil agent, and he said, ―Say, this man who delivers oil to me says he does not think 

very much of your chance down in your own district.‖ ―Well,‖ I said, ―what do you mean?‖ And he said, 

―He was in here, the other day, and we started talking politics. He was delivering from the B.A. in 

Moose Jaw,‖ and he says, ―By the way, who is your candidate?‖ I told him ―Niles Buchanan from 

Rockglen.‖ ―Oh‖ he said, ―that fellow! Why I lived in Rockglen for years and, do you know, he is not 

going to get a single vote in the village of Rockglen.‖ ―Well‖ I said, ―what is the man‘s name?‖ So, we 

went in and we got the bill of lading for the load of oil and we got the man‘s name – I have it on file. 

That man had never in his life lived in Rockglen. He had no idea how the people of Rockglen were 

going to vote. But that is the kind of stuff that was peddled. Once again, I want to say that I am not 

holding this against the Liberal candidate in that district at all. He is a fine young chap; he just did not 

know what he was getting into, that is all, and I do not think they will ever get him into it again. 

 

During previous Sessions, and even in this debate on the budget, the member for Maple Creek had a 

little bit to say about out oil leases: no direct charges of maladministration or anything like that, just 

suggestions. I want to give him this thought in passing that, regardless of what we have done towards oil 

(I think the Minister of Natural Resources is quite capable of defending himself) regardless of whom we 

have issued oil leases to, I do not think he will find one horse that has an oil lease in the province of 

Saskatchewan – or even a jackass. 



 

March 9, 1953 

 

 

24 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, I was craving your permission to make a few remarks, not knowing for sure 

whether they would be heard or not, or whether I would be able to say them; but I would like, at this 

time, to move the adjournment of the debate. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:00 o‘clock p.m. 


