



















































Hansard: February 16, 1953


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Twelfth Legislature  

3rd Day 

 

Monday, February 16, 1953. 

 

The House met at three o’clock p.m. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Motion for Address-in-Reply 
 

Mrs. Marjorie Cooper (Regina City):  I rise to move the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the 

Throne with a full consciousness of the very great honour that has been given to me and to the 

constituency which I represent by the hon. Premier of this province. 

 

I am very proud to be one of the representatives of Regina constituency in this Legislature. I have lived 

in Regina since I was a very small child and I have come to feel that Regina is very much a part of me. I 

have seen Regina grow from a very small city to assume the important place it now has as a key centre 

in the economy of this province. I think Regina has grown into a clean and very beautiful city and we 

are all the more proud of the beauty when we realize that we had no natural advantages here but the 

beauty we have has been created by a fine group of men and women with a keen sense of civic pride and 

civic responsibility. Regina is in a period of great expansion; in fact this city is literally bursting at the 

seams. There is no stagnation here, Mr. Speaker, and with the rapid development taking place 

throughout the province we are looking forward with a great deal of optimism to our future. 

 

I am very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that this Government has given recognition to the growing importance 

of this capital city by giving us a third member in the Legislature. 

 

I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to the citizens of Regina for giving me the opportunity for 

sitting as a member of this Legislature. It is a privilege that is given to very few women in this country 

or in this province, and I am keenly aware of the responsibility in a manner which will be acceptable to 

the people of Regina who have placed so great a trust in me and in the Party which I represent. I have 

felt for many years, Mr. Speaker, that there should be more women in our Legislature. Canada’s record 

in this respect is not too good. Women make up half our population and we have just as much at stake in 

this business of government as have men. Any government is strengthened by having a variety of points 

of view represented in the House. Just as a farmer or a business man or labour man has a special 

contribution to make, so women have certain viewpoints and experiences that are needed. Men trust 

women with the most 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

2 

 

important things in their lives  the handling of their money, the running of their homes and the rearing 

of their children. Surely then, women can be trusted to work for the kind of legislation that will protect 

those homes and make life a safer and happier place for the children that we bring into this world. Who 

could be more concerned than women in seeing that every child has a decent home to live in, enough to 

eat, adequate medical care and all the education they have the desire and the ability to obtain. It is 

because we are so concerned with these things that women are becoming increasingly active in politics. 

I think perhaps every member of this Legislature, whatever his Party, will tell you that women are key 

workers in his constituency, and is it not true that in all organizations, church or otherwise, we find the 

women in there carrying their share of the load! This, in itself, is good, but not good enough. Women 

should not only be concerned with the formation of party policies, but they should sit in the legislatures 

at the level where that party policy is carried out. Without wishing any ill-fortune to any of the hon. 

members present it would be my hope that in future legislatures, both provincial and federal, we will 

find more of the seats occupied by women. 

 

So much for women in politics. I would like, at the outset of this address, to congratulate the hon. 

Premier of this province and the members of this Government on their overwhelming success in the 

recent election, and, at the same time, to congratulate the thousands of C.C.F. supporters who gave of 

their time and their money and their enthusiasm in achieving so great a victory. It must be a deep source 

of satisfaction to the members of this Government to feel that after eight years in office they retained the 

loyalty and the confidence and trust of the people of this province to such an extent that they were re-

elected with the largest popular vote in history. I think, Mr. Speaker, that our success was due to the fact 

that this Government has kept faith with the people of this province and has legislated for the benefit of 

the many, rather than for the privilege of the few. Another factor I think, for the great and contagious 

enthusiasm so prevalent among C.C.F. supporters all over this country is the fact that our programme is 

formed in co-operation with the members of our Party and our members all feel that they have a real 

stake in the future development of this province and that they were, shall I say, virtually co-authors in 

the ten-point programme which this Party presented as our election platform and which we hope to carry 

out in the next five years. The Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, indicates that we are proceeding, 

step by step in an orderly manner, to carry out our promises during the next year and the years to follow. 

It is refreshing, Mr. Speaker, to find a government that not only plans ahead with great care, but starts 

the first year after an election to carry out its programme, rather than waiting until just before a new 

election. 

 

In evaluating the programme and the progress of any government it is important to look at the basic 

philosophies that underline the actions of that government. This is an age of slogans. Any party or any 

group may take unto itself a variety of slogans and, particularly at election time, may make all kinds of 

promises that dictate the actual performance of a government; any government will only act in 

accordance with its basic motivating philosophy. “As a man thinketh in his heart so is he” was never 

truer than in the field of politics. 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

 

3 

The slogan adopted by the C.C.F. Party from its inception has been “Humanity First” and its programme 

has been dictated by a belief in equality of opportunity for all and economic security for all. At the 

beginning of a new term of office it is well to look at the record of this Government to see if we have 

been moving in the direction of our professed beliefs. First – financial position; not because I think 

money is the most important, but because the amount of revenue we have and the way it is handled 

determines, of necessity, the extent of our programme. Revenues in this province, in 1952, were the 

highest in our history. Our bonds have reached ‘A’ standing by rating companies, and this is no mean 

achievement because it gives us more favourable rates of interest and a wider market for borrowing. 

There has been a surplus of revenues over expenditures for every year that this C.C.F. Government has 

been in office. Now this shows capable and careful handling of our money and we are proud of it; but 

financial position alone is not the criterion of good government; it should merely be the means of 

providing security for our people. The test is not how much money, but how that money is spent. 

 

Now what have we been doing with our money? First – for one thing, we have been trying to bring more 

comforts and more of the amenities of life to the people in the rural areas of Saskatchewan, and I would 

like to congratulate this Government on the energy with which they are proceeding with the rural 

electrification programme. Our target of electrifying 40,000 farms in the next five years is a very 

ambitious one, but I like to think what it means to the people of this province and to the women in 

particular – women who have for years been struggling along with coal oil lamps and looking longingly 

at electric washing machines, refrigerators, electric irons and vacuum cleaners. Believe me, to them rural 

electrification is a great blessing. 

 

Then in the Department of Highways, our target here is equally ambitious – a $75 million programme 

over the next five years. We are one of the few provinces that will complete its share of the Trans-

Canada Highway in the allotted time. The improved highways will not only be a blessing to our own 

people, both rural and urban, but it also should do a great deal to encourage tourist traffic and bring 

added prosperity to this country. 

 

Now, all areas stand to profit greatly by our expanded programme for the development of our natural 

resources. The production of oil and gas is proceeding in this province at a rate that is arousing interest 

in all parts of the world, and risk capital is just pouring in. I notice in the ‘Leader-Post’ that Socony 

Vacuum alone are planning to spend $10 million in exploration in the Fosterton area. The major find of 

light oil in the Forget area is most encouraging. Saskatoon now has a prospect of natural gas in the near 

future, and we have good reason to hope that natural gas will be available in many other towns and 

cities, and I certainly hope Regina will be one of them. In fact, the mineral development in this Province 

is proceeding at such a rate, that the Speech from the Throne indicates that this Legislature is going to be 

asked to provide legislation for the establishment of a new Department of Mineral Resources. So much 

for stagnation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, turning to agriculture, I am really not going to deal with this as the seconder of the Motion is 

going to deal with it; but I would like to congratulate the Government on the appointment of the Royal 

Commission on Agriculture and rural Life. As the economy of this country is directly 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

4 

 

dependent on the prosperity of our farms, the report of this Commission may well be the most important 

ever tabled in this House. The calibre of the members of the Commission is of the very highest, and I 

was delighted to see that a very outstanding woman, Mrs. Nancy Adams, was appointed as one of the 

commissioners, and we may thus be assured that the needs of rural women will not be neglected. 

 

Now coming back to what I said at the start, about the relationship between our philosophy and our 

legislation, there is evidence that this C.C.F. Government believes in the democracy it preaches. It is 

opposed to discrimination on grounds of race, sex, politics or religious beliefs, and it enacted its beliefs 

in the well-known Bill of rights, and has since further strengthened that Charter of Human Rights by 

admitting women as jurors and, last year, by passing legislation to guarantee equal pay for women doing 

the same jobs as men. 

 

The right of labour to organize in unions of their own choosing and to bargain collectively with their 

employers has been protected by The Trade Union Act. The standard of living for the people in this 

province has been protected by one of the highest minimum wages in Canada. We are the only province 

to give two-weeks’ holiday with pay during the first year of employment. And I notice the Speech from 

the Throne forecasts amendments to The Workmen’s Compensation Act, which will raise certain 

benefits here. Labour may rest assured that this Government will continue to work for a rising standard 

of living for our labouring people. 

 

Now what about our children? What are we doing for them? We say we believe in equality of education 

for all, but what have we done about it? Well first, and I think most important, was the organization of 

larger school units wherein the strong areas may help the weak, and working together they can provide 

better schools, better libraries, better nursing and dental facilities and more equitable salaries for 

teachers, and more security for our teachers. 

 

Then second, but of course equally important, by tripling school grants since 1944, and third, by our 

system of equalization grants. This Government believes in the system of equalization grants and, last 

year, returned $1,600,000 in the form of equalization grants to our school districts. And even though the 

Public Revenue Tax is now to be returned to the municipalities, these grants will continue. 

 

Fourth, by the creation of a million-dollar revolving loan fund from which students who need help to get 

through University and Normal School can get that help. Last year, $116,000 was loaned to students in 

this province. Regarding this programme, Dr. Thomson, the President of the University, had this to say, 

and I quote: 

 

“Saskatchewan has made the greatest forward step on this Continent, by providing a million-dollar 

loan fund to help students through University and Normal School.” 

 

Then in our Adult Education Branch, and particularly through the Arts board, this Government is 

helping and encouraging students to 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

 

5 

develop their talents in music, in art and in drama. 

 

Sixth, by bringing educational opportunities to the people in the sparsely-settled districts of the north. 

Thirteen schools have been built and eight new teacherages. The Department of Health and Social 

Welfare are also doing an excellent job in this area. I do not think we can over-estimate the value of 

these services to those people in the north who were for so long neglected. 

 

One more thing I wanted to mention. I also was delighted to see, in the Speech from the Throne, that 

legislation is to be introduced to provide for improving our libraries, and that there is to be an increase in 

library grants. All these things are steps by which we are succeeding in bringing equality of education to 

all the young people in this province. 

 

Now what about Social Welfare? Well, I don’t think I need to go into a great deal of detail there, 

because I think the work of this Department is very well known and it is recognized by social workers 

all over this country as a pattern from which to copy. 

 

Our Child Care Programme is second to none. Our adoption programme is sound and skilfully 

administered. Our work with unmarried mothers is not only a fine piece of humanitarian legislation, but 

it also has been successful in rehabilitating many girls into useful and happy lives. 

 

Our record in penology is well known and has attracted the attention of penologists from all over this 

world. When we know of the conditions in some of the gaols and penitentiaries in the country, we 

realize just how much we have to be thankful for here. 

 

Then what about our older citizens? What are we doing for them? Well, besides providing our share of 

old-age pension and free hospital services and medical services for needy pensioners, we have homes for 

elderly people in Wolseley, Saskatoon and Regina. We are working in close co-operation with churches 

who take on care for the aged people. And I would like to congratulate this Government on the near 

completion of its new home for elderly people at Melfort. A great deal more still needs to be done in this 

area, Mr. Speaker. Additional homes would relieve congestion in our hospitals and mental institutions, 

and remove that burden of care for chronic cases, where old-age rather than illness is confining these 

people to hospital. I know the Government is well aware of this problem and is moving in this direction 

as rapidly as the necessary funds are available. I was pleased to see, in the Speech from the Throne, 

mention made of an expanding programme of nursing care for the aged, and I was hoping, when I saw 

that, Mr. Speaker, that we might soon have a new nursing home in Regina, because the need is very 

great here. 

 

I would also like to commend the Government on its decision to expand their programme for 

rehabilitating handicapped civilians, and in this connection I would like to suggest that there is one 

group, the deaf people, that should receive consideration. I feel that hearing aids and batteries for 

hearing aids should be exempted from Education Tax. It seems to me they should be in the same 

category as glasses and drugs and so on, and this is just a suggestion I would like to make at this time. 

 

Let us look, next, at the achievements of this Government in the field of public health. The C.C.F. 

Government believes that every citizen 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

6 

 

has the right to health care, regardless of ability to pay and they gave us the finest hospitalization plan on 

this Continent, as well as free treatment for Cancer and Polio and Venereal Disease. 

 

Regarding our Cancer programme, the Editor of “The Ottawa Citizen” had this to say, and I quote: 

 

“Even the Liberals admit that Saskatchewan had perhaps the finest Cancer control programme in the 

world.” 

 

The achievements of this Government in the field of mental health are well known and have earned 

tributes from such men as Dr. Meninger, who said that Saskatchewan had the most advanced training 

courses in Mental Hygiene in North America, and that experts would be coming to this province to 

study. 

 

Our Air Ambulance has had its seventh birthday on February 8, and since that time the service has been 

responsible for the safety of 5,000 patients and has travelled a distance equal to approximately fifty trips 

around the world. What a godsend that Air Ambulance was during the recent polio epidemic, because, 

with polio, speed of access to doctors and hospitals means just the difference between life and death, or 

between being crippled for life or recovery. I think this Air Ambulance is one of the best examples of 

what I mean when I say we believe that every citizen has a right to health care, whether they live in a 

city or in one of the most remote areas of this province. 

 

Hospital construction has proceeded at such a pace we now have a bed capacity of 7.1 per thousand, 

almost double what we had in 1944, and the City of Regina has a bed capacity of 17 per thousand, which 

is the highest in the Dominion of Canada. We have build a medical college at Saskatoon and we are 

constructing a hospital in connection with it, so that we can train our own doctors and hope to keep them 

in this province. 

 

We have now set up eight of the health regions, and we hope to set up more soon. This was one step that 

was suggested by the Health Services Planning Committees in the amazingly comprehensive report that 

they presented, which step they said was necessary before we implemented Health Insurance. 

 

This Government is now ready to proceed with a National Health Insurance Plan, and we view with 

great concern the probability that the Federal Government may not now be prepared to carry out its 

promise, made 33 years ago, for health insurance, and reiterated at every election since that time. 

 

Reading from a speech of the Hon. Paul Martin, he said this: “The time is not yet rips.” Not ripe after 33 

years! When will it be ripe, Mr. Speaker? Of course it will cost money. We know that; but health care is 

costing us money now. $671 million was spent in this country on health care, last year, but yet health 

care still depends on ability to pay. 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

 

7 

In a recent Gallup Poll, eight out of ten people interviewed expressed a desire for health insurance. No 

individual or family should be crippled for life by doctor bills, or denied care because they cannot pay 

for it. Of course there are privately-owned and co-operative schemes, but they cover a very, very small 

proportion of our people  25 per cent partially covered, and only 5 per cent fully covered. There is no 

question but that the administrative cost of these many schemes is greatly in excess of what it would be 

with an overall Health Insurance Plan. Certainly there are some shortages of personnel. There were 

certain shortages when we implemented our Hospitalization Plan, but we met them. I can remember the 

dire predictions of the opponents of this Government when we brought in hospitalization. Dr. Samuel 

Johnston one said, “Nothing will ever be attempted, if all possible objections must first be overcome.” 

People can always find excuses for things that they do not want to do. This again is a point that I think 

very well establishes what I have been trying to show you  the difference between a slogan and a 

basic principle. We believe that all people have a right to health care regardless of ability to pay, and we 

implemented that hospitalization scheme in our first year of office. The Federal Government say they 

believe in Health Insurance  they have promised it for 33 years and now  “The time is not ripe.” 

 

Saskatchewan is ready and anxious to proceed with its Health Insurance Plan, and I feel it will be a 

serious breach of trust, in view of the promises of the Federal Government if they do not implement 

Health Insurance at this Session. If some other provinces are not ready, why should Saskatchewan 

suffer? We are ready here, and we have a right to expect adequate help from Ottawa, to carry out our 

plans. 

 

But hand in hand, Mr. Speaker, with public health measures must go a vigorous attack on what I 

consider Canada’s No. 1 welfare problem  housing. There is no social evil in this or any other country 

that causes more ill health, is the cause of more mental illness, juvenile delinquency, broken homes, and 

other social evils too numerous to mention, than that of substandard housing or slums; and we are living 

in a false paradise if we do not think that slums exist in Canada, in this province, and in this city. 

 

Now we may not have large areas of dilapidated houses gathered together that we call a slum area, but 

we do have many dilapidated houses, quite unfit to live in, being occupied by thousands of Canadian 

people. We have whole families living in one or two rooms, and maybe several such families in one 

house. We have families living in trailers, in emergency shelters that were built just to tide people over 

an emergency, but they are still in use because there is no place for people to go. We have families 

separated. I could tell you of a family where the Government had to take the children in care, not 

because they did not want to live as a family but because there was no place to house them as a family. I 

have people coming to me constantly, in desperation over the terrible housing conditions under which 

they are living. I am going to cite just two or three examples  and I choose Regina, not because I think 

we are the only place that has problems, but because I do know the situation here. 

 

I was called the other day by a woman, and when she told me the conditions they were living under, I 

thought she must be exaggerating so I went to her home to see if it was true. This, Mr. Speaker, is what I 

found: A family of eight, mother and father and six children, living in a house (children ranged, by the 

way, from two months to fifteen years of age) that 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

8 

 

consisted of one room and a lean-to kitchen. The house was n very bad repair and, of course, it was non-

modern. Now, in that one room there was a double bed, and in that bed the four oldest children had to 

sleep. Beside the bed was a crib and in that crib the next child slept. Beside the crib was a little 

bassinette, right against the heater, the only place there was to put it, and in that little bassinette was a 

two months-old baby. In the same room, a day-bed had to be made up at night, where the father and 

mother slept – all in the same room. There was no clothes’ closet. The floor was in terrible condition; 

the cracks had come right through the linoleum and the draft came through. It was perfectly dreadful. 

 

The children had been ill. One little girl had been in hospital twice. Do you wonder? Could you expect 

anything else? The mother was at the breaking point and she felt that if she could not get out of that 

place, she was really going to be ill. She told me that when she had to do the washing – for a family of 

eight, mind you – the only place to hang the clothes in the winter was in the house. You can imagine 

that. And due to the general dampness in the house it took two or three days for those clothes to dry. Do 

you wonder that the mother was at the breaking point? Conditions like this, Mr. Speaker, are absolutely 

intolerable, yet we are putting up with them. 

 

I could tell you of the case of a young mother who came to see me. She was almost a nervous wreck 

trying to keep the children quiet. They were living in a couple of rooms in a house and they had two 

little children, and every time the little three-year-old boy ran across the floor, somebody was banging 

on the door – the landlady – too much noise. the family just lived in terror that the baby would waken 

and cry in the night. Surely it should be a God-given right for any family with children, to have a home 

of their own. 

 

Just one more case. This one distressed me very greatly and I just cannot forget it. It was the case of a 

young couple with two children, who were living in an attic. The husband was away a good deal. It was 

a drafty attic, and the windows were so high that you had to stand on a chair to see out. The husband was 

told that if they did not move out of there, his wife was due for a mental breakdown. Well, they tried, 

but they could not find a place. You might as well have smallpox as children, if you are looking for a 

place to live. The inevitable happened. That mother had to be taken to a mental hospital and those 

children were left without a mother. 

 

Conditions like this, in a so-called Christian country, are pretty hard to understand, and in my opinion, a 

great deal harder to condone. They say that the home is the foundation of society, and certainly it is the 

most sacred institution we have, but all the health programmes, welfare programmes, and recreation 

programmes we have will fail to produce healthy, well adjusted, stable homes unless we can solve our 

housing problem. 

 

Canada lags far behind many other countries in this respect. The January 15th issue of “MacLean’s 

Magazine” contains an article entitled “Our Sorry Record in Housing”, written by a social economist. 

He made a study of housing, since the war, in Britain, the United States, Sweden, Australia, and Canada, 

and he states that Canada rates last. 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

 

9 

Dr. J.O. Firestone, one of the top Federal housing officials said, in 1949, “There are 475,000 families, or 

36 per thousand, without homes.” The number has grown greatly since then, and we are not keeping up 

with the housing needs of new families, let alone catching up on the backlog. No country that has made 

an honest, realistic attempt to house its people, has been able to do so without a programme of public 

housing, without low-rental housing and subsidized where necessary. 

 

In studying the report of the Royal Commission on Housing, known as the Curtis report, presented in 

1944 to the Federal Government (i.e. nine years ago), it was recommended that the Government start a 

large-scale programme of public housing with emphasis on low rental housing, subsidized where 

necessary. The same recommendation was made by the Canadian Welfare Council and made after a 

great deal of study by a group of people that contains not only economists and socials workers but 

businessmen, bankers, insurance men, labour representatives and representatives of building trades. The 

Canadian Council of Churches also made the same recommendation may they couched their 

recommendation in very strong terms. 

 

Now, economists have stated that no family should purchase a home at more than two and one-half 

times their yearly salary, or rent a home at more than 20 per cent of their monthly pay cheque. Yet, what 

is the situation? Three-quarters of the homes built by private enterprise since the war have been within 

the means of only the top income third of our people. Practically none have been built for the moderate 

income group and virtually nothing for the low income group; and, of course, practically no rental 

housing. Quoting from Nathan Strauss, the former administrator of housing in the United States and a 

man who probably knows more than anyone on this continent about housing – this is what he says: 

 

“It is easier to make people believe the pleasant myth that private enterprise can and will build 

dwellings within the means of low-income families than to face the unpleasant fact that the goal is not 

achieved nor even in sight.” 

 

Private enterprise must build at a profit. This is not a criticism of private enterprise; it is merely a 

statement of fact. Experience has shown that low rental housing cannot be provided for low income 

people unless we forget about profit. The only sensible proven permanent solution for the housing 

question is public housing subsidized where necessary. And why not subsidies for housing? Subsidies 

are not new. Grants in aid of education are a form of subsidies. Family allowances certainly are 

subsidies. Recently the Federal Government gave a sizable subsidy to gold mines. Tariffs are one of the 

oldest forms of subsidies and, if my memory serves me correctly, it is not so many years since the 

families in the west were subsidized for not growing grain. Subsidies, properly allocated, are one of the 

finest methods known to distribute the national income more fairly, and in the light of the distressing 

circumstances such as I have outlined today, surely no one could conscientiously oppose subsidies to 

give our people decent homes to live in. 

 

In Britain, New Zealand, Sweden, Holland, the United States and Newfoundland, public enterprises 

have provided hundreds of thousands of 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

10 

 

homes for working people at rents that they can afford to pay. Surely a young vigorous country like 

Canada can do the same. It should not be a question of can we afford to house our people decently, Mr. 

Speaker, but in view of the social implications of bad housing, can we afford not to house our people 

decently! 

 

I would like to quote from a speech made by the late King George V on April 11, 1919: 

 

“It is not too much to say that an adequate solution of the housing question is the foundation of all 

social progress. If this country is to become the country we wish to see it become a great offensive 

must be undertaken against disease and crime and the first point at which the attack must be delivered 

is the unhealthy, ugly, overcrowded housing which all of us know too well.” 

 

Now, any action designed to eradicate the evils of bad housing must begin where the worst housing is, 

not where the best housing is. It must start with the lowest income group. Senator Wagner, another 

expert on American housing, said: “To ignore the needs of this group is like curing a cold and ignoring a 

cancer.” Thus, we must make a vigorous attack on this at all levels of government, and before we can 

accomplish a great deal we have got to have lower interest rates. Much of the housing that has been done 

by housing authorities in the United States – they have borrowed money from the Government at 2 per 

cent. We need longer terms of payment, lower down payments, and we need a great deal of research into 

cheaper methods of building. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that the Federal Government is to be commended on including Section 35 in its 

Housing Act under which for housing projects loans are available to be financed 75 per cent by the 

Federal Government and 25 per cent by the municipalities and the province together – and where 

subsidies are necessary, those subsidies will be paid at the same rate. Now, while all authorities agree 

that the chief responsibility for housing is with the Federal Government, because they are the only 

government that have the money to launch a housing programme, still there must be close co-operation 

with the provinces and the municipalities. I would like to congratulate this Government on its 

willingness – in fact, its eagerness – to enter into an agreement with municipalities who will build 

houses under Section 35 of the Act. I am very pleased to see, in the Speech from the Throne, that this 

co-operation is to continue. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the Government on making available very fine large tracts of very 

desirable land for housing projects in Regina. This is going to help the situation here a great deal and we 

are very grateful, but I would like to point out that it still does not meet the needs of the low income 

group. 

 

I would like to commend the Hon. Minister of Social Welfare for his considerable share in persuading 

private enterprise to build these houses and apartments on this land, and also to commend the Minister 

on the very active part that he has taken in urging municipalities to build houses under Section 235 of 

the Act. The fact that so few municipalities have taken advantage of this shows that there is need for a 

great educational campaign 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

 

11 

to acquaint municipalities with the provisions of the Act and to persuade them of the very dire 

consequences of bad housing in their communities. 

 

While poor housing attracts more attention in cities, it is not confined to cities. As much needs to be 

done in rural areas and in towns and villages, and I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that the subject of housing 

will be given a good deal of consideration by the Commission on Agriculture and rural Life. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I have tried to show that this C.C.F. Government, within its legal and financial 

limitations, has succeeded in its policy of the greatest good to the greatest number. but Saskatchewan 

can only go so far. We need more help from the Federal Government for Education, Social Welfare, 

Health and Housing. Thirty-three years of promises to implement a health insurance plan are not good 

enough. We believe in action, not promises. But neither can this province or this dominion continue to 

provide the social services that we need, if we should find ourselves in a world at war. Therefore, while 

our responsibility as a legislature is of course to Saskatchewan, we must work unceasingly for a world at 

peace. In our lifetime we have seen two wars, a devastating depression and we now face the possibility 

of a third world war that could mean the end of civilization as we know it. These things did not just 

happen, Mr. Speaker. They are the result of a basic philosophy that has neglected the needs of the 

masses of our people. In Europe, Asia, Africa the people are rising and demanding a better standard of 

living and our answer to these movements will settle our own future. We may suppress these movements 

by force, and we will lose the future if we do that. Or we may dedicate ourselves, as democratic socialist 

movements the world over are dedicating themselves, to pursue unceasingly the war on poverty and 

human misery and, by this positive approach, root out the seeds of war. Our answer to the needs of 

others will determine our own right to peace and security. I am proud, Mr. Speaker, to be a member of a 

government which places humanity first. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the hon. member for Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. C.G. Willis) 

that an humble address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor as follows: 

 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE WILLIAM JOHN PATTERSON, 

 

Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan  

 

May it Please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious speech which Your 

Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

12 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale):  Mr. Speaker, in rising to second the Address in Reply to the 

Speech from the Throne, I wish first to commend the mover on her fine speech. I would also 

congratulate the junior member for Regina on her election to this Legislature. I would sympathize with 

her though in being the only woman member elected last June 11, but I am certain, after having listened 

to her address today, you will agree that the viewpoint of the women of this province will be ably 

presented in this Assembly. My congratulations, too, are extended to the members for Canora and 

Humboldt. I am certain they will justify the confidence shown in them. 

 

This afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I wish to take a few minutes before going into my main speech to say a 

few words about my Constituency of Melfort-Tisdale. As mentioned in the Speech from the Throne, 

work on the Melfort Nursing Home is progressing favourably. The Minister of Social Welfare and the 

Government are to be congratulated on their decision to proceed with the construction of this three-

quarter million dollar undertaking. The Home, besides filling a need for the older people of the north-

eastern part of the province, will be an asset to the town of Melfort as well as a credit to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to refer to the booklets which have been placed on the desks of the members of this 

Assembly. This booklet has been prepared by the Melfort Board of Trade in order to publicize the town 

of Melfort and the Carrot River Valley in which it is situated. It is a fine pictorial record of Melfort and 

District. The Board of Trade, which is distributing it free of charge to interested persons, is to be 

commended in doing a fine publicity job. 

 

Congratulations are due to the town of Tisdale which, last year completed the installation of a 

waterworks and sewage disposal system. This marks a forward step in the history of that progressive 

community. The Tisdale School Unit was organized in 1952, following the second vote in that area. The 

Melfort School unit, which has been functioning since 1952, completed last year, in co-operation with 

the Melfort Collegiate District, a composite school with a capacity of 240 pupils, bringing to that area 

technical as well as academic training comparable to that obtainable anywhere in the province. 

 

The recent formation of the Melfort Union Hospital district resulted, in 1952, in enlarging the former 

hospital into a 72-bed structure with most modern equipment. Of interest to farmers is the Melfort Pig 

Hatchery Co-operative, which has been in operation for more than a year. The Hatchery, which, I am 

informed, is the only one of its kind now operating in western Canada, has 70 sows at its headquarters 

about five miles west of Melfort. When I visited it about two weeks ago there were already more than 

130 piglets which will be available soon for distribution among the co-op membership. 

 

To finish this section of my address I will mention the part taken by the Melfort Agricultural Society in 

encouraging junior club work among the farm youth in north-eastern Saskatchewan. Members of three 

4-House Clubs in that area won provincial honours and represented Saskatchewan at last winter’s Royal 

Winter Fair at Toronto. Margaret England and Dorothy Gilmour, of the Jordan River Clothing Club, 

placed fifth at Toronto in the clothing competition. Faith Elliott and her sister, Iris Elliott, of the 

Eastman 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

 

13 

Food Club, were third in their event at the Royal Winter Fair. Jack Levring and Harvey Dahl of the 

Melfort Dairy Club also finished third in the dairy cattle competition. 

 

Turning to the provincial scene, it would be no over-statement to say that the years since 1944 have been 

the most eventful in Saskatchewan’s history. The first socialist government on the North American 

continent, while putting into effect its pre-election promises, has carried out a programme that not only 

attracts attention throughout much of the civilized world, but has won for itself re-election for its third 

consecutive term of office. Parts of the C.C.F. programme have already been ably dealt with by the 

mover of the Address in Reply. Other accomplishments of this Government are deserving of mention. 

 

Ranking high on the list is certainly the achievement of the Department of Highways. When the Minister 

of Highways assumed office in 1944, he took over the responsibility of building up and retaining the 

largest provincial highway system in Canada, a responsibility made greater by the fact that three-

quarters of that system were highways in name only. At this time I should like to compliment the 

Minister of Highways and his staff for the vast strides made in improving and extending that highway 

system. The construction by the Department of 4,200 miles of road is a record of achievement of which 

the Department should take a great deal of credit. This mileage of construction represents over 50 per 

cent of the provincial highway system and greatly exceeds the provincial highway system of either 

Manitoba or Alberta. 

 

Also there has been vast improvements as regards blacktop in the province. Prior to election of the 

C.C.F. there were only 132 ½ miles of blacktop in Saskatchewan. By the end of 1952, Mr. Speaker, this 

has been increased to 995 miles. In this province today, one can travel over continuous blacktop from 

North Portal on the United States border to Regina and Saskatoon to Radisson, a distance of 376 miles, 

or from the United States border to Saskatoon to Rosetown, a total of 409 miles without leaving 

blacktop. Besides this, blacktop is rapidly being extended to connect all the larger centres of this 

province. 

 

So much has been accomplished by the Department of Highways in the period 1944 to 1952 that there is 

no doubt in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that that accomplishment materially assisted in the victory of the 

C.C.F. at the polls, last June 11. But not only was there on that occasion endorsement of the past 

highway achievements of this Government, but also there was approval of the highway plank of the 

platform upon which the C.C.F. appealed for re-election. A five-year programme comprising 2,500 

miles of grade, 1,200 miles of blacktop and 500 miles of asphalt-treated highway is indeed a programme 

worthy of support. 

 

While concentrating on highways connecting our larger centres of population, this Government has not 

forgotten the main market roads which are primarily the responsibility of municipal bodies. It has been 

the custom of past governments of the province to make grants towards the improvement of these main 

market roads. But the whole set-up of previous governments has not been such as to make municipal 

councillors happy. I studied the statements of 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

14 

 

grants received by the rural municipalities in the constituency of Melfort-Tisdale, a record which 

doubtless can be duplicated in practically every constituency in the province. I found that each rural 

municipality received a total of three or four grants in the ten years preceding 1944. The rural 

Municipality of Star City, in which I farmed, received in those 10 years three grants totalling $800. In 

the nine years of C.C.F. Government, the Rural Municipality of Star City received grants in excess of 

$10,400. 

 

Rural Municipal councillors, Mr. Speaker, appreciate the fact that the C.C.F. introduced an annual grant 

– an annual equalization grant based on the needs of the municipality, the amount of the grant varying 

with the assessment and population of the municipality, the mileage of provincial highways within the 

municipality, the topography, amount of bush cover, stone and other handicaps to road building. 

 

Rural municipal officials appreciate also that this Government saw fit to implement the 

recommendations of the Britnell-Cronkite-Jacobs report by withdrawing the tax from the property tax 

deal. The Public Revenue Tax of 2 mills, if retained by the municipalities, will substantially aid them in 

carrying on their work without increasing their rate of taxation over that of last year. 

 

Another Department in which great improvements have been made is that of Natural Resources. When 

the C.C.F. took office they found a record of neglect of the natural resources of this province. Prior to 

1944 no attempts had been made to find out what the natural resources were, nor was there any 

programme of conservation of our renewable resources. Now, to quote from the annual report of the 

Natural Resources Department for 1950-51: 

 

“Emphasis is placed on the gathering of basic data through our forest inventory, geological surveys, 

fisheries biological investigations, game and fur census and regional resources surveyed for the 

purpose of providing the basis for coordinated management and development plans which will permit 

the best use of the province’s natural wealth.” 

 

That approach to the problem of our natural resources has already shown results. Our Forest Industry, 

which last year produced products valued at more than $9 ½ million, is being placed on a sustained yield 

basis. 

 

One illustration of effective forest management practised by the Department concerns the work being 

done in the district by the new high utilization sawmill at Big river. As a result, in the forest inventory, it 

was estimated that there are 90-million feet of merchantable saw timber in that area. It is planned to 

remove the matured timber at the rate of 6 million feet annually for the next 15 years. Following this, the 

cut will be reduced to a sustained yield basis of 2 ½ million feet each year. Big River, because of this 

planned management of her forest resources, is assured of a timber industry in perpetuity. 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

 

15 

A natural result of the planned management programme for our forestry resources was the setting up of 

the Saskatchewan Timber Board which has assisted in the orderly marketing of timber products, in the 

stabilizing of price to the producer and in the assuring to the public of its just shares of the profits arising 

from the timber resources. 

 

It was realized early by the Department that forest management could not succeed without adequate fire 

protection, so high priority was given to a modern fire-control programme which features the only 

smoke-jumper unit in Canada. 

 

In our fishing industry, too, the Department has taken the lead in acquiring knowledge of the fishing 

potentials so as to manage this recourse in such a way that it will always be a source of livelihood or 

recreation to the people of this province. 

 

In our fur industry, a fur census in conjunction with a fur conservation programme is showing fine 

results, especially in regard to beaver population, the number of beaver taken in 1950-51, totalling 

141,000 as compared with 473 in 1944-45. 

 

Reference is made in the Throne Speech to the great prospecting activity taking place in the far north. 

The Saskatchewan Government is actively assisting in this development by completing geological 

surveys of promising areas. Besides, classes have been held to train prospectors, while assistance is 

being given to prospectors in the field. 

 

More spectacular than other mineral developments has been that of oil. For years it has been though that 

Saskatchewan had oil resources, but little exploratory work was done before 1944. When the C.C.F. 

took office one company was leasing large acreages on an exploratory basis, but there were no 

regulations making exploration compulsory. Under the C.C.F., oil production has increased from nil in 

1944 to 1,600,000 barrels in 1952, and this appears now only to be the beginning. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, oil companies came into here, spent a great deal of money — $31 million in 1952 

alone – even though the C.C.F. Government retained for the province from 25 per cent to 60 per cent of 

the Crown Resources in a checkerboard pattern. The interests of the people of this province have been 

safeguarded. The oil resources of Saskatchewan have not been given away. This development in oil, Mr. 

Speaker, has taken place in spite of the fact that critics of this Government proclaimed loudly that the 

policies of the C.C.F. would keep oil companies out of this province, that oil would not be discovered as 

long as the C.C.F. Government was in power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a farmer I am particularly interested in our agricultural industry. I am glad to say that 

the C.C.F. Government has recognized the basic importance of agriculture in this province. The amount 

of money made available for the work of the Department of Agriculture has increased from $493,000 in 

1943-44 to $3,666,000 in 1952.53. The work of the various branches of the Department has been 

extended, as reported in the Throne Speech to the end that the quality and quantity of production from 

the farms of Saskatchewan be improved and increased. 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

16 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there is another side to the agricultural picture which is of great importance. No 

matter what programme the Department of Agriculture follows, no matter how efficient the farmers 

themselves are, the welfare and prosperity of western agriculture depend directly upon policies laid 

down by the Federal Government. The matter of markets, of prices received for agricultural products, of 

trade agreements, of marketing boards, of costs of production and cost of living, are all under the 

jurisdiction of the government at Ottawa. 

 

Western agriculture has prospered in the last 10 years. In no other decade have farmers enjoyed such a 

period of stability. One contributory factor has been the great need for our agricultural products during 

and following the war. American and Canadian aid has helped importing countries to buy our farm 

goods. Also, because of the 5-year British Wheat Agreement, which assured us of stable prices, we 

escaped the fate of the farmers following the first World War when, with the disbanding of the Wheat 

Board, wheat prices fell sharply from the high of $2.32 in 1919 to .65 cents in 1923. 

 

Saskatchewan farmers have appreciated the fact that we have had forward prices; but we object to 

having our prices fixed without a corresponding control over costs of production. Since the removals of 

price controls in 1945, production costs have been continually rising, implement prices going up, 

railways requesting freight rate increases faster than the transport board can handle them, farm labour 

wages mounting, and cost of repairs climbing along with the cost of living. 

 

While these costs have been rising returns from a bushel of wheat have actually fallen. The International 

Wheat Agreement was fixed in American dollars. When the Government at Ottawa freed the Canadian 

dollar in 1950, and it rose above the United States dollar, we received less for every bushel of wheat 

sold under that agreement. The wheat farmer largely owes what prosperity he has to the fact that he has 

produced abundantly. In the past three years, Saskatchewan farmers have produced almost one billion 

bushels of wheat which is equivalent to more than four average crops. This large production has more 

than offset the comparatively low price we have received, so that we farmers have had a fair degree of 

prosperity. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are signs that this period of prosperity may be coming to an end. We have not as 

yet delivered half the 1952 crop to our elevators. It is altogether certain that, come July 31st, there will 

be a considerable part of this year’s crop still on our farms and, though we hate being pessimistic, there 

is a possibility that come July 31st there may be no International Wheat Agreement. With a huge 

carryover on our hands and no Wheat Agreement to dispose of it, in an orderly manner, the farmers of 

Western Canada could be in for a rough time. 

 

Farmers in Saskatchewan agree, practically unanimously, with the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, when it 

states in an advertisement in the “Western Producer” of January 29: “first, an International Wheat 

Agreement is the best way of marketing our wheat aid, second, prices in the new Agreement should be 

substantially increased.” 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, we would also agree, I think, that there should have been more done by the 

Government at Ottawa to control our production costs. If price controls had not been removed in 1945, 

if price levels 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

 

17 

had been held, we would not now be having difficulty in getting importing countries to agree to a 

substantially higher price or, in other words, to pay for our uncontrolled inflation. 

 

Even more important than Ottawa’s failure to hold the price line has been the attitude of the Federal 

Government toward trade. The world needs our agricultural products. However, with economic aid 

virtually at an end, we are relearning today that trade is a two-way street. We must buy from those to 

whom we wish to sell. Exports must be paid for, in the long run, by imports. 

 

Britain recently was exporting textiles to us, quite successfully – the Liberal Government at Ottawa 

increased the tariff from 15 per cent to 22 ½ per cent. Following the war, British automobiles were being 

shipped to Canada on an expanding scale – an anti-dumping duty was declared against them. 

 

This question of foreign markets for agricultural products is causing anxiety in practically every food-

exporting country. Here, in Saskatchewan, Mr. L.J. Bright, in a guest editorial appearing in the 

November 7 issue of the weekly “Co-operative Consumer”, is greatly worried about the Federal 

Government’s trade policies. In an article entitled “Agriculture – Canada’s Basic Industry”, Mr. Bright, 

after pointing out the importance of agriculture and effective export markets for agricultural products, 

states: 

 

“Before the farmer can share at all in these billions of dollars, the grain must be sold. A glance at the 

statistics tells us that the Canadian carry-over of wheat is increasing substantially. We know first hand 

that farm, country and terminal storage is jammed. We also know that our principal customers need 

our grain, but have great difficulty securing dollars with which to pay for that grain. Dollars can only 

be secured by loans or gifts from Canada or the United States or, and preferably, by sales of goods in a 

dollar area. 

 

“Many millions of bushels of our grain have been purchased by virtue of loans and gifts in the past 

few years, and without these purchases the position would have been chaotic and ruinous for the 

producer. 

 

“The only permanent solution is by reciprocal trade with our customers, and Britain has made valiant 

efforts to secure dollars by selling her products in Canada. We presume that the Federal Government 

is aware of the problems, and aware of the United Kingdom’s efforts to honourably solve them. 

 

“If then, we are to accept as sincere the compliments of our industry and of its importance, surely it is 

a fair question to ask why the Federal Government hampers with tariffs and anti- 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

18 

 

dumping duties the attempts by our main markets to secure dollars with which to buy our agricultural 

products. 

 

“Apparently when the chips are down, the Canadian automobile industry, which cannot compete even 

with the United States manufacturers without tariff protection, is more important than the agricultural 

industry. The selfish and greedy attitude of these people is exemplified in their refusal to allow British 

firms to display their cars at the Auto shows at Montreal and Toronto, next year. The sale of these cars 

and other products in Canada is essential to the welfare of every Western farmer. 

 

“Farmers should make a point of asking every candidate in the next Federal election where he or she 

stands on this matter. Do not underestimate the importance of this problem. Either we will exchange 

our food for Britain’s industrial products, to our mutual benefit, or we will become the colonial pawn 

of a Government-subsidized Eastern industry.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would agree with Mr. Bright on the importance of this question and, like Mr. Bright, I 

would urge that every candidate or potential candidate in the coming Federal election take the first 

opportunity to declare his stand on this important matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the States we find that the matter of trade is causing serious concern also. The editor of 

the “Country Gentleman”, in the February (1953) issue, discusses the question of markets in an article 

entitled “Farmers Have a Stake in Foreign Trade.” He says: 

 

“Export markets are necessities so long as American farmers produce more than this country needs. In 

the 1951-52 fiscal year, they took one-third of our cotton and wheat crops, one-fifth of our tobacco 

and soy beans, and one-sixth of our hard-pressed lard production. Altogether, our export trade added 

more than four billion dollars to farm income. 

 

“These foreign markets are now slipping away. Exports of farm products are down 30 per cent below 

the previous year. This loss has contributed to the drop in farm price levels. If it goes on, surplus 

problems will return and some of our crops will have to be cut back by acreage controls. 

 

“We do not have to lose these vital farm export markets. They can be held; but to do so will require a 

change in some of our traditional trade policies and 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

 

19 

thinking. the facts should be faced. The free European countries are the chief market for our farm 

surpluses, because they must import one-third of their normal food needs. 

 

“We have been paying a part of their food bill ourselves. In 1948-49, two-thirds of our farm exports 

were paid for by aid funds, but now less than one-fifth is being financed that way. Without aid, the 

free nationals lack the dollars to keep on taking as much of our farm products. 

 

“A substitute must be found for aid. The right one is proposed by the American Farm Bureau 

Federation: it is trade, not aid. This will call for some revision of our present tariff and trade policies. 

As these now stand, the food importing countries cannot trade with us enough to pay for the farm 

products they need. The Farm Bureau has urged a bi-partisan commission to devise ways of mutually 

expanding the free-world economy through more trade. 

 

“It is a good idea. Both farming and our most efficient industries must have foreign markets to 

prosper. The only way to assure them is by expanding the exchange of goods. In the 1920’s, when a 

similar situation existed, we took the opposite course and raised our tariffs. Other nations retaliated 

and American farmers went through the wringer as a result. Let us be more intelligent this time.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problem here is similar. We in Canada are faced with the same situation as in the 

States, so much so that if the Government at Ottawa does not revise its traditional trade policies and 

thinking, the farmers of Canada, too, are likely once more to “go through the wringer”, and, make no 

mistake about it, if the farmers do, the country as a whole will suffer for, to paraphrase Abraham 

Lincoln, “No economy can long endure half prosperous, half depressed.” Not only farmers, but every 

one in Canada has a stake in foreign trade. 

 

I would have liked on this occasion, Mr. Speaker, to take time to review the South Saskatchewan River 

project. However, I am sure, before this Session is over, every member of this Assembly will 

unanimously unite in protest against the recommendation of the Royal Commission, and will demand 

that the South Saskatchewan River project be proceeded with now. 

 

Reference should be made, Mr. Speaker, to the Crown Corporations of this Government. These 

Corporations, condemned on every hand by opponents of the C.C.F., threatened with being “thrown out 

the window” if the Opposition achieved power, nevertheless have contributed much to Saskatchewan’s 

industrial growth. In 1951, the Crown Corporations of this Government gave employment to 3,708 

persons and produced goods and services valued at more than $31 ½ million. 



 

February 16, 1953 

 

20 

 

The most outstanding corporation from the viewpoint of the farmers is Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation. No single thing has meant so much to the farm family as being connected to the power line. 

Beginning with 135 farms connected prior to 1944, the Power Corporation now has more than 12,000 

farms serviced – a tremendous undertaking when one considers the size of Saskatchewan farms and the 

distance those farm houses are apart. Practically all towns and villages in the province have been 

connected by a low voltage system, largely since 1944, while a higher voltage transmission grid 

transmits power from larger efficient plants in the province to the distribution network. In spite of the 

fact that many of the larger cities are separate from the Corporation, and that farmers are subsidized to 

the extent of 60 per cent of the cost of bringing power to them, the Corporation has changed a deficit of 

$231,000 in 1944 to a surplus of $1,450,000 in 1951. The Minister of Public works and the hard-

working officials and staff of the Corporation deserve our hearty congratulations for a job being well 

done. 

 

This afternoon, Mr. Speaker, the mover of the Address in Reply and I have reviewed some of the 

achievements of the past two Legislatures. Within the short period of time from 1944 to 1952 a 

‘people’s government’, dedicated to the principles of Humanity First has introduced measures of social 

security, of economic planning and management which have brought to the people of this province a 

considerable measure of social security and economic well-being. In the implementing of the 

programme recently endorsed by the electorate, it is my sincere prayer that the next four years will 

record a further improvement in our lot. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in seconding the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne as moved 

by the junior member for Regina. 

 

Mr. Tucker:  Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:30 o’clock p.m. 


