



















































Hansard: February 18, 1954


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session – Twelfth Legislature 

6th Day 

 

Thursday, February 18, 1954 
 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed, from Wednesday, February 17, 1954, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion 

of Mr. Wooff for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Robert Kohaly (Souris-Estevan): – Mr. Speaker, I rise as member for Souris-Estevan. I am well 

aware of the great honour which the people of the most southeasterly portion of our fine province have 

conferred upon me. I also realize that this situation is the result of democratically-minded citizens rising, 

once again in Saskatchewan, above common politics. I am well aware of the trust which has been placed 

in me and, despite my youth and inexperience, I am anxious to serve the people and this House to the 

best of my ability, strength and training. 

 

The people of Souris-Estevan deeply appreciate the many tributes paid by members from both sides of 

this House to the late “Ed” McCormack. It is the most valuable honour in public life to be spoken of so 

kindly by men of different political views. We know, in Souris-Estevan, that your tributes were sincere 

ones, and I must say that his passing was indeed a most grievous loss to many of us – to all of the people 

who came in contact with him in his business affairs, to all of the people who came in contact with him 

in his political affairs insofar as he served this province. My personal experience with him prompts me 

to remind the House that he held not only his associates on this side of the House in high regard, but was 

heard from time to time to say that he had many friends amongst the Government and that he honoured 

these friends as friends. He was respected by his friends of the press and the radio and by his friends in 

every walk of life. It is fair to say that he, too, served his country with distinction in time of war and in 

time of peace. I trust that in some small measure, Mr. Speaker, I may fill the need of this House and the 

need of the people of Souris-Estevan. 

 

I should like, first of all, to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on once again assuming your high office. I 

hope that my conduct shall be such that it will give you very little difficulty. I know you will realize that 

my inexperience may at times carry me a little beyond the proper procedure of this House. I join with 

you in the hope that this period of inexperience will be as short as possible. 

 

I also wish to acknowledge, at this time, the courtesy and valued assistance which I have received from 

our Premier. I also wish to acknowledge the valued assistance I have received from the Leader of the 

Opposition. I would be remiss if I did not inform this House that I have received the kind and patient 

instruction and help from the Clerk of the House. I cannot promise him that I shall not be a bother to him 

in this session and in the sessions which are to come. I can only say that to new members who come to 

this House it is very fortunate that we have a man such as our Clerk who is so kind to us. 



 

February 18, 1954 

 

2 

 

The mover of the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne is most certainly to be congratulated 

for his careful review of his Government‟s past. I also extend most heartfelt congratulations to the hon. 

Member for Swift Current (Mr. Gibbs) in seconding the Motion. I am informed that he has some 

connection or other with boilermakers, and it became increasingly obvious as he pounded away at 

another subject, that the Speech from the Throne was as empty as the boilers which he is so familiar 

with. His speech, however, was as jovial and robust as he is, and it is stimulating to see such a sincere 

Socialist speaking forthrightly as a Socialist in the face of a so-called Socialist government not always 

so straightforwardly Socialist. 

 

I listened with respect and with interest to the speeches of the Leader of the Opposition and our Premier. 

I thought that some new ideas from one or the other of them might be added to an otherwise rather 

empty Speech from the Throne. Needless to say, Mr. Speaker, I thereupon experienced my first 

disappointment in this House. I was, however, very pleased to see that much of the name-calling which 

has been prominent in the immediate past and other similar wastings of time and energy were happily 

missing. 

 

We were, however, more recently very shocked at the action of our Provincial Treasurer using the radio 

to announce the drastic increases in cost and the more drastic decreases in benefits under The 

Automobile Accident Insurance Act. Whether this increase was an act of the Crown Corporation or not, 

the proper place to notify the people of this province is in their Legislature. We, collectively, represent 

all of the people of this province; the Ministers are responsible to this Legislature, and, through us, to all 

of the people. One would have thought that the uproar over a similar announcement of new taxation, by 

radio, by a Minister of the Crown in Ottawa some six years ago, would have warned our Provincial 

Treasurer that the Legislatures and Parliaments of this country properly represent the people, and that 

they resent any apparent infringement on their rights, and I suggest that this could possibly be construed 

as such an infringement. I may assure you at this point, Mr. Speaker, that I shall have something further 

to say about this policy change at a later date, but it is sufficient to say that I feel this is an example of 

this Government‟s experiments ending up with another frantic „please remit‟ notice to the taxpayers. It 

looks like, eventually, we will all make our living by collecting taxes and premiums from each other. 

 

I should like to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to draw to your attention a few facts which exist in 

my constituency, a constituency which in no small way has continued over many years to make this 

province as progressive as we have heard the Premier so ably indicate in his speech, yesterday. We, in 

Souris-Estevan, are well known for the vast quantities of high-quality wheat which we have been 

producing for a period longer than the life of this province. We raise much livestock, and we have a 

nursery in Estevan which produces fine trees to help beautify the entire province of Saskatchewan, and 

we are very proud of it. We have so highly industrialized our coal-producing area to the point where the 

Bienfait field is now one of the largest in the Dominion of Canada. On behalf of the many men 

employed in these mines, I view with alarm the continued trend of this Government to convert its own 

needs to oil. 



 

February 18, 1954 

 

3 

The power plant at Estevan has been materially expanded so as to provide ever larger service to an ever 

larger area of our province. A large number of our men are working in the brick plant in Estevan and by 

the initiative and diligence of the plant management and staff – a characteristic by the way, Mr. Speaker, 

of all of our people – they are increasing their productivity and the quality of their plant. 

 

I spoke of grain and livestock a moment ago. Not only have we quantity, but we also have quality. I am 

sure that the House would like to recognize the national and international fame we have earned, this past 

year, when Mr. Reg Jones, of Torquay, repeated his performance of 1952 by winning 3rd prize for oil 

flax and 20th prize for his Chinook what at the Toronto Royal Grain Show. He was not satisfied with 

this and he invaded the Chicago International Exposition World Grain Show where he was awarded 5th 

for his oil flax and 16th for his what. It must be remembered, Mr. Speaker, that these events were open 

to exhibitors throughout the entire world. 

 

In addition, Rudolph Frietag, of Alameda, is presently the president of the Belgian, Percheron and 

Clydesdale Club of Saskatchewan and he took so many prizes at the Toronto Royal Winter Fair, last 

year, that it would now be impossible for me to mention all of them. It is sufficient to say that the only 

exhibitor to challenge Mr. Frietag was a millionaire sportsman from the United States. 

 

I wish to touch on, but not deal fully with, at this time, several important problems facing Saskatchewan 

today. Each one of us who meets the people of the province of Saskatchewan – the ordinary people of 

the province in their ordinary daily activities – know what their chief worries are. They worry over the 

cost of education insofar as it concerns tax on their property; they worry over the need for roads; and 

now, more particularly, they are worried over the financial possibilities and difficulties in which the 

municipalities find themselves. These are problems which we must face. I hope to make some 

suggestions today, and some suggestions at a later date, that may be of benefit to this House. 

 

The Speech from the Throne has mentioned the ever-increasing highway accidents. Our drivers are 

increasingly using our roads to devise new methods to murder and to kill. To be fair, one must admit 

that it is remarkable how few people are actually killed by automobile accidents. The danger of driving 

today is that other motorists are becoming as reckless as we are. Death Valley is no longer confined to a 

place in the United States, but is merely the distance from one curb to another. Bad driving habits of 

years are rapidly being caught up in the obituary columns, and they are something to which we must 

give serious consideration. These are caused by speed without ability, poor highway engineering, and 

the deadly makeup of the new automobile. There are men available who are able to and will teach our 

young people to drive properly, and those who are older and cannot and will not learn must be removed 

from behind the wheel. Most of the speeding is done by people who are going nowhere in particular, and 

we will not miss them off our roads. 

 

Let me suggest to the Government that they seriously consider not only the withdrawal of the driving 

privileges from those who are convicted of drunken driving, but that we also deny them the privilege of 

buying the very thing which creates their drunken driving, and that is 



 

February 18, 1954 

 

4 

 

liquor. Let us interdict them under The Liquor Act for a sufficient period of time for them to realize 

what their problem actually is. Let us provide more trained officers, and let them be officers with 

distinctive dress, and driving cars distinctively marked and not as under-cover men in inconspicuous 

automobiles. Let them not apprehend violaters particularly, but exclusively to teach and then to instruct 

them in the proper driving methods. Provide them in sufficient numbers so that the job may properly be 

done and their cost can be measured against the cost of human life and misery. 

 

Let the Department of Education realize that it is a waste of time and money to train a young man or a 

young woman if he is not to be left with us. A reasonable portion of the school time, already crowded, 

must be made available to them to teach the art of survival today. To replace the old method of driving 

habits, the bad habits of the father and the older brother which are today passed on to the younger driver 

as he comes along, stiffer penalties under The Vehicles Act are necessary. But this is a negative remedy 

and we are looking for positive ones. Let us act now and with decision to check this increasing death 

toll. 

 

A second subject of interest to me is oil and gas. There is considerable concern, Mr. Speaker, in the 

ranks of active farmers in my area over the possibility of their sharing in the royalty on possible 

production in Crown-owned mineral rights. The Province as a whole receives varying degrees of 

royalty, and I seriously urge the Government at once to give consideration to a policy whereby the 

holders of surface rights shall receive a share of this royalty on production. It is most important that this 

policy, if it is to be so, be announced at once, in order that all parties, including the farmer and the oil 

company, shall not be lost in a maze of technicalities if and when we have oil production. 

 

Many of the members of this House have noticed that the Leader of the Progressive-Conservative party 

in Saskatchewan, Mr. Alvin Hamilton, has through the press and radio, asked for a statement of policy 

for the use of wealth received from the sale of our expendable resources such as petroleum and minerals. 

The province has been receiving ever-increasing revenue and sums for the leasing of oil and gas rights 

held by the Crown to oil exploration companies and others. In addition, it is expected that the royalty on 

production must be increasing to a point where the combined effect is a very substantial one. The next 

30 or 40 years of exploration and production will result in a most sizable sum being obtained. If 

Saskatchewan proves to be the equal of Alberta (and there is no reason whatsoever why it would not) 

there is a possibility that up to $40 million each year will be received from these sources. This is not 

revenue, Sir, in the ordinary sense of the word; it is money derived from the outright sale of an 

expendable natural resource and is therefore properly termed capital. Once it is recognized as such, it 

becomes necessary that these moneys be used in a manner different from that of ordinary revenue. 

 

The Premier has indicated the happy expansion of oil exploration in this province over the past few 

years to the point where a statement of policy by the Government in the handling of these funds is an 

absolute necessity. The decision is not a difficult one, although it is most important. We must remember 

that this new-found wealth belongs not only to you and to me, but belongs to each succeeding 

generation. 



 

February 18, 1954 

 

5 

The value of each barrel taken from the ground and sold, and the proceeds‟ spent, is forever lost. This 

situation is true when the proceeds are allowed to drain into the general revenues of the province to 

satisfy present-day needs. It is therefore obvious that these funds must be reserved for capital 

expenditures. It is not to be denied that some portion of these funds must be used once in a while to 

increase production in other fields, and so start a new round of this wealth. 

 

This proposition, Mr. Speaker, is not without precedent in this province. In the early days of this 

province land was set aside for schools, and the money realized from the inevitable sale of these lands 

was put into School Lands Fund in the form of a trust fund. The principal of this fund has now 

approximated $23 million, and it would appear that the total interest and rentals has already reached a 

figure of approximately $50 million in something less than 50 years. The principal of this trust fund is 

never used, as my understanding is. The interest on this amount, plus the revenue from continued 

rentals, was made available to the Government for educational purposes, as I believe it should be. This is 

a perfect example of a natural resource of ours being set up in trust for succeeding generations to enjoy. 

The concept must be widened, however, in the application I am suggesting. 

 

It concerns millions and millions of dollars what may well be derived from our oil and natural gas 

resources. Instead of limiting the investment of this new fund, which I shall call a Development Fund, to 

Dominion, provincial and other guaranteed bonds, a portion of the money must be used for capital 

expenditure and development projects which would be self-liquidating. Ontario has a self-liquidating 

fund; Alberta has a self-liquidating fund. Saskatchewan appears to be falling behind. A good portion of 

this capital should go to self-liquidating projects such as our share of the South Saskatchewan River 

project and the re-opening of valuable agricultural lands in the Carrot River Valley; the building of 

special roads into the north for the development of minerals and tourist traffic; and municipalities could 

benefit by such things as providing waterworks, their own gas distributing system and other such 

projects, which are self-liquidating themselves. 

 

A smaller portion of the fund, however, could be used for capital projects which are not directly self-

liquidating, but will be for the benefit of this and future generations. Under this heading are included 

such things as arterial highways, permanent educational and administrative building and all those things 

which form a part of our long-range development programme. The House might eventually consider it 

advisable to retain a portion of this Development Fun for a more conservative type of investment, and 

possibly to assist in retiring our public debts. 

 

Therefore, in some 25 years we have a development fund of approximately $1 billion. While this fund is 

so being collected, the interest alone would reach approximately a half of $1 billion. Even if no further 

capital were forthcoming, at the end of that period we would still have our original capital for the 

generations to come, which is, of course, the exact problem which I have in mind. To repeat: if this 

policy were accepted we would have, first, the development fund itself; second, we would have the 

interest on the money for ordinary revenues of the province; and most important of all, we would have 

the new industries which this fund and the interest thereon would set up. This statement of policy must, 

of course, come from the government, but it would be better if all of the parties publicly agreed to the 

principle, in order that we would have some assurance that future governments would tend to be bound 

by our foresight. 



 

February 18, 1954 

 

6 

 

Just as education in Saskatchewan owes a considerable debt to our forefathers who set up the School 

Lands Fund in 1905, so by our action here in connection with this matter, we may hand on to future 

generations, undiminished, the birthright which we have inherited. The size of this project may startle 

the House at first sight; but when one realizes that in Alberta, in the present fiscal year, the government 

of that province will receive between $50 and $60 million from oil and gas revenues, then the 

possibilities for Saskatchewan become easily clear. Let me put it this way: the average income for the 

government of Alberta from the oil and gas industry will be about $40 million for each year since the 

Leduc field was discovered. Applying these figures to our province, and the situation (we are told by 

geologists) is quite similar, we have every right to expect approximately the same revenue. These are 

large figures and this is a large province; but it is a large problem, and I am sure that the members of this 

House will accept the problem, large as it is, and come out with an answer to all of our people which 

will be sufficient and proper. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier in his speech to this House yesterday painted in glowing terms the progress of 

mineral and oil development in Saskatchewan today. It is a good picture; a picture about which we are 

all very proud, and it is certainly up to us to stand up and to say publicly that we are very proud of the 

picture in Saskatchewan today. 

 

I might say that, in my opinion, it is very clear that from this development and from this speech that it is 

mostly due to the policy of this Government in encouraging private enterprise which has contributed 

now so much, and which has contributed so much in the past, to the development of our fine province. 

 

On entering public life in this province last year, rather hurriedly, I indicated my position to the people 

in Souris-Estevan to be that I was a supporter of private enterprise and that, generally speaking, I was 

opposed to Socialism either in theory or in practice. I indicated that I would assist and support the 

official Opposition in carrying out their duty of providing constructive criticism and at times suggestions 

to the Government for them to accept and incorporate if they so see fit, and that is to be my intention. 

 

On the other hand, I also made it clear, at the time I entered into public life that whenever the 

Government announced policies which, in my opinion, were for the benefit of the province of 

Saskatchewan and for the betterment of the people of Souris-Estevan, then I would support them. My 

position, Mr. Speaker, remains unchanged today. 

 

Mr. S.H. Carr (Rosthern): – In rising to take part in this debate, Mr. Speaker, I am very conscious of 

my inexperience in matters of this kind, but, to make matters worse, I am somewhat confused. Before I 

left my constituency, many of my good friends said, “Whatever you do, don‟t get into any quarrels or 

squabbles. Those fellows will eat you alive.” Well, after the opening ceremonies were over, many of the 

good members from the other side came over and introduced themselves and welcomed me to this 

House. I saw many members on this side shaking hands with the others, patting one another on the back, 

and I thought I had come to the wrong place. But, on Monday, after listening to the fiery member from 

Swift Current, (Mr. Gibbs) and our 



 

February 18, 1954 

 

7 

rather provocative Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Loptson), I knew I was in the right place. But then, 

yesterday, after listening to the hon. Premier tell us that wonderful story of the great progress that free 

enterprise had provided in this province and the huge investment that capitalists had made to build up 

industry and develop our province, I thought perhaps that I had taken my seat on the wrong side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have made excellent progress, not only economically, but politically. When I think 

back just about the time I first started in municipal work, and I think back to the early „thirties, there 

were many people discouraged and disheartened with conditions as they existed at that time and a group 

of earnest men gathered together, I believe in this city, and they worked out a system they thought would 

solve all the problems, and, to give them credit, I believe they thought at that time their system would 

work. 

 

I thought just for a minute I might read a little bit of the basic idea that those men had at that time. This 

is taken, of course, from a well-known document known as the „Regina Manifesto‟, and the two opening 

paragraphs are: 

 

“The C.C.F. is a federation of organizations whose purpose is the establishment in Canada of a Co-

operative Commonwealth in which the principle regulating production, distribution and exchange will 

be the supplying of human need and not the making of profit. 

 

“We aim to replace the present Capitalist system with its inherent injustice and inhumanity by a social 

order from which the domination and exploitation of one class by another will be eliminated, in which 

economic planning will supersede unregulated private enterprise and competition and in which 

genuine democratic self-government based upon economic equality will be possible. The present order 

is marked by glaring inequalities of wealth and opportunity, by chaotic waste and instability and in an 

age of plenty it condemns the great mass of people to poverty and insecurity.” 

 

I believe that the hon. Premier said, yesterday, that now we have the highest per capita income in the 

province. To continue: 

 

“Power has become more and more concentrated in the hands of a small irresponsible minority of 

financiers and industrialists and to their creditor interests the majority are habitually sacrificed. When 

private profit is the main stimulus to economic effort our society oscillates between periods of feverish 

prosperity in which the main benefits go to the speculators and profiteers, and a catastrophic 

depression.” 



 

February 18, 1954 

 

8 

 

And a final paragraph of that famous document is: 

 

“No C.C.F. government will rest content until it has eradicated capitalism and put into operation the 

full programme of socialized planning which will lead to the establishment in Canada of the Co-

operative Commonwealth.” 

 

I believe that, at the time that document was drafted, the men who drafted it were sincere, and with that 

sincerity they attempted to win the support of the people of this province. But it was found that the 

people would not accept it, particularly the farmers, because they had the impression that their land 

would be socialized. It was made clear by the leaders that land would not be socialized and the small 

businessman would not have to give up his business. From 1933 to 1944 the plan was modified, with the 

results that this party that now forms the government was elected. Of course, they did attempt to 

establish their socialized industries in this province. Some may have succeeded to some extent, but on 

the whole, they did not add a great deal to the wealth of the province. Still, behind it all, was the idea 

that eventually when people became educated they would accept the idea of a socialized economy. 

 

The idea did not appeal even to all those who had supported the C.C.F., and so, about 1950, there was a 

change in the policy. In the summer of 1950 there was a C.C.F. convention in Vancouver and at that 

time the national leader did set forth what he thought would be a more acceptable policy. If my memory 

serves me right, I believe our hon. Premier made a statement to similar effect. This is a news report from 

the “Free Press Prairie Farmer‟, dated August 16, 1950, and it quotes part of Mr. Coldwell‟s speech: 

 

“Several years ago I expressed the opinion and received criticism for expressing it, that democratic 

socialism must involve the acceptance of a mixed economy. I said that certain monopolies and basic 

industries were suitable, in some cases ripe, for nationwide ownership and control and that a vital form 

of democratic ownership was through co-operative associations. I stated, too, that where an industry 

was not monopolistic, or tending to monopoly in its field, served the community well and treated its 

employees properly, there was no need to place it under public ownership.” 

 

Now you will note, the first thing is the nationalization of the basic industries. In 1933 it was the 

nationalization of all the means of production, distribution and exchange. But there is a slight change 

here. It is just the nationalization of the basic industries and then the co-operative effort, and finally 

there is a place for private effort. That was in 1950. 



 

February 18, 1954 

 

9 

Not all the supporters of the C.C.F. party agreed with that. I have another news item here from the 

„Saskatoon Star Phoenix”, dated August 17, 1950, following that convention. The heading is “C.C.F. 

Policy has not Altered”: 

 

“C.C.F. national policy remained absolutely unchanged as the result of the recent convention in 

Vancouver, Robert A. Walker, Hanley M.L.A. said Tuesday evening in the Farmer-Labour Hall, in 

reporting to the Saskatoon C.C.F. Constituency Association. It was only wishful thinking on the part 

of the Opposition, particularly Walter Tucker, in stating that the C.C.F. had abandoned democratic 

socialism. The Hanley member said that the C.C.F. still had the same philosophy as outlined in the 

Regina Manifesto, only it was now expressed in terms of present understanding and would be 

interpreted according to changed conditions. 

 

“Some local members (that is, at Saskatoon) were not satisfied with this explanation and asked if the 

Regina Manifesto would be kept in its present form as the basis of party policy, or would it be 

reworded or amended. It was pointed out that there were several definitions of democratic socialism in 

other countries.” 

 

Now, that is up to 1950. Yesterday I was very pleased to listen to the hon. Premier‟s explanation of the 

mixed economy. Yesterday, private enterprise came first, then co-operative effort and finally, public 

enterprise. 

 

Premier Douglas: – I was working up to a climax. 

 

Mr. Loptson: – That thought just occurred to him. 

 

Mr. Carr: – I said at the beginning that we had economic progress. I believe from the remarks made so 

far, that we have had political progress, too – excellent progress. I think that if this progress continues at 

the same rate – mind you, this is only in 20 years that this has changed; if it continues at the same rate 

for another 10 years, all the members opposite will be Tories, and then the people down East will be 

saying (to use part of the words of my hon. friend from Swift Current) that the C.C.F. party in western 

Canada are the big fat capitalists out west. 

 

I noticed a news item in the paper, last night. The hon. members laughed when I said they might be 

Tories. The Tories are the ones who do the most talking in this country of ours about getting lower 

taxes. Here I 



 

February 18, 1954 

 

10 

 

have an item “Moose Jaw Member Raps High Taxation” – that is Mr. Ross Thatcher, C.C.F. member of 

parliament from Moose Jaw: 

 

“During debate on the unemployment situation, Mr. Thatcher said high taxes were affecting consumer 

purchasing power in domestic markets, harming the nation‟s investment programme, discouraging 

initiative and incentive, and forcing Canadian prices up.” 

 

Now, I will leave that, but I just wanted to show that we were getting political progress as well as 

economic progress. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Premier for the gracious words of welcome that he tendered 

to the people of Rosthern on behalf of their member and for the tribute he paid to my predecessor. I 

would like to congratulate the hon. member from Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) and the hon. member from 

Swift Current (Mr. Gibbs) the mover and seconder of the motion. The thing that impressed me most in 

their addresses was their sincerity. While I did not agree with many things they said, I did believe that 

they were sincere. They believe in socialism. I have a great respect for a man who has a belief and 

stands up for it. Another thing that impressed me was the pride that they took in the part of the country 

that sent them to sit in this House, and I think that that is only right. Each one of us, if we are worth our 

salt at all, is proud of the part of the country that sent us here and proud of the people that live in it. 

 

I would like, in the few minutes of time that have been allotted to me, to tell you a little about my 

constituency. First, I would like to say that I am very proud to represent the constituency of Rosthern. It 

is unique in one respect in particular; it is the only constituency in Saskatchewan that has consistently 

elected a Liberal member since this province was formed. 

 

Mr. Loptson: – Sensible people! 

 

Mr. Carr: – I do not want to get into anything that had to do with the by-election, but yesterday the hon. 

Premier mentioned in his remarks that the Liberals never learn. Well, as far as Rosthern is concerned, 

the C.C.F. never learn either. They just cannot win that seat! In rejecting the Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation in Rosthern – and they have rejected it – the people of Rosthern have not 

rejected co-operation. Many of the early settlers of Rosthern were there long before other parts were 

settled and they brought with them a system of co-operation that the people in other parts of the country 

learned at a later date. We have the usual retail co-operative outlets (grocery stores, oil and gas) that 

other people have; we have them up there in almost all our towns and villages. They do a very good 

business and are giving good service. There is also co-operation between the municipalities in Rosthern 

without a larger unit. The councils just get together and say, “Look, where are you going to build that 

road?” When they are told they may say, “couldn‟t you move it over here because it would serve more 

people from our municipality?” And they work out a plan of building roads. 



 

February 18, 1954 

 

11 

Just while I am on this I am going to make a suggestion. The Municipal Administrator Advisers (I think 

they are called) are advising the municipalities to lay out a long-term plan for building main market 

roads because it will save money and will build a better system of roads. Many of our municipalities are 

doing that, and this is the suggestion I would offer: that the Department of Highways call in these 

Municipal Administration Advisors and get them to tell them a plan – now maybe the Department has a 

plan, but they are not making it known to the municipalities, and it is causing considerable difficulty 

because our municipalities do not know, very far ahead, just where the highway is going to be built. I 

could go into that a little more but I have a few things here to finish. 

 

In our constituency of Rosthern we have two union hospitals which are a co-operative effort as you 

know; and I believe that the hospital in Rosthern is considered one of the finest small hospitals in 

Canada. The people of Rosthern are very grateful for the contribution that this Government made in 

grants, and they appreciate very much the share that was contributed by the Federal Government. But 

there are certain special co-operative efforts that we have in Rosthern that you do not find many other 

places. For instance, one of the first things is a co-operative hail association which has been in existence 

for a long time and they have, I believe, the lowest hail insurance rates of any hail company in this 

province with the exception of the Saskatchewan Municipal Hail. The head office is in Waldheim, and it 

is one of the best managed companies in this province. Another thing is a co-operative fire insurance 

company with a head office also in Waldheim. It is an excellent company with very low rates, even 

lower than the Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): – Could that be possible? 

 

Mr. Carr: – I know, because I am a Saskatchewan Government Insurance agent, and I cannot sell 

policies to compete with it. In fact the only ones that I can sell a policy to are the C.C.F. and we do not 

have many of them. 

 

But the co-operative effort that I am most proud of, and that all the people of Rosthern are most proud 

of, is the Youth Society. The Youth Society has provided an invalids‟ home in Rosthern; in fact they 

have two, to provide for those people who, because of their physical handicaps or because they are sick 

but not sufficiently sick to require hospital care, need attention. I know that if the Minister of Public 

Health (Hon. Mr. Bentley) were here he would agree that it is one of the finest, best-managed homes in 

this province. A very interesting thing is that they are able to care for those people for $40 per month. I 

mean that all the contribution the patient has to make is $40 a month, and if he has a pension that will 

cover it. The young people find the money to make up the difference. Just recently they have established 

a home for handicapped children. I am not sure on this, but I believe that the Department of Social 

Welfare is assisting them to some extent – at least there is co-operation between them. 

 

This invalids‟ home that I speak about is a very fine one. I have visited the home and many of the 

patients there would be in hospital, if it were not for that home. I am going to make a suggestion (and 

this is not on the urging of the people of Rosthern) that some way should be found to make some 

contribution to homes of that kind. I believe there was some contribution made in 1952, but not since. 

 

Mr. McDonald: – That was election year! 



 

February 18, 1954 

 

12 

 

Mr. Carr: – There is another thing I would like to mention about the co-operative effort of the people in 

Rosthern seat. I was pleased to hear the hon. Premier say, yesterday, that Saskatchewan should be a 

haven of freedom. The people of Rosthern constituency have brought many displaced families from 

Europe to the community. I could tell you story after story about it. I would like to mention just one. 

There is a quota on the number of these people coming to Canada, but there was one family – a father, 

his wife and two or three sons – which, because the quota was filled, went to South America; the only 

way they could get out of Germany. A group of people – and this is an organized group of people – 

raised the money in the community to bring them from South America up here; it cost them $3,000. 

They did not ask the Government for help; they did it themselves. Now perhaps hon. members will 

wonder why I am telling you all this. I am telling you this because the people in Rosthern constituency 

believe that people should help themselves before they ask the public to do it. There are too many 

people, these days, who are turning to the government to solve their own problems. The hon. member 

from Swift current mentioned in his address that they needed an old folks home in Swift Current. I have 

not any doubt they need it. But in Rosthern they did it themselves. 

 

I am proud of Rosthern, and I will do my best to serve them in this Legislature. 

 

Mr. James Ripley (Athabaska): – Mr. Speaker, I heard some rumours, last year, to the effect that the 

hon. member for Athabaska might like to change his seat to the other side of the House. I would like to 

say now, that there is no truth in that remark whatsoever. 

 

I have found, on coming down here to Regina to the Legislative sessions and meetings and on talking to 

people in general, that information about the northland, as it is generally called down here – it is a very 

vague term mentioned even in the Throne Speech; that real knowledge is quite limited. I find, even 

amongst members of the House, that they are not too sure in their own minds of what a huge country we 

have up in the north and the great importance it will have in the future. I think possibly that is due to the 

fact that most people down here, when they are using highway maps and one thing and another, find the 

very top of the map is Waskesiu and Lac la Ronge and Prince Albert and so on. In fact, just the other 

day, a chap asked me if I was acquainted with some relative of his – “he is up north there, the other side 

of Prince Albert.” It turned out that he was at Uranium City so I pointed out to the chap that he was 

about 500 miles north of Prince Albert. 

 

We have had very many visitors from among our own residents and thousands of tourists who have gone 

to Lac la Ronge, and they have enjoyed the very fine fishing there and the vacation facilities, and I think 

most of them came back from what seemed like a long drive feeling that they have been a very long way 

into our north country. But actually, Lac la Ronge is about the centre of the province, both east and west 

and north and south; and when they have travelled what seemed to them a long distance from the 

international boundary to Lac la Ronge, it is pretty hard for anyone to conceive that there is still just as 

much country to the north of them that is still the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In the area of Lac la Ronge we begin to see this Pre-Cambrian area that is generally talked about, and I 

find that a lot of people really do not understand that term either – they call it the Pre-Cambrian Shield. 



 

February 18, 1954 

 

13 

They don‟t know whether it is a shield for fighting off arrows or something like that, or not, but actually 

it is the mineralized outcrop of rock which comes to the earth‟s surface up in that region, and it extends 

from Lac la Ronge northward right to the upper part of this province. It forms a base of some of the 

greatest mining properties in Canada. 

 

I see that this area is mentioned in the Throne Speech, and also the fact that there are 18,000 mineral 

claims recorded in the past year. I spent quite a bit of my time, last summer, up in that area north of La 

Ronge, and found it to be quite highly active with uranium oxide. I covered a lot of the ground myself, 

and I believe that the largest percentage of these claims would be in the area directly north of Lac la 

Ronge, within a hundred miles of there. I would like to give an impression of how this statement in the 

Throne Speech, that there are 18,000 claims there, will be taken by northern people who are responsible 

for a good part of that statement. To give an idea of the value in the recording itself, recording fees are 

$5.00 per claim, which is $90,000 for the recording of those 18,000 claims, and we figure, amongst the 

mining and prospecting people, that a minimum of $20 per claim is a reasonable cost to do the necessary 

work just to outline the claim, cut the lines and put in the stakes – doing the necessary work just to hold 

that claim. Well, at $20 per claim that makes $360,000, and using the very minimum figure, that makes 

a total of $450,000 as the cost of those mineral claims to the people in the north that are claiming that 

ground in the hope of having some development done in the near future. Now $450,000 is quite a 

considerable sum of money to be put up, not by big mining companies – there are a few operating there; 

but it is generally put in by prospectors and trappers and people like any one of us who go up there and 

do that work on a speculation basis, on the same basis as a person down here would buy a tract of 

unimproved land with the hope of improving it to a point where it would develop something of value for 

him in the future. 

 

To my mind, and in the minds of the people in the north, I believe the fact that they have 18,000 claims 

is not where the Throne Speech should begin or end; they should have some indication of what they are 

going to do about those 18,000 claims. They are in the central part of the province; transportation is very 

difficult – it is all air transportation or long weary canoe trips over rapids and pretty tough portages; and 

I think the time has come, Mr. Speaker, when this Government should start to get down to work, where 

they should actually start to talk of development in the north, because there is a great deal of difference 

between saying that we have this great accumulation of mineral claims and the point where there is 

going to be any development in them at all. In fact, it is very possible within the next three or four 

months that a large percentage of those mineral claims will lapse and be abandoned because the small 

investor who invests his time and labour in mineral claims finds it almost impossible to carry on the 

necessary assessment work and so on to hold his claim in good standing; and it is generally the custom 

to interest a mining company with sufficient exploration capital to carry on this work and, if possible, 

bring the ground into development. 

 

We have mention in the Throne Speech about our mining achievements, and the hon. Premier has also 

mentioned that we are one of the 



 

February 18, 1954 

 

14 

 

big producers of base metal – ahead of Manitoba and Alberta. I would like to enlarge on that just a little 

bit. I have heard the hon. Premier mention the fact before on the radio and in speeches, and the fact that 

we are ahead in base-metal development is no great achievement on our part. The fact is, in Manitoba, 

the abandonment of the Sherritt Gordon property at Sherridon reduced, to a great extent, the base-metal 

production there. They have gone on to develop the nickel property at Lynn Lake, which has resulted in 

the recent completion of a railway to that area – a new stretch of railway up beyond the 57th parallel, 

150 more miles northward than it had been before. The effect of these extensions in rail through the 

country in general is of a great deal more benefit than actually having the mining property when one 

gives a little thought to the other industries that go with it such as pulpwood and commercial fishing and 

many other small mining enterprises that would not keep a railroad busy but can, by the proximity of a 

railway, be developed. Also there are many deposits of not really high value such as asbestos and 

feldspar and things along that line which only become valuable when a railway is fairly close at hand. 

 

This development at Flin Flon of which we hear so much has been, actually, of the greatest benefit to 

Manitoba. In the respect of bringing means of employment and transportation to other industries, and the 

things that go hand in hand with the development of a big mining town, that is of the greatest benefit to 

Manitoba. We have a similar condition in the Beaver Lodge development – Uranium City. It has been 

called the „hottest square mile on earth‟ and I fully believe that it will prove to be so in the future, and I 

think we are going to have a few more hot square miles too, down in the Foster Lake area. But this is 

another case that is similar to the Flin Flon situation, where we are not benefiting through the province 

in general by the supporting industries associated with that mining operation. The largest part of all of 

the heavy material required for Beaver Lodge goes through Alberta and is shipped by heavy barges from 

Waterways and through Lake Athabaska; thousands and thousands of tons of materials required for 

mining operations go through that province. That alone brings a good deal of industry and employment 

in itself which is not directly connected with the operation of the mines. So the situation is that we have 

Flin Flon on one side of our province being entirely supported and utilized through Manitoba; and the 

other operation which is developing – Beaver Lodge – is all going to Alberta, on the other side. 

 

Here we have a very fine group of claims right in the middle of the province, a very long way from any 

means of transportation, and to bring any of those mining operations into fulfilment is going to take a 

similar condition such as either heavy water transportation or rail, because these mining properties 

cannot be developed by aircraft. They can be started and explored by aircraft, but they cannot be 

developed into producing mines without a great deal of heavy equipment. The nearest city we have to 

there is Prince Albert, and we have every opportunity, I believe, of establishing the same system and the 

same reasons for extending our northern transportation to our possible mining regions, as Manitoba had. 

The Manitoba Legislature and members from the north spent considerable time in helping to put through 

that railway project to Lynn Lake. I believe the Federal Government contributed to the amount of $55 

million. 



 

February 18, 1954 

 

15 

To the north of Prince Albert we have considerable farming areas, and it is quite feasible that that could 

be extended northward from there. Then we see mention of a possible pulp development. I have been in 

the pulpwood industry myself in the past, and it is only really feasible where you have reasonable 

transportation, cheap transportation such as a railway. Another good reason for having a railway farther 

than that is Lac la Ronge. In fact I believe a railway was surveyed there back in 1928 to Moose Point, 

but financial conditions shortly thereafter caused it to be abandoned. For the past three years, however, 

the Anglo-Rowan people have been doing a great deal of exploration work there and they have found a 

very large ore body of low-grade copper. Low-grade copper they know has certain value, although of 

course it would be low; but they have to plan on the value of that mineral when they get it out to the 

markets, and the only conceivable way for that to be done would be by rail. 

 

Then north of that again there are two or three different companies that I know of. The Lac la Ronge 

Uranium Company have been doing work there for considerable time, and they have a fairly well proven 

uranium oxide deposit. A few miles further north again the International Nickel Company has taken an 

option on nickel property, and I understood there was another mining company interested in a copper 

showing that was staked in the past year. 

 

Then we are still not quite to the area where a great deal of this new uranium oxide development occurs 

in the Foster Lake region, and that extends a long way northward. Beyond that there is the Cree Lake 

property with some claims staked there, and then we are coming a little closer to the possibility of 

Beaver Lodge. But if we add all these things together from Prince Albert and keep adding northward, 

there is a possible economic reason for putting a railroad through to the north. I think if it was 

investigated and tabulated properly, there would be a very good possibility. 

 

That is the kind of development that we need and it is the kind of development that we should capitalize 

on now. This Government should investigate those possibilities while conditions are such that they can 

be exploited. Those 18,000 claims may or may not prove up to any great possibilities, but it does not 

take an awful lot to make a valuable mine. For instance, the Hudson Bay mining property at Flin Flon is 

a little over half in Saskatchewan, and they have been operating for over 20 years and they have still not 

extended beyond the area of two claims. From the portion of that which lies in Saskatchewan we realize 

$1½ million a year in royalties, I understand, so that if one-quarter of one per cent of those 18,000 

claims could be brought into actual development and production, we have every excuse in the world to 

ask all the co-operation we can get in developing a railway as far north as possible. That is the only way 

I can see that these mineral properties can realize any success or be of any real advantage to the 

province. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is my opinion and the general opinion in the north of what development needs. The 

fact that the claims are there is no indication of actual development at all. This Government is taking 

action in other ways up north that has really been of no value, such as the fish business and the fur 

business, and I think, if they would leave the fish and fur business to private enterprise as is done in 

other provinces, 



 

February 18, 1954 

 

16 

 

that they would be ably looked after. They then could get on with something that is really of worthwhile 

value to industry – the things that are really the lifeblood of industry, such as railways, telegraph, postal 

service, telephones, airways, and things that are operated on a large scale. That is what I consider to be 

the business of government – not trying to sell fish and furs. 

 

While I am on that subject of fish, we had a fairly good example of the sales ability of the Fish 

Marketing Service this summer. For the first time in many years the Churchill River was open for 

sturgeon fishing and, of course, not knowing exactly how many sturgeon there were available in the 

river there was no particular quota set, either in Manitoba or Saskatchewan. There were 7 licences issued 

in Sandy Bay, with 5 nets to a licence. The men got started to work and then after working for a few 

days they produced some sturgeon and the quota was set at 4,000 lbs. They were compelled to sell this 

4,000 lbs of sturgeon through the Fish Marketing Service, and there was supposed to be an initial 

payment of 50 cents, so that they had $2,000, presumably, to split among themselves. Sturgeon nets are 

fairly expensive, costing around $35 each; and then they had to supply gasoline, grub, tents, canoes, 

motors and so on, to get themselves up the river. So there was not much left after they split it and 

calculated their costs, so they complained and asked for an extension, and they got a 1,000 lbs. 

extension. Some of those men did not even pay for their nets; one or two made a little money. But they 

had rather a severe complaint to make because 30 miles down the river, where the Churchill passes over 

into Manitoba, at Pukatawagan, the independent buyers were buying the fish right there on the river, and 

their prices were a minimum of 80 cents for the cow sturgeon and the various weights which were not 

choice for the market, and a maximum of $1.10. When they finally finished fishing they had taken 

17,000 lbs of sturgeon from the same Churchill river, so that those people are not very well satisfied 

with their 50 cent price or their 5,000 lb. limit. 

 

They had a meeting last fall, and asked some of the Government field officers, “When is the rest of the 

price on the sturgeon coming along?” They replied that it was pretty difficult, but they did not think 

there was going to be any. And that is the way it turned out. So they are not very proud of the sales 

ability of the Fish Marketing Services. Similar conditions occur in the fur marketing, and I would 

strongly urge this Government to abandon these not very worthwhile practices and get on with 

something that is really going to promote some industry in this province. I cannot support the motion. 

 

Mrs. Cooper: – I move the adjournment of the debate. (Debate Adjourned) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:00 o‟clock p.m. 


