



















































Hansard: February 24, 1954


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Twelfth Legislature 

10th Day 

 

Wednesday, February 24, 1954 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

Hon. T. C. Douglas (Premier): – Mr. Speaker, there seems to be some slight misunderstanding 

concerning the meeting tonight, and I think there should be some clarification so that other organizations 

will not misunderstand. Therefore, I should like to make one point clear. Radio and press statements are 

being made to the effect that the delegation of the Saskatchewan Farmers‟ Union are meeting the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, and I notice the brief which has been sent to members is called 

“The Presentation to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan.” Now all members, of course, are 

aware of the fact that this is a law-making body, and that the Assembly, as such, does not meet 

delegations. From time to time the Legislative Assembly appoints committees of the Legislature who 

have authority to meet groups or even to call groups before them for the purpose of getting their views, 

but the Legislative Assembly as such does not meet delegations, and I want to make sure that we do not 

set any precedent now by which organizations will think that from time to time they can petition to meet 

the Legislature. 

 

What is taking place tonight, as I understand it, is that the Caucuses (both the Government caucus and 

the Opposition caucus) have been asked by the Saskatchewan Farmers‟ Union to meet with them, and it 

was decided to have a joint caucus in this case, and the members of this side and the members on the 

opposite side are meeting with the S.F.U. informally as caucuses, and not the Legislative Assembly as 

such. It is not an important distinction, but it is important if we set a precedent by which we might get 

innumerable organizations asking for permission to come and appeal before the Legislature. I think it 

should be clearly understood by the press and the radio and the Farmers‟ Union themselves that the 

meeting is purely an informal one of private members as such, and not of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker: – It is understood then that the House will not be in session tonight. 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed, from Tuesday, February 23, 1954, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of 

Mr. Wooff for the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Wm. S. Thair (Lumsden): – Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned the debate last evening, I was dealing 

with some of the farm problems in Saskatchewan. 

 

I might say that almost all prices of farm products in Saskatchewan depend to a very large extent on 

tariff and trade relations with the rest of the world. Thus the Federal Government at Ottawa has almost 

complete control over the agricultural economy of Saskatchewan in the matter of income taxes, freight 

rates, excise and customs duties, all trade and tariffs and dumping duties, farm storage of grain, boxcar 

allocation and the sale of grain. 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

2 

 

It is rather interesting to know how the Saskatchewan Liberal members of the House of Commons voted 

on a number of questions regarding tariffs, wheat storage, boxcar allocation and other matters. The 

Hansard of 1953 reveals that on November 23, Mr. Victor Quelch of Acadia, supported by Hazen 

Argue, moved to amend the Canada Wheat Board Act with regard to the payment of farm storage. I 

might say that no vote was taken. It was talked out, and adjourned by Mr. Studer, the Liberal member 

for Maple Creek and it went down to the bottom of the Order Paper where it will rest until the next 

session of the House of Commons. 

 

I might say, also, the Hansard of 1953, which I have here reveals that again on December 8, 1954, page 

1169, an amendment to the Canada Grain Act was proposed by Hazen Argue re the allocation of boxcars 

at shipping points. The four Liberals from Saskatchewan voted against it. The votes for this resolution 

were 29 and the votes against it were 111. 

 

Again, on December 16, 1953, Hansard reveals that the Liberal Government introduced an amendment 

to the Customs Act, permitting great increases in tariff protection to Canadian industries. Mr. Cameron, 

the C.C.F. member for Nanaimo, moved an amendment that the proposed motion would cease to have 

effect after March, 1955. The resulting vote was that not a single Saskatchewan Liberal supported this 

amendment while the C.C.F. all supported it. 

 

Farm costs have made tremendous increases during the past four or five years in farm machinery, cars 

and trucks, also in the price of our fertilizer (which has advanced from $60 to $123 per ton), all the 

chemicals used in spraying, hardware, gas and oil, building costs and many other commodities used in 

farm operations, not to mention rubber tires and anti-freeze. A recent investigation by the Combines 

Investigation Committee of the House of Commons revealed that eight of Canada‟s major rubber 

companies had combined to „fleece‟ the Canadian public on the price of rubber goods, particularly tires. 

The Rubber Association has confessed to this crime. The amount of the penalty was some $10,000 of a 

fine for each company. Even so, this venture would still be a highly profitable one because the value of 

the rubber goods sold by these companies during the period within which the charge was made was to 

the value of $645 million. That was the sales during that time. I leave to your imagination what the extra 

amount of profit was throughout that long period. A mere fine of $10,000 does not mean anything to 

great monopolies doing this amount of business. 

 

With regard to anti-freeze, after the Government of Canada had removed the protective tariff, anti-freeze 

immediately dropped, last fall, $1.00 to $1.50 per gallon; but the public would like to know why the 

Government did not take this action some two years before. 

 

According to statistics available from D.B.S. for 1938, the operating costs of Saskatchewan farmers 

were $88 million, plus new machinery, bringing the total to $97 million. In 1952, D.B.S. says, the 

operating costs of Saskatchewan farmers were $270 million, plus some $93 million for the purchase of 

new equipment, or a total of $363 million. The estimated operating cost for farmers, in 1953, would be 

$300 million, plus the purchase of new machinery upwards of $100 million, or a total of $400 million 

operating costs as compared to 1938 when it was some $97 million. This is according to D.B.S. – except 

1953 which is an estimate. It is believed that the operating cost of Saskatchewan farms this past year 

would be four to five times greater than in 1938. In addition to this, we have the capital cost of land 

which is purchased at high prices, new buildings and other 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

3 

 

 

things that have risen comparatively. An actual case of a farmer in Saskatchewan (it is not myself) with 

some 400 acres of fallow wheat, 400 acres of bare fallow, listed something like this: for six items only. 

These were seed, oil and gas, taxes, labour and fertilizer, and spraying the crop by air, and it came to 

nearly $4,500. That was in 1953. In addition to this there was the cost of repairs, depreciation of 

machinery and truck, the cost of living, interest on investment and half a hundred other things which are 

not included. 

 

A recent estimate shows that the farmers who represent some 40 per cent of the population actually 

receive only some 10 or 12 per cent of the gross national income. If one considers the cost of producing 

this actual amount of some 10 or 12 per cent, it does not leave very much of a margin for net farm 

income. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just like to quote from Professor Van Vleet, the head of the farm management 

department at the University of Saskatchewan, who made a statement recently as follows: 

 

“High operating costs and high capital that are necessary to operate a farm today has made the 

farmer‟s position extremely vulnerable in spite of the fact that he is enjoying the highest gross income 

in agricultural history.” 

 

Professor Van Vleet also went on to say that he believed the heavy capital outlay required by the farmer 

today left him in a more precarious position than in the early ‟thirties. 

 

I would like now to say a word about the co-operative movement in this province which has made such 

tremendous progress in the last few years. In 1953, the co-operatives in Saskatchewan had 500,000 

members and did nearly $500 million of business. The Federated Co-ops, in 25 years of operations, had 

sold goods to the amount of $168 million and has made savings to the Co-op members of nearly $8 

million during that period. In 1953, the Federated Co-ops had sales of $29 million and savings of nearly 

$2 million. The Sherwood Co-op, with headquarters at Regina, is by far the largest retail co-operative in 

Canada with a total of nearly 17,000 members, and it did a business, in 1953, of over $4 million. 

 

At this time, I would like to draw the attention of the House to a recent establishment in Regina of the 

Lumsden Vegetable Co-op Limited. It is the first of its kind in the province. It will carry on the business 

of warehousing, processing and marketing the root and vegetable crops for some 12 growers in the 

Qu‟Appelle valley near Lumsden. I might add that it is now in the process of grading and packaging 

potatoes for the city trade here at Regina. The total output of the growers of potatoes in the Lumsden 

valley this past year was 4 million lbs. From three to four hundred acres are planted to potatoes. 

 

Rapid progress continues in the programme of electrification in Saskatchewan. In 1939-44 only some 30 

farm homes were electrified. I am one of the fortunate ones and have had power for 27 years; it went 

right past my door for two years, and I did not know enough to get on and they did not want farmers in 

those days. In 1939-44 only 30 farm homes were electrified, while, in 1953, power was served to 5,500 

farms, or a total to date of 18,000 farms. I believe the objective of this Government is to 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

4 

 

reach 6,500 farms in 1954, and I understand that $60 million has been spent in generation, distribution 

and transmission of farm lines in Saskatchewan. It is interesting to note that in the province of Alberta, 

during the past six years, the profits of the private power companies have exceeded $18 million. In 

Saskatchewan, the „People‟s Government‟ owns the entire system. In Alberta, the private companies 

own most of the system, but farm organizations in Alberta at the present time, including the 

municipalities, have condemned the present plan of private monopoly and are asking for public 

ownership of the power lines. 

 

The Saskatchewan Automobile Insurance, in spite of rate increases for 1954, continues to be the 

cheapest and the most satisfactory automobile insurance in America. I believe actually, for the same 

protection, the Government Auto Insurance costs less than one-half of the cost of private companies. 

Auto insurance is cheaper in Saskatchewan companies because of the competition of Saskatchewan 

Automobile Insurance which has forced the private companies to lower their rates in Saskatchewan. In 

other Canadian provinces insurance rates are at least double Saskatchewan rates. The private insurance 

companies would be glad indeed to get rid of the Government Automobile Insurance, then they could 

really „go to town‟ on their rates. Saskatchewan Automobile Insurance, compared to United States and 

other Canadian provinces, has saved Saskatchewan motorists hundreds of thousands of dollars in 

insurance premiums – in fact I was going to say millions but maybe that would be a slight over-

statement. 

 

Increased oil and gas development has also taken place during this past year, as was outlined in the 

Speech from the Throne. Oil companies have spent more than $150 million in the past four years. Over 

450 oil and gas wells were completed. Exploration of oil and gas may total $68 million in 1954. 

 

I believe the Hospital Services plan in Saskatchewan is the most important health service ever granted to 

the people. During each of the five years, one person in five has received hospital care under this plan. 

In other words, over 1,100,000 people have received hospitalization since the plan went into effect in 

1947. It is the considered opinion of many persons who visit this province of Saskatchewan that we have 

in this province the finest health services and other lines of social services in health and mental 

treatment of anywhere in the Dominion of Canada. We are still waiting of complete health service as 

promised by the Liberal Party at Ottawa and yet, when a national health service plan was voted on in the 

House of Commons on November 16, 1953, it was opposed by Mr. Studer, M.P. in the vote which was 

taken which I have here before me, in Hansard. The other Saskatchewan Liberals slipped out behind the 

curtain and were not to be caught. 

 

I was gratified to learn from the Speech from the Throne that a Bureau of Alcoholism is to be set up for 

the purpose of studying ways and means by which the large increase in drinking and alcoholism could 

be curbed. This whole question seems to be one of the worst evils facing any government today, in all 

sincerity, whether from the standpoint of health or morals or economic security. A recent survey 

reported in the „Leader-Post‟ shows that Canada‟s rate of alcoholism has risen by 1950 to 810 per 

100,000 population, and it places Canada in the sixth place among the world‟s countries in alcoholism. 

Statistics show that a higher percentage of Canadians drink liquor than Americans. Canada spends over 

$2 million a day, or $735 million per year on liquor. If we face up to these figures honestly must we not 

ask ourselves, are we becoming a nation of drunkards? And while we believe that 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

5 

 

 

temperance will be advanced by improving the social and economic conditions, as is noted from a 

quotation in the „Montreal Gazette‟ of February, 1953: 

 

“In Montreal alcoholics are found chiefly not in „skid row‟ but in the industries, professions and 

homes of the great metropolis.” 

 

To those who would advocate an increase in outlets and a relaxation of the laws, I would like to quote 

from a report by Dr. Jellinek of the World Health Organization: 

 

“The ravages of alcohol are least felt in the countries where liquor laws are most severe.” 

 

The methods of reducing drunkenness used in Britain are by reducing outlets, reducing hours of sale, 

increasing the taxes on beer, wine and spirits. At the present time the tax in Britain on alcoholic 

beverages in three times what it is in Canada. A drunken driver in Britain may be fined up to $500 or a 

year in jail, and ruled off the road for life if he is in a motor accident. 

 

In the 28th annual report of the Board of Evangelism of the United Church of Canada this statement 

occurs: 

 

“The United Church believes that nationalization is the first step to temperance policy.” 

 

It also points out the fantastic profits of the liquor trade. For example, gin, which is immatured neutral 

grain spirits, is made for 9 cents a quart at the distillery. A quart of gin will make over 20 cocktails, so I 

am told, and that is $8.00 selling price for a 9 cent product. Now while penalties, controls and 

rehabilitation must play its part, the other answer to this problem must surely be found in the education 

of the young people. I congratulate the Minister of Education for the copy of the manual which has been 

placed on our desks and which will be used in the schools of Saskatchewan. We feel the people of 

Saskatchewan have the courage to co-operate with one another and share the vision of one world. 

However, a word of warning: let us guard against complacency. 

 

In the past reports of actions of so-called totalitarian states in purges and persecutions seem far away. 

Our attitude has been simply „it can‟t happen here‟. Even when McCarthyism reared its ugly head in the 

United States, we said, “this is Canada; it can never happen here.” But just recently a member of the 

House of Commons from Alberta rose to extol McCarthy and to recommend his methods for Canada. In 

Quebec, a new Act – Bill 38 – has recently been passed. This Act forbids books, speeches or broadcasts 

which are, and I quote: “abusive or insulting.” Also an informer can declare that he believes that an 

offence ingoing to be committed and an injunction will be issued at once. That actually has McCarthy 

beaten; it is only matched by Russian Communism. 

 

In Victoria, B.C., we learn of consideration being given to the burning of books in public libraries which 

might be considered subversive . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: – Who said that? Tell us who said that. 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

6 

 

 

Mr. Speaker: – Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: – That hasn‟t been proved. 

 

Mr. Thair: – And yet in spite of so much talk of freedom in debates in the House of Commons where 

the Liberals are greatly in the majority we find that, on December 7, 1953, Alistair Stuart, C.C.F. 

member in the House of Commons, introduced a motion approving the Declaration of Human Rights as 

adopted by the United Nations. The House divided on the motion of Mr. Harris to adjourn it and the 

following vote is interesting. All the Liberals voted to adjourn the debate and the C.C.F. and a lot of the 

Conservatives voted to have the debate carried on. The vote was 86 in favour of the adjournment, with 

some 55 against. I might say, to give credit, that Mr. Drew and Mr. Diefenbaker voted along with the 

C.C.F. on this motion – not in favour of the adjournment but of adopting the motion. It was opposed by 

the four Liberals from Saskatchewan, the fifth Liberal being absent. 

 

One thing all totalitarian movements have in common, whether it is communism or pacifism or Nazism 

or McCarthyism or plain old-fashioned dictatorship, is the necessity to eliminate all opposition. Surely 

the political implications – because the province of Quebec is slightly involved – might be forgotten 

when one of our basic freedoms is at stake. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the House of the words of our Premier in reference to 

hysteria and suspicion – to keep that sort of thing out of Saskatchewan and make it an island of tolerance 

and goodwill and a haven of neighbourliness. 

 

I shall support the motion. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): – Mr. Speaker, I might say at the outset that I support the motion. I 

want to add my congratulations to all those who have spoken before me. I particularly want to 

congratulate my neighbour, the member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff). I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 

member for Turtleford, along with others, and the member for Swift Current (Mr. Gibbs) did a 

marvellous job; but I particularly want to congratulate the hon. member for Turtleford. I believe that the 

hon. member is the personification of the spirit that built the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation in 

the first place, and I think his speech indicates that spirit. It also indicated the spirit that is going to 

continue to build this movement throughout Canada and throughout the world. It was that spirit, without 

any doubt in my mind, that imbued our great leader, J. S. Woodsworth, to his untiring work in 

pioneering this movement when the going was tough – a man of unlimited courage, Mr. Speaker, a man 

who was not afraid even to be jailed for his convictions; and he was. When some of the smug people say 

that it cannot happen here, I say it did happen here, not so long ago, during the lifetime of most of the 

people in this House. I think that this imbues our present leader here in Saskatchewan to his untiring 

work. 

 

I was rather disappointed to notice the lack of interest on the other side of the House when the Premier 

made his statement of policy regarding the four freedoms. I also was quite happy to see that some – 

especially the younger members – were quite in accord with them and applauded him roundly. These 

things are important. It is no use laughing them off and shrugging your shoulders and saying that you re 

just borrowing trouble. They are happening. If you read, you will find that people are trying to tear down 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

7 

 

 

the very foundation of this democracy of ours. Surveys south of the line show that people refuse to 

think. I would like to recommend a report – I shall not quote from it – on the editorial page of „The 

Commonwealth‟, of a survey taken in the high schools of the United States. I would like to recommend 

that survey and I would like you to peruse it. It showed briefly that 49 per cent of the students in the 

United States are doing a lot of totalitarian thinking and are not very democratic. That is not very far 

from here. A lot of us are doing a lot of worrying about what is going on the other side of the puddle, but 

I think we had better tend to our washing at home, and see to it that it does not happen here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to say no more about the various speeches that have been made in here. I 

probably ought to spend just a moment on what was said, or some of the things probably that were not 

said, by the hon. Leader of the Opposition. Apparently he was not too pleased with the Speech from the 

Throne and chose the same old ground to fight his battles on. I think the public of Saskatchewan have 

had quite enough of that, and I do not think we need say anything further. 

 

I was a bit alarmed, however – going back to what I said originally – that a statement credited to him, 

apparently made publicly or in this House, in which he said that the Communists had organized the 

Wheat Pool. I would like to quote from a booklet here entitled „Co-operation: History and Philosophy‟ 

and it is written by L. J. Bright. There is a quotation by a famous Canadian statesman in here in which it 

says: 

 

“Co-operation retains all the benefits of free enterprise; add thereto the benefits of social ownership. It 

removes the evils of capitalism without substituting therefor the evils of political dictatorship.” 

 

Now, it wasn‟t J. S. Woodsworth who said that. The Rt. Hon. MacKenzie King made that statement. I 

would recommend this booklet for reading to the hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words about the constituency I represent. I said last year 

that we are the gateway to the playground of Saskatchewan and also the gateway to some of the best 

farming communities, livestock areas and so on. I said that if you wished to spend a holiday to good 

advantage, we welcome you to The Battlefords It is not only an historic area, but its scenery is equal to 

anything that you would find, I believe, anywhere in Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to say, too, I hope that for the time you come up on your holiday, we have not the water 

threat. While the City of North Battleford has a filtration system that is not being affected at the present 

moment by this polluted water from Edmonton, we are still afraid that even though the river sands are 

taking this out through the filtration into our wells, these sands may reach the filtration saturation point 

and they may be completely ruined. The story is different, however, with the Saskatchewan hospital and 

I believe the town of Battleford, which is in a bad way. I think that the Premier has made a statement to 

the Premier of Alberta which says that if nothing is done, an ultimatum will be given to these companies 

to close up. I would like to say that I am perfectly in accord and I think that one of the most sensible 

solutions made in the House of Commons and offered in the House of Commons, was made by the hon. 

federal member for The Battlefords, Mr. Max Campbell, who said that the easiest way to find 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

8 

 

 

out what and where the source was, was to close these plants up for 24 hours and take progressive tests; 

then we would know. It is just as simple as that. But, apparently they are sitting back and are not 

wanting to take decisive action. It seems that there is a difference as to just who is committing the 

offence. I wonder who these people are who think they can pollute our water and get away with it. 

 

I would like to say further that The Battlefords‟ people will be, and are, quite happy to know that No. 5 

Highway between Fielding and Radisson will be completed this coming year. Construction on that will 

be completed; the contract has been let. I am also busy now twisting the hon. Minister of Highway‟s arm 

to get a little black-topping done at least as far as Denholm out of North Battleford, and I hope he gives 

in easily. 

 

I am sorry to say that the housing situation in the city of North Battleford is still precarious. Temporary 

housing set up by the Department of Social Welfare at the Airport Apartments is still well filled, but 

there is still a need for a real housing programme in the city of North Battleford and I hope that one is 

undertaken in the near future. I believe present plans offered by national-provincial authorities open the 

gate to that type of a housing scheme. I also hope that this gas development that is going on about the 

province brings gas to North Battleford before too long. There are people of the opinion that there is 

enough up there right now, but I think that the people would like the real thing. 

 

We also could use an old peoples‟ home in that area; that is my belief. The Salvation Army are doing a 

marvellous job of taking care of both women and men, but something further than that must be done. 

The population is going up in that area, especially the aged population, and I think that our old pioneers 

are entitles to good, comfortable housing in their old age where they can live among their old friends 

and enjoy themselves in their retiring years. 

 

At this time I add my congratulation to other members on the advent of two new members, namely, the 

member for Rosthern (Mr. Carr) and the hon. member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. Kohaly). I was rather 

taken aback with some of the things that the hon. member for Rosthern said in his talk, and I thought 

immediately of what the hon. member for Swift Current had said in his seconding speech on the motion 

for the Address is Reply. He said, “I suppose we can look forward to the same old cracked record.” 

Well, it seems in this case that is was the same old record with more cracks. Regarding the contribution 

of the member for Souris-Estevan, I think we should note that this is an historical event. It is the rebirth 

of an old party in this Legislature, even though some people regard the parentage with a raised eyebrow. 

The member made a very able contribution and we congratulate him for it. I think that he has a future in 

political life in this country. There was one statement that I would like him to go a little further on, 

however. It is all very well, Mr. Speaker, to stand up and say „I unequivocally stand for private 

enterprise‟. Too many of us have not too much argument with a statement like this. But where does he 

stand with regard to some of these people who are conspiring to undermine the very foundations of our 

economic system? 

 

Mr. McDonald: – Socialistic monopoly? 

 

Mr. Loptson: – The Socialists are the monopolists. 

 

Mr. Kramer: – That is what we want to know. We also want to know where the rest of the hon. 

members on the other side of the House stand in regard to some of these things. There is a curious 

silence when it comes to challenging the right of some of these monopolies to conspire to milk the 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

9 

 

public of Canada for various articles that they need in order to keep the production of Canada on an even 

keel. 

 

There was also an attack made on our increased insurance rates. Well, as far as I am concerned, I am no 

happier than you are about having to pay more money; but I want to suggest that it is in the hands of all 

the public of Saskatchewan to do something about it to reduce the accident rates. As far as considering 

this a failure, Mr. Speaker, I wonder just what they wish to do. Will they stand up and say they want this 

automobile insurance Act thrown out? Will they go on record? Some of them did when it was brought 

in. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): – All of them. 

 

Mr. Kramer: – Yes, all of them. I wouldn‟t be surprise if that is the way they feel about it. I would just 

like to compare what happens in other provinces, and I have here an article from the „Canadian 

Underwriter‟ entitled „Family of Hit-and-Run Victim awarded $5,250 from the Fund‟: 

 

“Mrs. Henry Corban, Peterboro, and her three sons were awarded a total of $5,250 and costs in their 

suit against the Ontario registrar of motor vehicles recently. The money which must come out of the 

unsatisfied judgment fund was a damage award to the widow and her children following the death of 

36-year-old Henry Corban, struck down and fatally injured by an unidentified motorist while walking 

along an avenue in Peterboro Christmas Eve, 1952. Mrs. Corban was awarded (in 1954) $3,000 and 

$2,000 is to be paid into court on behalf of the three children. The total of $5,000 is the maximum that 

can be paid out of the fund for the death or accident of any one person. The extra $250 was statutory 

grant to cover funeral expenses.” 

 

Note the delay of over a year in making payment; and the fact that Mrs. Corban had to sue in order to 

obtain judgment. Possibly that would suit some of the legal practitioners. Under the Saskatchewan Plan 

without any necessity to incur any legal costs, Mrs. Corban would have received $8,175 within a few 

weeks of the accident. The payment would be made up as follows: $5,000 for Mrs. Corban, principal 

dependant, $1,000 each for each of the three children and $175 funeral expenses. Apparently it does not 

cost as much to bury them in Saskatchewan. The maximum payable under the Ontario Unsatisfied 

Judgment Fund for death of one person is $5,000. The maximum payable in Saskatchewan is $10,000. 

Some owners of older cars are grumbling that the $200 deductible brings their premium rates of $6 and 

$10 out of line. 

 

Mr. Cameron: – Oh, I did not think anyone grumbled about your insurance. 

 

Mr. Kramer: – Last year in Ontario, a young immigrant woman was driving an uninsured jalopy which 

was involved in an accident. A judgment for $16,000 was rewarded against the immigrant couple. The 

Unsatisfied Judgment Fund made a partial payment to the victim. The young owners of this old car have 

to pay the balance outstanding to the victim and then pay the Unsatisfied Judgment Fund the amount 

advanced to the victim. They will be saddled with a debt for the rest of their lives. If that car had been 

registered in Saskatchewan the whole amount would have been paid due to the fact that more than one 

was injured. 

 

I might go further. Most of us will remember that there was a multiple accident in which four heads of 

families were killed in an accident not too far away, in Alberta. Again the same thing would have held 

true. 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

10 

 

There would have been $40,000 spent and available on those four heads of families under the plan. I 

would like to refer again to „The Commonwealth‟ and I‟ll refer it again for reading not only to the hon. 

members opposite, but anyone within reach of my voice. In the editorial here, it says: 

 

“One of the most disgraceful exhibitions of treachery to the interests of the Saskatchewan people by 

the „Daily Blatt; in its comments upon the revision in rates for Saskatchewan government auto 

insurance. It stated that the new rates would make the insurance cost about the same as that offered by 

private companies. This is a disgusting lie, and „Daily Blatt‟ editors must know it.” 

 

It goes on to compare policies: 

 

“In the first place the policies offered by private companies do not include the personal injury 

coverage such as is provided by Saskatchewan public insurance. But even so, the private company 

rates are so much higher than the public insurance rates that no private company has any hope of 

selling any amount of auto insurance in Saskatchewan even to the people who are the bitterest enemies 

of public enterprise. 

 

“Total coverage for the oldest model cars under public insurance costs $33. Similar coverage from a 

private company is Saskatchewan (minus the personal injury coverage) would cost $50. 

 

“Total coverage for a new car under public insurance costs $57. Similar coverage from a private 

company in Saskatchewan (minus personal injury coverage) would cost $177. 

 

“It is to be noted also that the private companies in Saskatchewan substantially reduced their rates 

after the public insurance plan was started. So the private companies in Saskatchewan offer far 

cheaper auto-insurance than the private companies in other provinces. But they still can‟t sell it 

because they are so far out of line with public insurance. 

 

“A glance at the rates in other provinces shows what would have happened in Saskatchewan if private 

enterprise had been allowed to continue without competition (again, I‟ll repeat, without competition) 

from the public plan: 

 

“In Alberta, the owner of an old car pays $55 for the coverage which the Saskatchewan owner gets for 

$33. In Manitoba the rate is $50. 

 

“In Alberta the owner of a new car pays up to $298 for the coverage which the Saskatchewan owner 

gets for $57. In Manitoba the rates run up to $208. (Take some notes, gentlemen!) 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

11 

 

“Of course the amounts vary from the lowest to the highest according to the car to be insured. It is 

easiest to see the entire picture if we speak in terms of averages. In Manitoba the average car owner 

must pay $130 for complete coverage; in Alberta he must pay $170; but in Saskatchewan he pays less 

than $50 and gets personal injury coverage besides. 

 

“The „Daily Blatt‟ says the rates for public and private insurance are about the same! What enormous 

dishonesty!” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I do not want to dwell too long, but some of the statements that were made I think 

need challenging. As I say, and as I have said before, none of us are too happy about having to increase 

this, but if we stop to think of it, the amount of money that is paid out today when a car is wrecked, or 

even when people are injured, compared to what was paid at the outset of the plan, these costs are out of 

the hands of a provincial government. We have no responsibility whatever for risking costs, and they are 

still going up. As long as our national economy is such that our costs are going up and up, we are going 

to be carried along with it provincially and there is nothing you can do about it, outside of doing the best 

you can. I am sure that that is what the Government Insurance office is doing and what The Automobile 

Insurance Act supervisors are doing in the administration of this Act. So much for insurance. 

 

I would also like to say a few words about the agricultural picture. It was mentioned in the Speech from 

the Throne that it was believed (and we are convinced) that a livestock marketing board on a national 

level is necessary today. In fact, it is overdue. The hon. Leader of the Opposition stated that we had the 

opportunity to go ahead provincially. That is just why Bill 82 was passed and introduced by the hon. 

Minister of Agriculture at Ottawa, in a vain endeavour to throw the monkey on the backs of the 

provinces, and again in order to refuse the responsibility for national leadership. This question affects all 

of us. The whole national economy is affected by this livestock picture, and anyone who is foolish 

enough to think that we can put a little patch on a pair of trousers here in Saskatchewan, is just doing so 

much wishful thinking. 

 

In the first place we have no jurisdiction for setting prices of any kind. We have no jurisdiction over the 

national economy. We cannot stop the packers from going outside of the country even if we refuse to 

deal with them. The whole thing is in exactly the same category as the wheat, and our Wheat Board has 

worked marvellously well. We have a complete parallel. Certainly there are a few different problems to 

meet in the livestock picture, but if there is a will, there is a way. So far we have not been able to 

convince the Federal Government that they should take the bull by the horns, and a few hogs and one 

thing and another by the ears, and get busy and protect the farmers of western Canada especially, who 

are right behind the „eight-ball‟ financially with their livestock. 

 

Livestock prices have suffered some pretty rough going lately. I quote a few pertinent facts concerning 

our picture today: hogs, the average price per cwt. dressed, of hogs sold on the Edmonton livestock 

market went down by 12 per cent; Saskatchewan hog marketing in 1953 went down 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

12 

 

by 21.5 per cent compared with marketings in 1952. In cattle the weighted average monthly price per 

cwt. of all grades of cattle sold on the Winnipeg livestock market in 1953 represented a decline of more 

than 46 per cent from the 1951 level. The price to the producer has gone down more than 50 per cent 

since 1951, if the increased freight and handling costs are taken into account. Similarly with sheep and 

lambs – down more than 40 per cent this past years and now wheat prices. 

 

We hear that the price of No. 1 Northern at the Lakehead has been cut to $1.79. This represents a drop in 

the selling price of 24 cents a bushel since August of 1953. Saskatchewan farmers are now selling their 

wheat more cheaply than they did in the final years of the 1946-1950 bilateral agreements with the 

United Kingdom, despite the fact that farm costs have gone up by 22.6 per cent. And just mark this – in 

terms of purchasing power, the farmer today is getting only about $1.39 per bushel for his wheat, basis 

No. 1 Northern at the Lakehead compared with $2.00 a bushel in 1948. Similarly with other prices: rye, 

down by 71 cents a bushel and it was already low; flax, down 73 cents a bushel. And coupled with this, 

Canada has lost her export market for everything but wheat. 

 

Some of these things do not seem to worry certain people too much. As far as I am concerned, they 

worry me. Most of us present here attended an agrologists‟ meeting in the basement of this building not 

so long ago, and the need for conservation was brought out there, the conservation of our resources here, 

especially our farm resources. Certain things we need in conserving those resources. One of the main 

things is fertilizer; and yet we allow a monopoly to continue to flourish in the fertilizer field. I would 

like to quote again but it isn‟t necessary. I will cover it more briefly. There was $174 million profit made 

by the Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company last year, the company that has the monopoly on the 

ammonium phosphate. Not only that, Mr. Speaker. Immediately after the war, we owned two munitions 

plants that had been built by the taxpayers of Canada, manufacturing nitrates, one at Niagara Falls and 

one at Lethbridge, Alberta. The Federation of Agriculture advised the Government to hold on to at least 

one of these plants which could easily have been converted into a fertilizer plant. They did not take that 

advice. They sold them for 20 per cent of their cost to United States interests, and today they are 

standing idle while a monopoly flourishes in the fertilizer industry. The costs have doubled and tripled 

in fertilizer since 1938, in spite of the increase of 130 per cent in the use of fertilizer. 

 

Now, if we are going to conserve our resources – after all we are only here and in the farming business 

for a short while; we are only the custodians of these resources. Other people are going to follow us; and 

if we are going to mine out all the fertility and leave a desert for generations to come, the responsibility 

is going to be ours. Again a monopoly. 

 

Today we are also a nation on wheels and those wheels require rubber, tires and what-have-you. And 

what do we find in the rubber field – again another monopoly! The present anti-combine legislation is 

evidently unsatisfactory to take care of the situation. Sure we investigated them and fined them $10,000 

each; but what did they make? The investigation showed that they extracted illegally $19,500,000 during 

the years they operated the combine: $19,500,000 – and for that offence we fined them $10,000 each. I 

would like to hear a word from some of the gentlemen opposite on that question. Is that free enterprise? 

If it is, we want none of it. 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

13 

 

We could go on and on. I am going to be followed, I understand, by the hon. Minister of Agriculture, so 

I am sure that his message will interest you far more than mine. 

 

I was questioned not so long ago by one who said, “I am surprised at the ability (he was a stranger to 

Saskatchewan, apparently) of some of the Cabinet Ministers and some of the private members you have 

in your legislatures. I cannot understand why these men are fooling around with Socialism, or talking 

about co-operation. They could do far better if they took a job with a private business and made a name 

for themselves and make three or four times the money.” No doubt they could, Mr. Speaker, no doubt 

they could. 

 

I would like to read, in closing, again from „The Commonwealth‟ – which is a pretty good paper. 

 

Mr. McDonald: – Oh, no, no again! 

 

Mr. Kramer: – It is entitled “Progress” and it is contributed by E. H. Tudor. 

 

Mr. McDonald: – Who is he? 

 

Mr. Kramer: – I think it could be dedicated again to our erstwhile leader, J. S. Woodsworth: 

 

“And old man going along the highway 

Came at the evening, cold and gray 

to a chasm vast and deep and wide 

The old man crossed in the twilight dim – 

The sullen stream had no fears for him,‟ 

But he turned when safe on the other side, 

And built a bridge to span the tide. 

“„Old man,‟ said a fellow pilgrim near, 

„You are wasting your time building here. 

You never again will pass this way, 

Your journey will end with the closing day. 

You have crossed the chasm deep and wide 

Why build you this bridge at evening tide?‟ 

“The builder lifted his old gray head, 

„Good friend, in the way I‟ve come‟ he said 

„There followeth after me today 

A youth whose feet must pass this way. 

this stream that has been as naught to me 

To the fair-haired youth might a pitfall be. 

He, too, must cross in the twilight dim. 

Good friend, I am building a bridge for him.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I will support the Motion. 

 

Hon. I. C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): – Mr. Speaker, I first of all wish to observe and hope that 

some of the Socialist members on this side of the House will have a bit more regard to the division of air 

time. 

I wish to join immediately with all of those who preceded me in this debate in proffering my 

congratulations to the mover and seconder of the 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

14 

 

Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne, particularly the mover of the motion who, by his 

speech, indicated his own high quality and personal integrity. The seconder of the motion lived up to his 

working-man reputation as a boilermaker and went into his speech wholeheartedly, directly, and in a 

manner that we knew meant perfect straightforward honesty coming, as it should, from a labour man. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the newly-appointed Leader of the Opposition and I hope that Divine 

Providence will assist him in carrying out and discharging his duties to the full extent of his native 

abilities. 

 

I want particularly to congratulate the two new members in the Legislature for the very fine addresses 

given by both of them. I hope that the level of their contribution to the House will improve, as I know it 

will, and I am certain that they will give a good contribution and a good account of themselves in this 

Legislature. The two new members started out very well in their speeches and they ended their speeches 

very well. Similarly, Mr.Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition started out very well, but here all the 

similarity ceased. The hon. Leader of the Opposition‟s speech material progressively deteriorated as his 

speech went on, and I regret very much that the constructive intention mentioned at the outset of his 

speech was so soon forgotten and that he reverted to the age old political device of casting doubt on the 

character of public personalities, a practice common to the Saskatchewan Liberal party. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition made a feeble attempt to salvage something out of the political garbage-

can that had already gone to the nuisance grounds where is properly belonged. The Leader of the 

Opposition ought to learn and know that the „kickbacks‟ to date have only been against the Liberal 

party. 

 

Mr. Loptson: – That‟s what you think! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – The Leader of the Opposition spent considerable time in giving his interpretation as 

to why the C.C.F. was elected as the government of this province. I would suggest to him that he re-

evaluate, re-appraise or re-analyze some of the conclusions that he arrived at. The hon. member from 

Saltcoats, the Leader of the Opposition, also mentioned and endorsed a few of the good things the 

Government had already done and intended to do; but instead of giving credit to the Government, as he 

stated he would, he proceeded to take credit unto himself and the Opposition for these good things. That 

is not exactly giving credit where credit is rightly due. However, it is at least a truly Liberal concession. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition then went on to proffer some advice to the Government. One of the first 

suggestions was that the hospitalization tax should be removed, apparently secure in the knowledge that 

any suggestion of this kind would be politically popular. Like the Leader if the Opposition, the 

Government also knows that such a step would be politically popular; but unlike the Leader of the 

Opposition the Government has the immediate responsibility of providing services which the Leader of 

the Opposition perhaps never hopes to assume. He can, therefore, take more liberties with suggestions of 

this kind than the Government can. 

 

Mr. Loptson: – A good sound suggestion anyway, wasn‟t it? 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

15 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – He did not suggest how the hospitalization plan would be continued if the tax were 

removed. He did not explain how the other services, improved services and new services that he 

suggested would be financed if this particular tax were abolished. 

 

I was quite interested in the observation made by the hon. member for Swift Current when he suggested 

that the new Leader of the Opposition might introduce a new flavour in the House. As everyone knows, 

the hon. Leader of the Opposition has a nickname – a very flavoury nickname „Minty‟; and when the 

hon. member for Swift Current mentioned that new flavour I immediately began thinking about first-

grade roast lamb, because it is usually served up with a „minty‟ flavour. I expected something new, but 

to my great disappointment and dismay it was not long in the course of the hon. Leader‟s address when I 

realized that it was the same old Liberal mutton stew that was being served up, with the same old stains 

on the tablecloth. The hon. member for Saltcoats said that the Throne Speech, although not one of the 

lengthiest, was one of the most barren Throne Speeches that this Government had brought into this 

Legislature. 

 

Let us, Mr. Speaker, examine the contents of the Throne Speech to determine whether this statement is 

correct or not. I propose to do that in a most unique way, if I may. I want, first of all, to make a 

comparison between the 10-point programme upon which this Government was elected, then refer to 

appropriate passages within the Throne Speech itself, and the people of this province can determine 

themselves whether or not there is material in this Throne Speech that is meaningful to them. Despite all 

of the talk that is usually the order of the day during an election time, the people will support the 

government that has fulfilled its commitments. In June, 1952, we said: 

 

1. A $75 million highway and market road programme. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I turn to the Speech from the Throne in order to appraise the progress made in that 

particular direction. The Speech says: 

 

“Unfavourable weather conditions hampered both highway construction and maintenance operations, 

but despite those conditions 495 miles of grading, 1,100 miles of gravel surfacing and 219 miles of 

bituminous surfacing were completed.” 

 

And it goes on. It mentioned that the grade construction on the Trans-Canada Highway was now 64 per 

cent completed. Is that of no significance? Is that unimportant? The people of this province, 

understanding the meaning behind this particular progress report contained in the Throne Speech, fully 

realize that we are on the way to the completion of that $75 million highway programme. And another 

quotation with reference to highways: 

 

“Increased attention will be paid to the important problem of market roads. Engineering staff of the 

Department of Highways has been assigned to design a grid of main market roads for submission to 

the rural municipalities. This work is being done in conjunction with the Municipal Advisory 

Commission which is studying the financial implications of such a system.” 

 

This will be good news to the municipal people and the farm people who so 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

16 

 

badly need better roads in rural areas. 

 

Pledge number two given at the 1952 election: 

 

2. Power to 40,000 farms and all towns and villages in Saskatchewan. 

 

What is contained in the Throne Speech with reference to this? Here is what I find: 

 

“During the past year, a gas pipe line was constructed from the Brock gas field to the City of 

Saskatoon. The Saskatchewan Power Corporation is supplying gas to over 5,000 customers in the City 

of Saskatoon and in six communities in the vicinity of the pipe line. Since the early construction of the 

Trans-Canada Gas Pipe Line is now assured, our public gas utility is laying plans to make gas 

available to other communities in the Province.” 

 

And No. 4 in our election pledge said: “Natural Gas in larger cities and intermediate points.” Is that of 

no significance or importance in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And the rural electrification programme is also mentioned in the Throne Speech, a progress report that is 

reassuring to the people of the province and an indication that these 40,000 farmers and all towns and 

villages in Saskatchewan will be receiving electricity at the end of this Government‟s term of office. 

 

3. Continued development of Saskatchewan‟s oil and mineral resources. 

 

What does the Throne Speech say in reference to that? I read here: 

 

“A new record was achieved in 1953 when nearly 700 wells were drilled for oil and gas and three 

hundred of these will likely prove capable of commercial production. Expenditures on petroleum 

exploration and development during 1953 broke all records. A number of new discoveries were made, 

of which the Smiley light oil field is undoubtedly the most outstanding. Production of oil in 1953 

increased 60 per cent over 1952 to reach 2,700,000 barrels.” 

 

And it is estimated that that production will at least reach 5 million barrels next year. Is that of no 

significance, is that a barren Throne Speech? It contains so much, Mr. Speaker, and this Government has 

a reputation of implementation of programmes and promises so well carried out that it is beginning to be 

a matter of course, and the Opposition seems to overlook the progress that is being made. 

 

5. Construction of the South Saskatchewan Dam in co-operation with Federal Government. 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

17 

 

The Throne Speech says – you know it is getting so that we are almost afraid to talk to the Federal 

Government about the South Saskatchewan Dam because every time we do it costs us more money. 

Here is what the Throne Speech says: 

 

“During the past year, the Government of Saskatchewan has continued to urge the Government of 

Canada to proceed with the South Saskatchewan River Development Project. Further demands of the 

Federal Government for Saskatchewan to assume greater financial responsibility for this project have 

been met. At the present time a joint committee is meeting to draft an agreement for submission to 

both Governments. It is our hope that the Government of Canada will give favourable consideration to 

proceeding with this important irrigation project during the present year.” 

 

If there is any criticism to be directed I would suggest to the hon. members opposite that they direct it to 

the Federal Government; and perhaps in their own minds and to their own satisfaction determine how 

much cost should be imposed on the people of Saskatchewan for this very valuable project which will 

contribute so much to the national wealth and the general economic well-being of Canada as a whole. 

 

6. Reclamation and settlement of new Northern areas. 

 

The Throne Speech says: 

 

“Significant progress has been made in this direction despite very adverse weather conditions.” 

 

I do not propose, Mr. Speaker, at this time to dwell in any detail with matters pertaining directly to my 

Department. That can better be done when the budget is before the House and when Estimates are under 

consideration 

 

I would, however, like to make one observation in connection with new settlement and drainage 

activities in the northern part of the province. As hon. members know, the Government tabled an interim 

report by the Royal Commission in regard to northern settlement, and I congratulate the Government on 

its straightforward honesty in tabling a report when they probably could have waited until the final 

report was completed. The report is critical in places and is in accord with much of the thinking that we 

have been doing in regard to policies affecting northern settlement and reclamation projects. I would, 

however, like to refer to some of the press statements that came out as a result of the tabling of that 

report. 

 

Again, as is usually the fashion with our Liberal dailies, they must „slant‟ the news to the best possible 

political effect. Now they have left the impression, with these kind of headlines, that land settlement in 

new areas was to be discontinued, when they said: “Agro Commission calls for land settlement halt.” I 

want to say, Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no intention to halt land settlement. It is our intention to 

proceed with land settlement in new areas. 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

18 

 

The next one says: “Land settlement probe is asked.” There was no probe asked. The inquiry and the 

study has been made by the Royal Commission. The recommendations have been submitted. Many of 

those recommendations will meet with the complete approval of our people, perhaps not to the same 

broad extent because we do have practical budget limitations; but already some of the recommendations 

of the Commission in this regard are being implemented as is indicated in the Throne Speech when it 

says: 

 

“Provision will be made for making cash payment of earned clearing and breaking credits to settlers 

occupying Crown land in northern Saskatchewan.” 

 

Number 9 of our pledge to the people in the 1952 election: 

 

9. Extension of medical care programme. 

 

I need not refer to it – that has been done by other speakers who have spoken of the number of patients 

who have been assisted through the Saskatchewan Hospitalization plan. I can, however, refer to the 

statement in the Throne Speech which indicates that the University hospital will be completed in the 

coming year and possibly patients will be admitted; and that the medical college is already getting under 

way. Someone on the other side of the House mentioned that we hadn‟t given the former administration 

credit for building this Legislative building. Well, knowing their propensity to debate, naturally they 

would have to have some place to carry on debate, and it is to the credit of the former administration that 

we have this fine Legislative building; but I think it is more to the credit of this administration that we 

have taken the bold step – and it was indeed a mighty step, Mr. Speaker – of providing a University 

hospital and medical college at the University in Saskatoon. 

 

10. Extension of Social Welfare benefits. 

 

I look about in the Throne Speech for some indication in that regard and I find statements like this: 

 

“Additional accommodations for aged persons is being provided at the Melfort Nursing Home which 

will be in operation in April, and construction of the Regina Nursing Home will commence in the 

present year.” 

 

Why on that one bit of progress alone, the old administration would have probably gone out and tried to 

win an election! And here is another one: 

 

“Communities and organizations are showing keen interest in the provision of housing projects for the 

care of the ambulatory aged pioneers of their districts. Since the announcement of the Government‟s 

policy offering capital and maintenance grants for this purpose, six agreements have been completed 

and fourteen are in various stages of negotiation.” 

 

That will give our aged shelter and accommodation close to their neighbours. 

 

I could go on, Mr. Speaker, but I think I have given sufficient to the House that would indicate that this 

is a government that gets things 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

19 

 

done; and we look at the bottom of our platform card used in the 1952 election and it says: “Get things 

done! Vote CCF!” Well, we are getting things done, and the people of this province know it, and as long 

as we fulfil those commitments, no matter how much talk we get from the Opposition, this Government 

will be back in power again. I wish I could say as much for the Federal Government at Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Loptson: – Wishful thinking! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – Now I wish to turn to other matters. 

 

Mr. McDonald: – Nice Dream! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – Mr. Speaker, as everyone knows, the general economic conditions of agriculture 

have been steadily growing worse in the past years. It is recognized on good authority that our basic 

industry is caught in an ever-tightening cost-price squeeze and that the cost of goods and services 

required by farmers is increasing steadily in contrast to steadily declining prices for the produce of the 

farm. In the case of livestock, as was mentioned by the hon. member for The Battlefords, it went down 

with bumps. 

 

First, I wish to deal with farm costs. In the light of the situation just mentioned, I was amazed to hear the 

Leader of the Opposition coming to the defence of the farm implement companies and stating that the 

farmers were not hard up financially because they had a large surplus of grain on hand. Whether this 

surplus of grain is an asset will depend on the price the farmer will eventually receive for the grain that 

is now stored on his farm. I will, therefore, a little later on, after I deal with increasing farm costs, deal 

with farm prices and tendencies in that particular regard. Let us first of all refer to the position of the 

implement companies that the Leader of the Opposition so enthusiastically defended. How well have 

they done in the past few years? It is necessary, Mr. Speaker, when you manufacture an implement to 

have steel. So first let us look at the steel companies. The net profits after taxes of the three main steel 

companies in Canada increased from 1945 to 1952 as follows: they made about $6½ million profit in 

1945, and $20¼ million profit in 1952, an increase of 210 per cent in profits. 

 

Let us now look at the poor implement companies our hon. member from Saltcoats wishes to defend. 

What were their profits like, after taxes again? In 1945, the three major companies – Massey Harris, 

International and Cockshutt – had a net profit of $3¼ million approximately. In 1952, they had a net 

profit of $17,882,000, or an increase in percentage of 447 per cent. And still the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition tried to convince this House that the Cockshutt Farm Implement Company had not made 

much profit, and one of the reasons he gave was that labour costs had gone up in the manufacture of 

farm implements. Let us take a look at this labour cost matter. These figures are those obtained from the 

report of the Select Committee that inquired into the price, sale and distribution of farm implements of 

this Legislature, which indicated that, in 1949, salaries and wages made up 42.4 per cent of the 

manufacturing costs per dollar for the factory value of farm machinery; but in 1950, labour and salaries 

only represented 28.9 per cent of the total per dollar gross selling value at the factory. 

 

Now let us take a look at another angle. The hon. member said he had some shares in the Cockshutt 

Implement company – he must have got short-changed someplace along the road in view of these 

favourable reports that 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

20 

 

we have. A shareholder of the Cockshutt Farm Equipment Limited, who bought a share of common 

stock in 1943 at $9.25, now holds two shares worth a total of $32 and has collected $8.55 in dividends 

since he bought the shares, receiving an annual interest rate of 9.2 per cent. Working capital of the 

Cockshutt Company jumped from $4,894,000 in 1943 to $22,728,000 in 1952, and reserves increased 

from $1,000,000 to $2,500,000. Now that indicates a pretty healthy condition in the farm implement 

business. We know that if the agricultural situation deteriorates, perhaps they, like other industries, 

won‟t do so well in the future. 

 

Now I wish to say something about the increase in freight rates, and I am doing this to indicate to 

members of this Legislature the tremendous added burdens of cost that have been progressively placed 

on the shoulders of agriculture during the post-war period. In 1948 we had the 21 per cent increase in 

freight rates; in 1950 we had another 20 per cent, which made a cumulative increase of 45 per cent to 

that time, and then a succession of freight rate increases culminating in 98.1 per cent increase. 

 

I would like to translate that into terms of what it would really mean to a livestock producer for example. 

In our Department we base our schedule of lease fees on the average price of all cattle and the classes of 

cattle on the Winnipeg market, less freight, from the highest shipping point in Saskatchewan to 

Winnipeg, and the shipping point that was picked happened to be up in my country, north of 

Lloydminster. In February 1943, the freight rate from that point to Winnipeg was 48 cents and it went up 

progressively until in March 1953, the freight rate from that point was $1.06 per cwt. or an increase of 

over 100 per cent in freight rates. 

 

The hon. member for The Battlefords indicated the drop in cattle prices, and I am going to refer to them 

too. Anyone who tells me or anyone else that there aren‟t trouble clouds on the horizon for agriculture is 

just talking through his hat. We are living on a little borrowed time because we have had wonderful and 

abundant crops. I hope this honeymoon continues, because I don‟t like to face adverse circumstances 

and the Government doesn‟t. No one does. But anyone would be foolish not to evaluate the present 

economic situation and then proffer some suggestion to the government at Ottawa as to what should be 

done about it; and that is the purpose of my reference to these figures this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What about rail rates – I have mentioned them, but wish to mention one more thing in that connection, 

and it is that in the past 40 years, the railways earned more than twice as much in western Canada (that 

is, Canada west of Fort William) than in eastern Canada, despite a heavier volume of freight in eastern 

Canada where the rates are, of course, competitive. Therefore, the bulk of these freight rate increases 

were applied to western Canada, and I want to make this observation, Mr. Speaker: a nation 

economically divided will have great difficulty in remaining politically united, and I hope that the 

Federal Government will take speedy and early action to equalize these freight rates so that all sections 

of this great nation can share equitably in the economic benefits of our transportation system. It is 

something that is long and far overdue. 

 

Sometimes I think it is unfortunate that we do not have a government at Ottawa that can go out to the 

people with a pledge like that, and an equal record of fulfilment, and I want to suggest to the hon. 

member for Saltcoats that if he wants to abolish the C.C.F. by one means or another, ballot or otherwise 

(I don‟t know what he had in mind – but knowing the workings of his mind I think he had other means) I 

can tell him how he can do it. 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

21 

 

Let the government at Ottawa do something towards the fulfilment of some of their pledges. I don‟t like 

political activity. I would rather be back on my ranch attending to my own occupation, and I would be 

very glad to have someone else do this job if they would do it. The reason I find myself here, Mr. 

Speaker, is because we have had governments in this province and we have had governments in Ottawa 

that have not moved in response to the needs of a situation, nor even in response to the demands of 

popular opinion until they found themselves „out on their ear‟ like they did back in 1944. And believe 

me, if this government at Ottawa does not wake up it will be out on its ear too. I am not suggesting what 

political party will take its place, but there will be a political party take its place unless they get a move 

on. 

 

Mr. Loptson: – It won‟t be the C.C.F. anyway. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – I wouldn‟t be a bit surprised but that it might be the C.C.F. I can say this much, Mr. 

Speaker, if there was a C.C.F. government in Ottawa at the present time we would have equalization of 

freight rates – 

 

Mr. McDonald: – Just a dream! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – For the benefit of the hon. members I just might read to them the platform on which 

the C.C.F. went to the country in the last Federal election campaign – 

 

Mr. Lopston: – They knew they wouldn‟t need it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – I would suggest to them that they urge their particular political party to adopt this 

programme, because I think it is an excellent programme and everyone in this House will agree with it: 

 

1. Canadian leadership for peace; to eliminate the hunger and poverty on which Communism 
thrives; to build collective security and support of the U.N. and its principles. 

 

2. Immediate nation-wide health insurance. 
 

3. A social security programme to include sickness benefits, old age pensions, family allowances at 
adequate rates. 

 

4. One hundred thousand new homes a year; marketing agencies to handle farm and fish products 
in inter-provincial and export trade. 

 

The hon. member for Athabasca (Mr. Ripley) suggested that we should abolish the Fish Marketing 

Service. The hon. members opposite are going to have an opportunity to vote on a motion in a support of 

a livestock marketing board. I am looking forward with interest as to how they are going to vote, and if 

the hon. member for Athabasca is consistent he will vote against a livestock marketing board as well. 

 

6.  Guaranteed forward prices based on parity for primary producer. 

 

7.  Regain and expand overseas markets through co-operative, economic arrangements with 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

22 

 

Commonwealth and other non-dollar countries 

 

Let us take a look at this export market situation and see what has happened under a Liberal 

administration. There was reference made to it in the Throne Speech debate; concern was felt over the 

fact that our trade relations with other countries were deteriorating and that our export markets had, to 

all practical intents and purposes with the exception of wheat, vanished completely. The Government at 

Ottawa has been consistently saying that we are not losing the U.K markets. In 1949, total agricultural 

exports to the U.K. were $413.4 million in value; in 1951, $292.4 million in value – a drop in that 3-year 

period of time of 30 per cent and a much greater drop at the present time. Take pork products: in 1944 

we exported 700 million pounds of pork to Britain; in 1952, four million pounds. 

 

Mr. Loptson: – Why don‟t you ship your hogs to Britain? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – And cheese: exports to the U.K dropped from 135 million in 1945 to a mere trickle 

in 1952 – the lowest in 60 years, in 1952. 

 

Mr. Loptson: – There is nothing to stop you yet from sending them over. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – Not losing our markets? There is the evidence, and it comes from the Dominion 

Bureau of Statistics. 

 

Mr. Danielson: – How much did you buy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – The same story can be told of beef. I would rather the hon. members would answer 

some of my arguments with similar facts, and that is the reason I have deliberately adopted the practice 

of giving these hon. members some figures to bolster the arguments. Let them come forward with 

figures to bolster some of the statements that they make in this House. 

 

Mr. Danielson: – We will. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – They make random statements, unsupported statements, hoping that someone who is 

not well acquainted with the situation will believe them. What about beef? In 1945 our exports of beef 

were 200 million pounds; in 1952, 17 million pounds. 

 

Mr. McDonald: – To whom? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – Now, I want to say something about prices in connection with this. Our beef prices 

in the past few years have fallen very drastically. As I have mentioned to the House, we calculate the 

basis of our lease rentals on Crown lands on the price of cattle at the Winnipeg market; that is the last 

six months of the calendar year on the Winnipeg market. Let us look at them. In 1948, the average price, 

less freight in every case, for all cattle on the Winnipeg market was $15.05 per cwt.; in 1949 it was 

$14.34 per cwt.; 1950, $20.79; 1951 (that was a high year), $26.24 per cwt.; 1952, $15.62 per cwt.; and 

1953, $11.21 per cwt. 

 

Mr. Loptson: – What were they in Great Britain? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – And still the farmer I mentioned at Greenstreet, Saskatchewan, pays for over 100 

per cent more freight. We do not need it percentagewise or otherwise. And there is every prospect on the 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

23 

 

best authority from the senior officials of the Dominion Government at Ottawa that next year will see 

another drop in livestock prices. So our daily press and the hon. Leader of the Opposition say we are 

prophets of gloom, that everything is all right. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps there is an offset, as I mentioned. We have had bountiful crops the past three 

years and the drop in price in dairy, poultry and livestock products has not been felt to such a great 

extent. But, not having the livestock, in the event of getting back to normal crops (as in every probability 

we will in this province) or maybe short crops, we will not have this livestock production. First of all 

you will not have the livestock production to fall back on because as our market outlets to Great Britain 

deteriorated our livestock farm population dropped in Saskatchewan. It might interest hon. members of 

this House to know that we have got less livestock (I am talking about cattle, hogs and sheep) in 

Saskatchewan right now than we did in 1921; and, of course, we have far fewer horses. We must have 

nearly 774,000 fewer horses at the present time, which just simply indicates that the reduced horse 

population was not even made up by other livestock. So we are in a vulnerable position in the event of 

crop failure. We are particularly vulnerable with a combination of price failure and crop failure. 

 

I agree with the hon. member for Wilkie (Mr. Horsman) when he said that even if prices remained up, if 

we had a crop failure in this province, there would be quite a few farmers, and municipalities too, 

looking in vain for a means by which to meet operating costs and to meet the costs of providing 

municipal services. 

 

I do not think it is necessary for me to give any further indication that there is every possibility, with 

present price trends, that we will have to take very drastic action in the economic field if present 

tendencies are to be arrested. There is very little hope that I can see of any possibilities of trade relations 

with the United States, where they have their own agricultural problems. 

 

I should mention, too, that everyone has been depending on the ability of the Wheat Board to maintain 

the price of wheat. They have done a heroic job in marketing our wheat, and it is the only farm 

commodity in the history of this country being marketed through that kind of agency that has provided 

the farmers with the kind of price stability that they want. It is the only government agency that has 

exercised the power to fix prices and the farmers appreciate the efforts of the Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. Loptson: – Why try to undermine it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – I am somewhat alarmed, though, Mr. Speaker, in regard to the new policies that are 

being adopted in connection with the marketing of our wheat. The recent announcement of the Hon. C. 

D. Howe that the price of wheat at Fort William would be arbitrarily dropped by 7 cents a bushel was of 

very great concern to me, because it seems to me it indicates already a concession to the buyer to make 

it easier for the buyer to buy the wheat in the East and to get rid of our surplus in that way. I hope it will 

not resolve itself into a selling war between this country and the United States. We in Canada have been 

living under the protection, especially in wheat, of the American Price Support „umbrella‟, but that 

protection may be removed if a selling war takes place. We would be in a very vulnerable position to 

defend ourselves. A lot of the credit that has been 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

24 

 

taken by the Liberal Government at Ottawa for maintaining the price of grain can be attributed to the 

supports in the United States . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: – You wouldn‟t give the United States credit for anything, would you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – . . . much as we appreciate the good work that has been done by the Wheat Board in 

connection with marketing. Now some say, “Well, how does the price of wheat stack up?” I took the 

trouble of getting a few figures. In 1948, 1949 and 1950, the domestic price of wheat was $2.00. In those 

two years the International Wheat Agreement price was $2.00 a bushel. Now, the price of our domestic 

wheat and our wheat under I.W.A. is $1.79 per bushel, a very considerable drop. Class 2 wheat in 1948-

49 and 1949-50: in 1948-49 it was $2.26 a bushel; in 1949-50, a little less. Now for class 2 wheat the 

price is $1.79 a bushel. 

 

I can remember one time when the Tories were in power at Ottawa, when we got that 5 cents a bushel 

from R. B. Bennett during the ‟thirties and we thought it was manna from heaven. But the Hon. C. D. 

Howe takes 7 cents off the Fort William price just like that! I hope it does not continue, or this great 

surplus of grain that we prefer to call a reserve could really turn into a tremendous liability as far as the 

farm people and the economy of this province is concerned. 

 

Mr. McDonald: – Finish the statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – Now, Mr. Speaker, there is one thing that we are all aware of. We are all aware that 

there is not an abundance of food in the world. We do not need to fear overproduction. It is a matter of 

distribution. It is a matter of building up the kind of trade relations that will bring the abundance of food 

production that Canada is so greatly endowed with to the needy areas of the world. I was hopeful, Mr. 

Speaker, that that would be done at the conclusion of World War II. I was looking forward with great 

hopes that our farm people would be called upon to produce food to the limit, if the „four freedoms‟ 

meant anything. We were hopeful then that F.A.O., the world Food and Agriculture Organization, would 

have a free hand in meeting the tremendous food emergency situations that were occurring in all parts of 

the world. Nothing was done. F.A.O. proposed an international commodity exchange. I regret that the 

Government at Ottawa turned that plan down. We need more of that. We need more commendable plans 

of this kind because I am certain as I stand here and talk to this House this afternoon, that world 

problems will never be solved – the problems of world peace, the problems of developing international 

trade and creating better relationships of good will – unless we feed these hungry people. 

 

I see the hon. Leader of the Opposition smile. He does not think of those things; they are not concerned 

with them. All he thinks about is this free-enterprise philosophy. I often wonder if he has any concept of 

social responsibility at all in his entire makeup. It is funny I have never heard one member on the 

opposite side of the House express any opinion or an idea that has some constructive social thought 

behind it. They seem to think it is a joke; but one day, when their colleagues are „out‟ at Ottawa, they 

will know it is not a joke; and if they continue the present policies of building up profits for their free-

enterprise friends on the basis of defending ourselves with armaments, they may wake up on a place 

something like that little island on the Pacific ocean where they dropped a hydrogen bomb and the 

whole thing disappeared – an island 10 miles long and 5 miles across. 



 

February 24, 1954 

 

25 

 

There is a potential danger there, Mr. Speaker. and I believe that the best way to meet this situation is to 

expend some energy and do some financing in the direction of bringing, first of all, food to meet the 

immediate requirements of the people of India and China or Korea or whatever side of the fence or the 

curtain they might be on. 

 

This week, Mr. Speaker, is „Brotherhood Week‟ and I want to say that I am in an amiable mood today. 

There is only one thing, Mr. Speaker, that I am intolerant of. I am intolerant of prejudices and narrow 

viewpoints. I like to see people raise their eyes a bit, and I think it is time that we raised the general level 

of this debate a little bit in this House and say some purposeful things, things that will mean something 

to the people. When I think of agricultural problems here, quite naturally my mind goes out to the 

hungry people of the world, because the entire purpose of producing food is to feed people. So I would 

like to see an organization set up that would implement the spirit that is implied in Brotherhood Week. 

This is Brotherhood Week, and this Brotherhood Week extends not only to the outer boundaries of our 

country, but beyond them . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: – Over to the Opposition? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – . . . to people elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Loptson: – Would you say over to the Opposition? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – Oh, yes, if the hon. Leader of the Opposition wishes me to extend my brotherly 

love, if he will reciprocate with some similar idea, we will have a whole lot in common, and I can go 

down the street arm-in-arm with him singing „Hallelujah – another reformed Liberal‟. 

 

Canada, Mr. Speaker, is in an enviable position to make a tremendous contribution to stabilizing the 

food needs of people in other parts of the world. If we embark on a programme of that kind I am sure 

that we will make a far greater contribution towards stopping the spread of totalitarianism than we can in 

any other manner. I hope, too, that we can follow up such a programme with rehabilitation assistance in 

order to build the economy of those underdeveloped countries, so that those people can gradually 

improve their living standards. The peon in Mexico, and a peasant in India or China is a mighty poor 

customer. It is to our advantage to build up their general living standards and thereby build up 

permanent export markets. I am looking hopefully forward to the day when the many prevailing 

orthodox trading difficulties can be overcome, that we can place our trade relationships on the basis of 

actual need, and finally, in the final analysis, implement that spirit of Brotherhood Week. 

 

I think following this direction is merely following the direction pointed to us by Him who taught us our 

Christian philosophy. As I see it, there is no other course. If we follow that course, “Do unto others as 

you would have them do unto you” – implement in a practical, scientific way the story of the Good 

Samaritan; if we do that, Mr. Speaker, we will not only be solving problems here, but we will be solving 

social problems elsewhere, and we will eventually bring about that most desirable objective, the 

brotherhood of man under the fatherhood of God. I hope that I may live to see tangible progress made in 

that direction in my day, Mr. Speaker. I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. T. R. MacNutt (Nipawin): – Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate Adjourned) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6 o‟clock p.m. 


