



















































Hansard: March 19, 1954


 1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second SESSION —Twelfth Legislature 

27th Day 
 

Friday, March 19, 1954 

 

The House met at three o’clock p.m. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

IMPROPER QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before the Orders of the Day are called, I wish to make a statement to the members 

that, since yesterday’s sitting, Notices were received of ten questions which, after due consideration by 

myself and the Clerk, were held off the Order Paper until I have had an opportunity of discussing their 

propriety with the members concerned. The questions relate to present or former members of this 

Assembly and are of a nature which must inevitably provoke a whole series of counter questions in 

reprisal. The information sought in several of the questions has been given previously in this Assembly 

and appears in ‘Questions and Answers’ in the Journals of very recent years. In other cases the 

information is readily available in the Public Accounts. In this connection I refer the members to 

Beauchesne’s third edition, citation 294, page 119, the authority on which I am acting. That authority 

reads as follows: 

 

A question, oral or written, must not: (gg) seek information set forth in documents already accessible 

to the questioner, such as statutes, published reports, etc. 

 

I shall be pleased to discuss the propriety of these questions, or the necessity of these questions, with the 

members who have submitted them. 

 

FREIGHT RATE APPEAL DISALLOWED 
 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — Before the Order of the day are called, I wish to make an announcement which 

will, I feel, be of considerable interest to all citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

You will all recall that the railways of Canada made an application to the Board of Transport 

Commissioners for what they term their rate base, or rate of return, of some 6½ per cent of the 

investment in rail which, in granted, would have meant an increase of some $48 million in the Canadian 

freight bill. The Board of Transport Commissioners at that time rejected the application of the railways. 

The Canadian Pacific Railway appealed the ruling to the Supreme Court of Canada, and the appeal was 

heard by the Supreme Court Judges on Friday last, commencing at 10 o’clock in the morning. The 

Supreme Court gave their decision this morning, disallowing the appeal of the Canadian Pacific Railway 

against the decision of the Board of Transport Commission. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity of paying tribute to the Saskatchewan solicitor, Mr. M. A. 

MacPherson, Q. C. and his associates in law 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

 

2 

from the other provinces of Canada, who took such an active part in the rate-base and rate-of-return case, 

making such an excellent job there and again before the Supreme Court last Friday. 

 

So the Supreme Court has disallowed the application of the Canadian Pacific Railway for an appeal 

against the decision of the Board of Transport Commissioners on the question of law. 

 

SECOND READING — M.L.A. SUPERANNUATION 

 

Second Reading of Bill No. 64 — An Act respecting the Superannuation of Persons who have 

served as Members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — I should explain first that, at the time I moved the first 

reading of this Bill, we did not then have the Crown recommendation, so today I would like to inform the 

Assembly that His Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of this 

Bill, recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the Bill respecting the superannuation of persons who have served as members of 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. I desire to move the second reading of this Bill. 

 

This provides for the establishment of a superannuation plan after long service for members of the 

Legislative Assembly. Members will be required to contribute 5 per cent of their allowances, which 

amount will be matched by contributions from the Treasury. In this respect the plan is similar to various 

superannuation plans covering the Public Service, in various Crown Corporations and other government 

agencies. Such a superannuation plan will remove one of the factors which prevent many excellent men 

from entering public service who realize that, without such a plan, it is impossible to provide adequately 

for their later years, as long as they are in public service. In these days we must do everything we can to 

strengthen our parliamentary institutions. This can be done in no better way than by getting the best 

citizens of our province to enter public life and to remain as long as their constituents desire them to do 

so. 

 

We cannot allow our Legislature to be made up of only the wealthy classes or of those who cannot make 

a success of anything else. To insure that every citizen, when called upon by his constituents to represent 

them, is able to do so, we must see that they are paid an adequate indemnity and are provided with some 

measure of security for the day when they are unable to return to their previous work. This is essential if 

we are to get and keep the kind of representatives necessary to maintain and strengthen our democratic 

parliamentary system. 

 

It is not my intention today to outline the details of the Bill; this can best be done in Committee. In fact, it 

has been done quite well for us already by the press. I do want to say, however, that on the basis of past 

experience, the plan is actuarially sound and will not be a charge on the public funds beyond the 

matching of the contributions to be made by the members, or less than $15,000 annually. 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

3 

 

It should be pointed out that this is a co-operative undertaking from which many of the members will 

never benefit; but, at the same time, all will have the satisfaction of knowing that they will have the 

additional security if they are elected by their fellow citizens for a lengthy period of service. Up to the 

last election we have had in Saskatchewan a total of 352 members elected since the province was formed. 

Of these, 178, or over 50 per cent, were elected for only one term, and 85, or 23 per cent, for two terms. 

Thus you see, Mr. Speaker, there is a pretty heavy mortality rate among members of the Legislature 

insofar as selections are concerned. On this basis only 25 per cent of the members elected would ever be 

eligible to receive any allowance. 

 

It might be of interest to point out that of the balance, 60 were elected for three terms, 13 for four terms, 

and only 16 in the last 50 years were elected for five or more terms. 

 

Saskatchewan has pioneered many new ideas. This one, however, I must admit, has been borrowed from 

the Canadian Parliament which has a superannuation plan for its elected members, and from Nova Scotia 

which has a retiring allowance plan for members of the Executive Council, although a Committee has 

now been set up to extend the benefits to include the private members in that province. 

 

I would like to correct a report in the newspaper this morning and last night, that it was the desire of the 

Cabinet Ministers to have superannuation plan for themselves. Such is not the case. On the contrary, the 

members of the Cabinet have, from the beginning, felt that such a plan should include the members of the 

Assembly. It should be pointed out that members of the Legislature cannot neglect their own business, 

trade, or farming operations for a long period of time without a very considerable loss of income and 

future earning power. Farms are neglected because of the service to the public over a long period of 

years. Private members, through neglecting their work, find themselves in the position where their future 

income is greatly reduced. 

 

We have not endeavoured to provide a plan such as those now in existence, but rather a more modest, co-

operative plan that will not be a burden on the public purse. As indicated earlier, it is not my intention 

today to outline the details of the Bill. This can best be done in the Committee of the Whole. I would like 

to point out that the Bill is being presented by the Government for consideration of the members, and I 

am authorized by the Government to state that we are prepared to consider any amendments which may 

be offered when the Bill is in Committee. 

 

I feel confident that this plan will commend itself to all reasonable-minded people, who believe in the 

strengthening of our democratic institution of representative government, and who believe that, when 

men and women have served this province long and capably, they should have some measure of security, 

and not be forced to live their last years in a condition of poverty. And because I feel confident of this, 

Mr. Speaker, I move the second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. G. H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to take up very much time of the 

House with what I have to say. I would, of course, appreciate a little more extensive explanation of the 

principles of the Bill from the hon. Minister who just introduced it. I only want to say that if this Bill had 

come into the House a couple of 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

 

4 

years ago, there is every possibility that I would have supported that Bill. Today, Mr. Speaker, we find 

ourselves with a change of economic condition; an increase of salaries or wages for that matter is bitterly 

resented by the people. We find that we are at a time now when things have started to go the other way, 

and the fellow who has got to pay the shot is not unmindful of that fact. And contact with my people, 

about the beginning of the week (I happened to be absent from this House last Monday), indicates to me 

that the public opinion in my district is absolutely and utterly opposed to this Bill. I am not for anybody 

else. I am speaking only for myself. 

 

I must point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that in Ottawa the Cabinet Minister’s salary is $27,000 a year. He is 

going to get $3,000 pension or superannuation, or whatever you like to call it, when he reaches a certain 

time when he can start to draw this benefit. In Saskatchewan, where the Cabinet Minister’s salary is 

$7,000 a year (except the Premier’s, of course, which is a little more), they are going to draw $3,000 a 

year under the proposal here. I think the discrepancy between these two things is too much. 

 

There is a wide difference between the members in Ottawa and the members in Saskatchewan. We come 

down here for a couple of months in the year and generally in the wintertime. We can go back home and 

attend to our duties. I have been here for 21 years, and when I came into this House we cut the salary for 

the members to $1800, and that’s all we had for a number of years. It wasn’t enough, Mr. Speaker, but 

we were getting just as much as the taxpayers who paid us that money, and more I submit to you that as 

conditions are, I am going to vote against this Bill on principle. It is not the time, and I don’t think it is 

necessary in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to prolong the debate on this point. Of course, I respect 

the views expressed by the member for Arm River. I think, however, that the members would want the 

people of this province to keep in mind that we are already doing this very thing for all the civil servants 

in the province, and for all the employees of Crown Corporations. We are matching their contributions to 

enable them to provide for some superannuation when they reach a certain age. 

 

Mention has been made of the members of Parliament at Ottawa. Members of Parliament at Ottawa will 

draw a pension of $3,000 a year after they have served 16 years (4 sessions) in Parliament, irrespective of 

their age. Under our proposal, of course, a man would not be eligible for a pension even though he had 

served a long period in the Legislature until he was 55; but at Ottawa if a man was elected, as one 

member who is there now was elected when he was 24 years of age, he could at 40 years of age draw a 

pension for the rest of hi life. We are not proposing anything as ambitious as that. This pension will be a 

pension which the member himself will build up by virtue of his contributions. After 10-year’s service, if 

a private member were to retire at 55 years of age, his pension would only be $720 a year. If he had 

served 20 years, he could get up to a maximum of $1440. 

 

I notice the member for Arm River made a statement which I have also seen in the press, and that is the 

only reason why I rise to deal with it. The statement has been made repeatedly that there is some 

justification 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

5 

 

for the Ministers of the Crown having a superannuation plan, because after all, Cabinet Ministers have to 

discontinue whatever their mode of livelihood is and devote their full time to portfolios for a number of 

years; and if they try to go back into business, or back into farming, or back into their particular 

profession or trade, they have lost all their continuity, and lost whatever superannuation they might have 

had in their employment, and therefore, they need some superannuation. 

 

But, it is argued, that is not true of a private member. It is argued, just as the member for Arm River has, 

that a member only comes here for 2 or 2½ months of the year and consequently his avocation is not 

interfered with. That is not quite correct, Mr. Speaker. The fact is that members of the Legislature are 

here, it is true, for 8 or 10 weeks, but all the rest of the year they are at the beck and call of their 

constituencies. Every municipal council, every school board, every drainage district, every group of 

farmers who want to have a power plan put in for their area, come to see the member. 

 

I am not deprecating the work done by the Federal members for one moment, but I was a Federal 

member for 9 years and I have been a member of this Legislature for 10 years, and I want to say that, in 

terms of the constant pressure, in the terms of meeting the people of your constituency from day to day 

and serving them from week to week, it is a much more onerous task in many ways to be a provincial 

member than to be a federal member who is in Ottawa a large part of the year and, therefore, deals with 

his constituents by correspondence. I cannot agree that the private members of the Legislature work here 

for only two months of the year and the rest of the year are back at their homes earning a living. I know 

members of the Legislature who, almost every week, have to leave their business or their farm to go and 

sit in with municipal councils, to come in here to Regina with delegations, to attend innumerable 

openings of different sorts, to sit in with hospital boards and so on. That means being absent from their 

business. 

 

A railroad man was a member of this Legislature some years ago. He was defeated in a subsequent 

election; but when he left this Legislature he pointed out to me that every day he was in attendance here, 

every day that he had to leave his train to go with a delegation or to sit in with a municipal council, he 

lost $21 a day. Well, that was fine because that $21 a day that he lost was made up by the fact that the 

people of Saskatchewan gave him an indemnity. But what was not made up was that his pension as a 

railroad man will be computed by the salary paid him by the railroad, and that salary was reduced by $21 

a day for every day he was absent. Consequently, his superannuation, when he reaches superannuation 

age, will be reduced accordingly. He estimated that is he had stayed in this House for another term (he 

was only here one term) that he would be getting about 20 per cent less pension at retirement age than 

another railroad man who had not had to absent himself from his job to attend to public business. Private 

members are affected! 

 

Then take the case of many farm members who, by virtue of the fact that they have to attend to the affairs 

of their constituency, must have a hired man. They often are called away from their farm just at the busy 

season when the crop is being put in, or the crop is being taken off. It is possible for them to lose very 

considerable sums of money which restricts their ability to make provision for their families. 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

 

6 

I don’t want to be too maudlin about this, or suggest to the people of the province that we think members 

of the Legislature should have special consideration. But in the past few years I have gone to the hospital 

to visit three former members of this Legislature who did not sit in the Legislature while I was here. I 

know that all three of them were in very straitened financial circumstances. They were men who had 

served many, many years. They did not belong to the political party which I support, but for many years 

had served this province and served their constituencies. I don't think it is proper to ask men who have 

served their day and generation faithfully to come to the end of their days and hardly have enough to 

keep body and soul together. I don’t think it reflects too well on our sense of responsibility as citizens, 

and I don’t think, frankly, that the people of this province want that sort of condition to continue. 

 

This is not any munificent sum. This will mean that a member may retire after 10 years with $720 a year, 

or a maximum of $1440 after 20 years. The Minister who has paid in throughout the entire period, could 

have a maximum of $3,000 pension. Pensions of that kind are available to civil servants who, in many 

cases, have had higher salaries and have had less onerous responsibilities than are carried by members of 

the Executive Council and members of the Legislature. I therefore feel that this is a proper step, and I 

think it will do much to encourage those who, because of the financial vagaries of public life, might stay 

out of public life, to take a stand for election to the Legislature when they are asked to do so by their 

constituents. 

 

The question being put it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

SECOND READING — INDEMNITY BILL 

 

Second Reading of Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly Act 

 

Premier Douglas: — This looks like ‘Be Kind to Politicians Day’. This is an amendment to The 

Legislative Assembly Act to increase the sessional indemnity of the members by $400 and the expense 

allowance by $200. 

 

As most people know, the members of the Legislature now receive an indemnity of $2,000 a year plus an 

expense allowance of $1,000 a year, making a total of $3,000 a year. This amendment proposes to 

increase the total by $600. 

 

There may be, and there have been in some quarters, some criticism that such an increase is not 

justifiable. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is always a ticklish question for members of the 

Legislature to deal with. Other people can negotiate about their wages with their employer and try to 

convince their employer that they are worth more. Their employer will try to convince them that they are 

not worth what they are getting now. But members of the Legislature are in the very awkward position 

that they have to decide themselves what they think they should be paid. That always 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

7 

 

leads to a good deal of embarrassment. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I am not at all embarrassed in rising to suggest, on behalf of the 

Government, that the indemnity for the members should be raised. To those who are critical I would 

suggest, first of all, that they recollect that 14 or 15 years ago the indemnity for members was $2,000. 

Most people recognize that the purchasing power of money is about half, or less than, what it was 15 

years ago. If we look, for instance, at what was paid to the federal members at the same time that the 

provincial members were receiving an indemnity of $2,000 we find that those of us who were federal 

members (as I was in 1940) were getting $4,000. Apparently, it was considered, in view of the larger 

responsibility of federal members, the longer time in session, the larger area to cover, that the indemnity 

should be exactly double that of the provincial member. 

 

What has happened in the interim? In the interim, the provincial member’s indemnity has gone up by 50 

per cent. It has gone up from $2,000 to $3,000. But a federal member’s indemnity has gone up from 

$4,000 to $10,000, or an increase of 150 per cent. If we were suggesting an increase for the provincial 

members on the same basis as the federal members, we would be suggesting an indemnity of $5,000. We 

are not suggesting anything of that sort. I have had it suggested to me by people outside of the 

Government that the members’ indemnity ought to be at least $4,000, or exactly double what it was 15 

years ago, because roughly salaries in many categories, particularly in executive positions, are about 

double what they were 15 years ago. Yes, secretaries and stenographers and deputy ministers are just 

about double what they were 15 years ago. Yes, secretaries and stenographers and deputy ministers are 

just about double what they were 15 years ago. But we are not suggesting that the indemnity of members 

should be doubled over what they were 15 years ago. We are suggesting an increase of only $600 to 

bring them up to $3600. Considering the purchasing power of money, that represents, really, $1800 as 

compared to what it was in 1940. 

 

Lest people get the impression that public men in this province are overpaid, it is rather interesting to 

look at what is being paid in other parts of Canada. For instance, Quebec pays an indemnity to its private 

members of $6,000 a year; Ontario pays an indemnity of $3,900; Manitoba pays $3,000; Alberta pays 

$3,600; British Columbia pays $3,000 — but they have an amendment in their constitutional act by 

which they don’t pay any income tax on their indemnity, or any part of it; consequently, that $3,000 is 

income tax free. It will be seen that the amount we are suggesting, $3600, will bring us into line with 

Alberta; will put us ahead of Manitoba; will put us less than Ontario and less than the province of 

Quebec. 

 

Just so that we have some idea of the comparison for other positions, it is worth noting that the cabinet 

ministers in this province are paid less than those of any of the provinces west of the Maritimes. The only 

ministers who get less than the Cabinet Ministers in this province are in provinces where they are only 

part-time positions, such as New Brunswick and Prince Edward Island. Nova Scotia pays its cabinet 

ministers $8,000 a year and that is being raised to $10,000; Quebec pays its cabinet ministers $11,000 a 

year; Ontario, $10,000 a year; Manitoba, $8,000 a year; Alberta, $8,500 and British Columbia, $7,500 

(again of course, with the income-tax-free clause) Saskatchewan pays only $7,000 per year. 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

 

8 

I have the dubious distinction, Mr. Speaker, of being the lowest-paid Premier of any province in Canada 

outside of the Maritimes. Even in Nova Scotia they pay the Premier more than they pay me and, of 

course, there is probably a very obvious reason for that. He is probably worth more. I thought I would 

say that before the Leader of the Opposition said it for me. I do want to point out, however, that, insofar 

as Cabinet Ministers are concerned those in Saskatchewan are getting less in salaries than Cabinet 

Ministers in any other provinces except those two provinces I mentioned where a Cabinet Minister is on 

a part-time basis. Where portfolios are a full-time job, we have the lowest salaries both for the Cabinet 

Ministers and the Premier, and in terms of the members of the Legislative Assembly we are not out of 

line. 

 

Compare the amount paid to the members in Ottawa. The private members receive $10,000 a year. The 

Cabinet Ministers are paid a total of $27,000; the Leader of the Opposition $27,000, and the Prime 

Minister $37,000. Even the Senators are paid $10,000 a year! I think that, in suggesting an indemnity of 

$3600 a year (that is, indemnity and expenses combined) we will not be getting out of line at all. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, it is always a delicate and somewhat embarrassing subject to deal with, because I 

know perfectly well that there are members who would very gladly serve their constituents and serve the 

people of this province without any indemnity at all. There are many men who have a devotion to public 

duty who, if there was no indemnity, or if the indemnity was only some nominal amount, would still feel 

the urge of public duty, and would come here and serve their day and generation to the best of their 

ability. But the interesting thing is that the battle over the years to have an indemnity came from poorer 

members. In the history of Great Britain it was the Liberal Party first of all, and later the Labour Party, 

which fought very hard to get indemnities. There was a time in Great Britain when a member of 

Parliament was not paid anything. Later on, he was only paid some nominal fee of a few guineas, 

because it was an honorary position. It was the landed gentry, the squires of the community, the lord or 

some important person in the community, who got elected. The House of Commons was a rich man’s 

club at one time. 

 

There was a growing body of public opinion in Great Britain and in the Mother of Parliaments that 

people should pay their members so that any John Doe, whether he was digging coal, or whether he was 

growing crops, or whether he worked on the docks, or whether he was a school teacher, or whatever he 

might be, could become a member of parliament. The people felt that anyone who had a contribution to 

make to the public life of the community, should be in a financial position to enter Parliament and to 

speak for the people he represented. 

 

While I say it is true that there may be members here (and there are members in other places) to whom an 

indemnity is not important, I think we must never allow public life in this or any other province to get to 

the place where it becomes the sole prerogative of the comfortably well off to represent the people in the 

Legislatures. I think the people of the province, if they want public life to stay on a high level, if they 

want to keep public life open to every class of citizen, must be prepared to pay an indemnity to make it 

possible for every citizen whom his neighbours want to send to the Legislature to come here without 

putting himself in a financial position that 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

9 

 

will make it impossible for him to continue as a representative of his constituency. 

 

While I know the members, who being politicians, and very modest and shy creatures, may feel a bit 

embarrassed about this, I have no embarrassment at all on behalf of the Government in bringing this 

legislation before the House and recommending to the members that their indemnity be increased by 

$600 in keeping with the increased costs that have come as a result of the increased cost of living and the 

very heavy commitments which they have in their constituencies. I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to say that these two Bills, one in 

regard to the pension or superannuation of members and the other regarding the increase of the indemnity 

are naturally the responsibility of the Government, and I think they have to assume that responsibility. 

My opinion is somewhat the same as my seat-mate’s here, the member for Arm River, and I think 

probably our position may be similar to that of some members on the other side of this House. The 

increase in indemnity and the superannuation do not mean much to us. We are fortunate that we have 

been able to save enough out of our hard work through life that we can get along even if we do not make 

anything on our indemnity. But I do remember the time when I had to lose an election deliberately 

because I could not afford to get elected, and I think possibly that some of the young men who are sitting 

in this House may find themselves in a similar position. For that reason I would feel rather reluctant, just 

simply because it doesn’t mean much to me, to stand in the way of those who may be in a similar 

position as I was, some years ago. 

 

I don’t think that any member serves for his indemnity. I don’t think that any ordinary member in this 

Legislature can say that he is making money on what he gets in the way of indemnity; that is, if he is 

getting around his constituency and serving the people as he should be serving them. I just wanted to say 

those few words in order that you may know my stand. It is not that I want it, but I don’t want to stand in 

the way of those who are much younger than I am, knowing what they may be going through and what I 

have gone through in previous years. For that reason I am not going to oppose this Bill. 
 
Mr. Robert Kohaly (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, it may be very presumptuous of me to say 

anything either one way or the other in connection with either of the two bills that have been read, and 

especially the one presently being considered. 

 

I do know, and Mr. Speaker is well aware, that as one of the younger ones in years and experience in the 

Legislature, other young ones would like to get into the Legislature. It is a great honour and distinction 

and a privilege to be able to serve any group of people in the province, and especially such a good group 

of people in the province, and especially such a good group of people as we have in our individual 

constituencies. However, it is almost impossible to even contemplate attending a nominating convention 

if you are a man of about 25 or 30 or so. You have a family; you have obligations. You are probably 

starting in a business; somehow or other trying to get started, and you, of course, need all the years which 

are necessary when you are young, when you have a little energy. 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

 

10 

This Bill, I believe, and again speaking for myself alone, is a good one, and it tends to make it a little 

easier for us, as young people, to go into public service. How long we will stay here, after the Provincial 

Treasurer reading the casualty list, I don’t know just how long we are going to last. Maybe as a young 

person, I could have saved myself some worries by staying out of it altogether; but the fact is that there 

are many young people who are interested in doing just this work, and I believe that it is a good step. 

 

The Government should be commended for having the courage to bring it in the face of some of the 

opposition that there has been recently when other governments have done just this. Whether it is a good 

thing or not, as far as my personal career is concerned, I want to certainly say that I am definitely in 

favour of this step being taken, and I look at it from the point of view of the young person — not only 

myself, but many other young people who must come behind and attempt to run, attempt to get elected, 

attempt to serve in this Legislature, attempt to do all they can for the benefit of their constituents not only 

during the period of time which we sit here in Regina, but during the course of the entire year, the 12 

months, when you are called upon to attend and to do the many things which the Premier so ably set 

forth. I think that this figure is not an undue figure. It is one which we can accept to help to defray the 

cost and to encourage other younger men to come on afterwards and to continue to build this province 

the way it has been in the years gone by. I certainly intend to support this Bill. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

SECOND READING — SCHOOL UNITS BILL 

 

Second Reading of Bill No. 70 — An Act to Amend the Larger School Units Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, this is the Bill to provide amendments to 

The Larger School Units Act. There are a number of provisions in it which are provisions of detail and 

which, I think, can be most adequately discussed in Committee. 

 

The main change in the Bill is the change which proposes to alter the basis upon which equalization 

grants are paid to Larger School Units. I did have the opportunity to speak generally in this regard during 

the budget debate, but maybe at this time I can provide some additional information as to the effect of 

these changes and as to the situation with regard to financing education in this particular part of our 

school administrations. 

 

I would like to begin by referring briefly to some of the statements made by Dr. Lazerte in speaking to 

the School Trustees’ Association convention yesterday. Dr. Lazerte, as some hon. members will know, 

was for a number of years Dean of the College of Education at the University of Alberta. Since his 

retirement he has continued his research work, and one of his research projects has been undertaken at 

the request, and under the 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

11 

 

guidance, of the Canadian School Trustees’ Association. It is a project in which he is studying the 

financial support of education right across Canada. 

 

I think that Dr. Lazerte’s summary of his study going up to about the end of 1952 (I think the figures do), 

would be of interest to the members of the Legislature. He is reported in this morning’s paper as having 

said that Saskatchewan is relatively fortunate in its equalization grants for schools. He bases this on his 

information gathered in an 18-month study. 

 

He goes on to say that when the Saskatchewan equalization grants are plotted on a graph, the scheme 

presents a symmetrical curve less erratic than that of the other four western provinces. This he takes to 

indicate that the grants taper off according to the decreasing needs in a uniform pattern. And that is, of 

course, the aim of the equalization grants. 

 

He comments that Saskatchewan has the second highest ratio of provincial grants to operating costs, 

being led only by British Columbia. He comments also that the actual expenditure on an operating basis 

on a classroom was the highest in Alberta, and was actually the least of the four in the province of 

Saskatchewan. When he referred to the percentage of the operational budget spent on teachers’ salaries 

… 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I don’t think that my hon. friend is sticking to the 

subject of the Bill. He is making a political speech and not explaining the Bill. I think your remarks are 

entirely out of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, if I may speak to the point of order. I am about to discuss the effect of 

equalization grant changes insofar as they affect our Saskatchewan schools and I am now reading the 

point of view of a very well-known research person in Canada with regard to the position of our present 

grants, and I would submit to your Honour that that is quite in order. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — No, that’s not in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the hon. Minister of Education is quite in order in simply reading and quoting 

authorities on what he is proposing in the Bill. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — It is very unusual, Mr. Speaker, for a Minister, when he is explaining clauses in a Bill, 

to recite opinions of various men all over the world. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, it seems to me only obvious that if a person is going to jump he has 

got to have something to jump from. Maybe the Leader of the Opposition does not believe that one 

should know where you are going from and where you are going to, but I happen to believe that. The 

information which I am giving might be of some use to him in assessing the effectiveness or otherwise of 

our grant structure. That’s why I am reading it. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — We know it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — He pointed out, Mr. Speaker, continuing, that the percentage 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

 

12 

of the operating budget spent on teachers’ salaries in Saskatchewan represented 56 per cent of the 

expenditures for operational purposes and that he found to be the second lowest percentage of the total 

budget in Canada. The highest was in Newfoundland with 85 per cent; that is, 85 per cent of their total 

expenditures went to teachers. The lowest was in the province of Manitoba where 53 per cent went to the 

teachers. That should give us some guidance as to just how fair or otherwise, both when looked at with 

regard to the situation internally and when looked at with regard to comparisons with some other 

provinces. 

 

The provisions of the Bill which affect the equalization grant structure, I have referred to previously. 

They are, as I pointed out before, somewhat complicated, and I would just like to refresh the memory of 

the House in that regard. The equalization grant in school units in the year 1953 was simply determined 

by finding the amount of money which, when added to the basic per diem grants and to the income from 

taxation at the rate of 12 mills on rural assessment and 16 on urban assessment, would provide an income 

for that unit of $2450 for each elementary classroom, $2500 for each high school classroom. The change 

which we are proposing is that our grants will be such, considering again the income from per diem 

grants and considering the income from taxation at a rate of 14 mills on rural property and 18 mills on 

urban property, as to provide an operating programme at the rate of $2750 for an elementary classroom 

and $2950 for a high school classroom. 

 

I should like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the reason for changing the mill-rate figure used for 

calculating the equalization grant purposes is to give a better distribution of the increased grants when 

you consider the needs of the districts. Let me put it this way. If we had kept the same mill-rate figures in 

the new formula as in the old, but changed only the programme costs which we wanted to provide, then 

the effect would have been to distribute the grants on an equal basis. That is, if one unit got $250 more, 

the other unit would also have got $250 more, regardless of the ability of that unit to finance. By 

increasing the mill-rate figures used, we do tend, as we have in the previous changes, to put additional 

amounts of money into those areas least able to carry the load for themselves. 

 

There are two other provisions which might be mentioned. One again has to do with those units, or will 

have an effect upon those units, who have been arranging for numbers of their students to receive 

education in schools outside of the unit organization. This applies particularly to those units which have 

in their centre a city, or which have in their centre a large town. The practice is (and, of course, it is a 

desirable practice) that for many students arrangements have been made to get their education in these 

cities or in these towns. That is particularly desirable of course in those areas where the city or the town 

can offer composite high school facilities which could not be offered in the smaller centres in the unit. 

 

As a result, some of the units have been paying fees, and paying fees in addition to the maximum amount 

in the Act, by negotiation, at a rate considerably above that maximum. The maximum was previously, 

you will recall, $50 per student; we have just within the last week or so passed legislation increasing it to 

$70. But many of the units have been paying an amount in excess of that. Some of them have been 

paying $100 for each student; some of them have been paying more than that. They have not, up to the 

present, received any grant credit for that kind of an operation. 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

13 

 

The hon. members will understand that if, instead of having those students educated in the city of 

Yorkton, or the city of Weyburn, or the town of Melfort or the town of Melville or some other town or 

city, the unit had been operating classrooms to provide this education, then for those classrooms the unit 

would have been receiving a grant. The situation could have been that, if they were paying a fee 

sufficiently high, particularly if the unit was one receiving an equalization grant, they might have been 

money ahead to have operated a small school of their own and receive the grant, not have had to pay the 

fee, and, of course, would have had less favourable educational facilities. So, we have felt it well to 

recognize that kind of a situation in our grant structure. For purposes then of calculating the equalization 

grant, we will include a figure of $25 per year for each of the students so taken care of and being 

provided with assistance — that is, with fees and so on being paid for by the unit. That applies to the 

calculation of the equalization grant. 

 

Another change which we propose is to increase the rate at which we recognize the cost of a conveying 

classroom. By conveying classroom I simply mean a classroom or a district from which the students are 

being conveyed to some neighbouring district for purposes of education. It is most difficult, as I 

mentioned before, to know what is a fair and equitable fee. It depends so much upon the conditions 

which govern the conveyance. If the youngsters are spread all over a group of districts, the cost is one 

thing. If they happen to be neatly clustered along a road as is true in some cases, the cost is quite 

different. If one bus can accommodate three rural school districts previously operating classrooms and 

take them into another centre without opening up any classrooms in that centre, that’s one situation. If it 

can only accommodate two, and perhaps you have to open another classroom when you get them into the 

urban centre, that is still another. 

 

We have not what you would call a complete set of statistics on these costs, Mr. Speaker, but it does 

seem to us that the average cost of conveying is probably something in excess of one-half the cost of 

operating the classroom; that is, when you consider that frequently the unit saves the cost of operating an 

actual classroom. It may be able to accommodate those youngsters in one classroom, one extra classroom 

instead of three, or two instead of three, as the case may be. So we have proposed to increase the rate 

given to that type of arrangement. 

 

I should like to take just a moment to emphasize the importance of that kind of an arrangement in the 

province of Saskatchewan if we are going to adequately service our school population. I mention that 

now, and in case the Leader of the Opposition thinks I am again out of order, to illustrate why we 

propose this particular type of change. The hon. members will all know the problems of providing 

services in a province of Saskatchewan in which the population is distributed over such a large area. It is 

a problem which affects the building of roads, the extension of power, the provision of health services, 

the provision of educational services and half a dozen other services at least. 

 

May I illustrate our relative position again by reference to these statistics. At the most recent year for 

which I have comparative statistics, Saskatchewan had 167,000 students being serviced by 7,300 

teachers. Alberta at that time had 174,000 students and employed 6,800 teachers. British Columbia had 

173,000 students and employed only 6,300 teachers. In other 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

 

14 

words, when Saskatchewan had some 7,000 fewer students than Alberta, we had 500 more teachers 

required to staff the schools for those students. At the same time we had a total population 100,000 less 

than Alberta which had to provide those extra teachers. 

 

The comparison is still more far-reaching when you look at British Columbia, because we had 6,000 

fewer students than British Columbia, but we needed 1,000 more teachers, and British Columbia had 

200,000 more total people to provide that teaching staff. I think we must not forget in this province that 

we have a situation there, due to our geography and the type of our economic difficulty, which must be 

recognized and which has very far-reaching effects insofar as our school population is concerned. 

 

For example, in the year 1952, we had 77 schools in the province with an enrolment of less than 6 pupils. 

We had 554 with an enrolment of from 6 to 9 pupils. We had 934 schools with an enrolment of from 10 

to 14 pupils. In that whole group, if you add those up, there are over 1500 classrooms. Now then, if those 

students — and I realize, Mr. Speaker, the bigness of that ‘if’ in many cases; but if those students could 

have been taught in groups of 20 instead of groups of 6 or 9 or 14, we would have required 700 fewer 

teachers. If they could have been taught in groups of 25, we would have required 900 fewer teachers to 

adequately serve our school population. Those figures, I think, should indicate to anybody the importance 

of a planned and intelligent type of centralization of school population. 

 

Some question is raised from time to time with regard to grants and mill rates in larger school units as to 

the relationship between the mill rate in the urban areas of the district and the mill rate in the rural areas, 

or on the rural assessment of the district. The units Act, as hon. members who are familiar with it will 

know, leaves the differential to the discretion of the Unit Board. It does make further provision that there 

may be an appeal against that differential. The point I want to stress is that while in the calculation of our 

grants, we have used a mill rate of 12 on rural and 16 on urban (now use 14 on rural and 18 on urban), 

that does not mean that the Unit Boards have to use that same differential when they are deciding their 

own mill rate. In 1953 I find that some 23 of the Units had a spread of more than 4 mills, as between the 

rate of taxation on rural and urban assessment. Some of them went up as high as 8 or 9. In some cases 

where towns have come in as a result of a special agreement, the difference between the rural and urban 

rate is even more than that. There were 30 of the units in which the differential was 4 mills or less. The 

point I want to emphasize is that that differential is in the hands of the Unit Boards, but is subject to 

appeal if any particular town and district feels aggrieved. 

 

May I have reference again, Mr. Speaker, to some of the effects which this change and other changes 

made in previous years have had on school finance. When speaking in the budget debate, I did indicate, I 

think, that this change, this year, would provide for some units an additional 3/10ths of a mill, that it 

would provide for some other units an amount of money equal to an additional 5 mills of taxation. 

Somebody suggested that I was not being honest because I gave only what it would do to the high 

assessed and only what it would do to the low assessed and that there was something ‘fishy’ about the 

middle. Well, perhaps I can at this time give some bit of additional information with regard to the effect 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

15 

 

on some units which have a more or less medium — not less than average, but medium — assessment. I 

may be pardoned, Mr. Speaker, for example if I should refer to the school unit of Biggar. In 1944, going 

back 10 years, if that unit had been operating the number of classrooms which it now operates, the grants 

would have been in the neighbourhood of $44,000; but in 1954, the grants will be in the neighbourhood 

of $132,000, or roughly $3 for $1 — that is, their rate will be roughly three times the rate of 1944. 

 

It is rather interesting to note that the increase in those 10 years has been about twice the total amount 

which would have been received in 1944. The increase this year to a unit with that kind of condition will 

be worth approximately 1½ mills of taxation. I should have mentioned that the assessment per classroom, 

counting each conveying classroom as one-half a classroom, is in the neighbourhood of $100,000, 

slightly over $100,000, and the effect on other units of that type is similar. The Saskatoon West unit, 

which happens to be a neighbouring unit, has an assessment per classroom, again counting the conveying 

classroom as one-half an operating classroom, of $110,000. Had they operated in 1944 the same number 

of school districts that they operate in 1953, they would have collected in total grants some $45,000. In 

1954 they will collect in the neighbourhood of $130,000, or again approximately that relationship of $3 

for $1; the rate is three times as much. The increase to them is worth about 1¼ mills. 

 

I would like to mention again the problem of equalization grants which is raised by virtue of the fact that 

we use the assessment per classroom as a basis. I am not in any position to quarrel with the validity of 

that assessment, Mr. Speaker, but I do wonder whether or not it does give an entirely adequate and vital 

picture of the relative ability to finance school purposes. I know, for example, that if you examine the 

relationship between the actual assessment of farm property and the estimated sale value of that farm 

property in the south-western part of the province, you get a different relationship than if you take the 

relationship between the present assessment and the supposed market value of property in the north-

eastern part of the province. Those are problems which are under study. The method of using, however, 

the assessment per classroom is one which is commonly accepted in educational financial circles 

throughout western Canada at least, and, as I said before, until we find something better, then we will 

have to continue, I think, to lean heavily on that as a means of measuring our equalization grant support. 

 

I would like to point out one or two other items, Mr. Speaker. All of us are aware of the fact that in some 

of our units, the tax rate is getting high, and that is a point of concern to those people and to us also. But 

again I should like to point out that, if it is high, we are certainly not alone in that kind of company, 

because one finds the same things in neighbouring provinces. For example, in 1953, the maximum rural 

mill rate imposed by any unit in the province of Saskatchewan was 35, which was in the Meadow Lake 

Larger Unit. And all of us would agree that that is a high mill rate for school purposes. I may add that 

was the only unit 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

 

16 

with a mill rate of over 30 on rural land. But when I look at the neighbouring province of Alberta, which 

sometimes the members of the Opposition talk about as being quite a place to go and to live in, I find that 

the rate of taxation for school purposes on rural property there is up to as high as 50 mills. And I have in 

mind the figures quoted by the Minister of Municipal Affairs recently, in which he said that taking the 

school taxation and the municipal taxation, the average school plus municipal taxation on a quarter-

section of land in Alberta, it turned out to be more than $90; in Manitoba it turned out to be more than 

$100; and in that same year in Saskatchewan it was not quite $60. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the second time in just two years that I have had the privilege of announcing an 

increase in school grants to the Legislature and to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. In 1952, 

the hon. members will remember that provision was introduced which increased school grants by the 

extent of $1,600,000. They will also remember that, in that particular year, the proceeds of the Public 

Revenue Tax were directed to the educational fund for that one particular year. When, however, 1953 

rolled around, the Public Revenue Tax was, of course, removed, thereby making available to the 

municipalities a taxation field worth $1,800,000 which prior to that time, for a quarter of a century, had 

been the field of the provincial government to tax and to spend as the provincial government saw fit. In 

1953, our grants increased by $300,000. This year, in 1954, the estimates indicate that we will be 

providing an additional one million dollars for school grant purposes. 

 

If you add the increases of 1952, 1953 and 1954 together, Mr. Speaker, they add up to $2,900,000. When 

you consider — and I suggest it is fair to consider — the effect of the removal of the Public Revenue Tax 

along with that, you get a total of $4,700,000. In other words, as a result of increases in school grants 

beginning in 1952 and the removal of the Public Revenue Tax in 1953, the addition of school grants this 

year, the people of the province have improved ability to carry educational and other municipal costs, as 

a result of those two actions, to the extent of $4,700,000. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — On a point of privilege. I want to say to you that I never listened to such a gross 

violation of the rules of this House as I have, this afternoon. There has been one of his political speeches 

delivered, and there is reference to 13 or 14 sections of this Act, and I never heard one word of where 

they are or what they amounted to. Purely a political speech. 

 

Premier Douglas: — This is a Bill to amend The Larger School Units Act. This is to provide the basis 

upon which increased grants will be paid. The Minister has explained, first of all, what the present 

situation is, what the situation will be after the new grants are put into effect, and the basis upon which 

the increase will be paid out throughout the larger school units. Mr. Speaker, he is not supposed to 

discuss the sections on second reading. He is supposed to discuss the principle of the Bill. He has 

discussed the principle of the Bill. He has discussed the principle of the Bill as it stands and how the 

principle will be affected by these amendments which the House is being asked to approve. The fact is, 

of course, that the Opposition have so long tried to tell people that these improved grants have not helped 

education, that now they are faced with the actual grants themselves and the legislation, they don’t like 

it—and I don’t blame them. 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

17 

 

Mr. Danielson: — On a point of order. It is a violation of the rules of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It is a gross violation of the rules of this House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, oh — are you … 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Wait a minute. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — I just want to speak on a point of order before you give your ruling. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Are you rising to a point of order? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I certainly did! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order I would say that the hon. member for Arm River is 

not in a very good position to judge what is a point of order in this House. Earlier this afternoon, I spoke 

on the principle of a bill for the superannuation of members. The hon. gentleman got up and complained 

that I hadn’t gone over it and given the details of the different sections of the Bill. In other words, he 

doesn’t know the difference in what is supposed to be discussed on second reading and what is supposed 

to be considered in Committee of the Whole. The hon. gentleman has sat in this House, on his own 

admission this afternoon, for 21 years. You wouldn’t think he had been in here for 21 minutes, the way 

he acts. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Another violation of the rules. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Will the hon. member sit down? I have recognized the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, further on the point of order. The suggestion is that I have not 

discussed the proposals of the Bill. I stated when I began, and I think stated fairly clearly, that the 

majority of the space occupied by the printing on the Bill had reference to relatively minor amendments 

which could best be discussed in Committee, but that the Bill also did provide — and I did not mention 

the section because then I would have been out of order, I think — did provide for a change in the basis 

of paying equalization grants for schools, and I felt the House might appreciate (though the member 

doesn’t) — some additional explanation of the relative position of our present equalization grants and the 

effect of the changes. That, I submit, was entirely in order. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Just another budget speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — My ruling is that the hon. Minister was entirely in order because he was … 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I absolutely disagree with you. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — All right, if you want to challenge my ruling, you know how to do it. Do you wish to 

appeal from the ruling of the Chair? 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

 

18 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, there is no point in challenging the ruling. It is all over now. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, but you won’t accept my ruling. My ruling was that the Minister was completely in 

order in explaining the principles of the Bill. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

SECOND READING — SCHOOL GRANTS 

 

Bill No. 70 — An Act to amend The School Grants Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill which will complete the picture with regard to changes in 

school grants proposed at this session. 

 

The other Bill to which I had reference affected the equalization grants in Larger School Units; this Bill 

affects the grants as paid to districts which are not in larger school units. 

 

The way in which this change is brought about is, first of all, by providing for all elementary schools an 

increase at the rate of 50 cents a day or $100 a year. That is, it will bring the basic, operational, per diem 

— or whatever you want to call it — in some places in the province as low as 90 cents a day, or $180 a 

year. It is now $500 a year — the minimum grant which we pay for an elementary school classroom. 

 

It provides also for the change in equalization grants for these particular districts; and for this discussion I 

want, again, to break the schools down into two or three groups. I want to have reference, first of all (the 

member for Arm River might find out something about the principle of the Bill, if he wanted to listen) to 

the rural and village schools which are not included in larger school units. In 1953, in determining 

equalization grants you took the difference in the assessment per classroom and $125,000 and multiplied 

that by 12 mills. The amendment changes that basis in this way: we will take the difference between the 

assessment per classroom and $130,000 and multiply that difference by 13 mills. 

 

There is one other change with regard to this type of schools. Previously we included all school districts 

down to a floor of $25,000. If there were districts with less than an assessment of $25,000 up to $60,000, 

so that any district then, with an assessment of less than $60,000, would be calculated as if its assessment 

were $60,000. 

 

In so doing that, I want to state that we realize there are possibly 30 districts (or something like that 

number) with an assessment of less than $50,000. We realize that these districts would have gained 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

19 

 

more under the equalization grant had we left the floor at $25,000, and we realize that they may need 

some special assistance over and above what is provided by the formula. We do have the authority, under 

Section 5 of The School Grants Act, an authority which has been used for many years in giving help to 

those districts which you can hardly build a formula to adequately care for. If you do try to build a 

formula to take care of those extremes, there is a danger of distorting the formula so that it doesn’t do the 

job for the rest of the districts. So, it has been recommended to move the floor up to $60,000 and those 

other districts will have to be considered as special cases. 

 

The second group of schools I refer to is the group of town and city schools operated in municipalities in 

which there are less than 50 operating classrooms. Previously this group received an equalization grant 

on the basis of 12 mills-times the difference between the average assessment per classroom and 

$120,000. The proposal is to change that basis to 13 mills-times the difference between the average 

assessment per classroom and $125,000. 

 

May I refer again to the fact that there is a difference in the ceiling which we recognize as between rural 

and village schools and town and city schools. In effect it means that we will pay, under the new formula, 

on $5,000, of assessment more in rurals and villages than in towns and cities. In other words, the rural 

district will get the advantage of 13 mills time $5,000, or $65 a year which the town or city doesn’t get. 

And the reason for that, as I mentioned before, is that in the rural areas and village areas they have the 

cost of bringing the students together in a group, and so we feel that some differential is warranted. 

 

The third group of schools to which I have reference is that group of schools located in city 

municipalities (they could be in towns but it applies only to cities) which operate more than 50 

classrooms. This includes all of the cities, it so happens, except the city of Weyburn. This group of 

schools will have their equalization grants calculated on the same basis as if they were larger school 

units. 

 

Just one or two examples as to what this change does mean, again. For a rural elementary room with an 

assessment of $60,000, this change is worth $230 or an amount just less than that produced by 4 mills of 

taxation. If one wants to go back to ten years ago, with regard to that particular school we find that, in 

that year, they would have received in grants $460, or an amount of money equal to something less than 

8 mills of taxation. The amount that they will receive, this year, will be wroth something more than 23 

mills of taxation, and the increases in grants over that period have been worth, to that district, something 

more than 15 mills of taxation. If you look at an example like this — I have just taken, for example, a 

town which happens to have seven elementary classrooms and three high school classrooms, which has a 

total assessment of $740,000 — we find that the situation as compared to the situation ten years ago is 

worth something like 10 mills to them. The improvement over that period had been worth approximately 

10 mills. 

 

I want to say just a word with regard again to our position relative to that of some other provinces in 

connection with our larger urban centres, because there are some people who commonly suppose that the 

rate of support is much less in Saskatchewan than it is in our neighbouring provinces. So I will 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

 

20 

give these figures as they apply to the major cities in our neighbouring provinces and in Saskatchewan. 

In the year 1952, which is the last year for which we have complete statistics, the grant to the combined 

districts in the city of Regina (that is, the public schools, the separate schools and the collegiates) 

amounted to 11.8 (roughly) per cent of the total expenditures of those three districts. In the city of 

Saskatoon, the percentage of our support was about the same; about 11.7 per cent. In the city of 

Winnipeg, in that same year, their government grants accounted for approximately 8 per cent of the costs 

of operating their schools in that particular year. The province of Manitoba, however, in the following 

year did increase their basic school grants so that, in 1953, their percentage of support in the city of 

Winnipeg has moved up to something over 13 per cent. 

 

In the city of Calgary, again in 1952, government grants amounted to between 9 and 10 per cent of the 

expenditure by the school districts. In the city of Edmonton, they amounted to 11.03 per cent. Again, 

there is this difference that, in Alberta, in the cities, if they had a building programme, they would qualify 

for some 25 per cent grant on the cost of that building programme. 

 

May I point out, Mr. Speaker, that even had our building assistance in Saskatchewan been applicable to 

school districts with an assessment such as has Regina or Saskatoon, and if the city of Saskatoon, for 

example, had had a building programme of $1 million, then the carrying costs of our grant, the amount 

they would have been relieved of carrying if we had made a grant on the basis of the Alberta system to 

them, would only increase our percentage contribution by approximately 1 per cent. Therefore, I think it 

is fair to say that our larger urban centres received, in 1952, as good support and, in general, better 

support than did the major cities in our neighbouring provinces; and I have pointed out that Manitoba has 

improved the situation as far as the city of Winnipeg is concerned, since that particular time. 

 

I do want to emphasize that in this grants structure with the one exception that I mentioned when we do 

make a differential as between rural and urban in the ceiling which we consider, we consider not whether 

a community is a rural community or an urban community, we do consider their ability to pay as 

measured by the average assessment per classroom. 

 

There is a lot of discussion again about the relative value of urban assessment as compared to rural 

assessment when it comes to supporting school costs. Is the $1,000 assessment in a rural district as much 

value as we have assumed that the urban districts should be handicapped somewhat. Some people will 

tell us that it should be handicapped more, and some people will tell us that it should be handicapped 

less. It still remains one of the large unexplored areas in which, unfortunately, we have not too good 

information which can be considered as entirely scientific and correct. But we are continuing to study it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would move the second reading of Bill no. 72 — An Act to amend The School Grants 

Act. 

 

Mr. Robert Kohaly (Souris-Estevan): — Before you put the question, Mr. Speaker, Will the Minister 

compare the situation as it will exist in the province of Saskatchewan as to rural schools, with the 

situation in our neighbouring provinces? 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

21 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I think I did that, in some measure at least, when I was making my 

“political” speech previously. I can say that, insofar as our basic grant is concerned, it is a bit difficult for 

this reason. Alberta is all organized as larger school units, and we are almost all organized, whereas 

Manitoba has one. But so far as our basic grants are concerned, we will now pay $500 a year for each 

elementary classroom and $700 a year for each high school classroom. If my information is correct that 

is the same basis which is used in the province of Alberta. 

 

I think — and again, one finds it difficult to get comparable statistics; but my opinion is that our 

equalization pattern is better than that of Alberta; and I refer again to what Dean Lazerte said as to the 

better sort of shape to our curve. I could refer to the fact I mentioned before, that we had at least one unit 

(perhaps more) in Alberta with a rural taxation rate of 50 mills as compared to our maximum of 35. It is 

difficult to know just how they compare. 

 

With regard to Manitoba, the basic grant in Manitoba is higher than ours; ours is $500 and their, I believe 

at the moment, is $700, with perhaps some alteration to that if there happens to be a small enrolment; but 

I am not too sure on that particular point. Again it is difficult to compare because they have no larger unit 

organization and we have a larger unit organization. In an overall way, I think it would be right to say 

that the percentage of the costs carried by each of the three governments is probably fairly close to being 

the same. I do not think there would be too much difference. 

 

Now that is not too definite. You can understand it is easier to compare two cities here and two cities 

there than to take your whole rural situation and try to make a comparison. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next 

sitting. 

 

SECOND READING — HOUSING BILL 

 

Bill No. 73 — An Act to amend The Housing Act 

 

Hon. J.H. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, this amendment has been occasioned, 

in part, by changes which have been made in the National Housing Act. 

 

Also on page two, part 2 (a), it deals with general housing, outlining the steps that are necessary or that 

are required to be taken by the municipality to enter into agreements and to proceed with housing under 

section 35 or section 9. 

 

It is noted that one of the major amendments is the “municipality may enter into an agreement with the 

consent of the Local Government Board”. They may enter into agreement with the senior Government 

with the approval of the Local Government Board who will, of course, examine carefully the financial 

position of the municipality to see if it is in a position to do so. 

 

Now part 2 (b) has to do with housing for aged persons, and it 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

 

22 

outlines the method by which this may be done. It provides, as an example, for groups of municipalities 

to go together to form a company for the provision of a housing project to meet the requirements of what 

constitutes a housing area. 

 

I think the other amendments which are of a minor nature can best be discussed in Committee. 

 

I would move Second Reading of this Bill — An Act to Amend the Housing Act. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

SECOND READING 
 

Bill No. 68 — An Act to amend The Limitation of Civil Rights Act. 

 

Hon. J.W. Corman, Q.C. (Attorney General): — This is an Act curtailing the enforcement of certain 

civil rights. It sounds like our legislation, but it was passed in 1943. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Leader of the Opposition): — I suppose it is one of those that doesn’t mean anything. 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — Well, I don’t know whether that means anything or not, but in any event, it was 

considered good Liberal legislation. I am not making a political speech; I am in agreement with it. 

 

Among other things it does provide that where an article is sold under a lien note or a conditional sales 

agreement, the remedy of the vendor shall be only the right of repossession. He cannot sue for the 

purchase price. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — We passed that in 1938. 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — Well, I think probably it is pretty good legislation. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Even before that — in 1934 I think it was. You couldn't sue if you had seized the 

article. 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — That’s right. You cannot sue either before or after you repossess, in the ordinary 

case. There is no suggestion that we change that; but an exception was made, in 1943, when the Act was 

passed, and I believe it was copied from Acts passed before that, possibly from 1934 or 1935, in the case 

of mining machinery, mining equipment or mining material. In respect of those goods the vendor had the 

right of repossession and the right to sue for the purchase price. 

 

The oil industry have made representations that in regard to equipment required in connection with the 

exploration and production of petroleum and natural gas, the same provision should be made. We agree 

that if mining equipment should be exempted from the exemption, then machinery and equipment used in 

the exploration for oil and gas should also 



 

March 19, 1954 

 

23 

 

be exempted. And, after a long speech about very little, I would move Second Reading of this Bill. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6.00 o’clock p.m. 

 


