



















































Hansard: March 11, 1954


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Twelfth Legislature 

21st Day 

 

Thursday, March 11, 1954. 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed from Wednesday, March 10, 1954, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of 

the Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): That Mr. Speaker, do now leave the chair. (The Assembly to 

go into Committee of Supply). 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour):  Mr. Speaker, I would just like to add to the word of 

welcome given to the students from Scott Collegiate by the junior member from Regina (Mrs. Cooper) a 

few moments ago. Perhaps some of these young ladies who are in the gallery today, may follow the 

example of our junior member and sit in this House at some future time. 

 

There has been a considerable amount of publicity in the last few weeks in regard to the unemployment 

situation both in Saskatchewan and in Canada, and while we wish to retain an optimistic outlook, at the 

same time we cannot ignore the alarming increase that is going on at the present time. I have some 

statistics here which indicate that at the present time there are 316,000 unemployed in Canada – that was 

on the 1st of December; it is probably greater now by quite a bit. In 1949, there were 222,000, and the 

increase of almost 100,000 has taken place in those four years, which is now the highest since the end of 

the war. As far as Saskatchewan is concerned, we have quite up-to-date figures, and at the fourth 

Thursday in February there were 15,784 unemployed in this province, which is also the highest since the 

end of the war. 

 

Most members, Mr. Speaker, make some reference to their constituencies, and while I have never done 

so before in this House I believe it is quite in order, today, leading up as I am to the local housing 

situation. We all know Regina as far as its physical characteristics are concerned, and I will merely 

mention it as a clean, well-laid out, beautiful city set right in the heart of the prairies; and a great deal of 

credit is due to the men and women who took part in the pioneering period. Some mistakes were made, 

mainly in making the narrow streets, regarding which we should not be too critical because 50 or 60 

years ago it would have been difficult to foresee modern developments resulting in the tremendous 

traffic problems we have today. It would seem, however, that those who are now in charge of 

community planning need not make the same mistakes; but with 100 miles of prairie, or perhaps more, 

between here and the state of Montana (plenty of space) we find new projects being laid out with some 

of the streets narrower than those built 50 years ago, and where, if cars are parked on both sides of the 

streets, two cars cannot pass in the centre. 

 

Just another brief reference to community planning, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps not too important. I think 

it was a gracious and thoughtful 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

2 

act in remembering Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Cecil Ingersoll Merritt of Vancouver, who led the 

Saskatchewan Rifles at Dieppe for which he was awarded the Victoria Cross, by naming a crescent in 

the north-western part of the city in his honour. but it does seem rather extreme, Mr. Speaker, to have 

named four streets after him, especially when a number of other holders of the Victoria Cross lived in 

this province all their lives and, including our Sergeant-at-Arms, Harry Mullin, have not been so 

recognized. 

 

I have digressed, Mr. Speaker, and now again referring to the city of Regina: we have a population of 

almost 74,000, or a gain of 19,000 in the past 20 years. In 1934, we had 55,000, of which over 11,000 

were on relief – one out of every five. We do not wish or expect to see those days return. 

 

As the capitol city of the province, Regina is under somewhat of a handicap by being looked upon in 

some quarters as a rich centre to which other parts of the province pay tribute, and also in being 

considered in some quarters as something of a „snooty‟ place, if I may use a slang term, Mr. Speaker. 

The same situation prevails in other provinces, Edmonton being regarded in the same light in Alberta; 

and Victoria in British Columbia. There is no justification for such feeling, Mr. Speaker, for Regina is 

just another community with most residents in the middle-income bracket, quite a number, 

unfortunately, in the lower-income bracket, and a few well off. If any snootiness ever did exist here, Mr. 

Speaker, I can assure you it is gone now. Our citizens are friendly people, law-abiding, good neighbours 

and considerate of the unfortunate. In this connection I would mention the Lions Club, which has just 

about completed a drive to raise funds for the erection of a new residence and service centre for the 

blind of southern Saskatchewan. This is being done with the generous assistance of the late Mr. & Mrs. 

Nash, formerly of this city, and I am pleased to be able to say that the Provincial Government has made 

a grant of $20,000 in cash and also provided an excellent building site on Broad street between College 

avenue and the Auto Camp. 

 

Other service clubs also do excellent work for the community and I wish to commend them all for what 

they have done and what they are doing. 

 

The housing situation in Regina is still very bad in spite of the heavy building programme carried on for 

the past seven or eight years; and the requirements still keep ahead of the supply. The Provincial 

Government has owned for many years the property between Broad and Winnipeg streets, from 

Wascana Creek to the various educational buildings along College Avenue. Last year, the eastern half 

was turned over to the city with the understanding that it would be sub-divided into 170 lots and sold to 

private citizens for a reasonable sum. No speculation was to be allowed. These lots were quickly 

snapped up in September, and many people started building immediately, with the result that ten 

families were in their homes by Christmas – a very creditable showing, I believe. The other half of the 

property was sold to the Gladmar interests and 80 buildings containing four units each, or a total of 320 

units, are being built. Due to bad weather conditions the project was not finished last year as was 

expected, although a number of families are now in. This property was sold by the Government at a 

reasonable price which reduced the capital cost and enabled the Gladmar company to rent the suites for 

reasonable amounts. As I recall, it is $47.00 a month for a two-bedroom suite and $60.00 for three 

bedrooms. The policy of selling land for building purposes at 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

3 

reasonable prices, where speculation is not allowed, is, we believe, only fair and proper. 

 

A great deal of building is gong on, Mr. Speaker, and eventually the housing situation will right itself; 

but in the meantime a good many people are living in crowded conditions – basements, attics and so 

forth. Just before leaving this subject, it will be of interest to members of this House to know that 

building permits for the year 1950, in Regina, amounted to $6,475,000; and in 1953, it had increased to 

$27,124,000. The city of Saskatoon, in 1950, had building permits of $6,830,000 and last year, 1953, 

they were $17,074,000. There was a tremendous increase in Moose Jaw – in 1950, $445,000; and last 

year, $2,169,000. So much for housing, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Social Welfare is doing all he can 

to improve the situation. 

 

May I now commend the Minister of Highways (Hon. Mr. J.T. Douglas) on behalf of the citizens on 

having in his estimates an amount earmarked for the building of a by-pass from a point near the eastern 

city limits to connect up with the Moose Jaw highway, about three miles south. This will avoid, 

obviously, excessive traffic congestion and at the same time, tourists who wish to come into Regina to 

our city will still have every opportunity of doing so. 

 

As far as the administration of actual labour legislation is concerned, it will be found mostly in the 

operation of the Wages and Hours Branch which deals with the main features of legislation, such as The 

Hours of work Act, Holidays with Pay Act, Minimum Wage Act and so forth. We have found it 

necessary to take on additional help since last June, when the legislation was extended to all parts of the 

province. This Branch collected $31,814 under The Minimum Wage and Hours of Work Acts, during 

the 15-month period ending March 31, 1953; under The Annual Holidays Act, $12,653; and under The 

Industrial Standards Act, $334. These amounts were paid to a total of 1,025 employees who had been 

underpaid. It was necessary to prosecute on 19 occasions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The 44-hour week or less is gradually becoming more widespread. A recent release from the  

Federal Department of Labour shows that 26 life insurance companies employing over 10,000 people 

are now on a five-day week and work from 32 ½ to 37 ½ hours per week. Some people will scoff at that 

and refer back to the good old days when wage-earners worked 12 hours a day or more. Sometimes we 

wonder what was good about those so-called „good old days‟; but it was merely an acceptance of the 

times. The present trend is fewer working hours and, unless there is a shortage of workers, there is no 

need for long hours. Banks in all cities of this province are now on a 40-hour or less work week and a 

five-day week, and this policy is gradually being adopted either voluntarily, as in the case of the banks, 

or through union negotiations. A survey taken for the city of Regina shows 15,280 employees working 

40 hours a week or less, 9,010 working 40 to 44 hours, and 660 working over 44 hours. These figures 

are approximate. 

 

The Government has received recommendations for legislation to be passed providing a 40-hour 

maximum week, but until other provinces have come down from 48, as they all are except British 

Columbia, or in Alberta, 44 hours in the cities, it has been decided to stay at least 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

4 

this year with our 44-hour week now in effect, which provides 44 hours in the eight cities and 9 larger 

towns and 48 over the balance of the province. 

 

I have an interesting clipping here, Mr. Speaker, in connection with wages. It comes from „Canadian 

Labour‟, a paper printed in the east, of February 19, 1953, and here is what it says: 

 

“Eighty per cent of the 3,001,322 male wage or salary earners had annual incomes of $3,000 or less at 

the time of the 1951 census, the Dominion bureau of Statistics reported recently. Only 5 per cent had 

incomes of $4,000 and 3.5 per cent failed to report their earnings. Forty-three per cent of the total were 

earning less than $40 a week. 

 

“Among the 1,073,000 women workers, 84 per cent earned less than $40 a week; only 13 per cent had 

salaries over $2,000 a year and 3 per cent failed to report earnings.” 

 

This should silence any person or persons who complain that labour is getting too much, or is 

responsible for inflated prices. Again may I say, in 1951, 80 per cent of the male workers received less 

than $3,000 a year; 84 per cent of the female workers less than $40 a week. That was back in 1951 so 

the percentages will not have changed very much during that time. 

 

I wish to mention, now, the fact that farmers or farm help are not covered by compensation in case of 

accidental death or injury in this province, or any other province as far as that is concerned. We 

continually read in the press of accidents occurring, usually in the handling of farm machinery, and in 

the event of death, the widow is left without income, as compared to $60 a month for life and $25 a 

month for each child up to the age of 16 in the case of the industrial worker. I would like to see the farm 

group covered in some way, and in fact, the Chairman of the Compensation Board has advised me that 

farmers may now protect their employees upon application to the Board if they so wish. The cost of such 

protection would, of course, be required to be paid by the farm industry by setting up a fund. The 

Government, however, is not proceeding with any legislation, desirable as it may be, until it is better 

understood by the farming population; and in this respect we would welcome representations from farm 

organizations. 

 

I would like to refer now to something along the lines of traffic, Mr. Speaker. Despite an educational 

programme, slogans, publicity and so forth, our traffic accidents continue to increase, and, last year, 124 

persons were killed on our highways – the highest I believe in our history. Property damage, too, 

showed a heave increase, but I place this as being secondary in importance to life and limb. The 

Provincial Treasurer has stated that the number of traffic officers will be greatly increased and more 

drastic penalties invoked for traffic violations during the coming year. It is to be hoped that this will 

bring about the desired results. What this province needs is safer driving 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

5 

habits on the part of the motorists, which I prefer to a large number of convictions. If this cannot be 

achieved on a voluntary basis drivers will have to learn the hard way. It is desirable that traffic 

violations do not occur rather than have them happen and the drivers chased, caught and convicted, 

which might be known as the 3-C treatment, Mr. Speaker. I do not, however, recommend drastic action 

for trivial violations. 

 

The use of red illuminating tape on the rear of vehicles has been a great improvement, and accidents 

where cars are left on the highways and struck are decreasing. Fifty cents worth of this tape on the back 

of a small panel truck near Morrisburg, Ontario, last summer, struck by a loaded bus which careened 

into a canal, would have saved the lives of 20 passengers. I noticed a press report, a few days ago, where 

a rear-end collision took place between two C.P.R. passenger trains at night, somewhere in Ontario. 

There would be, of course, two red lights on the last coach, but in spite of this collisions have taken 

place over a period of years. I suggest that large sheets of this illuminated tape, placed on the rear of all 

trains, would add to their protection and safe operation. 

 

Here is a suggestion which just came to me a day or two ago and which, in my opinion, has some merit. 

It concerns the drivers who continually are involved in accidents – the “motor maniac” type, a 

descriptive word used by the hon. member for Hanley, a few days ago, and very appropriately too. It 

would be proper punishment to place a governor on his car, at his own expense, of course, so he could 

not travel faster than say 50 miles an hour. Such procedure would also have a deterrent effect on other 

speed artists. 

 

A few days ago, I received a lengthy telegram from a Motor Transport Association, requesting my 

assistance to increase the weight load permissible on the highways of this province. For the moment I 

considered a reply, suggesting that this industry (and it is large and powerful, Mr. Speaker) might 

purchase a right of way through the country the same as pipelines do, build their own road and operate 

their trucks at any weight they saw fit. However, I did not do so, and no doubt the hon. Minister of 

Highways will tell us, when he speaks next week, just what weight these roads are built to carry. 

 

If we, in this province, or all provinces for that matter, wish to maintain the luxury of duplication of 

transportation, we obviously must pay for it in some way. Railways, by loss of the most lucrative traffic, 

will require either subsidization or higher rates. They are the arteries no province or country can do 

without and they carry any kind of traffic offered in any kind of weather and maintain a service the year 

round. The trucking industry is not obligated to accept heavy or bulky shipments and, in the event of 

storms, do not provide service at all. They can telephone the Department of Highways to get the roads 

open, at public expense of course, so they can get through. Their road bed is the people‟s highway, and I 

suggest that gas tax and licence fees do not compensate for the damage they do. 

 

We pay for this duplication in other ways, Mr. Speaker; that is, by the number of accidents in which 

commercial trucks are involved. 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

6 

During the calendar year of 1952, there were a little over 3,300 accidents in this province involving 

trucks, 55 per cent of which were commercial trucks, and 45 per cent farm trucks. There were 52 deaths, 

1,007 injuries and $1 ¼ million in property damage, all concerning trucks. 

 

During the calendar year 1953, there were 4,695 accidents involving trucks, approximately half of which 

were commercial vehicles. I have been unable to get a breakdown of fatalities and injuries as between 

farm and commercial trucks but there was a total of 124 deaths, last year, as I mentioned a few moments 

ago. It stands to reason, Mr. Speaker, that the more commercial trucks on the highways, the more 

accidents there will be. Our highways were originally built for the pleasure and convenience of our 

citizens, urban and rural, and tourists; but 20 or 25 years ago commercial trucking began, at first in a 

small way, but now, as an example of the saying “today‟s concession is tomorrow‟s right”, they are 

demanding the right to increase weights to an unreasonable amount. 

 

In 1950, a test was made on a stretch of highway of reinforced concrete 1.1 miles in length in the State 

of Maryland, where soil conditions and moisture were average. Trucks of various weights with single 

axle and tandem axle vehicles were run over this four-lane piece of road continually for a period of six 

months to ascertain how the pavement stood up. The 44,800 tandem axle load had to be stopped after 

92,000 passes because the pavement was cracking up at the rate of 100 feet a day; the 22,400 lb single 

axle load had caused six times as much cracking as the 18,000 lb load; and the 44,800 axle load, gross 

weight 54,000 lbs had caused twelve times as much cracking as the 32,000 lb axle load, gross weight 

40,000 lbs, after 92,000 trips had been made. The 40,000 lb gross weight load continued until 164,500 

trips had been made, which would indicate that this is just about the limit. The telegram I received 

requested that this limit of 40,000 lb gross be raised in this province. 

 

There is a definite place for commercial trucking, Mr. Speaker, but I do question the necessity of this 

industry in most of the long-haul traffic, which is an expensive duplication as I previously stated. With 

more of these juggernauts coming on our highways all the time, and every one a menace to life and 

limb, it is doubtful if such a situation should be allowed to continue indefinitely. If it does, we pay for it. 

Opinions expressed here are, of course, my own. 

 

I have a clipping here which refers to „piggy-back‟ hauling of big truck trailers on railroad flat cars. The 

article has been printed with comments by Mr. Philip W. Porter in the Cleveland „Plain Dealer‟ – he is a 

columnist, and Sunday editor and in a recent column, this is what he said: 

 

“The behemoths (that‟s a good word) of the highway, once loaded, can be carried across country more 

swiftly and cheaper on rails than by chugging along under their own power. The greatest appeal is the 

fact that the giant menaces would be removed from the highways and 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

7 

this menace comes from the great number of such truck trailers on the road now, not from the drivers, 

whom he characterizes as skilled and courteous. 

 

“So thick are the trucks, he notes, that they form the principal hazard for passenger cars. A drive of 

any distance consists of short intervals between trucks or parades of trucks.” 

 

Things are not quite that bad in this country, Mr. Speaker, but in the States the average motorist does 

have a pretty rough time getting over the road sometimes. 

 

Leaving that, Mr. Speaker, I come now to the office of the Fire Commissioner. Last fall, an unfortunate 

and sad accident occurred in a town in the southern part of the province, caused by cleaning clothes with 

gasoline. A woman went to the store during the morning and bought two gallons, taking it home on a 

small hand sleigh. I feel that the clerk was not very alert and might have warned her for he knew they 

had no car and if they had they would not be getting gasoline in a two-gallon can. However, she took it 

home and started cleaning clothes in the kitchen where a small fire was burning. In a short time, fumes 

ignited, and the small house was in flames almost immediately. A neighbour managed to rescue an 

infant who was in a crib just below a window, but a two-year old boy could not be reached and died in 

the fire. Gasoline has a number of uses, but cleaning clothes is not one of them. Even when used outside, 

cases are on record where the slightest spark, perhaps from a button or the rubbing of silk, has ignited 

the gasoline. The office of the Fire Commissioner comes under the jurisdiction of this Department, and 

an amount of $85,000 for this is in the budget for the coming year. This is collected by a one percent 

assessment of all fire insurance policies which makes the Branch self-sustaining at no cost to the 

treasury. 

 

The Theatres Branch is also administered here. Two theatres and two public halls were burned last year, 

but fortunately they were empty at the time. Fifty-eight new theatres were built, which is an indication 

of the confidence this industry has in the province of Saskatchewan. I would especially commend Mr. 

Barney Smith of Watson. 

 

I will briefly outline what I believe to be the highlights of the activities of the Fire Commission Branch 

in the years 1952 and 1953. During 1952, the fire loss in Saskatchewan was nearly $3 million, the three 

leading causes of fire being, first, smokers‟ carelessness; second, electricity; third, stoves, furnaces and 

heaters. This reminds me of the Hit-Parade, Mr. Speaker; for a number of years electricity was in fourth 

place, now it has moved up to second place, which indicates the care that should be taken with electrical 

appliances, wiring and so forth. During the year 1953, 26 persons were burned to death, 20 of them 

being children. There were over 1,200 Saskatchewan dwellings that suffered fire loss amounting to over 

$580,000. Most fires occurred in the homes, and it is interesting to note that 25 of the 26 persons who 

were burned to death lost their lives in home fires. The careless smoker, the careless use of inflammable 

liquids and leaving young children alone, unattended, made the greatest contribution to this unnecessary 

loss of life and property. 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

8 

The office of the Fire Commissioner, in an attempt to reduce this loss, have six fully qualified inspectors 

who inspect public buildings and make recommendations to urban municipalities regarding the 

prevention of fire and the purchase of suitable fire protection equipment. An effort has also been made 

to educate the school children on the basic fundamentals of fire protection. It is estimated that, during 

the past year, 55,000 school children in Saskatchewan viewed fire prevention films and received 

instruction in fire prevention and fire fighting. Through the medium of public hearings the staff of the 

Fire Commissioner‟s office also spoke to approximately 6,200 Saskatchewan citizens and encouraged 

them to purchase suitable fire extinguishers for their homes, explaining how to operate them and how to 

remove hazards. 

 

In comparing our Saskatchewan fire loss with other provinces I find account to the latest report issued 

by the Dominion Fire Commissioner, that, over a five-year period Saskatchewan had a per capita fire 

loss of $2.81, which is the lowest in Canada; $7.00 per capita is given for the province which has the 

highest. This should not encourage Saskatchewan citizens to become complacent, Mr. Speaker. Rather 

we should become more determined than ever to eliminate entirely this unnecessary destroyer of life and 

property. 

 

I have another clipping here – the last one, I think – from the „Leader-Post‟ of March 3, which might be 

of interest to this House and to the public generally. From Barrie, Ontario, it says: 

 

“Mr. and Mrs. Walter Bradnam, convicted of neglect in the death of their baby son when fire gutted 

their cottage, were sentenced in magistrate Court today. Walter Bradnam, 30, was sentenced to nine 

month‟s imprisonment in reformatory and three months‟ indefinite. His wife, Betty Mae, age 25, drew 

sentence of nine months‟ indefinite. 

 

“They were convicted February 27th for unlawfully exposing a child under two years whereby his life 

is endangered. The couple‟s eight-month old son, Andre, died in a fire at their cottage near 

Collingwood, 75 miles northwest of Toronto, February 12th, while the parents were away.” 

 

I will go on, now, to the Electrical and Gas Inspection and Licensing Branch, which continues to 

expand, due to the large building programme, and the rural electrification that is in progress throughout 

the province. 

 

Electrical inspection is one of the four protective services for the public good. Just as we provide 

protection for everyone against fires, crime, disease, we must provide electrical inspection to provide the 

people of the people against fatalities from electric shock; and their property from death-dealing fires 

attributed to electrical causes, and particularly in hamlets, villages and so forth. A key role of this 

Branch is safe-guarding a community from electrical hazards to life and 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

9 

property. One of the least known, and yet one of the most important activities carried on by the Branch 

is control over the sale to the public of unsafe electrical equipment. The public can assist and protect 

themselves by asking “Is it C.S.A. approved?” before making a purchase. “C.S.A.”, by the way, Mr. 

Speaker, means Canadian Standards Association, and they have a place in Toronto where all new 

appliances coming on the market are subject to rigid tests, and they must pass these tests before they are 

approved. Unapproved electrical appliances are not of the same standard and may be dangerous. 

Electrical inspections are also made by this Branch in mines, for instance coal mines, and includes the 

Flin Flon and Uranium City areas. 

 

A considerable number of electrical fires are still being caused by persons overloading conductors or 

circuit wiring, using lamp cord extensions for heating appliances, over-fusing and plugging fuses. One 

fatal accident occurred from an electric cream separator not being connected correctly to the circuit 

conductors – not reported, and, of course, if it was not reported it was never inspected. There were eight 

prosecutions for infractions under this Act, last year. 

 

The inspection of gas installations by the gas branch commenced on January 2nd, in Saskatoon, and 

surveys inspections have been made in the other towns where gas is being used. 

 

Licences are not being issued to gas-fitters, contractors and supply houses. Persons desiring to engage in 

the gas business would be well advised to obtain their licences immediately. The amount of $212,000 is 

required for the operation of this branch, which is self-supporting through licences, fees and so forth. 

 

We come now to the Boiler, Pressure Vessel and Elevator Branch of the Department – one of the oldest 

and most important safety branches in the provincial government. Actually there have been few boiler 

accidents for some time, mainly due to the safety requirements and careful inspection service maintained 

by the staff and the chief inspector, Mr. Joseph Taylor, who, by the way, is also Dominion chairman of 

the Canadian Standards Association code. This Branch is charged with the administration of the two 

Acts in their entirety, namely, The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act and The Passenger and Freight 

Elevator Act, and certain safety sections in The Factories Act. 

 

Time will not permit me, Mr. Speaker, to go into many details but the history of the Branch is actually 

quite interesting, and it reflects, to a large extent, the industrial growth of the province. Without giving 

actual dates, this may be summed up as follows. The first Boiler Act was put into effect about 50 years 

ago; it provided only for the safe construction and operation of high pressure steam boilers. Many of the 

first engineers were those qualified to operate steam engines driving threshing machines, as there were 

once more than 6,000 such engines licensed by the Branch. Now there are none, although a few of the 

old boilers are still being used for other purposes. 

 

I wish to briefly mention our Apprenticeship Branch, which was set up almost nine years ago, and is 

now operating exceedingly well in turning out a good class of workmen, which is, of course, its 

function. 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

10 

Frank Ellis, a well-qualified tradesman in electricity and motor mechanics, is now the Director of this 

branch and has replaced Mr. Dornan, who resigned last May. Apprenticeship training, which is so 

necessary for our building and service trades, showed increased activity in the year 1953 and employers 

are taking more interest, which has caused an increase in new apprentices. for the year ending December 

31, 1953, the number of apprentices completed was 80, the number of active apprentices, 672, and the 

number of trainees attending apprenticeship school, 427. The estimated increase in apprentices for the 

coming year is 100 over the past year. If this proves true (and all indications are that it will), the school 

will be confronted with an enlarged enrolment and very inadequate accommodations. Since the 

buildings were never made for use as a school, it is impossible to lay out an efficient plan, and this 

over-crowding is bound to cut down efficiency of the training. It is, therefore, planned to have better 

quarters within the next year or two, replacing the Air Force huts which have served the purpose up to 

now. The apprenticeship schools are located in Saskatoon and Moose Jaw. At the Saskatoon school, 

trades taught are electricity, motor mechanics, carpentry, sheet metal work, plumbing and a new trade, 

pipe-fitting; and also barbering and beauty culture. Because of insufficient facilities the trades of auto 

body repair and welding, both ARC and gas, are carried on at the technical school in Moose Jaw. The 

new trade of pipe-fitting, which became part of the regulations in 1953, is not operating to capacity as 

yet, but it is expected it will, next year. This is necessary on account of the expansion of the gas 

programme. 

 

In summing up, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Labour is smaller in proportion to the number of 

employees in other departments, but it is, nevertheless, one of the most important in government, 

dealing as it does, directly or indirectly, with the financial welfare of wage-earners in this province; their 

daily or weekly hours of work, earnings in the lower income bracket, the ease with which employees 

may organize under The Trade Union Act, compensation benefits for injured employees and so forth. In 

closing I wish to emphasize that this Government =, through the Department of Labour, has the interests 

of all wage-earners in the province at heart, and does everything possible to improve working conditions 

consistent, of course, with employer relations. Mr. Speaker, I will support the budget. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural & Mineral Resources):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

open my speech by reading a very short chapter from the January issue of the „Monetary Times‟. I am 

sure that everyone in the House will be interested in it. This is what it says: 

 

“The Liberals now in their tenth year of political exile have not enjoyed a minute of it. What is more, 

it begins to look as if they will do no better than Moses, who, as you recall, was 40 years in the 

wilderness.” 

 

That is what the „Monetary Times‟ in the column “Ottawa Notebook” says about the Liberal party in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

11 

I wish to thank the Leader of the Opposition for sending me his picture. I am going to send it back to 

him and ask him to autograph it. I will appreciate having it in my souvenirs. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  He should have been reading Karl Marx. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank:  Mr. Speaker, I was very interested in some of the remarks made by the hon. 

members opposite yesterday – of the hon. member for Nipawin (Mr. MacNutt) from Arborfield and the 

hon. member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy). I noticed that the hon. member for Nipawin made 

something, or tried to make something, of the claim that the C.C.F. promised to do away with the 

Education Tax. I would agree that it would be very pleasant for everybody concerned to do away with 

that tax, and I am sure my hon. friends opposite will agree with me. Of course, the actual promise made 

was a conditional one: that the money would not be needed on account of other revenues taking its 

place. We have had to face this question . . . shall we discontinue some services, shall we cease to 

extend services and do away with the tax, or shall we continue to give services and extend them and 

keep the tax? We faced that issue and we faced it honestly. We decided that the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan, particularly after the adjustments in the tax providing for a good many exemptions, 

would prefer to have it continued and have those services continued too. 

 

I do not think there is one hon. member opposite who has the intestinal fortitude to get up in this debate 

and move an amendment asking that the $16 million, which comes in from the 

Education-Hospitalization tax, be taken off the budget . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson:  We might surprise you. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank:  . . .and at the same time specify what services they want cut down . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson:  We‟ll show you. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank:  There isn‟t one who has the courage to do that. Not one of them has the 

courage. . . 

 

Mr. McDonald:  All we ask is that you keep your promises. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank:  . . . to move that motion and to vote for it. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Keep your promises. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank:  There is no danger of them doing it . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald:  The debate isn‟t over yet. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank:  Now the Liberals have always been good at making promises for other 

people . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald:  What about your promises? 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

12 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank:  . . .and they have certainly made plenty of promises for the C.C.F.; and this 

old promise in regard to the tax was one of them. They made many more. They promised for us that we 

would not have any development of our resources. They promised for us that we would bring financial 

ruin on the province, and all the people have to do is to follow the history of the province to find out 

how much out those promises were. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  You may have just done that. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank:  Of course, the Liberals have made lots of promises for themselves too. 

Back in 1921 (I think it was) they promised a Dominion-wide health programme, and I know that the 

late Hon. Dr. Uhrich, when he was not Minister of Public Health, in 1934 when he was in opposition, 

promised at the convention which was being held at Saskatoon at that time, to bring in state medicine. 

He said to them: “State medicine is the only answer; we will bring it in.” They were elected in 1934. 

They were in there 10 years and they did nothing about it. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Where did you read that? Are you making it up? 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank:  The hon. member asks where it was read. I read it in the Saskatoon „Star 

Phoenix”, and I think I can dig up the old clipping yet. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  What paper? You can‟t prove it. It‟s not fair . . . 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank:  Now, there‟s another little promise that was made every year, several times 

a year as a rule, from 1935 to 1952, and that concerns the South Saskatchewan River Dam. That 

certainly was promised, and that promise has not been carried out. 

 

Then Mr. Taggart who used to be the Minister of Agriculture in this House, promised the bridge in Swift 

Current election after election. On one occasion, I believe somebody presented to him a candy bridge, 

and that is the nearest they ever got to getting a bridge. 

 

Now, in regards to the promise of state medicine, the health programme, we have to a great extent kept 

the Liberal promise. In regard to the bridge at Swift Current, we have kept that promise for them. And 

so, probably, Mr. Speaker, as we keep some of the promises they made and did not keep and they make 

some promises for us which we cannot keep, probably we are even. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  You got the cash before you could do it. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Nipawin made one remark. He said, in 

regard to the welfare of the province, the C.C.F. gives Providence no credit. I was rather surprised to 

hear him make that remark. I should think that he should listen to our prayers every day, and he would 

realize that he is all 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

13 

wrong. Of course, what he is interested in is not in giving Providence credit, but seeing that the 

Government does not get any at all. I suppose he would like to blame the C.C.F. for the three-times 

normal rainfall that came in the Smoky Burn area, and I take it from his words that he pretty well does 

blame the C.C.F. for that. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  You take credit for everything else. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  Well, the settlers in that area have had a tough time of it. They are not to 

blame. But they went in there and had a good chance. Unfortunately they met disaster through the 

extremely wet years. Not even the members opposite could have seen the need for drainage in that area 

when it was settled. The l party is trying to make capital out of the disaster of these new settlers. I wish 

that I, and every other veteran after the first world war, had had as good an opportunity in 1919 and 

1920 as the veterans have had under our settlement plan since the second world war. 

 

The hon. member also shed some tears for the senior citizens of the province. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  Apparently he forgets that the average pension in 1944 was $17.50 a month. 

Of course, he will say “Well, the Liberal government didn‟t have the money at that time.” 

 

Mr. McDonald:  How much are you paying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  Mr. Speaker, that old story about the Liberal Government not having the 

money has quite a bit of nonsense in it . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson:  You are not paying them that much now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  . . . because they did not try to get revenue. The Liberal government in this 

province did not try to get revenue. The one talent that they had, they hid. They should read the parable 

of the talents. I will give you an example. The Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company was 

operating in Saskatchewan for a long time. In the eight years 1937 to 1944, the Liberal government 

collected royalty which amounted to three-quarters of one per cent of the value of the ore. In the 

following eight years, from 1945 to 1952, we collected royalty which amounted to five per cent of the 

value of the ore. Now, Mr. Speaker, if the Liberals had collected royalty from that company (and they 

were well able to pay it) at the rate of five per cent during those years, they would have had nearly $4 

million more, and if we had collected royalty 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

14 

at the Liberal rate, we, in our eight years, would have had $10 million less. So, you see, it is poor 

business to talk about not having the money when you do not try to get it. They are very poor farmers 

over on that side of the House. They were not making the best of the farm they had. 

 

Mr. Ripley:  It‟s poor business to kill the goose that lays the golden egg. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  We farm as well as the fellows on the other side, that‟s a cinch. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  I heard also that the hon. member was taking credit for gravelling the 

Crooked River – Carrot River highway last summer. I would suggest to him that the Hon. Minister of 

Highways is the person who deserves credit for that. . . 

 

Mr. MacNutt:  It was my prodding. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  I would suggest also that if I deserve any credit for getting gravel on that 

highway, it is because I supported the budget and helped to get the Minister of Highways the money 

with which to do the work. And it is just a puzzle for me to figure out how the hon. member who has 

voted against every budget can then go out in the country and claim credit for getting gravel on a road. If 

he had had his way there would have been no budget passed. There would have been no money for 

gravelling roads. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Marvellous deduction! You‟re a whiz! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  The hon. member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) said that school grants 

were going up, but not as fast as the mill rate. I took the trouble to look up an example, and in just one 

school district (as a matter of fact, my own school district) in 1944, the mill rate was 26 mills for school 

purposes; in 1948, it had gone up to 30 mills; an increase of 15 per cent. In 1944 that school got in 

grants $635; in 1948 they got $1,081, an increase of 70 per cent, so that in this case the mill rate went up 

15 per cent between 1944 and 1948 and the grant went up 70 per cent in the same period. I would be 

tickled to carry the same comparison on until 1953, but the school district was then included in a school 

unit and is now better off than ever, and the mill rate now has gone down from 30 mills in 1948 to 24 

mills at the present time – lower than it was in 1944. I would just like the hon. members to remember 

that. 

 

I would like to take a little time to review some of the work of my departments. In the Department of 

Natural Resources, 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

15 

we have five administrative districts. These five districts, Southern district, Northern district, Hudson 

Bay, Prince Albert and Meadow Lake have a field staff of 90. These five district administrations have 

the problem of carrying out the general administration of resources all over the province. They have a 

great deal of work to do. I will say more about them later. 

 

Then, in the department we also have three programme branches – the Forestry Branch, the Fisheries 

Branch and the Game Branch. Now, it is the work of these programme branches to devise and lay out 

programmes for the conservation, development and utilization of natural resources in accordance with 

the policy of the Government. Those programmes are put into effect and carried out by the district 

administrations. 

 

We have five service branches in the department. First, there is the general Administration Branch; 

second, the Surveys Branch, the Construction Branch, the Radio Branch and the Fire Control Branch. 

We have two public information branches: the Museum of Natural History and the Conservation 

Education Branch. 

 

Now, let us look at each of these for a few minutes. First, the districts and their work programmes which 

they have to carry out. In the budget which we have before us at this time, provision is made for the 

maintenance of about 1,300 miles of roads and fireguards in the forest area of the province. Provision is 

made for 900 hours of aerial patrol. Aerial patrol is for the purpose of detecting fires, for the purpose of 

making counts of game, and, on occasion, for the purpose of taking enforcement action in regard to The 

Game Act or some other Act. The budget also provides for the continuation in the Hudson Bay district 

of the programme for the construction of agricultural fireguards. An agricultural fireguard is a cultivated 

field alongside the provincial forest, and we give to the farmer who is situated alongside the forest a 

bonus, a subsidy, to help him clear and break a strip 20 rods wide along the forest boundary. 

 

In road improvement and construction in the districts, we have the following principal projects: Some 

gravel on the Fir River road, located North-west of Hudson Bay; in co-operation with the Timber Board 

to extend the Dore-Smoothstone road; to do some construction on the Chitek fireguard road, that is in 

north of Leoville. Then there is the Turtle Lake cut-off fireguard over in the Turtleford constituency. We 

have provided a vote of $75,000 for construction on the Beauval road. (I am sure my hon. friend from 

Meadow Lake won‟t vote against this budget on this occasion). We also have a vote of $50,000 for 

mining roads which will be of interest to my hon. friend from Athabasca (Mr. Ripley). So we do have a 

fairly substantial work programme there. 

 

In addition there is the general maintenance and improvement work of buildings at headquarters, of 

patrol cabins and so on. In the Northern District, of course, there is in addition the municipal services 

which we give, because we do, in that area, take the place of the local municipality or local 

improvement district. We carry out in 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

16 

the north a considerable amount of dam construction and improvement work on portages. Of course, 

included in the municipal services is street maintenance and that sort of thing. 

 

I would like just to review the history of Uranium City. The development of Uranium City has been 

rather dramatic and swift. I was there in 1951. At that time there was nothing on the site except the 

surveyors‟ stakes. The main road from the port of Bushell to Beaverlodge was just started. I visited the 

place again in September 1952. Then the streets had been cleared; the road was through, and there were 

many buildings constructed at that time, many under construction, and of course, many tents and shack 

tents on the site, too. I visited the place again in September 1953, and found a hotel in operation with 

about 40 rooms, quite a number of stores selling all kinds of goods, more sub-divisions had been 

surveyed; there was a 4-room school new, and an 8-10 bed hospital which was getting along towards 

being ready for operation. Then I made a trip in in January on the inaugural flight of the new Dakota or 

DC3 plane from Prince Albert, and found that the town is served with electric power from a central 

power station. The building had continued. A recent census taken by one of the local citizens shows the 

population of the town to be 714, so it is growing and growing fast. 

 

The Forestry Branch, as I said, is one of the programme branches of the department. One of its big jobs 

is in carrying on the forest inventory work. That is now complete in the mixed-wood belt. This year, we 

will be doing aerial photography on about 4,000 square miles in connection with the forest inventory 

work. This forest inventory is a Dominion-Provincial effort, and that programme will be completed in 

1955. From then on, the work of forest inventory will be on a lesser scale, but will be necessary to keep 

the inventory up to date and useful. 

 

Forest management is another work of the branch. The establishing of working circle areas so to manage 

the forest in those areas that we will have constant production and perpetual operation. One is 

established at Armit, east of the Hudson Bay. We are working on one at Green Lake and one at Dore 

Lake, and now the pulpwood reservation at Candle lake, of course, becomes very important as a 

working circle area. I am quite hopeful that the prospects are very fair for a pulp mill in the area before 

too long. Forestry Branch also caries on studies in forest land use. This House recently passed an 

amendment to The Forest Act putting certain areas into the forest. Before that was done these were 

studied and then, in co-operation with the Department of Agriculture, it was decided it was the kind of 

land that should be in our provincial forest. The reverse also is true when it comes to taking land out of 

the forest. 

 

We also carry on some silviculture and research work in forestry. In the coming year we will only have a 

small number of seedling trees to plant out – 150,000 I think it is; but we will be transplanting from the 

seed-bed to the transplant rows about half a million. Our greatest interest in reforestation is in helping 

nature. We will again be carrying out some work in scarifying to help nature regenerate the forests. Of 

course, we have to collect seed if we are going to operate a nursery, and we do carry on research studies. 

 

The Fisheries Branch is also a programme branch. We are carrying out biological studies in the Ile a la 

Cross – Buffalo Narrows area; 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

17 

also on the Qu‟Appelle Lakes and on Reindeer Lake. These biological studies get a part of the basic 

information which is necessary if we are going to put into effect good management policies on these 

lakes. But some of the other basic information is acquired in other ways. We are carrying on a creel 

census at Lac la Ronge, at Last Mountain Lake and on the Qu‟Appelle Lakes. These are the areas that 

are most heavily fished by anglers and, unless we have some fairly accurate idea of the amount of fish 

taken out of the lakes by anglers, it is very difficult for our biologists to arrive at intelligent 

recommendations as to the management of the lakes. 

 

We also will be getting commercial catch statistics on lake Athabasca. We collect spawn for use in our 

hatcheries. We hatch spawn from some of our quite common varieties and are able to trade the 

fingerlings with other provinces, or some of the states, for some of their species of fish which are very 

desirable here. We will still be operating the experimental hatchery at Lac la Ronge and our hatchery at 

Fort Qu‟Appelle. This hatchery at Fort Qu‟Appelle is now over 50 years old. I think we will have to face 

the problem of replacing it at some time, and I was wondering if the anglers would mind paying an extra 

50 cents on their licences so, in about 3 or 3 ½ years, that would pay the cost of a new hatchery which 

would enable us to keep the angling in good shape. 

 

One interesting little bit of work that has been done is the live fish exhibits at the Sportsman‟s Show. If 

any members get an opportunity to see them, it would be a good idea to have a look at them. We do have 

in Saskatchewan plenty of very lovely and attractive fish. We will be carrying on, too, some lake 

classification work, in the north of the province. 

 

Now, the Game Branch work is much similar to the fisheries Branch‟s except that it is in connection 

with game and fur animals instead of with fish: the biological studies, the game count, disease studies, 

studies of the statistics. I would like to say here to all hunters: “Please return your licence and fill in the 

amount of game you shot legally. I won‟t ask you to commit yourself. You know there is a $10 fine for 

not turning in your licence and reporting the game you took.” But if we start enforcing that, the first 

thing I will do is check over the members of the Legislature to see that they have all turned in their 

hunting licences. I would ask all hunters to co-operate with us and give us this information. The return 

of licences has been much too low. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  We don‟t have any of them here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  I would like to say a word about the hunting accidents we have had, and 

some of the other damage through hunting. Last hunting season we had two fatal accidents. One was 

from shooting where a hunter mistook another hunter for a game animal and shot him. The other was a 

drowning accident when the people were out hunting ducks. These accidents are unnecessary. When we 

are out on deep water the greatest care should be used and when we are handling a gun we should never 

forget that guns are made to kill, and we should never pull the trigger or point the gun unless we are sure 

we are pointing it at something and pulling the trigger at something we want to kill. We should not 

guess, and that is what causes the accidents. 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

18 

Let‟s look first and shoot second. 

 

There was, I think, too much vandalism among the hunters this past season. Nine horses were shot, 11 

cattle were shot, 6 calves, even one pig, one cattle dog, and in one case one John Deere tractor was shot. 

This may sound funny but it should be serious to the hunters. In addition there were numerous 

complaints of fences broken and gates left open. In one case 150 cattle got into their winter feed. Two 

flocks of tame ducks were shot, and I think it was 13 tame chicken were reported shot. Every landowner 

has the right to put up „No Hunting‟ notices around his land, and if every landowner in the province puts 

up those notices, there won‟t be much room for the hunters in Saskatchewan. this is a problem that the 

hunters have got to deal with. If this kind of vandalism is going to continue, then they can expect to have 

less and less country in which to hunt; and only by avoiding this kind of thing and making for good will 

between the farmer and the hunter can they expect to have hunting privileges throughout this country. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to touch briefly on some other branches. Our Surveys Branch carries on the various 

work which I have often described before. This year it is carrying on with the running of our north 

line-fence, the boundary between Saskatchewan and the Northwest Territories, in co-operation with the 

Federal Government. 

 

The Construction Branch I have often described, too. It looks after the maintenance and upkeep of 

equipment to do work for the districts. The Construction Branch builds roads, fireguards, buildings, 

dams, lookout towers and so forth. 

 

The Fire Control Branch – well, I think the name is obvious. It maintains fire-fighting equipment, takes 

charge when fires break out and looks after the fire prevention programme. The Fire Control Branch has 

the smoke-jumpers. We have budgeted for 600 hours of flying time. They have fire patrol men, tower 

men who watch for fires, stand-by crews and fire co-operators. The fire co-operators are farmers who 

live adjacent to the forest and who receive a small amount per month, a retainer fee, for which they give 

service in the detection and suppression of fire. 

 

Our Radio Branch I have described before: 414 two-way sets at the present time, and there is a big job 

of keeping them in operation and repair. 

 

The Conservation Education branch: one of the principal projects of that branch is the “Conservation 

Corner” published in most of our weekly newspapers. They also do some work in films with which they 

carry on educational work in conservation; they issue publications, and we have one man who visits 

about 250 schools a year giving talks on the subject of conservation. We realize that the Department is 

powerless to carry out a good programme of conservation unless we have the goodwill and support of 

the public generally. That is why it is essential that we carry on this work of conservation education. 

 

The Museum of Natural History is at the present time very busy preparing to move into the new building 

and preparing for the Jubilee Year. 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

19 

If I may turn now to the other department, the Department of Mineral Resources, for a few minutes, I 

would like to run over the organization of that department. The largest branch in the department is the 

Petroleum and Natural Gas Branch. That branch looks after the petroleum lands, the statistics in the 

petroleum development work, the geology and the engineering. Each of these divisions has its work to 

do. We have a Transactions Branch. The Transactions Branch is where you find the mining recorder. He 

handles (or his branch handles) all dispositions of Crown minerals except petroleum lands. The 

engineering branch is the Mines Inspection Branch that carries out inspection work. We have the 

Records Branch. Their job is to maintain a record of the Crown-owned mineral lands and, obviously, 

unless we have that record we cannot do the best job of administering. They are now, and will be during 

the coming year, working on completing that record. 

 

There is a Geology Branch in connection with the pre-cambrian area. This Geology Branch will have 

three survey parties in the field during the coming year. The three men to head those parties will be Dr. 

Mawdaley and Dr. Byers of the University of Saskatchewan and Dr. Budding of our Department. Last 

year, we carried out an aerial magnetic survey on about 1,200 square miles in the Lac la Ronge area. 

This year we have budgeted for a similar area, and the work will be done in that area north-east of 

Buffalo Narrows where iron showing have been found. This branch carries out prospector‟s training, a 

prospector‟s school every year, that will be starting very shortly, so that the course will be over in time 

for the prospectors‟ assistance plan which is annually becoming more popular. 

 

In the department there is the Mineral Taxation Branch. The Mineral Taxation Act, as all members 

know, has been upheld by the Courts. Tax notices are now being sent out, but I can assure everyone we 

will give people quite reasonable time. There will be no steps taken on any forfeitures this year, but we 

would advise people to pay the tax and I think it is a just and fair tax. This is property which is valuable. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  How do you know? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  Everyone who has mineral rights can lease it and get revenue anywhere 

from 10 cents to a dollar an acre and sometimes $2 or $3 an acre and, in addition, a cash bonus 

sometimes as much as $5,000 or $10,000 on a quarter-section. I cannot see any reason why the surface 

rights owned by the hon. members in this House or anybody else should pay a tax on this property and 

the owners of mineral rights not pay to the public purse, in some way, some tax. It is a fair and just tax, 

and if anyone does not want the property, I would be glad to go around and take it over and pay the tax 

and take a chance as to whether there was anything on it or not. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Rubbra would take it off your hands. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  And everybody is paying the tax. As a matter of fact, if the hon. members 

would refer to the questions they would find that in the present fiscal year, up to the end of January, we 

collected nearly $2 ½ million from companies who had mineral 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

20 

rights over 40,000 acres in each company, and from individuals with smaller holdings $205,000. So, 

again that is a nice chunk of revenue. It won‟t be that big every year, because quite a bit of that is 

arrears. 

 

The next branch I want to discuss is the Industrial Minerals Research Branch, and the greatest event 

taking place in this connection is the potash development. We have not only the operations at Unity, but 

the Potash Company of America is very busy at Saskatoon, and I have no doubt that they will make the 

final decision shortly to put down a shaft and put in a mine. We have companies that are exploring and 

looking into the question of developing bentonite. 

 

The other branch that I might mention is the Oil and Gas Conservation Board. Since it was set up it has 

had three hearings. One was on the question whether or not there was sufficient gas to warrant building 

a pipeline to Saskatoon. One was on the question of the unit operation of the Brock gas field, and the 

other hearing was on the question of an application to build a pipeline from the Smiley oilfield to the 

inter-provincial pipeline. 

 

Now in the oil and gas business, to bring the hon. members up to date, we have at the present 24 defined 

oil and gas fields in the province. We have 836 oil wells which can produce – 595 of them actually did 

produce in 1953; 260 of these producing wells were new ones drilled in 1953. We have 89 gas wells in 

the province that can produce; 28 of them produced in 1953. 

 

Now, to come to the activities in drilling in 1953, the final figures are 678 wells drilled in 1953. Those 

678 wells mean 2,300,000 feet of drilling. Interpreted into miles it is 440 miles of well – enough to reach 

across the province from the east to the west. Of that 678 wells, 330 are capable of producing oil; 204 of 

them were actually on production; 22 are capable of producing gas and 32 of them are un-defined and it 

is not known yet whether they will be producers or not. The balance, of course, have been abandoned. 

 

Our proven oil reserve during the last year has gone up a considerable amount, and now is nearing the 

one billion barrel mark: Somewhere, I would say, between 800 million and one billion barrels of proven 

oil reserves. That sounds like a lot of oil. We should not get too excited about it. Time will be necessary 

to get the full realization of the benefits. In many areas there has to be more development to get a greater 

volume of production to make marketing economical. Much of our oil is not of the type that is desired in 

this market by our refineries here in the province. So we have the question of pipelines and refineries. 

Eight or 10 companies have leagued themselves together to study the possibilities of a pipeline to market 

the oil from Eastend, Dollard, Gull Lake, Fosterton and so on, into the Minneapolis-St. Paul area. One 

company has announced their intention to build a refinery at St. Paul on the banks of the Mississippi 

which will be designed to handle this type of oil – a medium gravity oil high in sulphur content. That 

work will be going ahead, I expect, during the coming year. All of these things are necessary for the 

marketing of the oil, and as I said it will take some time, and it will mean millions of dollars of 

investment in pipelines and in refineries to get it to market. 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

21 

The policy followed by the Government in regard to the Crown reserves has not changed. No door has 

been closed. When a case comes up for consideration careful consideration is given to it, and whatever 

disposition method is considered to be in the best interests of the province is followed. I think that that is 

the only stand that any government can take. 

 

Two to three years ago, many exploratory permits were extended under special agreements. Those 

special agreements are not expiring. Some of them have already expired; some of them expire in the 

near future. We are offering new special agreements for another two-year extension agreement, with 

very substantial work and drilling commitments. A number of companies have already renewed and are 

lined up for extensive work during the coming year and the following year. In 1953, the total 

expenditure in oil exploration and development was about $51 million. The prospects for 1954 are good. 

Now that there is more knowledge available to the explorer than ever before, the interest of the 

companies is high and we are having new companies quite often come and enquire and show their 

interest in the province. 

 

I would like to say just a few words about the work in the pre-Cambrian area and I just want to give you 

one set of figures, Mr. Speaker; that is the number of mining claims in good standing as at December 

31st: in 1951, 4,700; 1952, 8,200; 1953, 25,500. The figures on staking of claims is just as outstanding; 

but the claims in good standing is a good indication of the work that will be carried on. Prospecting 

during the past year was well distributed throughout the north. Claims were not all staked in one place; 

but there is still room for lots more prospectors, and we have now several new mines in our 

pre-Cambrian area in the making. 

 

This budget, Mr. Speaker, will not enable us in these departments, nor I suppose in any department to do 

everything we would like to do, nor to do everything that is desirable to do. More could be done which 

undoubtedly would be for the good of the province. But, Mr. Speaker, it is a good and practical budget. 

It extends social services, but it also extends and develops the economic base on which those social 

services must rest. Particularly is that extension true in my own departments, in the Department of 

Agriculture, the Department of Highways and some of the Crown Corporations which are laying a very 

important economic base. 

 

This budget is not too big, but it is the best we can afford at the present time. The hon. members 

opposite have stated that they will vote against it, but not one of them has given a logical reason why 

they vote against it. Some of them have indicated that they are going to vote against it because it does 

not do this, that or the other thing; but apparently they have all agreed that they are going to vote against 

it because it is too big. 

 

I would love to see the hon. members opposite do either one of two things: either produce some good, 

honest and logical reason for opposing the budget; or else support the budget. However, I am afraid that 

voting against the budget will not shorten that 40 years in the wilderness; but that is their choice. As for 

me, I shall support the budget. 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

22 

Hon. J.H. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare):  Mr. Speaker, I join with the other members of this 

House in congratulating our two new members. I have had the good fortune of an acquaintanceship with 

them in the past, and I am sure that in the amiable atmosphere of this Legislature that this acquaintance 

will soon ripen into a lasting friendship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I again have the privilege of extending my congratulations to the Provincial Treasurer. 

Because Saskatchewan people believe in integrity, efficiency, vision and initiative in their public men, I 

am confident, and I do predict, that our Provincial Treasurer will bring down many such budgets as he 

has brought down during this Session: budgets to provide for the ever-expanding economy of this 

province, for improved and expanding welfare services, for debt reduction and budgets without 

increased taxation. That is a real accomplishment and it has been going on now year after year. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Increased taxation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy:  My constituency of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, continues to flourish and to 

distinguish itself in the yes of the nation. Just in one area alone, in amateur athletics, in which we 

specialize in Saskatoon, may I point out that, this year, we won one Dominion championship – curling. 

The Saskatoon Technical High School won that honour. Last year, the Hilltops won the Dominion 

Junior Football Championship. The year before, George Generieux won the gold medal, the highest 

award obtained by any Canadian at the Olympics. You see, Mr. Speaker, championships are annual 

events in the good city of Saskatoon. Moreover, the fine engineering accomplishment of the 

Saskatchewan power Corporation in bringing gas to our city in a matter of a few months, to some 4,000 

homes and businesses, is an indication to other communities in the province that they, too, will one day 

share in this blessing under a provincial gas distribution system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure you will agree with me that among the most valuable people in society are loyal, 

efficient, civil servants; not loyalty to any political party because that is not their business . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Oh no, of course not! 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy:  . . . but loyalty to their jobs, loyalty to the great ideal of public service. I wish to 

express my personal thanks for the efficient and untiring efforts of the staff of my Department, from my 

right-hand man, my Deputy Minister, Jack White, down to the most junior member of our staff. Ours is 

an expanding and difficult Department. Our people are dealing in the intimate lives of many people who 

have difficult problems. Our Department is an expanding one as is evidenced by the new programmes 

which are being introduced. It is our aim to establish in this province a complete welfare service, one 

which will serve s a model to the rest of this continent. 

 

I am happy to announce that the reorganization of our Department is rapidly being accomplished. This 

has consisted of the decentralization of our services into various regions in the province so as to bring 

those services close to the needs of the people; so that the people may call at the district and regional 

offices and have their problems 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

23 

taken care of; and the complete elimination of any degree of bureaucracy. 

 

One of the most exacting branches of our Department is that of Child Welfare. In the last fiscal year, 

1952-53, we had 2,615 children in care. 

 

One of the divisions of the Child Welfare Branch is child protection service which was given to 1,254 

homes. It is the aim of the Department to keep the child within its natural home, to compose the 

difficulties which may exist in family relationships, to prevent the break-up of homes, to take care of 

their problems, so that the child may be retained with its natural parents and in its home. I am happy to 

announce that only 43 children, from 30 families, were made permanent wards of the Minister by the 

courts; 38 children from 17 families were made temporary wards of the Minister by the courts. In such 

cases the children will undoubtedly be returned to the homes when the problems which confronted each 

home and had led to the neglect of children were taken care of. One hundred and sixty-four children 

from 98 families were taken into non-ward care. Now this non-ward care is a mutual arrangement 

between the family and the Child Welfare Branch to take care of children during possibly the illness of 

the mother, or in many instances, it is necessary to remove children who are suffering from crippling 

diseases, such as polio, during the time they are receiving treatment. All such children will be returned 

to their homes. 

 

The Child Welfare Branch continues to give efficient and complete-as-possible services to unmarried 

mothers, of which there were 1,141 last fiscal year. In this connection, services are given as soon as 

pregnancy is discovered, when arrangements are made for the care and future of the mother and child. 

The mothers are encouraged to retain their children; the future of the unmarried mother is worked out so 

that she may be in a position to continue with her child. As complete services as possible are given to 

our unmarried mothers. Only 269 children were made permanent wards, 13 temporary wards and 315 

non-wards. 

 

The Branch also endeavours to get agreements from putative fathers for the support of the children: 101 

of those were arranged for last year, and 9 filiation court orders, under which a total of $38,817 

collected. 

 

Another division is that of services to children in care, and this is the very basis of our child welfare 

programme, involving as it does our foster homes. Of the 1,643 children in care at March 31, 1953, 

1,328 were placed in family homes. the value of this type of service cannot be overestimated. Society 

owes a great debt of gratitude to our foster parents who welcome these disturbed children into their 

homes, who bestow upon them love and affection and give to them the same sense of security that their 

own children enjoy. These children of ours are given an opportunity of developing naturally in a normal 

healthy, happy Saskatchewan home. I might mention the fact that Child Welfare provides clothing, 

educational costs, hospital and medical services, and spending money; also we pay $1.00 a day for 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

24 

children from one to 12 years of age; $1.15 for children 13 years and over; $1.45 for handicapped 

children and $1.65 a day for children that present special problems and where an element of custody 

may be necessary. I merely mention this because some confusion seems to have arisen in Public 

Accounts Committee, the other day – an intimation that less than these amounts were being paid. Such is 

not the case. I made a special check, and it would be quite impossible to pay less than the amounts I 

have mentioned. 

 

Another important division of the Child Welfare Branch is our adoption service. Three hundred and 

twenty-seven adoptions were finalized in the last fiscal year, and 282 children were placed in adoption 

homes. This process of adoption is a very careful and scientific process. The workers, of course, always 

keep in mind the type of adoption best suited for the future welfare of the child, and even such details as 

the resemblance between the adopting father and the new son are taken into consideration. And how 

many times have I heard the adopting parent making the boast that his son is the dead spit and image of 

him, and the same applies, to a lesser degree possibly, to the mothers. It is necessary that children should 

fit into the adopting home, which is kept on probation for a period of one year. Then, if the child has 

adapted himself to the new home and to his new parents, legal adoption is finalized, and that child is 

given all the legal rights of a natural child. 

 

There has been considerable public concern over this business of international traffic in babies, 

published in the newspaper as a “multi-million dollar racket” of the most debased kind. Many people, it 

seems to me, Mr. Speaker, are inclined to give lip-service to Christianity, who actually worship the God 

of Mammon and seem to think, because they have money, that money will buy everything. I do not 

know, in all of our social problems, that which is more despicable, more dastardly, that this business of 

trafficking in babies on an international scale. 

 

I brought this matter into the House last year, and was informed by the Leader of the Opposition that 

such statements as mine would give comfort to the enemy; that if I referred this to the United nations 

organization as an example; that (to use the Leader of the Opposition‟s exact words) “if we did that it 

would be taken advantage of by the Soviet Union to make propaganda against Canada.” Well, that is 

some excuse for the continuance of this practice! My reply, today, is the same as it was a year ago – that 

my enemies are the racketeers who indulge in the inhuman, barbaric practice of trafficking in babies. I 

was told that it only applied to a few babies. Last year, the outbreak was in Toronto. This year, you have 

been reading in your papers “Thousands of babies have been sold in the past ten years”; “Police uncover 

a $3-million black-market in Montreal”; “that couples, from across the line, have paid from $3,000 to 

$10,000 for babies.” It has even been brought up in the House of Commons, so that my concern for this 

problem seems to have been based on a very serious condition indeed. 

 

I have been asked by several people if it would be possible here in Saskatchewan for such a traffic to 

take place. I am sure that it would not, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to assure the people of the province that 

there is small likelihood of it happening here in 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

25 

Saskatchewan. In the first place, we have a sound unmarried mothers‟ service and that, to my mind, is 

the best preventive. This service must be accepted by the clients themselves, which it is in 

Saskatchewan, by doctors whom the unmarried mothers consult, and also by lawyers. In order to 

acquaint them and the unmarried mothers with the procedures to be followed, we have published a 

pamphlet, “What shall I do?” We have sent it in to all the doctors‟ offices and lawyers‟ offices in the 

province. We have excellent co-operation from the legal profession and from the medical profession. 

 

Also in this province, we have a very close liaison with Vital Statistics and it becomes a triangular 

liaison between Family Allowances, Vital Statistics and our Child Welfare Branch – all alerted to any 

deviations from the normal which may take place. Also, the Director of Vital Statistics must report 

illegitimate births to our Department, and we are in duty bound to investigate each of these. Also, Mr. 

Speaker, a married woman registers a child in this province as her own. Therefore adoption is not 

necessary, and Mr. Reid, the statistician, has assured us that it would be very, very difficult to deceive 

him. Another reason is that in this province there is a central control in social welfare and vital statistics; 

in a province such as Quebec there is multiplicity of agencies, so that it is difficult to get the overall 

picture of what may be happening. 

 

Speaking of Corrections, Mr. Speaker, our programme of giving help, guidance, retraining and 

treatment, both within our correctional institutions and in local communities, has steadily improved, and 

this serves to hold the line in this province, in contrast to what is happening elsewhere. An adequate, 

fully-trained staff in sympathy with the programme is essential, and we are endeavouring to bring our 

staff up to strength. Staff undergo a three-year training programme. During the recent winter there has 

been an increase in our gaol population. This may be temporary (I hope it is), occasioned by a rather 

serious unemployment situation which has developed across Canada during the winter. Also, we have 

been plagued by transients with no fixed abode. 

 

I am pleased to announce, Mr. Speaker, that the province of Saskatchewan gaol has not been converted 

from a purely custodial institution into a treatment centre. Facilities are being introduced which should 

soon place it on the same level of training and treatment as our Regina gaol. 

 

The time has come when consideration must be given to the removal of the women‟s gaol from its 

present location to a new one. For some reason probably best known to the architect in days gone by and 

to the Department of Public Works that administered gaols in those days, the women‟s gaol in Prince 

Albert was made a part of the men‟s gaol, and that has always created a serious problem. The time has 

now come when we must give consideration to the establishment of a women‟s gaol elsewhere than as a 

part of the men‟s gaol in Prince Albert. 

 

Since Indian and Metis problems are very much to the fore in Parliament and in this Legislature, I would 

like to deal with our provincial rehabilitation programme as it affects Metis and which involves over 

1,000 of them. I agree with what has been said in this House that the Metis have been a proud, dignified 

people who have played an important part in the early life of the prairies. But, down through 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

26 

the years, especially since the turn of the century, their resources of livelihood have disappeared – trap 

lines, hunting, transportation and so on; and even within recent years employment which they had 

hitherto had on farms has disappeared with the mechanization of agriculture in this province. Their place 

in society in Saskatchewan and on the prairie, has deteriorated, and for the most part they have isolated 

themselves in communities. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, in days gone by, and even at the present time, certain unscrupulous white 

people have exploited them with the result they entertain a deep and abiding suspicion of white people. 

This exploitation applied to the script which was given to them back in the latter part of the last century. 

It was filched from them by „land scalpers‟ for next to nothing – for a horse, or maybe a bottle of 

whiskey. They have been exploited by the traders and the dealers; they have been exploited in the matter 

of wages. All of these things have made the Metis people very suspicious and very difficult to deal with, 

because they are even suspicious of each other. there has been a neglect of education in the past. Many 

Metis are illiterate. They were not admitted to Indian schools, although their community may have been 

located on the edge of the reservation. Nor, in some cases, were they admitted to local schools, for 

various reasons. I have noted, and we are all concerned about it, that the improved economic conditions 

in the north have not had the desired effect among Metis of raising their social and economic standards. 

This is a serious problem and one which must be faced up to. 

 

As I have said, this suspicion of the whites, and indeed, of some of their own so-called leaders, many of 

whom are mere „stooges‟ of traders and dealers – yes, and of politics, the Liberal party of this province. 

Promises made before an election were promptly broken, and the people neglected after the election. So 

long as these so-called leaders of the Metis group could influence the voting of the Metis, that was the 

only concern of the Liberal party in days gone by, with the result that the Metis had only one faith left 

and that faith was their church. 

 

We have been very fortunate in having Father Blanchard assist us in the programme of rehabilitation of 

the Metis people, in the prairie region of the province. He has a great love and understanding of the 

Metis people; he was born at Duck lake. Also, he has the philosophy of co-operation deeply embedded 

in his heart and mind. His first programme, which was carried out in Willowbunch where there are some 

35 Metis families, was to teach and to give the Metis people an understanding of the philosophy of 

co-operation. They agreed that they had assets which, if used co-operatively, could do a great deal to 

improve their own conditions. 

 

Our department, and Father Blanchard too, believe that it is not good enough to give to the Metis people, 

but they must earn and so, savings unions have been established in some seven of the communities in 

which we are working. Co-operative gardens and other co-operative projects have been developed so 

that the nutrition of the children and their parents has greatly improved. Our Lebret Metis farm which 

produces stock has sold beef and milking stock, pigs and poultry to these various communities. 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

27 

Schools have been built where required – at Crooked Lake, Duck Lake, Crescent Lake. Crescent Lake is 

an interesting story. There the teachers, Mr. and Mrs. Hirsch, have played a great part in improving the 

condition of that community of Metis people. A school was built there, but prior to that the white school 

in the community had prohibited the Metis children from attending, and possibly for very good reasons. 

Under the leadership of Mr. and Mrs. Hirsch, during the past four or five years, the two-room school 

which exists there has improved the children, sports have been developed, they have a school orchestra, 

they travel around the country. They have developed leadership, and great strengths and abilities have 

been discovered in the Metis children, with the result that now the white people of that area have asked 

permission to have their children attend this Crescent Lake school. 

 

We have programmes in various stages of development at Crooked Lake, Willowbunch, Lebret, 

Valjean, Glenmary, Duck Lake, Crescent Lake; and, besides, we have a bout 90 Metis people on our 

Lebret farm. We have been greatly encouraged by the improvement that has taken place. I only wish that 

we had many more men such as Father Blanchard to do the necessary work that must be done to 

improve the lot, not only of the Metis people but of the Indian as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Nipawin (Mr. MacNutt) yesterday, made a comparison in social 

benefits between Alberta and Saskatchewan. I am sorry he is not in his seat, because my remarks, for the 

next few minutes, are being directed towards him. I would like to know why he did not make a 

comparison between a Liberal government in an adjoining province, such as Manitoba, and this 

Government in Saskatchewan. For his benefit, and as an indication of what would happen to the needy 

people of Saskatchewan should there ever be a return of a Liberal government to this province (which 

God forbid!), I am going to make the comparison in social welfare services between this province and 

Manitoba. 

 

I would point out to my hon. friend, and I am sure he realizes, that the payment of a pension or an 

allowance alone does not meet the needs of welfare cases, be they children or aged or handicapped or 

any other category. They need constant and skilled services by a well-organized, efficient and trained 

field staff. They need hospitalization and health services, rehabilitation, nursing care and housing. No 

matter how much is paid them, unless these needs are met you fail in any welfare programme. 

 

Let us examine what is being expended in the two provinces. In child care and social welfare, for the 

year 1953, we expended $1,400,000; in Manitoba, $500,000. but, remember this. We provided many 

services which the Liberal government in Manitoba does not provide, such as hospitalization and 

medical services for these groups. 

 

Supplementary allowance for old age security: we pay $570,000; Manitoba paid nothing. 

 

Mothers‟ allowance – we paid $1,328,000. I don‟t know what Manitoba paid, but in this year there were 

700 in Manitoba receiving mothers‟ allowance, while in Saskatchewan we had 2,424. We paid medical 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

28 

services for this group, including old age pensioners, of $759,000; Manitoba paid nothing. 

 

Hospitalization costs in this province for this group, amounted to $2,192,000; Manitoba, nothing or 

virtually nothing, except for a few in unorganized areas they were responsible for. We paid out for these 

groups in child care, social aid, supplementary allowances for old age security, mothers‟ allowance, 

medical services, a total of $6,224,000 in 1953. Manitoba paid out less than $1 ½ million for these same 

services, and I am not dealing with programmes in which they do not give any services such as we have 

here in Saskatchewan – rehabilitation, nursing homes, child care in institutions and in housing etc. 

 

To give you some idea of the comparison between a generous (1) Liberal government in Manitoba and 

the C.C.F. Government in Saskatchewan, the food allowance – as an example, we provide for a food 

allowance to indigent persons of $22.10 a month; in Manitoba the food allowance was $5.75 a month. 

We provide clothing – a schedule of $5.50 a month for adults; they provide $3.30. There are no 

supplementary allowances. I am quoting from the “Public Assistance in Canada – the Canadian Welfare 

Council report of 1953.” There are no supplementary allowances paid in Manitoba; there are no 

provisions for old age security; there is no provision for medical, hospital, dental or optical care for old 

age pensioners, or the recipients of mothers‟ allowances, except in their unorganized areas of the 

province. There the municipalities are called upon to render whatever services they are getting. 

 

Manitoba cannot boast of a welfare programme. To go on. Mothers‟ allowance in Saskatchewan is paid 

to 11 categories; in Manitoba, as far as I have been able to discover, to only four; and that is why there 

are 700 (or were in 1953) mothers‟ allowance cases in that province while in this province we had 2,414. 

 

To continue with the report; there is no provision for medical care for their recipients of mothers‟ 

allowances in Manitoba, and under section 18 of the Act there is a provision for registering liens against 

property owned by the recipients of mothers‟ allowances. That is the situation that used to exist in this 

province a few years ago when the Liberals were here, with respect to old age pensioners; but thank 

goodness that sort of practice is a thing of the past . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson:  You don‟t pay them at all now! 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: Manitoba has no welfare programme, or any sort of programme for old age 

pensioners; there is no medical or hospital care, and there are no welfare services. The Department of 

Health and Public Welfare know nothing of where needy pensioners are or what their needs are. All that 

is done is to send out pension cheques and, in the case of old age assistance, ensure that the means test is 

rigidly enforced. 

 

Now that is the contrast between the type of welfare service in a C.C.F. province and your Liberal 

province of Manitoba! 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

29 

There are several other branches of my Department, Mr. Speaker, with which I would like to deal. I may 

have an opportunity of touching on some of them tomorrow. Meantime, I beg leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned). 

 

TRADE CHANNELS 

 

Moved by Mr. Erb, second by Mr. Brown (Bengough): 

 

“That this Assembly respectfully requests the Government of Canada to take immediate steps to free 

trade channels by removal of all restrictive trade policies such as tariffs and anti-dumping duties which 

contribute, directly or in-directly, to the accumulation of alarming surpluses of agricultural 

commodities, in order that these commodities may move to those areas of the world which urgently 

need them.” 

 

Mr. Walter Erb (Milestone):  Mr. Speaker, the resolution which I bring before the House, this 

afternoon, is one which deals with matters of great concern to the primary producers of agricultural 

commodities, and, in the final analysis, of great concern to every Canadian citizen. 

 

I believe it is axiomatic to say that, if we are to have a reasonable level of prosperity of agriculture in 

western Canada and Canada as a whole, the agricultural industry must be maintained, strong and stable 

at all times. The problem of surpluses is one of great significance; it is a problem that must soon be 

solved if we are to escape its consequences. There are, of course, other factors that contribute to the 

general welfare of agriculture, such as parity prices and so on; but in my opinion, the main problem at 

the present moment is the problem of disposing of our agricultural surpluses, particularly the commodity 

wheat. 

 

During the war years, as we all know, Canada had demonstrated her agricultural productivity by 

unprecedented food shipments to the United Kingdom; and indeed, we began the post-war period with 

ourselves linked to Great Britain with food contracts. But since the end of the war, we have witnessed 

the disappearing of our contracts, one by one. This traditional market to which we have always looked 

as the market which would absorb our surpluses, has virtually gone. I might point out some figures 

obtained from the Dominion Bureau of Statistics. I won‟t labour the House with figures back as far as 

1941, but I will go back to 1948. In the value of dollars, our wheat and flour shipments to Great Britain, 

in 1948, amounted to some $333,563,000. In 1949, this had dropped to $327 million; and by 1951, our 

export of wheat and flour had dropped to $202 million. 

 

Regarding our bacon export: everyone in the House will remember, during the war, farmers were 

encouraged to go into bacon production. As a matter of fact, the Research Council at Ottawa set up a 

bureau whereby 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

30 

farmers were informed as to the best methods whereby we could produce a hog to satisfy the British 

market. We know that we had increased our production, through those years, to the extent that, in 1944, 

we had supplied the British market, by volume, some 692 million lbs of bacon of a value of $147 

million. However, since the end of the war – and as I have pointed out that our contracts, one by one, 

have slipped away – we find that, by 1948, our bacon contract amounted to some 200 million lbs by 

volume, or $67 million in value; and had slipped, by 1950, to $24 million in value; and, by 1951, to 

nothing. 

 

The same can be said for our cheese market. In 1948, we had some $11 million in value of cheese 

exports to the United Kingdom; by 1951, it had dropped to $8,700,000, and in the last two years, 

shipments of cheese have been virtually none at all. 

 

The same story goes for our eggs. We had built up a considerable egg production in this country and we 

were linked, also, with the United Kingdom with our egg contract. The same thing has happened here. In 

1948, we had, by value of export of eggs to the United Kingdom, $14,206,000; and by 1951, it had 

dropped down to nothing; and as a matter of fact, in the last two years we have supplied no eggs and no 

bacon to Great Britain. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  Where are you going to get any to ship there? We haven‟t got any. 

 

Mr. Erb:  So that is the situation with regard to our diversified agriculture. The hard truth is, Mr. 

Speaker, that, as it now appears, wheat is about the only commodity that we can actually hope to export 

in any large quantity and that export of wheat is becoming increasingly difficult. 

 

The loss of our egg, bacon and cheese market, of course, is the result of tariff barriers and currency 

exchange difficulties. the United Kingdom, as I have stated, had been our traditional market for these 

commodities, but it has been unable to earn the necessary dollars in this country to purchase these goods 

and, as a consequence, has been forced to look elsewhere, particularly in the sterling areas, for her food 

requirements. It is not long ago that a Soviet delegation came to Great Britain to work out a trade deal. I 

think every time any country comes to work out a trade deal in respect to selling Great Britain 

commodities that we produce and in turn taking good from Great Britain, means just that much less we 

are going to enter into a two-way trade with the United Kingdom. And so, as a result, our production in 

bacon and in cheese and in eggs has been drastically curtailed. It was interesting, during the Federal 

election, to read that Mr. Gardiner took the C.C.F. to task for deploring our lost bacon market. He said, 

“Why cry over a lost bacon market when Canada is only able to supply her own requirements?” Well, 

what Mr. Gardiner did not say was why we lost the British market. The fact is that we could still be 

supplying the British market with bacon, cheese and eggs, had we had a policy so designed that would 

enable British goods to come into this country and enable the British to earn dollars in order to buy our 

goods. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  How much did the C.C.F. Government buy from Britain? 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

31 

Premier Douglas:  Ten times as much as your Liberal government. 

 

Mr. Erb:  That‟s right. I don‟t believe our friends in the Opposition have given us any clues or any 

direction whereby we might be able to sell more wheat to Great Britain. 

 

During the war years we had been encouraged to increase our hog production and many farmers 

throughout Canada (as a matter of fact, most of them, I believe) were engaged in hog production and so, 

as these contracts slipped by one by one, we found ourselves in the position of having huge surpluses of 

pork. Then, when the floor price was pulled out from under the pork, we all know what happened. It 

forced the farmers out of production and so we are in the position, as Mr. Gardiner says, that we are only 

producing enough pork for our own consumption; and I think that is quite right. 

 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that it is a tragedy indeed, particularly a tragedy for the west where there are such 

great potentialities for agricultural diversification, to forgo the great contribution that we could make 

towards feeding a hungry world; and that, of course, is simply because of the lack of vision on the part 

of the Federal Government and its inherent weakness against the selfish industrial pressure groups. 

Tariff and anti-dumping duties have become a barrier against a prosperous agricultural economy. 

 

A case in point, which well illustrates my resolution, is the re-imposition of the anti-dumping duty on 

British cars. In 1948, the British home-market value of motor cars in sterling was so high in relation to 

the Canadian cars at the then exchange rate of $4.03 per pound sterling that the British Exporters found 

they could not sell their cars in Canadian without invoicing below the home-market value. Because of 

this condition the Canadian Government, by order-in-council, temporarily suspended the dumping duty 

measure. That was in 1948. Since September, 1949, when the British pound was devalued, the 

discrepancy between the British home-market valuation n sterling and the Canadian dollar was 

remedied, and thus it was contended by the Federal Government that the dumping duty suspension was 

no longer required to make British cars saleable at the present prices in this country. 

 

It was further argued that, under the Geneva Trade Agreement, the suspension of the dumping duty, in 

1948, had to be applied to all countries, including the United States; but at that time the export of cars 

from the United States and from foreign countries was under quota and, of course, being under quota at 

that time, was an additional advantage to the British exporters of British cars. Recently these quota 

limitations were removed. If dumping duties remained suspended there was the danger that the absence 

of protection might be abused by other foreign exporters who would benefit more than the British. 

 

The crisis which brought about the suspension of convertibility of sterling into dollars has not passed. A 

recent estimate has it that it may be several years before the United Kingdom will be in a position to 

trade on the basis of unrestricted convertibility of sterling into dollars. It is obvious, therefore, that in the 

interim the United Kingdom will remain almost totally dependent upon her exports to the dollar 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

32 

area to earn the cash needed for buying wheat and other agricultural products from Canada. In the 

absence of this type of trade the United Kingdom has no other recourse but to severely curtail the 

purchase of food from the dollar area, particularly from Canada, and seek elsewhere for her food 

requirements. 

 

If it was consideration for the British problem that prompted the suspension of anti-dumping duties in 

1948, then the removal of the anti-dumping duties in 1951, was ill-timed, because, as I mentioned 

before, the Canadian exports of wheat and flour had dropped from $338 million value in dollars to some 

$202 million in 1951, and the exports to the United Kingdom of other agricultural products such as 

bacon, cheese and eggs had dropped from a value of $148 million in 1948 to only $47 million in 1951 – 

almost to zero in 1952 and 1953. The situation, since then, has not improved; s a matter of fact, it is 

deteriorating right along. 

 

Now the devaluation of the pound sterling in terms of Canadian dollars had, as its primary purposes, the 

stimulation of sterling exports to the dollar area. It was to the advantage of the Canadian farmer that this 

objective be accomplished. Instead, under pressure from Canadian automobile manufacturers, the 

Canadian Government re-imposed the anti-dumping duty against British cars, claiming that the crisis 

was over. The statistics, according to the Dominion bureau of Statistics, show how wrong they were, 

because the imports of passenger cars into Canada, chiefly from the United Kingdom, rose from 17,037 

in 1948, when the dumping duty was lifted, to a peak of 81,722 in 1950, and it dropped to 35,665 in 

1952, following the re-imposition of the dumping duty. 

 

The fact of the matter is that the United Kingdom has had to impose stringent measures on its domestic 

economies in order to meet the crisis in currency exchange. Accordingly, various taxes have been 

imposed upon automobiles at home because cars in Great Britain are regarded as a luxury since they 

utilize steel and gasoline and oil; and that, of course, to an extent that the austerity programme in Great 

Britain cannot very well afford. Accordingly, British cars at home are quite highly priced; but the 

anti-dumping duty is automatically imposed whenever the fair market value in the country of origin is 

found by Canadian Customs to be more than the invoice price of the exports. The result of imposition of 

the dumping duty has not, despite the devaluation of the pound sterling, made British cars competitive in 

Canada. 

 

The argument that other countries may take advantage of the lifting of the anti-dumping duties, Mr. 

Speaker, lacks validity. If European countries with steel shortages and lack of effective distribution, 

maintenance and repair systems (in this country) can sell cars competitively after paying transportation 

costs of many thousands of miles, then it is a fact that our Canadian cars are overpriced and the solution 

does not lie in further increased tariff barriers. This is but one incident in many. 

 

The Canadian Government at various times has proved receptive to organized industrial pressure groups 

which have sought to perpetuate their existence in the haven sheltered by restrictive trade measures. 

These measures, in recent years, have been variously applied against the 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

33 

importation of Cuban sugar, imports from Japan, textiles – remember Japanese shirts coming into this 

country? – and Czechoslovakian and Polish-manufactured goods. The latter two – that is 

Czechoslovakia and Poland – have had a duty of 50 per cent imposed upon their goods before applying 

the regular tariff charges, presumably because customs officials could not determine what a fair market 

value was in these countries. 

 

The Canadian Government, Mr. Speaker, seems to have taken several steps which instead of stimulating 

sterling area exports to this country have had the opposite effect. Several years ago, the Canadian 

Government decided to encourage the British to send textiles to this country as a means of encouraging 

trade, by promising to remove the tariff. However, when the British goods came into this country and 

became really competitive, then the tariff was re-imposed. It is time that the Canadian Government 

realized that, as far as the farmers are concerned, tariffs are a barrier against their income; they are not 

just barriers against the manufactured goods that are coming into this country to compete with other 

goods. When they are imposed against the goods of the best customers for our agricultural products, 

they put off the day when free multilateral trade can again return to the free world. 

 

I should like to make some remarks about the latest anti-dumping duty that we have heard about 

considerably, and that is in respect to sub-section 6 of section 35 of the Customs Act, known as „Bill 29‟ 

when it first came in. The purpose of the new sub-section was to offer protection to the Canadian textile 

industry against the dumping of cheap American textiles on the Canadian market at the end of each 

season when the prices fell because the manufacturers of these goods sell off their goods that remain in 

their stocks at lower prices than those prevailing during the season. The House of Commons has decided 

that they would label the practice of the United States sending textiles to this country as dumping. There 

is an article I should like to read from the „Leader-Post‟. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: Oh, no! 

 

Mr. Erb:  . . . depicting the plight of the textile industry: 

 

“The hated word „depression‟ is being used more and more in Canada sorely to beset the textile 

industry. Closed factories, layoffs and widespread short-time tell the story of an industry battling 

hardship. While Canada as a whole was gaining world-wide attention in the drive to boom conditions, 

her textile business was going the other way, although it produces anything from nylons to camera . . . 

„We are hard put to scrape enough work to carry on present production, which is far from what we 

would like to see‟, said Blair Gordon, President of the Dominion Textile Company Limited.” 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

34 

The Canadian textile industry, Mr. Speaker, is a high-cost industry. It already enjoyed a high level of 

tariff protection against imports from the United States and overseas. The added protection under 

sub-section 6, I submit, would make it appear that the existence of a textile industry in Canada is open 

for question. 

 

Reading from the „Canadian Forum‟, Harry Eastman has this to say: 

 

“Dumping has traditionally been considered to be harmful to the importing country. This view, of 

course, is quite misguided when the dumping is a permanent phenomenon. In such a case the 

consumers in the importing country are able to purchase the commodity in question at a lower price 

than that which they could normally expect, and their standard of living is thereby raised. If such 

dumping prevents the profitable operation of a domestic industry, this is only a sign that it is cheaper 

for the importing country to obtain the goods by the indirect process of producing other goods for 

export and purchasing the dumped imports with the proceeds. The country‟s level of economic welfare 

is higher without a domestic industry.” 

 

While the new law, Mr. Speaker, ostensibly was passed as an emergency measure in respect to the 

present plight of the Canadian textile industries, it has much broader implications in that it can be 

applied not only to textiles but to all manufactured goods. 

 

Again quoting from the „Canadian Forum‟: 

 

“Under the new subsection 6 of section 35 of the Customs Act, Canadian Custom appraisers are not to 

accept the actual price paid for manufactured goods as a basis for value for duty purposes of goods if 

they suppose this price is below normal. The normal price is that which prevails at times other than the 

end of the season or of the marketing period when inventories are liquidated. It is determined by 

calculating the weighted average of the prices charged by the manufacturer for similar goods over a 

past period which may be as long as six months. The calculation of such an average will involve the 

scrutiny of the books of the manufacturer and will take considerable time during which the importer 

will be uncertain as to the duty he will ultimately have to pay. Uncertainty is itself a barrier to trade as 

has so often been pointed out to the government of the United States by Canadian businessmen and 

governmental officials when, in the past, they complained of the procedures of the United States 

customs.” 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

35 

Now, in anticipation of what my friends might be saying – that the C.C.F. group at Ottawa supported 

this anti-dumping measure – I want to say that the group at Ottawa did support this anti-dumping 

measure, but only on the ground that it was imposed as an emergency. They moved an amendment in 

the House to the effect that this legislation should be reviewed every year because, as I have stated 

before, this law is not only applicable to textiles, it can be used against all manufactured goods coming 

into this country. For that reason they supported this only after their efforts to have the amendment 

read into the Act had failed. It is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the anti-dumping law is not the solution, 

or the answer to the present plight of the textile industry. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  Better have the C.C.F. move this resolution in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Erb:  Mr. Cluny, who is the assistant Canadian director of the Textile Workers‟ Union of 

America of the C.C.L. says this: 

 

“Things are getting worse; progressively worse. (Mr. Cluny says) he believes the anti-dumping law 

won‟t take care of the troubles. Since it passed, the situation has become worse.” 

 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that when an industry faces a crisis such as the Canadian textile industry is 

even with its already high level of tariff production, further protection in the form of anti-dumping 

duty not only will not remedy its ills, but other industries may be adversely affected by the arbitrary 

protection of the one industry. Our agricultural industry can only remain stable when we have 

free-flowing trade and any new dumping device simply adds to the aggregate of tariff barriers and 

retards our progress towards multilateral trade. 

 

It seems to me then that, for Canada as well as for the United States, it means that we must be 

prepared to buy from other countries to the extent that we wish to sell. If we in Canada resort to some 

action which is designed to give artificial encouragement to or protect any one section of our economy 

(and I specifically refer to industry generally and certain sections of our industry particularly), we shall 

surely have failed to achieve that measure of prosperity that the distribution of our surpluses would 

provide. Unless the buyers of our foods can enter into Canadian markets without the discrimination of 

protective tariffs and duties then our already threatened economy will suffer more and more. If strong 

measures are not taken to maintain and regain our foreign food markets, then the population of our 

agricultural economy will be unable to purchase the manufactures of Canadian industries, such as 

tractors, combines, machinery, trucks and all items associated with the Canadian agricultural industry. 

The farmer, of course, as always, will be the first to face economic ruin, but his plight will spread to 

all other sections of our country with the resultant economic ruin of industry and all those associated 

with it. 

 

The time has come for Canada, as well as other countries, to face the international trade crisis. The 

only positive action we can take to insure a high level of employment and a continuous high level of 

agricultural production, is to permit those countries that need our food to do business with us. Any 

tariff or duty or trade obstacle must be 



 

March 11, 1954 

 

 

36 

removed that prevents these countries from selling to us. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is a solution to the trade and currency problems, and one that will bring the 

different sections of our economy into balance. This must not only be a Canadian policy, as I said, but 

a world-wide one as well. Canada could, of course, give that leadership. I want to say again that if 

agriculture and industry are to maintain prosperous levels, if hungry and needy peoples throughout the 

world are to be adequately fed and provided with a decent standard of living, and if we are to have an 

abiding peace with security and prosperity, then this side of the world must do everything that is 

possible to enable those nations who require our food to earn dollars by selling their products in our 

markets. 

 

In 1949, we recall, the Food and Agricultural conference of the F.A.O. made this observation which, I 

believe, should be a warning to us of what is required of us to remove our trade barriers to ensure freer 

and more normal trade in the world: 

 

“If all actions that are required to restore normal trading do not materialize, the nations of the world 

will resort to national action on restrictive lines to the detriment of consumers in all parts of the 

world. There could easily be a repetition of the circumstances that arose in the 1920‟s when the 

accumulation of agricultural surpluses was the determining factor which converted the financial 

crisis of 1929 into the world-wide depression.” 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I wish once more to state that if we are to escape the inevitable consequences 

that are inherent in the present situation of surpluses, falling prices, duties, tariffs and anti-dumping 

duties; if we are to maintain our economic equilibrium thereby making our contribution to the world in 

ridding the world of poverty and hunger, hopelessness and fear, then we must take immediate action 

toward removing those obstacles that have hitherto contributed in all too large a measure toward our 

domestic insecurity and the general insecurity of the world. I believe we face a great challenge, Mr. 

Speaker, and it is my hope that history will record that this generation rose up in true greatness to meet 

that challenge and had not failed. 

 

I therefore have much pleasure in moving this resolution. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald:  Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 6 o‟clock p.m. 


