



















































Hansard: March 17, 1954


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Twelfth Legislature 

25th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 17, 1954. 

 

The House met at three o‘clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

RE OIL LEASES 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural and of Mineral Resources ):  Mr. Speaker, before the 

Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I would like to make reference to the fact that advertisements will 

soon be appearing in the press and in oil industry magazines announcing the offering for sale of leases 

on three sections of land, two of them in the D‘Arcy gas field and one of them in the St. Lawrence field; 

seven quarter-sections of land – one at Dollard, four in the Midale area and two in the forget area. This 

will be a sale of leases, and standard royalties and standard regulations will apply, on a cash bonus basis. 

The closing date will be 4:00 p.m. Friday, April 23. 

 

PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are called, I want to 

present the paper that I promised, yesterday, that I could deliver to this House, when I was referring to a 

statement, or at least a press release with regard to a speech that the Premier, then the Rev. T.C. 

Douglas, made in Chaplin on December 14, 1942, when he was referring to state medicine and 

hospitalization. 

 

Yesterday, the Premier said that no such promise was ever made and at this time I want to send this 

across. 

 

Premier Douglas:  On a question of privilege. My hon. friend can state his question of privilege but 

he cannot put words in my mouth. I did not say no such promise was ever made. I said the figure he used 

was entirely wrong. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege . . . 

 

Premier Douglas:  I am on a question of privilege, Mr. Speaker, and I have the floor. The figure used 

was a question of $21.96; I merely asked my friend where he got the figure of $8.00. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Mr. Speaker, I want to read from the record of the official transcript, the words of 

the Premier, yesterday, when I was speaking, and he said this: 

 

―No such promise was ever made.‖ 

 

And I went on to remark on that, and again the Premier came back and said: 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

2 

Premier Douglas:  ―On a question of privilege, Mr. Speaker, may I ask what my hon. friend is 

quoting from? 

 

Mr. McDonald:  ―It is taken from a newspaper account of your speech in Chaplin on December 14, 

1942. 

 

Premier Douglas:  ―What newspaper and what date? 

 

Mr. McDonald:  ―It is December 14, 1952, and I think it is the ‗Star-Phoenix‘, I am not sure about 

that, but I can get you the paper. 

 

Premier Douglas:  ―It might be a good idea before quoting.‖ 

 

I think that is enough, Mr. Speaker. I was mistaken in the name of the paper; it wasn‘t the 

‗Star-Phoenix‘, it was the Moose Jaw ‗Times Herald‘, December 14, 1952, and I will read from that 

paper. 

 

Some Hon. Member:  We can all read! 

 

Mr. McDonald:  And it said: 

 

―State medicine and hospitalization could be furnished for slightly more than $8.00 per head per 

annum.‖ 

 

I will send the paper across to the Premier so that he can read it for himself. 

 

Premier Douglas: Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. I will be very glad to have the paper. I 

merely rose, yesterday, to comment on the fact that, in my opinion, the statement in the paper in quite 

inaccurate. The figure I used at that time was the figure of the Heagarty Committee of which I was a 

member in the House of Commons, and at that time I was speaking as a member of the House of 

commons; and the figure of that Committee was $21.96 per capita, which was the figure I used. 

 

Mr. Loptson: Was that in 1942 

 

Mr. McDonald:  That is not what you said at that time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Forty per cent provincial cost. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Mr. Speaker, before proceeding with the Orders of the Day there is one other item 

that I would like to bring up at this time and that was also a remark of the Premier‘s when I was 

referring to a figure of $70 million that I said that other agencies had paid off, which should bring down 

the debt of this province by that figure. And the Premier said ―You had better not trust your mind, you 

had better look up the records before you make a speech.‖ 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have looked up the record and I would like to say at this time that the figures total 

to slightly more than $70 million that have been paid by outside agencies to this Government, and, 

therefore, our 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

3 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. The hon. member – I know of course he is trying 

to waste radio time because he is afraid to have the reply to some of the foolish things he said yesterday; 

but the fact remains, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member cannot use the question of privilege to get up 

and debate, nor to get up and try to substantiate figures which he was not able to substantiate when he 

was taking part in the debate. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  It is not a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Mr. Speaker, I take exception to the Premier‘s . . . 

 

Premier Douglas:  I don‘t care whether you take exception or not, it‘s true. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  . . . saying I was unable to substantiate them. I said that I was speaking from 

memory and that, today, I would produce the figures to substantiate that statement; and I have them 

here, and if it is necessary I can table them in this House. And, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I want to say 

they are not my figures, they are the figures of the Government. 

 

Some Gov’t Members:  Sit down 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed from Tuesday, March 16, 1954, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): That Mr. Speaker, do now leave the Chair. (The Assembly to go 

into a Committee of Supply). 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture):  Mr. Speaker, before adjourning the debate, last night, I 

presented to the Legislature a review of the extensive activities of the Department of Agriculture and the 

province-wide responsibility for drainage and other reclamation activities extending throughout the 

entire province. I wish again to point out that drainage development in the area referred to by the hon. 

member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) and others, is only a small part of the Department‘s 

province-wide responsibility for general reclamation work. 

 

I also reviewed the development of past northern settlement policies, and referred to the comparative 

absence and inadequacy of former policies discharged by former administrations. I think I made 

reference to the northern settlement re-establishment activities and pointed out that, in many areas of the 

province, we see living monuments to that folly, today. I could enumerate some of the projects, such as 

Moody Lake, Onion Lake and the Big River area. I also wish to mention a Soldiers‘ Settlement scheme 

that was organized after World War I, in the Prairie River area, one of the areas that we are, at the 

present time, reclaiming by drainage. These settlers moved in there and withered on the vine until, 

today, most of those veteran settlers of World War I are gone, with other people in control of the land. 

 

I wish now to deal with the specific area referred to in the debate by the hon. member for Maple Creek; 

that is, the Smoky burn and Connell Creek 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

4 

area. This area was made available exclusively for veterans‘ settlement in 1946, and under favourable 

weather conditions (in fact, below normal moisture conditions) good progress was made at the outset in 

the development of this area and extensive acreage was brought under cultivation by clearing and 

breaking. Trouble began, as the hon. member for Nipawin pointed out, when the rains began. It really 

began with the frozen crop of 1950 and the subsequent rains which began in 1951 and continued 

unabated until the present time. This condition was not confined to the area referred to, but thousands of 

acres, particularly in northeast Saskatchewan, were affected. In Crop District No. 8, which takes in the 

entire area of northeast Saskatchewan. It might interest hon. members to know that, in 1951, 49 per cent 

of the crop was under water and remained un-harvested; so the problem wasn‘t confined to one 

particular area. 

 

The hon. member for Maple Creek, in his budget address, stated that the C.C.F. was using 

‗McCarthyism‘ as a whipping-post against certain members of other political parties who expressed 

views similar to McCarthy‘s. Does the hon. member not recall that the McCarthyites also endeavoured 

to involve the Hon. Mr. Pearson, the Minister of External Affairs, and to utilize this gentleman as a 

whipping-post? And does he not know that the C.C.F. group in the House of Commons came to the 

defence of the Hon. Mr. Pearson against this attempted McCarthy smear? 

 

This group will continue to protect public officials regardless of party affiliation, and the general public, 

against this type of undemocratic hysteria. When the hon. member was dealing with this matter, it 

almost sounded as though he were defending McCarthyism and the type of hysteria that is not consistent 

with freedom and democracy. 

 

However, the hon. member for Maple Creek then did endeavour to utilize three consecutive years of 

unusually heavy rainfall in northeast Saskatchewan as a whipping-post against the policies of the 

Government in that particular settlement area. Furthermore, he based his conclusions on the statements 

of one man, without taking the trouble to inquire into the situation further. Furthermore, he endeavoured 

to bolster his assumptions by letting his political imagination run riot; his over-dramatization reached 

ridiculous extremes, somewhat akin to an actor in a Shakespearean festival . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek):  My, my! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  It turned out to be that way – a comedy of errors. Well, Mr. Speaker, he was wrong 

about his objections to the criticism of McCarthyism and he was wrong about northern settlement, and I 

will give hon. members a few figures, this afternoon, in the course of my remarks. No one in this 

province has performed a more honest and conscientious service on behalf of the establishment of 

veterans than has the Hon. Mr. Sturdy. Every veteran in this province knows that he has a friend in the 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  He doesn‘t do much good. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  Now regarding the area referred to. The engineering staff of the Department of 

Agriculture was called upon to design a drainage system in the veteran settlement area, in 1951. The 

Department of Agriculture assumed full responsibility in 1952. The Department‘s development activity, 

by and large, involves only two full seasons of operations in the face of almost impossible weather 

conditions. When we assumed responsibility for veterans‘ administration, we discovered that, in 

addition to the $2,320 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

5 

made available by V.L.A., the Provincial Government has also given guarantees up to 100 per cent to 

the Co-operative Credit Society for loans to members of six veterans‘ co-operatives in the amount of 

$78,000; and, in accord with our agreement with V.L.A., the Provincial Government also guaranteed, in 

part, the V.L.A. grants advanced by the Dominion Government. To date, as a result of default, the 

Provincial Government has paid $7,840 to V.L.A. as satisfaction of those commitments in the area 

referred to. 

 

I should mention, Mr. Speaker, that in addition, work was provided both by the Department of Social 

Welfare and the Department of Agriculture to veterans during operations in that area. It is interesting to 

note that, since 1946 to 1951-52, the Department of Social Welfare have paid out $297,880 in wages to 

temporary and casual help. In addition, the Department of Social Welfare and the Department of 

Agriculture assumed an obligation to break 100 acres of land on each unit. This involved an expenditure, 

on the part of the Department of Social Welfare, of $531,000 in order to clear and bring under 

production approximately 34,780 acres of arable land. And since the Department of Agriculture 

assumed responsibility we have paid in wages to veterans in the area in the amount of $65,492 to 35 

veterans. In the light of this information it is almost ridiculous for anyone in this House to get up and 

suggest that adequate assistance was not available, and that this area did not represent the most generous 

assistance that any settlers have ever received in the history of this province. 

 

I referred, yesterday, at the conclusion of my remarks, to some comparative units outside this area on 

similar soils and poorer soils, on units that did not experience the same difficulty. I pointed out that 

some veterans, in seven years‘ time, on these other units had a gross return of crop income amounting up 

to 44,000 a year for each of the seven years they undertook clearing and breaking activities on those 

units. I would like to just make this point, Mr. Speaker, and emphasize the good progress that can be 

made under favourable conditions. All of the assets are still there and they will be utilized in due course. 

 

It is fully recognized that the land already broken could not be cultivated (a large part of it, that is) when 

this Department assumed responsibility for drainage in that area. It was also recognized that further 

financial assistance was required for many other settlers in north-eastern Saskatchewan. Therefore, in 

view of conditions in the spring of 1952, and the fact that much of the crop was under water in the fall of 

1951, the Department paid out $400,000 in payment of breaking credits held by lessees in that part of 

the province. Many of the veteran settlers who had credits coming to them received the benefit of these 

payments up to $800 per lessee. These veterans will also benefit in another payout that was provided for 

in the vote, this year, in the amount of $600,000. Any veteran in that area and any person in the other 

new settlement projects referred to in the Royal Commission report will receive a payout of 

approximately $1,200 per unit as further assistance to them in the coming season. So the assistance, Mr. 

Speaker, has been very substantial. 

 

In addition, in the flooded area referred to, the Department of Agriculture agreed to work some of the 

land and keep it in good tilth until the veteran could return and take up farming again. Last year, we 

expended a considerable amount of money in keeping the land under cultivation; and at this point, Mr. 

Speaker, for the benefit of the hon. member for Maple Creek, I am going to have the page boy take to 

him a map of the particular veterans‘ area, and he can see for himself the drainage ditches and the roads 

that have been constructed by the Department of Agriculture. 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

6 

Mr. Cameron:  You gave that to the Royal Commission, too, I presume. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: And if the hon. member for Maple Creek is still dubious I will invite him to come 

with me to the area and see the progress which has been made. I particularly want him to note the area 

on that map, and he can see the project and the parcel of land that the gentleman he met criticized; and 

he will find a good road on two sides of that quarter section and a drainage ditch on two sides of that 

quarter-section, too. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, in the light of this information no one could say that there was any lack of financial 

assistance or other assistance to get these veterans and other settlers established just as quickly as 

possible. We realize the need for speedy action in view of the heavy commitments which were made by 

the Government, particularly because of the heavy commitments by the veterans. The veterans came to 

see me in the spring of 1951, and we discussed the matter thoroughly, and I advised the veterans that we 

would do all we could and that, as speedily as we could, we would again bring the land under 

cultivation. It certainly was a great disappointment to the veterans who had very considerable acreage 

broken, had heavy financial commitments and could get no crop return from this land; but I advised 

them that we would share good and bad alike in the future, that many problems were ahead before a 

complete drainage design could be devised and before the physical work of putting in the installation 

would be completed. 

 

I pointed out to the veterans, too, that they were talking to a farmer who had similar experiences. I 

recall, in my own young years, when I was a little bit more adept and a little bit more full of vigour and 

vitality than now perhaps, I broke and cleared 210 acres in one summer, in the summer of 1929. And I 

not only faced adverse crop conditions, crop failures in 1929 and the 1930‘s, but also an economic 

depression, and I worked myself right in the hole just as these veterans did – not because of flood 

conditions but because of economic conditions. And I advised the boys I had nobody to talk to – I had to 

go in the shack and talk to myself. And it took me just about 15 years to work my way out again. 

 

I advised them that we were going to shorten the time that it takes to re-establish people. I realize, Mr. 

Speaker, that with the use of modern machinery, and as a result of my own experiences, that modern 

machinery should be utilized in order to clear and break land and thus to draw together the period of 

time that it takes to build up a good farm unit; and that is exactly what we are going to do. However, 

there is going to be limited pioneering no matter how this kind of work is done, so I advised my good 

veteran friends that we would get on with the job. 

 

That is exactly what we did. The Department tackled the job with a will. We realized that providing 

drainage under almost impossible conditions would be costly; in fact, under similar conditions, the 

advisability of doing anything at all might be open to question because of the cost. We considered this to 

be an emergency problem, and decided to bring drainage relief as quickly as possible, even though there 

would be extra cost involved. 

 

Just to mention a few of the problems – our engineers, when they first went in there, had to wade in 

water up to their hips in some instances to run levels. We were unable to use blade machinery; we had to 

rely on draglines, which is twice as costly. We also had to use dynamite for blasting ditches, and under 

these conditions the costs were about 50 per cent higher. In the last two years, it might interest hon. 

members to know, we utilized 31 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

7 

tons of dynamite to construct some 14 miles of ditches in that general area, and often we relied on the 

settlers who were experienced and able to use the dynamite, and we handed it out to them to blast some 

of the ditches to relieve flooding in the fields. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  What were you going through – rocks? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  Now what are the results, today, Mr. Speaker, after two years of operations against 

most adverse weather conditions? In the whole area involved the Department to date has run line 

surveys of 556 miles and cleared line right-of-ways of 115 miles; ditches constructed, 107 miles; ditches 

maintained, very nearly 33 miles; roads built, 87 miles; roads maintained, 22 miles. In addition to that 

we moved buildings to new locations for the settlers who wished to occupy their own individual units. 

We built bridges. We did many other things to assist in the establishment of those veterans in this 

particular area. Good progress has been made, Mr. Speaker, I only wish I had sufficient time at my 

disposal to deal in more detail with the various types of development that have taken place and the 

various obstacles confronting the Department of Agriculture . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson:  You can have all the time you want, as far as we are concerned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  . . . But to sum up the general results and benefits obtained, I can do so no better 

than to give to the House the figures of production for the co-operative farm areas. In 1951, this area 

harvested 19,000 bushels of wheat – that was the bad year. In 1952, there were 54,500 bushels of wheat 

harvested, and in 1953, 70,605 bushels of wheat were harvested, and this year things look much better. 

A great deal of summer fallow work has been done, and on the particular unit mentioned by the hon. 

member for maple Creek, I wish to advise him that there are 100 acres of summer fallow on that parcel 

of land ready for seeding next spring. 

 

So the prospects for 1954 look good in this area. We realize that putting in the drainage ditches alone 

will not bring immediate relief. It will be several years before the water levels are reduced sufficiently to 

take care of the annual precipitation to permit fieldwork at the proper time. But the assets are all there; 

nothing has been wasted. There has been no expenditure lost. the installations are there, the land 

improvements are there, and, in a very short time the settlers in that area will have some of the finest 

farm units in this province. 

 

I would have like time to say something about some of the other projects. The Bjork Lake area has been 

referred to. There are very few settlers in this area – only seven in residence. At Prairie River there are 

only two settlers in residence; and in the Clemenceau area there are only 19 settlers in residence, 12 of 

whom live in the hamlet of Clemenceau. So no loss has occurred there. The Department still has 

commitments unfulfilled in those areas to break another 50-acre plot for each one of the settlers; and 

also towards paying out clearing and breaking accounts, the area referred to by the hon. member for 

Maple Creek and the area referred to in the Commission‘s report will probably receive benefits in 

payments up to $180,000, and, as I said before, up to approximately $1,200 per lessee. It may be of 

interest to the House to know, too, that we have guaranteed bank loans for dwellings to 30 lessees, 

involving some $22,000, in the areas exclusive of the veterans‘ settlement area. 

 

People living in north-eastern Saskatchewan know the problems of clearing and breaking in that part of 

the province. The best answer provided 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

8 

to the criticism made by the hon. member for Maple Creek regarding adequacy of present assistance 

policies is that, if we advertise new lands for settlement, without the benefit of any assistance policies, 

we would be flooded with applications. Our experience indicates that we would have at least 20 

applicants for every parcel of land. But, as I stated before, there is no need for that kind of pioneering 

any more. We are dealing with a part of the province where all new lands will definitely be reclamation 

projects, and we are determined that, in the future, before settlement takes place at all, the drainage 

installations will be provided, access roads and roads within the area will be provided, and acreage 

broken before we invite settlement at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  The hon. member for Maple Creek referred to the interim report of the Royal 

Commission on Agriculture and rural Life to bolster his arguments. He overlooked one very important 

key statement contained in this particular report, and I wish to refer to it and I wish to draw the attention 

of the press, too, to this key statement contained in the report of the royal Commission. 

 

It is found on page 4, paragraph 8, and it says – and it is underlined, Mr. Speaker: 

 

―If this report seems unduly critical, then perhaps it reflects the Commission‘s acute awareness of the 

opportunity for a programme of development which might well stand as a model for the more difficult 

improvements now required in the long settled communities of the Province.‖ 

 

The Commission wanted to set up and recommended an ideal type of settlement project that would serve 

as a model and a guide to the settled areas of the province when we begin to deal with the matter of rural 

readjustment problems such as providing economic power services and all questions associated with 

settlement problems generally in Saskatchewan. This was their purpose and objective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I do not claim to be a complete perfectionist. I think, however, it is good to have reports of this kind, 

indicating what could be done provided, of course, the Government is prepared to make that kind of 

expenditure; and provided, of course, that the people of Saskatchewan are willing to provide the 

particular type of assistance required for a model set-up. As far as we are concerned, we have 

endeavoured to face this problem realistically. The roads are there; we can show them to anyone who 

wishes to go and see. The drainage ditches are there too, and eventually, as I stated, we will have very 

well established farm units in that area. 

 

I wish to take this occasion, too, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate the staff members of my Department, 

particularly the field staff, who have done such a good job in carrying out and discharging the 

programmes of the Department, particularly in this area of the province, against most adverse 

conditions. They have done, I think, an exceptionally good job, and they deserve the congratulations 

coming from me for the good work they have done to bring drainage relief just as speedily as possible to 

the particular area affected. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have taken a bit more time. However, I haven‘t encroached on another member‘s 

time any more than did the hon. member for 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

9 

Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) when he was endeavouring to make a speech in this House. I have 

endeavoured to present the facts – with no dramatizations, Mr. Speaker, and if the hon. member from 

Maple Creek still has any doubt, I would suggest to him that, when he gets any more ‗beefs‘, he find out 

the facts first, that he go to the source of the trouble. My experience is that if I believed every ‗beef‘ that 

I hear I would be in trouble nine-tenths of the time. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  You are! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  So I do some checking first, and I hope that, in the future, the hon. member from 

Maple Creek will do some checking. I have caught him off-base three or four times, Mr. Speaker, and I 

hope this is the last time. I will support the budget. 

 

Mr. R. Brown (Last Mountain):  Mr. Speaker, I think, in view of this being St. Patrick‘s day I ought 

to say in the beginning that like the Irishman I met during the war, I enter this debate strictly neutral and 

what‘s more, I know who I am neutral against. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House do not expect too much from the Opposition in the budget 

debate. About all we ask for is a little common sense and a little constructive criticism. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  That‘s too much to expect. 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  This is the second time that I have sat in this House and listened to 

this debate, and I am still waiting for a little of both from across the floor. I thought this year we may 

have received a little bit, but I find as usual we get what we have been getting for the past number of 

years, and that is the usual whining, snivelling, snarling criticisms designed strictly for political 

purposes. It has no bearing on the budget whatsoever; and is not doing either this House or the people of 

this province any good. 

 

I wish I had time, this afternoon, to spend considerable time dealing with some of the things that the 

members opposite have brought up during the past few days, but unfortunately, I haven‘t. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Lot of time. 

 

Premier Douglas:  Take all the time you want. 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain): I am going to keep this as short as I can; but there are one or two 

things that I would like to discuss, this afternoon. I was quite interested in the speech of the hon. 

member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) yesterday. I find that it was the same one he has been used for 

years; I believe I could give it myself, Mr. Speaker, without too much effort. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  A lot better. 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  The old cry –no bridges, no highways, broken promises . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson:  All true. 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

10 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  . . . and political patronage, and the old C.C.F. ‗machine‘. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  Well, Mr. Speaker, I haven‘t got the time this afternoon, or I would 

take great delight in debating with the hon. member the matter of broken promises. I have here a few 

files (and I have a lot more down in my office) through which I could go, and I could string out Liberal 

promises which have been broken clear from here down to the C.P.R. station. 

 

Speaking of political patronage (and he made quite a point of that yesterday), I wonder if the hon. 

member is old enough to remember, or whether he wishes to remember, what the Liberals in this 

province commonly refer to as the ‗good old days‘. That is, of course, the good old days when they had 

a real political patronage machine in this province. I would like to refer him to a little document which I 

have here. It is entitled ―The Saskatchewan Liberal Machine before 1929‖ published in the Canadian 

Journal of Economic and Political Science, February 1926. It is an article by a chap named Escott Reid. 

It is rather a lengthy document, and I do not intend to spend too much time going into it. But I would 

like to read just one or two excerpts from it for the edification of my friends across the floor. 

 

One here deals with provincial organization. This is one in which I am vitally interested, Mr. Speaker, 

because I happen to be interested in that for the C.C.F. myself. And it says this: 

 

 

―At the head of the effective party organization of the Saskatchewan Liberals, was the organizer for 

the province. His headquarters constituted the party‘s central office and there he had under him a small 

secretariat. A few members of the upper ranks of his outside staff were political journalists who acted 

as special workers with roving commissions, but the majority were civil servants and all, nominally at 

least, worked under cover. Each highways inspector, of which there were about 17 in the province, had 

charge of three or four of the 60 provincial constituencies. Each constituency had an organizer of its 

own, who might, or might not, reside in it. This organizer appointed two workers in each polling 

division of which there were usually 50. ‗The apostles went out two by two‘ was the customary saying 

among the organizers. In addition the constituency organizer was assisted by the road supervisors, the 

sanitary inspectors and the men in charge of the liquor stores.‖ 

 

This gives you some idea of what happened back in the old days, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  Still are. 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  Going on . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson:  There wasn‘t any Insurance office like you‘ve got. 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  I‘ll have something to say about my friend in a moment or two. 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

11 

Mr. McDonald:  Babes in the woods. 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  Dealing with ‗doubtfuls‘, they called them. Converting the doubtful. 

 

Some Hon. Member:  When you were a Conservative. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  When were you a conservative? 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  Well, I‘ll just say this – I won‘t read nearly all of it: 

 

― . . . was concerned not with government policy or administration, but arose because the doubtful 

voter had not been given what he considered the fair share of government jobs or contracts, it could be 

settled by the use of patronage. Similarly a doubtful area of a constituency could be won by a promise 

that a road would e put through it.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, my friends across the hall are the last ones to speak of political patronage or 

political machines! 

 

I would just like to draw to the attention of the House (I meant to do this some time ago, but it is going 

to work in all right now, seeing the matter has been brought up), a little article in the ‗Leader-Post‘ of 

March 5, which says, ―W. Bird named Director of P.F.A.‖: 

 

―W.R. Bird of Regina has been appointed Director of Prairie Farm Assistance, the federal agriculture 

department announced Thursday. Mr. Bird succeeds the late Mr. McGregor.‖ 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  They put the organizer in the right place. 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  The article continues: 

 

―The new director was born at Tyvan, spent his early years on the farm, went to high school in Regina 

and attended normal school. Mr. bird farmed for eight years at Tyvan and later was appointed for 

several years as field man for the Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture, Municipal Affairs and 

Highways.‖ 

 

He ends up promoted. And now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the House and the people of this 

province who Mr. Bird is. He is the late provincial secretary of the Saskatchewan Liberal Association. I 

am sure the farmers of this province will be glad to know who is going to be administering P.F.A. in this 

province, a matter which is of vital concern to them. I am sure they realize now, along with any benefits 

they may derive from P.F.A., they are going to get a large does of Liberal politics. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  A good man in the right place. 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  I was going to spend a little time speaking about what my hon. friend 

from Arm River had to say, but 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

12 

I think I will sum it up very briefly, Mr. Speaker. I have listened to that speech of his for a good many 

years too, not only in this House, but outside. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  You never learn. 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  And I would like to suggest to him that it is the same senile stuff that 

he has been peddling for years: Crown corporations; millions of dollars out the door; we have more 

money to spend than they did; we should bow down three times a day to the East and thank those great 

fathers at Ottawa because they return to us a small percentage of what they take away in taxes every 

year. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Sixty-three million dollars a year. 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  I would like to suggest to the hon. member that it is that kind of tripe 

that he has been peddling in this House which was responsible for the rout of the Liberals in 1952 and 

1953, and he darn near lost his own seat, and he will the next time. 

 

As far as the other members of the Opposition are concerned, Mr. Speaker, a number of them have been 

up and had a little say in this debate. Most of them dealt with their own little pet peeves and followed the 

line set by the hon. member from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) and the ‗Leader-Post‘, and that was about 

all there was to it. None of them had too much to say, and none of them had anything constructive or 

sensible to say about this budget. 

 

The main Opposition critic, of course, the hon. member from Maple Creek, I feel sorry for him, Mr. 

Speaker, along with a lot of other people on this side of the, because he got ‗joe‘d‘ into the job once 

again and, frankly, I don‘t think he relishes it a bit more than anybody else. Getting up and trying to do 

what they laughingly call, and we laughingly call, ‗criticizing‘ the budget. We got a great barrage of 

words and finally he lit on something which he though was really hot. He picked on the misfortune of a 

bunch of veterans in the north-east part of this province, misfortune brought about by an act of God, and 

tried his darndest to convince the people in this House and the people in the province that we were to 

blame for the rains. We have been blamed for everything else by the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, so I 

suppose we can expect that. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  The Royal Commission did too, eh? 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  Now, as I said, I do not want to take up too much time. There was 

only one other thing that the hon. member for Maple Creek seemed to get his teeth into, Mr. Speaker. He 

did shed a few crocodile tears about the plight of the municipalities, and, frankly, I think he cold have 

aroused a little support on this side of the House if he had approached the matter in a sensible, sane 

fashion. But no, once again he cold not resist trying to make political capital out of it. He tried to prove 

that it was all our fault and that we had done nothing for the municipalities. I‘ll have more to say about 

that in a moment or two. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year, speaking in this debate I stated that I felt it was only right that I support the 

budget for two very good reasons, the first being because the provisions of this budget do provide a 

further step to the implementation of the 10-point programme on which this Government was re-elected 

in 1952. Going on from there, on checking the budget over (and I think my friends opposite should do 

that sometime before they start to make 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

13 

their speeches), I find that the budget does provide a considerable amount of benefit to people of Last 

Mountain Constituency, the one that I have the honour to represent. For that reason, of course, I feel that 

it is my duty to support the budget. 

 

I have looked the budget over very carefully, and its provisions, particularly the increases in the various 

departments, this year, will mean considerable benefit to my people; but I would like to comment briefly 

on just two, namely, Highways and Power. In regard to Highways, I was particularly pleased to see that 

the Minister has provided for the commencement of the work of rebuilding No. 14 Highway . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald:  . . . need a lot of power . . . 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  I am glad he has, because if I hadn‘t been able to announce that, I 

don‘t think it would have been safe for me to go up to that part of the constituency. We are pleased 

indeed that this start is being made, and I had a talk with the Minister before coming into the House and 

I feel reasonably certain that it will not be too long before the job will be done. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  Who are you to . . . 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  I would like to remind him, though, that we have other problems as 

far as highways are concerned. No. 6 still has to be finished, and we are going to be very unhappy in 

Last Mountain constituency unless we get something done on the stretch of No. 20 between Duval and 

Nokomis, which is in deplorable condition. I could go on and tell him some more about highways, but 

I‘ll save that until later. 

 

I would like to mention Power, Mr. Speaker, for a very good reason. I find that the money which we 

voted for the Power Corporation, last year, provided for electrifying an additional 250 farms in Last 

Mountain constituency last year. That brought the total at the end of 1953 to 683 farms, and I am 

advised that, this year, a further 116 will be electrified – that all in the course of a very few years. I 

know people up there are very happy about it, and it is a far cry from the three or four farms which we 

had electrified before this Government came into office. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  I guess they‘d like $600 up there too, eh? 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  I would like to thank and compliment the Minister of Power and his 

officials on behalf of myself and the people of Last Mountain on the tremendous job they are doing as 

far as bringing power to people in the rural areas is concerned. 

 

I am not going to take much more time, but I would like to deal with one more matter because I think it 

is rather an urgent one; one which I mentioned the Opposition might have been able to get a little 

support on this side of the House for, if they had approached it in the proper manner. 

 

The hon. member for Maple Creek, along with other members of the opposition, have cried the ‗blues‘ 

about the plight of the rural municipalities. They have tried, as I said, to lay the blame for the position 

the municipalities are in all on the doorstep of this Government. Well, I don‘t intend to try and disprove 

their statements. That has already been done very adequately, particularly by the Minister of Highways 

and the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

14 

I want to say that I agree heartily with the statements made by those two hon. Ministers, that the 

municipalities are much better off and have benefited greatly by the policies of this Government since 

we came into office in 1944. But I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that while this Government has 

provided considerable assistance to the municipalities, and they are in a better position today than they 

have ever been before, they are still faced with tremendous problems and I think that it is up to this 

Government to try and do something about it. They do have a problem as far as financing is concerned, 

particularly in the matter of financing education costs in the province, in their particular municipality. 

 

I have one larger school unit which has been levying 30 and 33 mills for educational purposes and are 

faced with asking the municipalities for a further increase, this year. Now, Mr. Speaker, I am not saying 

that the municipalities have actually reached the limit as far as taxation is concerned, but they are 

running into this problem that the farmer, the taxpayer, the landowner is becoming more and more 

reluctant to see these taxes go up, and that charged against his land. I can understand that reluctance and 

I think a number of people will agree with me. The farmer has till a vivid memory of the 1930‘s, years 

during which he saw charges placed against his land, including taxes, to the point where it became 

necessary for a great number of farmers in this province to surrender those farms and give them up. It 

was easier to do that than begin to pay off the load of debt that was hanging over them at that time. 

 

The farmer, regardless of what anybody may say, knows now that he is feeling the recession as far as 

agriculture is concerned. He knows full well that, unless something is done immediately to alter the 

situation as far as markets are concerned, and the prices for his commodities, he is also facing an 

agricultural depression and in view of that, while he is quite prepared to carry the tax load and to pay the 

taxes, including the taxes for education, at the present time he is not too happy about it and he is going 

to drag his feet anywhere he can. 

 

Too, Mr. Speaker, our property owners, our farmers, I believe are of the opinion that the costs of 

education are not being evenly borne by all of the people in this province. They are of the opinion that 

too much of the burden of financing education in this province is being thrown on the backs of the 

property owners, while a lot of other people throughout the province are going scot-free. 

 

While as I say the farmer is quite prepared to pay taxes to support education as long as he is able, I am 

satisfied that he would rather see those taxes paid or levied in some other form than on the basis of land 

taxation. For that reason they are dragging their feet, and the municipalities are reluctant to raise their 

taxes any farther than they are at the present time. That means that the school boards have no recourse 

but to come to this Government and ask for further assistance. It is true that we are paying a very 

reasonable cost of educational facilities in this province, but I do not think, personally, that we have 

gone as far as we should go, and I think it is up to us to give very serious consideration to increasing the 

amount of money which we allocate to education each year. 

 

Looking the budget over, Mr. Speaker, I am satisfied that it would be rather difficult to cut down on any 

of the expenditures which we have laid on at this time, and therefore I am going to make a suggestion, 

one which will probably not be very popular, one which apparently our friends across the way 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

15 

have not got the intestinal fortitude to make. I am going to suggest that, if we really believe that we 

should do more for education in this province, and we cannot find the money out of these present 

revenues to put more into education, we very seriously consider either levying a new tax in the form of a 

personal property tax, a poll levy, or, if those are not feasible, then let us increase the present Education 

Tax and funnel several more million dollars a year back into education. I think it would be a very good 

investment, and I am satisfied that the property owners and the farmers of this province would much 

rather see that than they would see their land taxes continually going up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  Why don‘t you applaud that? 

 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain):  Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that is about all I have to say. I would like 

to deal with a number of other matters but time will not permit; so I am going to merely say that I shall 

support the budget. 

 

Mr. N.L. Buchanan (Notukeu-Willowbunch):  Mr. Speaker, I have not been on my feet before 

during this Session of the Legislature. I purposely held off speaking knowing that most of the things that 

I want to say would have been said by other hon. members, and thus my task would be that much less. I 

am not going to take up too much time in preliminaries; but I do want to say that I would like to 

congratulate the Provincial Treasurer on bringing in the biggest and best budget that has ever been 

brought into this Legislature. 

 

The size of the budget does not concern me at all. I remember about three years ago, speaking on the 

budget debate in this Legislature (it was then a $60-million budget), I stated that a $75-million budget 

would not worry me, nor the people I represent, and I am going to say now that I hope to see the time 

when our Provincial Treasurer will be able to bring a $150-million budget into this Legislature. 

 

The size of the budget is not important. A budget must pass two tests: first, do the taxes arrived at in the 

budget impose an undue burden on any section of our society; and second, are those taxes spent wisely 

and well, are they spent in the best interests of the people of the province? In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, 

this budget does that; does exactly that. 

 

Our financial critic, in speaking on the budget, the other day, said mainly two things: first, the budget is 

too large; and second, you are not spending enough money. You can sum up his whole speech in those 

two sentences. In other words, he wants to be everything to everybody. To the people who have to pay 

the taxes, he wants to hold out the hope that if there is ever a Liberal government in Saskatchewan their 

taxes will be less. And to the people who receive services from this Government he wants to hold out the 

hope that if there is ever a Liberal government in office they will get more. Now, you simply cannot 

have it both ways. 

 

There was no suggestion as to where money should be spent that is not now being spent, and there was 

no suggestion where we could increase money for any specific purposes. In other words, there was no 

constructive criticism whatsoever, nothing in which we could get our teeth into, understand and take 

action on. 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

16 

In British Parliaments all over the world the Opposition has a definite purpose to serve. That purpose is 

to act as a critic of the government, and to act as an alternative to that government. In neither of these 

did the financial critic or any of his supporters offer any alternative to the people of Saskatchewan in this 

debate or in any other debate in the 10 years that I have been sitting in this Legislature. 

 

I want to go into some of the things that the financial critic brought up. He said that municipal taxes and 

school taxes have increased. Well, he was not telling us anything that we did not know. We all know 

they have increased. He says that the increase from 1944 to 1952 in municipal and school taxes was 110 

per cent; in villages, 134 per cent; in rural municipalities, 116 per cent; and in towns, 191 per cent. Well, 

we all know that everything has increased. I remember back in 1942 you could buy an automobile for 

$1,500 to $1,800; today, that automobile costs you $3,000. You could buy a good suit of clothes for 

around $32 or $35, and today you have to pay between $70 and $80 for a suit not nearly as good as that 

you could buy then for $32 or $35. And the same with lumber, and with teachers‘ salaries. 

 

Let us examine the teachers‘ salary picture in Saskatchewan for the years that he mentions. In 1940, the 

average teacher‘s salary for the rural schools was $680; for the urban schools, $1,031, or an average for 

all teachers in Saskatchewan of $806. Last year, the average teacher‘s salary for rural schools was 

$2,066; for urban schools it was $2,629, or an average for all of $2,346 – a jump from $806 in 1940 to 

$2,346 in 1952-53; in other words, an increase of 291 per cent in teachers‘ salaries. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is something that was long overdue. There is no wonder, in viewing the salary 

picture of teachers in the early ‗thirties and ‗forties that we lost a whole generation of teachers in this 

province. It is no wonder that, today, young people, remembering the experience of their parents, have 

decided not to go into the teaching profession for fear that we might go into another recession and their 

salaries would be one of the first to drop. 

 

Then let us look at the school grants that this Provincial Government has been paying to these 

municipalities. The school grant for the fiscal year, April 30, 1945: to towns, the Liberal government 

paid $630,658.70; to villages, $647,534.16; to rural schools, $1,888,344.65, or a total to all schools in 

1945, of $3,166,537.51. Last year, 1952-53, this Government paid in school grants to the schools of this 

province, $8,706,537.67. This figure does not include the Dominion agreement refunds. This is the 

figure paid by the Department of Education in the form of school grants, construction grants and so on 

to the schools of our province. It represents an increase of 270 per cent over what was paid in 1945, and 

yet the taxes in those areas, according to the hon. financial critic, the highest one is in towns, 191 per 

cent increase over 1944-45. So the Department‘s contribution is greater in proportion than the increase 

of the local taxes. 

 

We come to the market road problem. About the only thing on which I did agree with the hon. ember 

was that the Government ‗s contribution to market roads must be continually increased if farmers are 

going to have the kind of roads that are necessary under our present economy. But let us look at the 

Liberal picture. Let us look at that. Taking the Gasoline Tax received by the Liberals in 1935-36, they 

received $1,749,000 and they paid out $9,816, or .56 per cent of the Gasoline Tax revenue received by 

them. The next year they paid out one per cent of the Gasoline Tax received by them in the form of 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

17 

municipal road grants; the following year, 1937-38, 2.78 per cent; then we had an election in 

Saskatchewan in 1938, and it jumped to 14.11 per cent, that year. But, the very next year, when the 

Liberals were returned, it dropped back down to 1.95 per cent, and the percentage of the Gasoline Tax 

received by the Liberal government during their last nine years of office, was 3.02 per cent; that‘s what 

they paid back to rural municipalities. 

 

Now, we come to 1944-45 and there was a change in Saskatchewan. The people of Saskatchewan grew 

tired of a Liberal government and they elected a C.C.F. government. We will take the nine years of 

C.C.F. administration in this province, and we will find that in the very first year, they increased the 

percentage of the Gasoline Tax paid to municipalities in the form of grants to 5.83 per cent; and it goes 

up each year until last year when they paid 7 per cent of the Gasoline Tax received back to the 

municipalities of this province in the form of road grants. Last year, we paid back to the municipalities 

in this province, in addition to the Public Revenue Tax which the Liberals were collecting, $823,501.42. 

The total of the last nine years of Liberal administration was only $742,177.85 paid back to 

municipalities. The total for nine years did not equal the amount that this Government paid last year. 

The percentage of the Gasoline Tax returned by the Liberals in nine years was 3.02 per cent. The 

percentage returned by this Government during the last nine years was 7.41 per cent. 

 

I want to go on and bring my last year‘s speech up to date, and so I am going to quote from it and add to 

it. You know it is very easy to follow a speech that you have made formerly; it saves a lot of work, and 

so that‘s what I did. I am quoting from the speech which I made last year: 

 

―The C.C.F. budget that we are discussing today is the last that we have before us of nine years of the 

greatest progress that this province has ever seen. I think it is reflected in the taxation picture of this 

province. In 1941, $13,656,000 was collected from the people of Saskatchewan in provincial tax. The 

municipalities collected another $17,391,000 or a total of $31,047,000 collected in municipal and 

provincial taxes in 1941 from the people of Saskatchewan. Their income at that time was $277 

million. The provincial and municipal taxes at that time were 11.2 per cent of the total income of the 

people of Saskatchewan. The percentage has been going down, Mr. Speaker. In 1951 the total 

provincial and municipal taxes collected from the people of Saskatchewan was $71,032,000. They had 

a gross income of $1,097,000,000. Their percentage of income paid in provincial and municipal taxes 

in Saskatchewan was 7.2 per cent, or a reduction of one-third. To be exact 36.3 per cent in taxes as 

compared to the provincial income. In other words, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are 

paying today a smaller percentage of their income in provincial and municipal taxes than they ever 

paid before in Saskatchewan‘s history.‖ 

 

To that I would like to add that once again this year there is a drop in that percentage. This year, the 

provincial, municipal and school administrations of this province are collecting a smaller percentage of 

taxes according to the personal income of the people of this province than they did 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

18 

last year. The taxes collected this year were $78,957,000. The personal income was $1,182,000,00. The 

percentage of that paid out in taxes was 6.7 per cent. 

 

I think hon. members of this Legislature will agree with me, and I am sure that the people of 

Saskatchewan will, when I say it is not so important the dollars that you pay out for something; it is the 

dollars that you have got left after you have paid it out that count. We see in this picture that today, 

according to our income, we are paying out far less than we did in any time under a Liberal regime. 

 

Let us now take a quick look at some federal taxes and see whether they bear out the same thing. I was 

not able to get the figures on the excise tax and the customs duty tax paid by the people of 

Saskatchewan. If I had been able to, they would have shown even a worse picture. But we find that the 

percentage relationship to personal income paid in federal taxes by the people of Saskatchewan in 

1944-45 was 3.5 per cent, while this year it has gone up over a half of one per cent; it is 4.06 per cent, 

just including individual income tax, corporation income tax, tax on undistributed income, non-resident 

tax, excess profits tax and succession duties. It does not include excise tax which everyone of us pays; 

nor does it include customs duties, as I stated before. So the Liberal government at Ottawa is doing 

exactly the opposite to what the C.C.F. Government is doing here in Saskatchewan. More and more we 

are increasing our contribution out of the goods that we have in federal taxes, while we are decreasing 

our contribution out of the goods we have in provincial taxes. 

 

I mentioned something about our municipal road problems; that is the problem which is cropping up 

more and more, year after year. We see it in our municipal conventions and the resolutions passed in 

municipal conventions; we see it in our own conventions. Last summer, numerous resolutions were 

presented to our convention in Saskatoon, acknowledging and recognizing this need for more and more 

assistance to main market roads out in the country. This is a need which has grown rapidly through no 

fault of this administration, through no fault of anyone‘s, but due to the fact that our economy is 

changing rapidly. Now, practically every farm is mechanized and all traffic is on wheels, going under its 

own power, requiring bigger and better roads, creating a problem and demand that will have to be met 

and dealt with. I am pleased that some steps are being taken. I am pleased to know that the Minister is 

giving every consideration to this, and I know that when he tackles a problem he sooner or later comes 

up with an answer to it. He has made for himself one of the greatest names of any provincial Minister of 

Highways that we have ever had in this province, and he will continue to do that. 

 

I was interested in the suggestion of the hon. member for Last Mountain, and I can go right along with 

him in that suggestion. If we are going to meet the needs of our main market road systems in this 

province, we are going to have to do something to put additional revenue into the municipalities in order 

for them to be able to meet the standards that are required today. 

 

I want to say in closing, Mr. Speaker, that I am going to support the budget. 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

19 

Hon. Mr. Fines (closing debate):  Almost two weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, I moved that you do now 

leave the chair, and I see that you are still there. Probably we can get you out, this afternoon, if I do not 

talk too long. 

 

I would like, first of all, to congratulate all those who have taken part in this debate. I would like, 

particularly, to congratulate those who have just taken part, this afternoon, I was very interested in what 

the hon. member for Last Mountain had to say in reply to the statement, yesterday, by the member for 

Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) concerning political patronage. He tabled a letter in the Legislature; one 

would almost think there was something very wrong with that letter. Yet, Mr. Speaker, the very purpose 

of that letter, addressed as it was to the various Departments, was to get lists of the key personnel in the 

various constituencies so that we might be able to be of some assistance to the members of the 

Legislature. In other words, one of the things we have been trying to do, through our Public Relations 

Office, is to improve the public relations, and there is no better way in which that can be done than by 

the members of the Legislature knowing who the different key personnel would be. Yet the way the 

member from Moosomin brought it in, you would almost think there was something sinister, something 

really bad about it. 

 

I was interested in what the hon. member just said about Mr. Bird, the new P.F.A.A. director. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, already the effect of that is beginning to show. I have in my hand the last issue of the ‗Hudson 

Bay Post‘, dated Thursday, March 11, and in that it stated: 

 

―P.F.A.A. to be discussed by the Farmers. All farmers in the Hudson Bay district, particularly those of 

Clemenceau and Irwin districts, are urged to attend a public meeting being sponsored by Mr. D.L.W. 

Hood, Monday night, March 15th at 8:00 o‘clock in the Parish Hall beside the Anglican church in 

Hudson Bay.‖ 

 

Premier Douglas:  The Liberal candidate! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  And it goes on: 

 

―In the event that any settler is unable to be present at that meeting but would like to have his file dealt 

with, he may make such file available to D.L.W. Hood and it will be taken care of.‖ 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, already, since Mr. Bird, the former secretary of the Liberal Association of 

this province, has taken over, he has now appointed his agents, and in that country Mr. D.L.W. Hood 

must approve applications before people can get P.F.A.A. 

 

Premier Douglas:  Liberal candidate twice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Yes, Liberal candidate twice, and now potential Liberal leader. Here he blows his 

own horn, quoting from what the Saskatoon ‗Star-Phoenix‘ had to say. He says that he ―doesn‘t want to 

go after the leadership, but he is available.‖ 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

20 

Premier Douglas:  ‗Barkus is willing‘! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: Oh yes, just like Mr. Tucker, a few years ago. He did not want to come to 

Saskatchewan, but the call was so great that he came back. But you know he was here only four years 

and the call got so great he was needed and could do so much to help the people of this province down 

in Ottawa, that he resigned his seat here and went back to Ottawa, because the call was so great! 

 

We find, too, here we have the P.F.R.A. organization, with the manager of it for the province, Mr. L.B. 

Thomson, being talked about as the next political leader for the Liberal Party in this province. How in 

the world are we going to distinguish between these federal organizations and the Liberal Party of this 

province? We have seen it for yeas in the city of Regina. The ‗Leader-Post‘, for example: the chief 

editorial writer, Mr. E.N. Davis, used to be the publicity director for the Saskatchewan Liberal Party; 

but, because the Saskatchewan Liberal Party felt it was wasting money to pay his salary, they turned him 

over to the ‗Leader-Post‘ and he now writes the editorials in the ‗Leader-Post‘. So, after all, it is getting 

very hard to distinguish between these different things. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I do want, first of all, to apologize to the members of this House. I regret 

exceedingly, more than I can say, that my budget speech, which I delivered two weeks ago tomorrow, 

was so poorly prepared and so poorly delivered that it put so many people to sleep. I must apologize to 

the members who found it so uninteresting. I do think, however, that that comes with very poor grace 

from any member who has been so sleepy in the morning that he has not been able to get out to attend a 

single one of the meetings of Public Accounts Committee. He can get his sleep in the mornings. He does 

not have to worry about sleeping while I am speaking. He was able to keep awake because he gets a 

good long rest in the morning, doesn‘t attend any Committee meetings; and yet is dignified by the name 

of ‗financial critic‘. I would think the first duty of any critic is understanding, and you can only get 

understanding through study of the various problems. 

 

A great many people talked about the public debt. The financial critic (Mr. Cameron), the Whip (Mr. 

McDonald) and the ex-Whip and ex-financial critic, the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson), all 

stated that my statements about public debt were not correct. The hon. member for Arm River is so 

quoted in the paper here: ―The debt of the province, judged by the standard used in almost every other 

province, has increased by $35 million between 1944 and 1948 . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson:  That‘s right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  . . . or between 1948 and 1953.‖ Now, Mr. Speaker, one of my jobs is to read nine 

other budget addresses each year, together with that of the Dominion. Ten budget addresses I have to 

read. I know how the other provinces do. I have here three examples. I have taken one, Social Credit – I 

don‘t want to be discriminating against any Party. In 1953, Mr. Gunderson, Chartered Accountant in 

British Columbia, here deducts the self-supporting debts, sinking funds, and he gets a total net debt. 

Then we go to the Conservatives in Ontario and see exactly the same thing. Mr. Frost, who is the oldest 

in point of yeas of any provincial treasurer in Canada, does exactly the same thing. From his gross debt 

he takes off his sinking funds and his self-liquidating debt, and he gets what he is pleased to call 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

21 

‗net debt‘. Then we go to a Liberal in Manitoba, and there again we find the same thing. From the gross 

debt they take off the self-sustaining debt, the sinking fund, and then he has two names for it, the net 

dead-weight or general debt. There is only one thing I am going to say about it and it is that if these hon. 

gentlemen believe the net debt has gone up, I want them to explain to me and to the people of this 

province how it is that in 1953-54 we required $3,779,000 to pay the interest on that debt but this year 

we are only asking for $3,364,000; in other words, a reduction of $415,000 in the amount of interest that 

we are going to have to collect this year. I want to say, also, that next year the people of Saskatchewan 

will be called upon to pay even less interest than they are being called upon to pay this year. 

 

A great deal has been said about Crown Corporations. My hon. friend from Moosomin started out, 

yesterday, and I wanted to get a chance to reply fairly soon because this thing is getting serious. 

Yesterday, at half-past three, when the hon. member from Moosomin spoke, he had the debts of the 

Crown Corporations at $4 million, and by the time the member for Arm River got finished, an hour 

later, it was up to $6 million. 

 

Mr. Danielson: I am going to correct that statement. I said when the brick plant was taken into 

account, it would be about $6 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Mr. Speaker, from the ‗Leader-Post‘ – the member‘s bible, here is what it says: 

 

―The Saskatchewan Government has lost a total of $6 million on its Crown Corporations, Herman 

Danielson, Liberal from Arm River declared Tuesday afternoon in the legislative budget debate. Mr. 

Danielson said that with the addition of the Government‘s losses on the woollen mill at Moose Jaw, 

the total loss on Crown Corporations would amount to $6 million. This did not include interest on 

amounts which had not been paid on advances.‖ 

 

Didn‘t include interest! Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: Where did you get the $ million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  From you. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Read it all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  The hon. gentlemen can read it for themselves. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  I want to correct the statement of the Provincial Treasurer. I have a transcript of the 

speech and if he can find the figure $4 million in there with regard to Crown Corporations, I will give 

him ten copies of the speech. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Oh, I would not take them for any price. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  I know you wouldn‘t. 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

22 

Premier Douglas:  It is tough enough to have to listen to them without having to read them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Mr. Speaker, this afternoon, I want to take a little time and I am going to ask the 

attention of the House . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Stick to the facts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  . . . in order that there will be no misunderstanding about the financial position of 

the Crown Corporations. With your permission, Mr. Speaker, and that of the House, I am going to table 

these figures, in order that they may be included with the speech. I am going to give them to the Press, 

and I am going to give them to the members of the Opposition. These are figures which are taken out of 

the Public Accounts. Any one of them could dig this material up themselves, but I thought it was about 

time that we had put together these things to see whether or not we have a deficit of $6 million. 

 

What are the facts, Mr. Speaker? I find, for example, that in 1944-45 the advance was $322,585; in 

1945-46, $1,649,443, bringing the total to $1,972,029. With your consent, Mr. Speaker, I won‘t read the 

rest. I will just put it on the table and it can be included in the speech. 

 

(Table I referred to by the Hon. Mr. Fines):  

 

Capital Advances 

 

 Advances Advances Repaid Balance 
1944-45 $ 322,585  $ 322,585 

1945-46  1,649,443   1,972,029 

1946-47  2,511,523   4,483,552 

1947-48  1,650,000 $ 658,500  5,475,052 

1948-49  2,170,000   950,000  6,695,052 

1949-50  2,322,788  1,235,000  7,782,840 

1950-51  1,899,300   824,614  8,857,526 

1951-52  1,684,250  1,000,000  9,541,776 

1952-53    938,000  1,550,000  8,929,776 

1953-54 x    347,500   830,390  8,446,886 

 

x Estimated 

 

This shows the advances each year, the advances repaid, and the balance, which shows the balance at the 

end of this fiscal year of $8,446,886. I have even included the $830,390 of the woollen mill. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, I have set up another table, a second table, which I would also like to put in the 

records. It shows the net advances; that is, the amount of advances less the amount repaid. Then I have 

the cumulative amounts which is similar to what we have in the other table. Then I have worked out the 

interest. The interest, Mr. Speaker, is at a rate for the first two years at 3 and 3.2 per cent. It is on a very 

small amount. Then it went to 3.4 per cent the third year, and for the last seven years at the rate of 3.6 

per cent, which I might say is slightly higher than the effective rate of interest that we have been paying 

on the money borrowed. 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

23 

(Table II referred to by the Hon. Mr. Fines):  
 

 Net 

Advances 

Cumulative 

Advances 

Interest 

1944-45  $ 322,585   $ 3,225 

1945-46 1,649,443 $1,972,029 36,078 

1946-47 2,511,523 4,483,552 105,780 

1947-48 991,500 5,475,052 179,253 

1948-49 1,220,000 6,695,052 219,060 

1949-50 1,087,788 7,782,840  260,598 

1950-51 1,074,686 8,857,526 299,484 

1951-52 684,250 9,541,776 331,168 

1952-53 612,000 (red) 8,929.776 332,460 

1953-54 482,890 (red) x 8,446,886 321,444 

  x Estimated $2,088,540 
 

And now, Mr. Speaker, the total amount of interest amounts to $2,088,540; that is, the total amount of 

interest on those advances throughout the years. This, Mr. Speaker, is all on capital account – these are 

the capital advances. 

 

In addition there were certain advances made out of revenue account for working capital, and I have 

here, also, a table f these advances and the amount that has been repaid. This went up as high as 

$1,098,000, and then was cut down, in 1949, to $692,000 where it has remained ever since. But allowing 

for the interest on that each year it amounts to $255,183. 

 

(Table III referred to by the Hon. Mr.Fines):  

 

REVENUE ACCOUNT ADVANCES 

(For Working Capital) 

 

 Advances Repaid Balance Interest 

1945-46 $ 662,500  $ 662,500  $ 11,925 

1946-47 436,000  1,098.500 39,546 

1947-48   1,098,500 39,546 

1948-49   1,098,500 39,546 

1949-50  430,000 692,350 24,924 

1950-51   692,350 24,924 

1951-52   692,350 24,924 

1952-53   692,350 24,924 

1953-54   692,350 24,924 

    $255,183 

 

Then there have been surpluses paid over to the Provincial Treasurer each year, and I have these 

amounts. In 1948, for example, $320,000 was turned back. I have allowed interest on that at identically 

the same rate. The next year there was $600,000 turned back, and I have also allowed interest on that 

amount to $11,658. That has gone on until March 31, 1954, when there has been turned over to the 

Provincial Treasurer from these Crown Corporations, $4,043,737, against which there should be credited 

interest of $423,180, making a total of $4,466,917. 

 

I come now to the deficits that have been paid out of current account by the Provincial Treasurer: 

March, 1950, Fish Board, $364,000; Leather Products, 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

24 

$82,727; Tannery, $73,036. The next year I added to that. I felt that since that was money that had come 

out of the Public Treasury there should be interest charged against it; so I have added the interest there. 

Then March, 1952, Clay Products, $102,751: At the request of the late member for Souris-Estevan, who 

felt that it was only fair that we should write-off some of this old obsolete machinery, the Treasury paid 

up $102,751. And then the interest. Then in March 31, 1954, I have brought it right up to date: Wool 

Products, a deficit of $830,390. Now, Mr. Speaker, those deficits amount to $1,453,168 with interest of 

$86,546 – a cumulative deficit paid by the Provincial Treasury, including interest, of $1,539.714. 

 

(Table IV referred to by the Hon. Mr. Fines):  

 

Surpluses paid to Prov. Treas. 

 

To Corporation Amount Interest Cumulative 
Mar. 31, 1948 General $ 320,000 $ 3,840 $ 323,840 

‗ 31, 1949 ― 600,000 11,658 935,498 

 ‗ 31, 1950 ― 600,000 33,678 1,569,176 

 ‗ 31, 1951 ― 580,000 56,484 2,205,660 

 ― 31, 1952 ― 598,683 79,380 2,883,723 

― 31, 1953   350,000   

 Reconstruction 395,054 103,788 3,732,565 

 ― 31, 1954 General 600,000 134,352 4,466.917 

  $4,043,737 $423,180  

 

Deficits paid by Prov. Treas. 

 

To Corporation Amount Interest Cumulative 
Mar. 31, 1950 Fish Board $ 364,264   

 Leather Products 82,727   

 Tannery 73,036  $ 520,027 

 ― 31, 1951    $ 18,720 538,747 

 ― 31, 1952 Clay Products 102,751 19,393 660,891 

 ― 31, 1953    23,788 684,679 

 ― 31, 1954 Wool Products 830,390 24,645 1,539,714 

  $1,453,168 $86,546  

     

 

 

Now this tells the story. I summarize it and what do I find? Surplus: $4,466,917 turned back to the 

Treasury; deficits, $1,539,714, or a total excess surplus over deficit of $2,927,203. But—just a minute! 

It is not that good, don‘t applaud yet. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: I must take some interest off, Mr. Speaker. We have had capital advances all 

through these years, so we have taken the figures from the first table, the interest on the capital 

advances, amounting to $2,088,540. that leaves $838,693. Then we have the interest on these revenue 

advances of $255,183, so that, after deducting that and making provision for everything that could 

conceivably be provided for, we find that there was a surplus over the deficits of $583,510. 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

25 

(Table V referred to by the Hon. Mr. Fines):  

 

 

Excess of surpluses over deficits 

 

 Before Interest After Interest 
Surpluses $4,043,737 $4,466,917 

Deficits 1,453,168 1,539,714 

 2,590,569 2,927,203 

Less Interest on Capital Advances,  2,088,540 

  838,693 

Less Interest on Revenue Advances  255,183 

  $ 583,510 

 

 

Mr. Loptson:  You had it in millions before. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Now, Mr. Speaker, I have here something which I think, too, will be of interest to 

the Hon. gentlemen. I am going to give them each a copy of this. This is a statement of accumulated 

surpluses and deficits of the Crown Corporations as at December 31, 1953, or at the time of winding up 

their affairs. This statement is approximately the same as what you will get in the Government Finance 

Office a year from now; but you might like to have it to study during the year, and so I have had these 

prepared and, with the consent of the speaker, I would like to table these today. 

 

One of the things that I think is interesting about this is that we have deficits, sure. We have had a deficit 

on the Fish Board of $364,000. We have had a deficit on the Box Factory of $18,000; Leather Products, 

$82,000; Clay Products, $269,000 (that, of course, includes the $102,000 I mentioned earlier); Tannery, 

$73,000; Wool Products, $830,000. Those deficits, altogether, total up to only $1,639,200; so I don‘t 

know where, by any stretch of the imagination, the hon. member for Arm River can get $6 million out of 

that — $1,639,000. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I find when I look at that table that, on the surplus side, the Government Insurance 

Office has a surplus for itself, and The Guarantee and Fidelity Company a surplus of $1,798,503. In 

other words, the Insurance office has made $160,000 more than sufficient to wipe out all the deficits for 

all the Corporations, to say nothing of the millions of dollars they have saved for the people of this 

province in reduced rates. 

 

(Turn to following page for statement tabled by the Hon. Mr. Fines) 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

26 

STATEMENT OF ACCUMULATED SURPLUSES AND 

DEFICITS OF CROWN CORPORATIONS AS 

AT DECEMBER 31, 1953, or at time 

of winding up affairs. 

 

 Accumulated 
 Deficit Surplus 
Saskatchewan Government Airways  107,015.63 

Saskatchewan Fish Board (Closed Oct. 31/49) 364,264.37  

Saskatchewan Forest Products:   

 1. Saskatchewan Timber Board Division  2,084,604.24 

  Saskatchewan Box Factory Division 18,920.92  

Saskatchewan Government Insurance office  1,588,362.45 

Saskatchewan Government Printing company  339,109.44 

Saskatchewan Guarantee & Fidelity Company 

Limited 

 210,140.98 

Saskatchewan Leather Products Division 

(Closed Dec. 31/49) 

82,727.23  

Saskatchewan Marketing Services:   

 Saskatchewan Fish Marketing Service Division  26,080.18 

 Saskatchewan Fur Marketing Service Division  277,610.89 

 Saskatchewan Government Trading Division  417.76 

Saskatchewan Minerals:   

 2. Saskatchewan Clay Products Division 269,861.03  

  Saskatchewan Sodium Sulphate Division  394,663.45 

Saskatchewan Reconstruction Corporation 

(Closed Dec. 31/51) 

 395,054.62 

Saskatchewan Reconstruction Housing Corporation 

(Closed March 31/47) 

 90,699.76 

Saskatchewan Tannery Division (Closed Dec. 

31/49) 

73,036.23  

Saskatchewan Transportation Company  368,351.49 

Saskatchewan Wool Products 830,390.33   

 $1,369,200.11 $5,882,110.89 

   

EXCESS OF ACCUMULATED SURPLUSES 

OVER ACCUMULATED DEFICITS 

4,242,910.78  

 $5,882,110.89 $5,882,110.89 

 

1. NOTE: The accumulated deficit of the Big River Mill Division amounting to $97,425.11 has been 
absorbed in this figure effective Nov. 1, 1952. 

 

2. NOTE: A deficit amount of $102,751,13 was absorbed by the Provincial Treasurer – Payment for 
fixed assets written off. 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

27 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I offer something else the members might like. I have copies for them. I want them 

to get all the information they can get. Mr. Speaker, with your permission again, I would like to table 

now and have included in this address, a statement of the surpluses and deficits of Crown corporations 

for their fiscal year ending in 1953. 

 

STATEMENT OF SURPLUSES AND DEFICITS 

OF CROWN CORPORATION FOR THEIR FISCAL YEAR ENDING 

in 1953 

 

 Loss for year 

ended in 1953 

Profit for year 

ended in 1953 

Rate of return on 

advances at year 

end/53 

Amount of 

Advance at 

Year end/53 

Saskatchewan Government 

Airways 

 $ 43,893.29 6.47% $ 678,000.00 

Saskatchewan fur 

Marketing Service 

 35,678.56 18.98%  188,000.00 

Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance Office 

 222,951.47   

Saskatchewan Fish 

Marketing Service 

 10,000.55  10.53%  95,000.00 

Saskatchewan Timber 

Board 

 312,756.31 10.80% 2,897,000.00 

Saskatchewan Government 

Trading 

 3,053.68 .92% 333,000.00 

Saskatchewan Clay 

Products 

 39,642.07 4.40% 901,000.00 

Saskatchewan Sodium 

sulphate 

 71,780.32 6.38% 1,125,000.00 

Saskatchewan Government 

Printing 

 43,541.75 14.37%  303,000.00 

Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 33,527.69 1.92% 1,750,000.00 

Saskatchewan Guarantee 

and Fidelity Company 

 86,604.44 32.9% 262,788.15 

Saskatchewan Box Factory $ 30,452.78    700,000.00 

Saskatchewan Wool 

Products 

307,174.56 ____________ _____________ 1,042,000.00 

 $337,627.34 $903,430.13   

     

Excesses of Surpluses over 

Deficits 

565,802.79    

 $903,430.13 903.430.13   $10,274,188.15 

 

This is similar to what I used in my Budget Address. I gave a summary excluding the Wool Products, 

because at that time the Wool Products‘ books were just in the process of being audited, and I did not 

like to include it; 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

28 

but this has included it and we find, for example, that this year there were surpluses of $903,430 and 

there were deficits, including $307,000 for wool, not only the operating deficit but also the capital 

deficit, which we put into the fund when we were winding it up, so that the deficits total $337,000. We 

subtract the deficits from the surpluses, and we find there is an excess of surpluses for the year of 

$565,802, even with the very bad year for wool, and winding it up, we still were able, on advances of 

$10,274,000, to show returns, this year, of 5.51 per cent, which I think is a very creditable showing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I hope that this will end, for all time, the loose talk, the silly talk, the stupid talk of 

those people. I don‘t know if it is that they do not know better, or that they do not want to know better; 

but I would say, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson:  We just don‘t understand your figures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  . . . that these figures should prove for all time . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson:  To whom? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  . . . that these Crown corporations have not cost the people of this province any 

money . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson:  Millions! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  . . . but, on the contrary, the Crown Corporations have been a source of revenue. 

And now, with these that have been difficult out of the way I feel confident from this day forward we 

will be able to bring forward even better results. When you go down over the list here and see rates of 

return all the way from .92 per cent for Government Trading; 1.92 per cent for the Bus Company; up to 

14 per cent for Printing; 10 per cent for the Timber Board; 10 per cent for Fish Marketing; 18 per cent 

for the Fur marketing; for The Guarantee and Fidelity, 32.9 per cent, and for the Government Insurance, 

using one dollar as the nominal capital, 222,000 per cent. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  You are doing a good job of skating on thin ice . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Mr. Speaker, these figures should prove conclusively, even to the people with 

minds that are like a vacuum. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  . . . per cent for the poor trapper. 

 

Mr. Speaker: Order! Order! 
 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  The next subject I want to deal with . . . 
 

Mr. McDonald:  Too much wool in your eyes . . . 
 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  The next subject I wish to deal with is one which has been referred to by the hon. 

member for Arm River again, and the hon. member for Moosomin, and that is the increased rates for 

automobile accident insurance. 
 

Premier Douglas:  Is that the river over there, that runs on and on? 
 

Mr. Danielson:  The babbling brook! 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

29 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Mr. Speaker, last year, the member for Maple Creek made some very serious 

charges in his official reply to the budget about us ‗juggling‘ figures between the compulsory 

automobile plan and the Government Insurance plan. I challenged him then to come into the Crown 

Corporations Committee and seek out the truth,. He never did it. He never did it this year. He never 

came near – never discussed it, I should say; he did turn up for that meeting. But he never even asked a 

single question. We put that report through without even a question being asked about the distribution of 

the expenses. 

 

There has been a great deal of talk in this debate about the $200 deductible and that the poor people will 

have no protection. I happened to tune in my radio, last night, to the member for Maple Creek, about 20 

minutes after nine, and I heard a voice crying, with tears being shed copiously (you could almost hear 

them through the radio), about the poor people with old cars who would now have no protection under 

the compulsory automobile insurance plan. 

 

Mr. Loptson: That‘s right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  You know, Mr. Speaker, it is only a few years ago that the hon. member for Arm 

River, the former Leader of the Opposition, and the ‗Leader-Post‘, all the Liberal people of this province 

were condemning the Government for including collision insurance – that we should never have had it. 

Yet this year, when we do something towards wiping some of it out, they come along and cry about it – 

that now the people aren‘t going to get collision insurance. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  But you are charging them for it, and not giving it to them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: . Mr. Speaker, I just cannot understand the mentality of people like that. What do 

they want? Do they want collision insurance or don‘t they want it? 

 

Mr. Loptson:  You are charging them for collision insurance and not giving it to them. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  You wiped it out, this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker: Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Mr. Speaker, the rate for insurance, today, is $6.00 – the lowest rate for the real old 

cars. What would you pay to get public liability of ten or twenty thousand and property damage of 

$2,000, and all these accident benefits, with benefits for widows up to $10,000, with out-of-work 

benefits from $25 a week up to $3,000? Mr. Speaker, $12 to $25 would be the rates that would be 

charged for that with any private company, and yet the people in Saskatchewan are getting that 

protection for $6. I think that the men who go about saying that we have taken away all the protection 

from these people, that they have no protection, are either woefully ignorant, or they are deliberately 

misleading the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  You are getting mixed up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: It is one of the two; I‘m not sure which it is. The hon. Minister of Education cited an 

instance in this House, the other day, of a case up in the constituency of Meadow Lake – a very tragic 

case 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

30 

where a man was killed, a passenger in an automobile, one of those old ‘35 cars for which they had paid 

a premium of $8. The man was killed and his widow received $5,00 for herself, $4,000 for her children, 

$175 funeral benefits – making $9,175 for an $8 premium. There was another case during this last year, 

where another 1935 car – this was a Ford, the other one was a Chevy; this man was killed, leaving four 

small children including twins 9-months old; and his widow received a cheque for $9,205. This, Mr. 

Speaker, was a godsend to her. It might not mean anything to the member for Arm River and some of 

the other calloused-hearted persons, but I am going to tell you it does mean a great deal to people in this 

province who do get into that kind of trouble. 

 

So, when they say that they get no protection for their $6, as the member for Maple Creek was telling 

the people, in his sob story last night over the radio in this province, I think it‘s disgraceful, utterly 

disgraceful, Mr. Speaker, instead of getting behind something that is good, and not trying to sabotage it. 

That is what has happened all the way through these Crown corporations; they have been sabotaged 

right from the start. When the Bill was introduced, the member for Arm River got up in his place in this 

House and said that he was ―opposed to it and 90 per cent of the people of the province were opposed to 

it.‖ 

 

Mr. McCarthy: It was only $5 then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Yet, when we introduced further conditions and provided collision insurance, they 

were against it; and yet, this year, when we take steps to remove the protection of collision insurance by 

raising the deductible to $200, right away they holler and holler. You just can‘t win, Mr. Speaker, with 

people like that; you just can‘t win. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  You‘re getting badly mixed up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  A year ago, in this House, on the 25th of February, in closing the debate on The 

Automobile Insurance Act, I stated as follows: 

 

―May I say right here, today, that if the number of automobile accidents continues to grow in 1953 and 

1954 at the rate they have in 1952, and if the inflationary trend that has been exhibited in that period 

continues, then we shall have to be coming back in another couple of years to increase rates again.‖ 

 

Mr. Danielson:  What has that got to do with the budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Premier Douglas:  The member for Maple Creek thought it had something to do with the budget. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  The hon. gentleman wants to know what this has to do with the budget. I would like 

him to answer me this question – Why did he, yesterday, think it had so much to do with the budget? 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Because it‘s paid by a tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker: Order! 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

31 

Mr. Danielson:  It hasn‘t anything to do with the budget at all. 

 

Premier Douglas:  Why did you discuss it in the budget debate then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Moosomin, yesterday, spent a great deal of 

time on ‗broken Promises‘. He went back to 1944. I am going to suggest to the hon. member for 

Moosomin that he get up to date. I will send him over some modern reading; I will send him over our 

1952 Platform. The people of this province, in 1944, voted on that platform; they elected this 

Government. In 1948, we went back to the people again, and may I say that it is a well-known fact that 

each new political platform that comes out supersedes all others that have gone ahead. 

 

Mr. McDonald: That‘s right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  In 1948, we came out with one to take the place of 1944. In 1952, we came out with 

another one, and the people of this province endorsed it overwhelmingly. 

 

That 10-point programme is something which I think is well known to the people of this province. I 

referred to it in my budget address, and I keep it close at hand at all times, because it is good to see how 

we really are carrying out our promises. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  How you really put it over the people! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Now, Mr. Speaker, there is one other point I would like to deal with. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Send it over. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  The member for Moosomin was going to abolish the Education Tax, yesterday. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  I wasn‘t; you were. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Oh no, he was going to do it! And, he said, ―how do we do it?‖ And he goes into a 

dance, and he says, ―right here, I will show you how. The Provincial Treasurer has a surplus of $10 

million liquor profits . . . ‖ 

 

Mr. Danielson:  That was the member for Swift Current. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  He called it a ‗stinking tax‘. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Mr. Speaker, he was going to use the surplus and abolish the Education Tax, but, 

you know, the strange thing is that just a little while later, the member for Cannington was going to use 

the surplus to increase education grants and one of the other members was going to use the surplus to 

build municipal roads. That surplus was used three times in the debate. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the surplus has already been used. The surplus has 

already been used for providing power, for providing telephones, for providing highways; we have no 

actual cash surplus. There is a revenue surplus which, as I pointed out clearly in the budget address, 

must be used to help to finance the largest capital programme this 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

32 

province has ever undertaken. 

 

I am to assume, from what has been said by the member for Maple Creek, the member for Cannington 

and the member for Moosomin, that they are in favour of cutting down the highway programme, power 

programme and telephone programme, by the amount of that surplus, in order that they can use the 

surplus for these other purposes. there is no alternative to it, Mr. Speaker, no alternative whatsoever. 

 

One other point – the hon. member for Arm River, yesterday, had a wonderful time about some bonds, 

financial guarantee bonds. He referred to a question which he asked the Government in the Legislature 

on February 22 – or not that soon; it was a little later. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Oh, it doesn‘t matter when it was. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  We‘ll give you the question if you haven‘t got it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  The hon. gentleman wanted to know, ―What is the amount of the mortgage loan 

placed by the Saskatchewan Government Insurance office on the property situated on Lots 1 to 4, Block 

310, Plan old No. 33, on 11th Avenue, Regina.‖ Well, the answer was that there was no mortgage loan. 

He then wanted to know, ―Who were the registered owners of this property?‖ Mr. Speaker, we had no 

information. I will tell you why we had no information – Lots 1,2, 3 and 4 are located on 11th Avenue 

and McIntyre street. The lots run east and west for 125 feet, and the Government has no information on 

any part except the west 65 feet of that. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  You might just as well save your time because . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  The next 30 feet, Mr. Speaker, belong to the Culic Motor and Cycle company; and 

the next 30 feet belong to Yaeger Furs. Well, the audacity if I attempted to say what is the value of this 

property. I might have been sued if I undervalued their property, or if I overvalued their property. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  What did you get the mortgage on? 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Mr. Speaker, this man, the Minister, admitted there was a $350,000 bond on that 

property Committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Will the hon. member sit down? 

 

Mr. Danielson:  That‘s all right. I told you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  First of all, we pointed out to the hon. gentleman . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson:  He admitted right in the Crown corporations committee, and now he denies it. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! 

 

Premier Douglas:  Don‘t blow your fuse, you might need it some day. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Are you through yet? 

 

Mr. Danielson:  It depends on what you say to me. If you can tell the truth, go ahead. 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

33 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! 
 

Mr. Danielson:  Very sorry, Sir. 
 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! It may amuse the gallery, but it certainly isn‘t adding to the dignity of this 

Chamber the way this debate is being carried on. I am going to ask the members to use a little more 

decorum. 
 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Mr. Speaker, I was about to say, when I was so rudely interrupted, that the 

Government Insurance Office had not placed any mortgage loan. What happened in this case is one case 

of what has happened in hundreds of others where contractors want to get a financial guarantee bond. 

What happens is that frequently they require money to finish the job; they go to the Bank; the Bank 

cannot loan money on a mortgage; they go to a mortgage company; the mortgage company cannot loan 

money until the job is finished. What they did in this case is they went to a banking institution; the 

banking institution said, ―We‘re sorry; we cannot lend you the money unless you get a financial 

guarantee bond.‖ So they came to the insurance office and wanted a financial guarantee bond. The 

financial guarantee bond was for $350,000, and to protect ourselves we placed a first mortgage against 

the property. 
 

Mr. Danielson:  There you are. 
 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Now, Mr. Speaker, I could tell them the value of the west 65 feet – it is more than 

double $350,000. 
 

Mr. Loptson:  But you said you did not have a mortgage. 
 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  You never asked me. 
 

Mr. Danielson:  Yes, I did! 
 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! 
 

Premier Douglas:  He doesn‘t know. 
 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Mr. Speaker, this gentleman has been in this country long enough to understand 

English. 
 

Mr. Danielson:  . . . which I didn‘t know? 
 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! 
 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. gentleman wants to know the amount of the loan placed by 

the Saskatchewan Government Insurance office on property situated on Lots 1 to 4. In other words, he 

wanted to know the value of the property of the dress company, and the Culic Motor and Cycle 

Company and the Yaeger fur Company. 
 

Mr. Danielson:  Oh, no! 
 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Oh yes, Mr. Speaker. that‘s what he asked. 
 

Mr. Danielson:  I asked three questions. 
 

Premier Douglas:  You should ask an intelligent question if you want an intelligent answer. 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

34 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Mr. Speaker, if the hon. gentleman wants to get information, intelligent 

information, then he must ask intelligent questions, I cannot answer them if they . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. Now he has made some statements there and 

they are not correct. My question was this: ―How much was the amount of the mortgage?‖ The answer 

was that there was no mortgage. The next question of mine, Mr. Speaker, was ―What was the value of 

the property?‖ – no knowledge. And the next question (there were three of them) was: ―What was the 

value of the property?‖ – Just a moment – two questions and the two questions he has answered with 

‗no‘. And yet he admitted in the Crown Corporations Committee that he issued a bond, or secured a 

bond of $350,000 against the property which he didn‘t know the value of. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  And he didn‘t know who owned it. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  That‘s right. My next question was, ―who was the owner?‖ – And he didn‘t know the 

owner; he didn‘t know the value. 

 

Premier Douglas:  Is this in order, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker:  The Provincial Treasurer was reading from the record. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  He wasn‘t reading from the record. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Mr. Speaker, the record is very clear. I‘ll read it again. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  What I would like to point out is that when questions are asked and answered they 

must be asked and answered in such a way that when they go into the records, the people who read the 

questions, can read the answers and know what they apply to. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  There was no objection to my question when it was converted into a Return, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  That may be a matter of opinion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Mr. Speaker, the question: ―What is the amount of the mortgage loan placed by the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance office on the property situated on Lots 1 to 4, Block 310, Plan Old 

No. 33, on 11th Avenue.‖ That could have been the amount of a mortgage loan placed on Yaeger Fur 

Company, or it could have been on Culic Cycle & Motor Company., or it could have been on this new 

block. That is the reason why we had to say that we had no information who the registered owners of the 

property were or what the value of the property was. 

 

May I point out again that the Government Insurance Office did not put up a single five-cent piece. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  No, but it zoomed to $350,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  As to the guarantee of $350,000, Mr. Speaker, may I say that for that we had double 

that amount of security. By this time probably we are off the financial guarantee bond. 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

35 

I just wanted to say that there are hundreds of these, and yet Mr. A.W. Embury, who was the one who 

raised this question in the first place – he went along to the Land Titles Office to place a mechanic‘s lien 

against this property. He found when he got there, the cupboard was bare. He found that already a 

mortgage had been placed upon the property by the Government Insurance office to protect our 

guarantee bond. So Mr. Embury was quite hostile about it, thought he had something on us, and gave the 

information out and it gets into this House. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have no quarrel with that, but I do 

object to his statement in the press that the Government insurance office has no right to be making 

financial guarantee bonds on private business like that. That‘s what we are in business for and, in spite 

of Mr. Embury, we are going to continue in that kind of business. 

 

The hon. member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) dwelt at some length upon the ‗shabby‘ way in which 

we are treating education in this province; that we weren‘t spending nearly enough on education. I want 

to say that I believe, and this Government believes, that education is one thing for which this province 

must continue to spend increasingly more of its revenues on. We have assured the school trustees. At 

their convention in Saskatoon a year ago, I assured them that, as more revenue became available, they 

could depend upon it, the amounts of their grants would be increased. I pointed out to them on that 

occasion that they could not expect those grants to go up suddenly; we did not want to increase them 

away up and then have to cut them back. We wanted to do something that would be on a good sound 

basis, something that would be permanent. What do we find, Mr. Speaker? In 1943-44 on a total 

expenditure by the government of the day of $32 million, $4 million spent on education, 12 ½ per cent 

of the budget; in 1954-55 our budget, $78 million, and we will be spending $14,463,000, or 19 per cent 

of our budget. In spite of the fact that it is a $78-million budget instead of $32-million, we are spending 

19 per cent on education compared with 12 ½ per cent. 

 

This Government has, through the different new projects they have established, shown their interest in 

education. What we have done in northern Saskatchewan, for instance, where there were hundreds of 

children who never had an opportunity to get any education whatsoever; in the extension of the 

provision of free textbooks in our schools, the establishment of the student-aid fund. It is true that prior 

to 1944, the government of the day did vote certain sums of money for scholarships and loans, one-half 

of which was contributed by the Federal Government. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  That‘s right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  But today, we have set up a fund with cash in the bank, actual cash there, of over a 

million dollars and, Mr. Speaker, there was no fund under the previous Liberal administration. that is the 

point that I tried to make, the other day. 

 

Then, too, what we have done in the field of our school broadcasts, something which I think all hon. 

gentlemen will agree, is a real credit to the Department of Education. So also is the work that the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board is doing, the work that is being done by the Physical Fitness and Recreation 

Branch. We shall have an opportunity to see in action some of the students who have developed their 

talents in the field of drama as the result of the work of this body. Then what has been done, too, in the 

field of Adult Education. All of these are new fields. And then the expansion that has taken place in our 

Correspondence Schools with the greatly increased numbers that are taking advantage of that. Today, we 

are saving the rural schools of this 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

36 

province millions of dollars by virtue of the fact that we have a system of correspondence schools which 

enables those youngsters to get an education. Then, too, we have done something to make the teaching 

profession more attractive, first by making more money available through grants to schools, and second, 

by what we have done in the field of teachers‘ pension or superannuation plans. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just like to mention one other figure in connection with this. In 1943-44 the grants 

to Education were $2,765,000. These were increased gradually. In 1947-48 there was an increase of 

$1,145,000; in 1950-51, an increase of $1,100,000; 1953-53, an increase of $1,600,000; in 1953-54, we 

turned back $1,600,000 in Public Revenue Tax, and in 1954-55, another increase of a million dollars. So 

today our grants are up to approximately $10 million – almost $4 for every $1 that was being 

contributed to Education prior to the time this Government came in. 

 

May I say that I think those members who, like the member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) yesterday, 

made comparisons between the amount of the basic grant today and 1944, were most unfair. I want to 

say that in many other respects the member for Moosomin was very unfair yesterday in connection with 

his figures. But yesterday he pointed out that, in 1944, schools were getting grants of $200; but in 

1953-54, they were getting $400 and now, he understands, it is to go up to $500. ―Well!‖ he says, ―What 

of it? That‘s just an increase of 2 ½ times,‖ What he didn‘t talk about was the equalization grants, which 

are the important things in the rural schools of this province. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  Depends where you live. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  the most a one-room rural school with an assessment of $25,000 in 1944 could get 

was $200 and yet, in 1953-53, they could get as much as $1,200 in equalization grants, and under the 

formula which has been adopted now they will be able to get another approximately $200. In other 

words, the schools will be able to get a maximum today of approximately $1,800, when up to 1944, 

including equalization grants and the per capita grant, all they could get was $500. Does that look as 

though we have been neglecting education? I want to say today that if revenues of this province continue 

to expand, it is our desire and our intention to continue to share it with those who are placed in charge of 

the responsibility of providing educational services for our young people. 

 

Much has been talked about what they are doing in Alberta in making loans and grants, lending money 

for self-liquidating purposes. It was not until after they had $90 million in the bank that they introduced 

their Bill to make loans available for self-liquidating purposes. I want to assure this House that long 

before we have $90 million we will have had legislation of that kind on the statute books, too. 

 

I would like to remind hon. members that we are in a position where we still have to go out on the 

market to borrow money, so any talk of us making large sums available to municipalities . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson:  And whose fault is that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  . . . is sheer nonsense. The hon. gentleman wants to know whose fault it is that we 

have to go out and borrow. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  . . . advantage of oil development in four years . . . 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

37 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  No, he‘s a great armchair critic. I‘d like him to be a foot critic – to stand up and 

make his speech. He had a wonderful opportunity. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one other point I would like to make before I sit down and that was referred to by the 

hon. member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. Kohaly). I would like to congratulate the hon. member for 

Souris-Estevan on his criticism. I know at least that he read the budget speech before he got up to give 

his criticism. I am not going to say that about the others. I know that he did, and I do think that his 

criticism of the budget was very fair. 

 

One suggestion that he made that I would like to comment on is that we should provide earlier Public 

Accounts. Mr. Speaker, I am in agreement; I would like to get earlier Public Accounts too; so would all 

my colleagues. I can assure you that it is not very nice for the Ministers of the Crown to get the Public 

Accounts on the day before the House meets and have to go over those and be prepared to answer all the 

governments that will be asked. The members want them in order that they can be prepared to ask 

questions; but the Cabinet Ministers like to get them so that they can answer the questions, which is 

pretty nearly equally as important. But here is the problem: The year-end is March 31st. We don‘t close 

off our books until April 15th and usually it is several weeks after that before all payments are recorded. 

Then the books often have to be kept open in order to record all the reimbursements that have been 

made from the Dominion Government – on highways, pensions or Dominion-Provincial grants. The 

practice has been to put in our claims to Ottawa up to the end of the fiscal year. In fact, Ottawa wants to 

show their expenditures the same fiscal year, particularly on Dominion-Provincial grants. 

 

Now, in 1952, the final statements for the expenditure for the use of the Departments and the Treasury 

were released on may 19th – not March 31st, but May 19th. Then, we get busy and try to get the 

tabulating work done; but that takes time. And the word of editing entails writing in descriptive headings 

of some activities, eliminating all those payees receiving under the $100, and setting up the material in a 

form which will be acceptable to the printers. This takes a tremendous amount of time, usually close to 

six months. So it was not possible in 1952 to forward the material to the printers until November 10th. 

By the time they get them over there and return to the public accounts‘ clerk for proof reading, they are 

set up in galley proofs. Then they all have to be checked. They are sent to the Departments to be 

re-checked, and then they go back to the printer to be printed. 

 

When you look at the size of our Public Accounts, I think you will agree that it is a pretty big job of 

printing to publish a volume the size of that. And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member for 

Souris-Estevan that my concern is equally as great as his, and I have been after my officials to get those 

Public Accounts out just as quickly as they can get them; but I can assure him that, if we can get them 

before the members comes in, we shall send them out. We did that one time when we got them and I see 

no reason why, with complete co-operation from all the departments, we should not be able to get our 

Public Accounts out sometime early in January. This year, of course, to make it doubly worse, we had 

these big Revised Statues and, of course, it was impossible to get the work done any sooner. 



 

March 17, 1954 

 

 

38 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, may I again thank all of the members who have taken part in the debate for 

the courtesies they have extended to me and the many nice things which they have said, and to say how 

grateful I am that the members of the Opposition have not been able during this entire debate to find 

anything in the budget which they could criticize. 

 

The question being put it was agreed to on division by 37 votes against 10, and the House resolved itself 

into the Committee of Supply. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6 o‘clock p.m. without question put. 


