



















































Hansard: March 26, 1954


 

 

1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Twelfth Legislature 

32nd Day 

 

Friday, March 26, 1954 

 

The House met at three o‘clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

SASKATCHEWAN GOVERNMENT AIRWAYS 
 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank: 
 

Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are called, I would like to draw attention to a matter of some 

interest to members of the Legislature, with regard to inquiries for the possibility of Saskatchewan 

Government Airways giving free rides in the north of the province of Saskatchewan. One member of the 

Legislature did more than inquire about it; he talked about it. He apparently went and lobbied the Board 

of Directors, with not complete success, but with some success; and the credit for this will have to go to 

the member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky), who is sitting over here. We will have to look into his 

ancestry after this one. 
 

This matter was discussed briefly at the last meeting of the directors of Airways, and this is a letter from 

the Chairman of the Board: 
 

―The Board felt that Airways could not undertake to fly the members of the Legislature on such trips 

free of charge, but that we would offer them the same rate as offered to commercial travelers – a return 

fair on a round trip for the cost of 160 per cent of a one-way trip.‖ 
 

It means this. The regular return fare from Prince Albert to Uranium City is $117.00. This ‗bargain‘ fare 

for members of the Legislature would only be $104.00, and next session, Mr. Speaker, I will be very 

much disappointed if I am not able to report that at least 30 members of the Legislature have taken this 

trip. 
 

CO-OPERATIVE FARMOUT 
 

Mr. Robert Kohaly (Souris-Estevan): 
 

Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I wonder if the hon. Minister of Natural 

Resources would care to comment on an item appearing in an editorial of ‗The Co-operative Consumer‘ 

under dateline March 19, concerning the recent farmout to the co-operative of the Smiley oilfield – the 

two sections in the Smiley oilfield. Undoubtedly the Minister has read the item and, if not, I would like 

to see that it is placed in his hands so that he could give the House a statement as to the effect of this 

editorial insofar as the Department is concerned. 
 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank: 
 

Mr. Speaker, actually I haven‘t read the editorial. It is one of the things I have been going to read but I 

haven‘t read it yet. I did read the short item in the ‗Leader-Post‘, and all I could say at the present time is 

that neither I, nor any member of the Government, wrote the editorial and that government policy has 

been announced, and any further policy will be announced in due course; and the Co-operative 

Consumers or the ‗Leader-Post‘ or anybody else will not make the policy for the Government. 
 



 

Friday, March 26, 1954 
 

 

2 

ASSISTANCE TO WHEAT PRODUCERS 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), seconded by Hon. Mr. Nollet: 

 

―That this Assembly reaffirms its support of the Canadian Wheat Board and the International Wheat 

Agreement as the best available means of implementing a policy of orderly marketing and long term 

commodity agreements. 

 

Further, that this Assembly recognizes the problems confronting the wheat producers arising out of the 

large supplies of wheat now accumulated in Canada and expresses the opinion that a conference of the 

representatives of western agriculture and the three Prairie Governments along with other interested 

parties could do much to assess the nature of the present wheat situation with a view to making 

representations to the Government of Canada regarding the problem of storage space and the need for 

assisting the farmers to finance their operations.‖ 

 

Premier Douglas: 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government, I am presenting this resolution in the hope that it will be 

passed unanimously as evidence to the world that this province is united in its support of the Canadian 

Wheat Board and the orderly system of marketing, and as an expression of our confidence in the value 

of long-term agreements as being eminently fair both to the producers and consumers of wheat. 

 

I am fully aware of the fact that the marketing of wheat comes exclusively within the jurisdiction of the 

Federal Government. All elevators and terminals have been declared to be works for the general 

advantage of Canada; therefore, the handling and marketing and sale of wheat and the entering into 

long-term agreements for the disposal of wheat, lie entirely within the jurisdiction of the Government of 

Canada. 

 

Nevertheless, in a province where wheat constitutes one of our main sources of income, it is only natural 

that the members of this Legislature and the people of this province should be vitally interested in what 

is happening with reference to the wheat marketing situation. I have no desire, in anything I say today, 

to sound like an alarmist; but since the art of governing is the art of foreseeing, it is the duty of the 

Government of this province and the members of this Legislature to become immediately cognizant of 

the present situation and to make such suggestions as we think are worthwhile to those who are 

responsible for the wheat policy of this Dominion. 

 

The Government of this province has some of our people in the Planning Board, in the Department of 

Agriculture, and in the Treasury Department, keeping in constant touch with the wheat situation. The 

Agent-General for Saskatchewan in the United Kingdom has visited a number countries and has kept in 

close touch with the wheat situation. On his way back to Saskatchewan, this year, he visited in 

Washington and in Ottawa, and in Winnipeg with the Wheat Board, and he has been visiting with the 

Wheat Pool since his arrival back in western Canada, in order that the Government of Saskatchewan 

may be kept fully informed as to what the general world picture is with respect to wheat. 

 



 

Friday, March 26, 1954 
 

 

3 

I would like to ask the indulgence of the House while we take a few minutes to take a look at the wheat 

situation. I would like to draw the attention of the House, first of all, to the fact that the last four crops 

that have been taken off in Canada have exceeded any ten-year average prior to 1950, and that the last 

three crops have been among the highest in our history. I will try not to weary the House with too many 

statistics, but I think some of these figures will be of interest to the members. The ten-year average, from 

1923 to 1932 inclusive, was 407.4 million bushels. The ten-year average, from 1933 to 1942 inclusive, 

was 353.1 million bushels. The ten-year average, from 1943 to 1952 inclusive, was 423.5 million 

bushels. I would ask the members to keep those figures in mind, and then to look at the crops for the last 

four year: in 1950 – 461.6 million; in 1952 – 552.6 million; in 1952 – 687.9 million (which was an all-

time record); in 1953 – 614 million (which was second only to the record of the previous year). 

 

That indicates that in the last four years, particularly, we have had an abnormal situation. In these four 

years we have actually produced what normally would be five or six crops. In consequence, we have had 

a fairly large carryover. But again I would ask hon. members to remember that we have always had, in 

Canada, fairly large carryovers of wheat, and again I will give some figures which I think will be of 

interest. Taking the same periods of time, from 1923 to 1932, the average carryover was 80.6 million; 

from 1933 to 1942, the average carryover was 213 million; and from 1943 to 1952, the average 

carryover was 206.7 million. Those are fairly substantial carryovers; but let us look at the last four years. 

In 1950 the carryover was 112.2 million, and that was much less than the average for the two previous 

decades. In 1952, the carryover was 189.2 million, and that was much less than either of the two 

previous decades. In 1952, the carryover was 217.1 million, just slightly more than the average for the 

previous ten years. In 1953, as at July 31st, the carryover was 362.7 million. This was some above the 

average carryover for the ten-year period from 1943 to 1952. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that carryovers are a relatively normal condition with us. Considering 

the large crops we have had in the last four years, it is only in the last two years that the carryover has 

been very much above what is a normal carryover for Canada. However, this carryover has been 

aggravated by the fact that we have had two large crops in succession – in 1952, the largest crop in our 

history and in 1953, the second largest crop in our history. In addition to the carryover of 362.7 million 

bushels, we had this tremendous crop, in 1953, of 614 million bushels. 

 

If we take the carryover – 362.7 million bushels – add to it the new crop in this crop year of 614 million 

bushels, we have, therefore, an estimated 967.7 millions of bushels on hand at the beginning of the crop 

year. If from that we subtract what are our normal domestic requirements of 160 million bushels, that 

left us with total stocks of wheat available for export, as of August 1, 1953, 816.7 million bushels. But 

there has been exported in this crop year 138.3 million bushels, leaving us with a surplus of wheat 

available for export of 678.4 million bushels as of February 1, 1954. That is a very considerable quantity 

of wheat for a country our size to have on hand. 

 

That figure of 678.4 million bushels is 22 per cent above our accumulated stock of wheat at the same 

time in 193, and it is 64 per cent above the stocks of wheat we had on hand at the same time in 1952. 

The situation is further complicated by the fact that the large crops in Canada and the large carry-over 

have coincided with very large crops in other parts of the world, and that very often happens, Mr. 

Speaker. We find, therefore, that in 



 

Friday, March 26, 1954 
 

 

4 

the crop year 1953-54, the world wheat crop was estimated at 7,045,000,000 bushels, which was second 

only to the previous year, 1952, when the world set a record for wheat production. The wheat crop in the 

world last year of 7,045,000,000 bushels is 17 per cent above the pre-war average, but 21 per cent above 

the post-war average. 

 

If we look at Europe which, after all, is our main market, there were very good wheat crops there last 

year. It is estimated that the wheat crop in Europe, last year, was 1,700,000,000 bushels. That was 6 per 

cent above their pre-war average and 34 per cent above the post-war average. 

 

Good crops in Canada and in the United States and abnormally good crops in Europe and in other parts 

of the world, is the situation which we find ourselves in at the present time. The wheat available for 

export in four major exporting countries as at February 1, 1954, stood as follows: United States had 

available for export 923.4 million bushels; Canada, 678.4 million bushels; Argentina, 156.2 million; 

Australia, 149.5 million – or a total in these four exporting countries of 1,907.5 million bushels of 

wheat. This figure represents 26 per cent increase in the stocks of wheat available in the four exporting 

countries as compared to the same time in the previous year. 

 

That, roughly, is the wheat situation in Canada and in the wheat producing countries of the world 

generally. 

 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that this attention, although abnormal, should not be an occasion either for panic 

or alarm. The fact that western farmers own large quantities of the best wheat in the world is not too 

great a cause for concern. After all, wheat is wealth, and it is better to have a flood of wheat than to have 

a storm of dust. If we are prepared to approach this problem intelligently, having in mind the interests of 

the producer and the consumer, surely it will not be a problem that ought to baffle the mind of man. One 

can be baffled by a problem of scarcity; but a problem of great quantities of food which constitutes 

wealth in its best form, is a problem which ought not to cause us either to panic or become alarmists. It 

is doubtful if the world has ever had a surplus of wheat over any 25-year period. That is, in any 25-year 

period in the world‘s history, there may have been times when there was a shortage in the first part of 

the 25 years; there may have been a surplus in another part of the 25 years; there may have been a part 

of the 25 years when supply and demand were fairly well equated; but it is doubtful if any time over a 

25-year average the world has produced more wheat than it required. 

 

I think it would be tragic if we gave the impression in Canada that a large supply of wheat had caused us 

so much concern that we were likely to dump our supplies of wheat on the world market at ‗fire-sale‘ 

prices. As a matter of fact, I submit that, if the history of wheat marketing is studied, it will indicate that 

a catastrophic drop in the price of wheat has never yet sold one extra bushel of wheat to the importing 

countries. All that could happen by depressing the price of wheat is to transfer some of the surplus from 

the exporting countries to be stored in the importing countries. All the lessons of history indicate that 

surpluses of wheat that occur from time to time will eventually be needed because, as I have pointed out, 

in any 25-year period the periods of surplus are usually followed by periods of deficiency. 

 

That story is as old as man himself. If one turns back to ancient history and to biblical times, one 

remembers the story of Joseph: Joseph in 



 

Friday, March 26, 1954 
 

 

5 

the land of Egypt faced with great surpluses of wheat and other cereal grains. Joseph‘s advice to the 

people of his day was to build themselves storage facilities in the seven fat years in the calm confidence 

that those surpluses would be required in the seven lean years that were bound to follow. It will be 

remembered that that was good advice and that, in the world of that day, people came from all the 

neighbouring countries to Egypt because Egypt was the only country which had the foresight to see that 

its surpluses of wheat were not an occasion for alarm but a warning to save them against the day when 

they would be required. 

 

Therefore, I submit to the members of this House and to the people of this province that these surpluses 

of wheat are abnormal. We have been extremely fortunate. There is no guarantee that these periods of 

surplus will not be followed by a period of deficiency. Therefore we should do nothing and say nothing 

that would give any person, or group of persons anywhere in the world, the impression that we are now 

prepared to see this wheat disposed of at calamitously low prices, but rather, indicate that this wheat 

should be held as a trust and as a guarantee that we will be able to meet the food requirements of the 

world in times of deficiency, which in all probability will come over the next period of years. 

 

The surplus of wheat, of which I have spoken, is further complicated by two things. The first is that the 

United Kingdom has withdrawn from the International Wheat Agreement, or more properly, they did not 

sign the International Wheat Agreement when it was up for renewal. That is something for regret; it is 

not a matter for recrimination. It is not my purpose at this time to say why it wasn‘t signed, or whose 

fault it is that the United Kingdom did not sign it. Suffice it is to say that the United Kingdom did not 

sign the International Wheat Agreement and that the market upon which we have usually depended for 

the sale of our wheat is not available to us within the framework of the International Wheat Agreement. 

 

The situation is also complicated by the fact that there is in the United States, available for export, some 

923.4 million bushels of wheat, and our position is bound to be affected by the selling and disposition 

policy of the United States. If the United States were to decide to embark on a fire-sale policy of 

disposing of its wheat, then, of course, that would have a very adverse effect upon our economic 

situation. I think most of us were heartened by the fine message issued by President Eisenhower on 

January 11th last, in which he committed his administration to an orderly disposal of their wheat and 

other surpluses. 

 

Since that time, I believe a conference has been held between the representatives of the Canadian 

Government and the United States government in an endeavour to see that there is no dumping policy 

followed that would cause embarrassment to either country. We must always remember, of course, that 

in the United States the final decision will lie with Congress, and we are bound to be somewhat 

apprehensive as to what will be done in that country in view of the very large surplus of almost one 

billion bushels of wheat that hangs over our heads. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the whole purpose of the International Wheat Agreement was to 

prevent disastrously low prices for the producer in surplus periods and calamitously high prices for the 

consumer countries in deficiency periods. I think that the International Wheat Agreement was designed 

to serve the best interests both of the producer and of the consumer, because it protected the producer in 

periods of surplus and it protected the consumer in periods of deficiency. for that reason I think it is 



 

Friday, March 26, 1954 
 

 

6 

to be regretted that the United Kingdom has withdrawn from the International Wheat Agreement and 

even more serious that the government of Great Britain has discontinued the policy of bulk buying and 

replaced it with the re-establishment of the grain exchange. We in this province are not likely to forget 

that during the deficiency period following the war, under the Anglo-Canadian Wheat Agreement, the 

producers of Canada sold wheat to the United Kingdom at reasonable prices, whereas if the speculative 

market had been followed, they might have received much larger prices that would have placed a very 

heavy burden upon the consumers in the United Kingdom and elsewhere. 

 

It would be regrettable if the speculators now, in a surplus period, were to take advantage of the 

producer when the producers of this country went out of their way to protect the interests of the 

consumer in a deficiency period, as they did from 1945 to 1950. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that in the long 

run, speculative marketing is as disastrous for the consumers as it is for the wheat producers. I believe 

that it is in the interests of both the wheat producers in this country and of the consumers in the non-

wheat-producing countries to have some system of orderly marketing and long-term agreements that 

will protect the interests of the wheat producer when wheat is in surplus, and protect the interest of the 

consumer when there is a shortage of wheat. I hope the day is not far distant when we can get the United 

Kingdom and other countries back into the framework of the International Wheat Agreement. If we 

don‘t, and if the speculative market once more is to reign supreme, we shall go back to the old system of 

having disastrously high prices because there happens to be a temporary surplus and ridiculously high 

prices whenever there happens to be a shortage, with usually the speculator playing both ends against 

the middle and exploiting both the producer and the consumer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it is in the interests of both the producer and the consumer to have a system of orderly 

marketing (and I believe that it is), then I submit that this country must adopt sound domestic and 

international policies with respect to wheat, so that we can maintain an adequate price to the producer 

during periods of surplus, and so that we can protect the interests of the consumer during periods of 

scarcity. 

 

If we are to make orderly marketing a success, then we must take cognizance of the need for storage and 

for financing wheat surpluses. As of March 3rd of this year, the farmers of this western country had 

marketed only 260.3 million bushels of wheat. That is 18 per cent below 1952, but only 5 per cent below 

1951. With 678.4 million bushels of wheat available for export all of our available storage in Canada is 

now fully utilized, and there are large quantities of wheat in storage on the farms. I think it is unlikely 

that the wheat quota will be very much above 8 bushels per acre by July 31st of this year. But the real 

problem will start when we begin to take off the 1954 crop. With terminal elevators and country 

elevators full, with part of the 1953 crop stored on the farm, the 1954 crop will present very great 

problems. 

 

My contention is that if Canada as a national policy (and it is a good one) is going to have a policy of 

orderly marketing, then the burden of carrying such a policy is not the sole responsibility of the wheat 

producers, but the responsibility of the Canadian economy as a whole. Therefore the Canadian economy 

must help the farmer solve these two problems that arise necessarily out of a long-term marketing 

programme. The first thing that must be provided is additional storage. If a big crop comes off in 1954, 

then storage will have to be found. The logical place to store additional wheat is on the farms. That 

means that by some means or other the farmer will have to get the 



 

Friday, March 26, 1954 
 

 

7 

necessary loans to build additional storage facilities. He will have to be able to get those loans at low 

rates of interest. He will have to have a provision similar to what they have in the United States, by 

which those loans are paid back out of payments for storage for which he will be credited for storing that 

wheat, with the additional provision that in any year when those granaries are not in use and not storing 

wheat, then there is no repayment on the loan. In other words, the farmers would be assisted to put up 

granaries, and the loans would be paid off as they stored wheat and out of the payments for storing that 

wheat. 

 

The second problem which the national economy must help the western producer to face is the problem 

of enabling the farmer to finance his framing operations until such time as we pass out of the surplus 

period into a period of more normal marketing conditions. As far back as 1941 I was advocating in the 

House of Commons (and I have never ceased to advocate since) that we should follow a policy similar 

to that in vogue in the United States, which started back in 1936, by which they advance to the farmers 

75 per cent of the parity price. I am suggesting that we should advance farmers 75 per cent of the initial 

price for wheat stored on the farm, or as an alternative, as they do in the U.S.A., the buying of the wheat 

outright and taking title to the wheat and paying the farmer for storing it on the farm. Of course, the 

payments for storing the wheat would be charged against the loan which was given to him to put up the 

storage facilities. 

 

This question of helping the farmer to finance during a period of surplus when his wheat cannot be 

readily sold, is not designed to look after the farmer alone. In western Canada our agricultural economy 

rests primarily on the ability of the wheat producer to dispose of his wheat, and if he cannot dispose of 

his wheat, it is not only the farmer who is financially embarrassed. It is the merchant; it is the business 

people of the community; it is the municipality; it is the school board, the hospital board; indeed all the 

people giving services in that community. Yes, and we can go much farther abroad. It affects business 

all across Canada. It affects the industries of Eastern Canada, all those who sell farm machinery and 

trucks and other goods to the farmers of western Canada. Therefore it would be in the interest of the 

Canadian economy generally, and the western economy particularly, to face up to the problem of how is 

the farmer going to finance during this period of surplus production of wheat, confident as I am that that 

period of surplus production will in time give way to a period of deficiency when this wheat which is 

now accumulated will be badly needed by nations in all parts of the world. 

 

That is why, Mr. Speaker, we have suggested in this resolution that probably there ought to be a 

conference of western agriculture and the western provincial governments and other interested parties to 

examine this whole situation. It may be somewhat premature to talk about a conference just at this 

moment; but we will see within the next month or six weeks what is likely to happen. When the St. 

Lawrence opens up, wheat may begin to move. There may be fairly large and substantial orders for 

wheat coming to the Wheat Board. We have no way of knowing for certain. It may be that, by the first 

of May, the situation will have improved and the conditions which I have outlined will not be quite as 

serious as they are at this particular moment. If that be true, I would be the first to suggest that the crisis 

had passed and no such conference was necessary. If, however, the situation does not improve and if 

there is not a very extensive movement of wheat out of Canada and from the farms to the elevators and 

from the elevators towards the terminals, then I suggest that such a conference should be held. 

 



 

Friday, March 26, 1954 
 

 

8 

The House might well ask, ―What is the value of such a conference?‖ I suggest that the first value of 

such a conference would be that it would enable western Canada to speak with a single voice, since our 

western economy is vitally affected by the present situation and by the future prospects. After all, 

orderly marketing is a national policy; therefore the consequences of a national policy should be 

accepted as a national responsibility. But the only way that the authorities in Canada can be expected to 

recognize the problems of one area in Canada, is for all the people and all the groups in that area to 

speak with a single voice. I would like to see such a conference bring together all groups in western 

Canada, irrespective of our other differences about other things, in order that we would speak together 

upon the need for action at the national level to safeguard our western agricultural economy from any 

injurious results arising out of the present wheat situation. 

 

Such a conference would present us with an opportunity of sitting down and assessing accurately all the 

facts in order that we may know what the situation is with respect to wheat, what the future prospects are 

of disposing of wheat, and how long we are going to have to carry this wheat. These are facts which 

could come out of the kind of discussion which I am suggesting. 

 

Another purpose of this conference would be to enable those attending it to canvass the situation to see 

what we in the west could do for ourselves, through our provincial governments and our municipalities, 

through our Pools and all our farm and business organizations. There may be things we could do 

ourselves to help meet this situation by pooling our resources and by putting our various ideas together. 

 

Finally, such a conference would enable the representatives of western Canada, as a united body, to 

present to the Government of Canada concrete proposals to enable our western economy to survive 

during this surplus period in order that the burden of implementing orderly marketing policy might not 

fall exclusively upon one segment of the Canadian economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am aware of the fact that, even if we get such a conference, and the conference sends a 

delegation to Ottawa to discuss the questions I have just outlined, and even if we are able to get a policy 

instituted to provide for additional storage, to provide for helping the farmer finance through this interim 

period, this is not the final solution. The final solution, of course, is to sell the wheat. As I have said, I 

am convinced that we will sell the wheat. Much could be done, however, to accentuate the rate at which 

we could sell our wheat. Something can be done by removing unnecessary trade barriers that stand in the 

way of our customers gaining access to the Canadian market, by overcoming some of the currency 

difficulties in countries which lack Canadian dollars. I have suggested before the setting up an 

International Currency Stabilization Fund by which we would be able to make it possible for countries 

not having Canadian dollars to put part of the payment for our wheat into an International Currency 

Stabilization Fund in their own currency. The United States is now accepting Sterling and francs for 

payment of surplus wheat and other surplus agricultural commodities. I think one of the things that can 

be done to help dispose of our wheat is for this country to step up its contribution through the Colombo 

plan, and to extend credit and to give further assistance to backward and underprivileged nations in 

order that we might be able to sell some of our wheat there. 

 

Again I point out that if wheat is going to be donated, or if wheat is going to be given on loan, to 

backward or underprivileged countries, it ought not to be at the expense of the men who grew the wheat. 

It ought to be 



 

Friday, March 26, 1954 
 

 

9 

the responsibility of the entire Dominion of Canada. It does seem absurd, however, that, in a world in 

which there is so much hunger, in a world in which there are so many millions of people who haven‘t 

enough to eat, we should be unduly concerned or unduly alarmed about these great surpluses. I am 

convinced that, if our country and the other countries of the world were prepared to support the ideas 

advanced by the Food and Agricultural organization for the setting up of a world food bank upon which 

needy countries could draw, we could do much not only to solve our problem of surpluses, but we could 

do much to raise the living standards of these backward people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we should stop and think of what the world is spending, or even what our own country is 

spending, in terms of national defence – and I am not quarrelling with spending money for national 

defence. In the kind of world in which we live, we can‘t go around with nothing but our bare hands to 

defend ourselves. As I have said in this House before, in the final analysis guns and bombs and planes 

are no final defence. They may be a temporary defence; they are not a final defence. The only final 

defence is to establish ourselves from them, because our neighbour‘s hand will be stretched out in 

friendship and neighbourliness to us. 

 

The suggestion I am making in this resolution is that, with this wheat situation as it is at the present time, 

and looking at it in the light of the history of wheat marketing over a long period of years, there is no 

occasion to become alarmed. This wheat will be needed; this wheat is invaluable. But in the interim 

period, during the period of adjustment, the Governments of western Canada and the Government of 

Canada have a responsibility. That responsibility is to see that the farmer is assisted in getting storage 

facilities and that he is assisted in financing during the period when he is waiting for this surplus of 

wheat to move out onto the markets of the world. We on this side of the House believe, and I hope we 

will be supported by all groups of the province, that this is a time to forget political differences, to forget 

different ideas on other questions, and to present a united front to the Government of Canada and to the 

world. We believe in orderly marketing. We believe, however, that a great surplus of wheat ought not to 

penalize the people who grew the wheat; but rather the fact that they have grown a great surplus of 

wheat ought to mean that the national economy will see to it that they are not penalized for having done 

such a good job of growing the best wheat in the world. That conference, if it is found necessary – and it 

will be necessary if the situation does not improve in the course of the next few weeks – should be held 

here in western Canada. This conference will permit us to sit down and assess all the facts, to work out a 

programme (in which we can take our part) to take to Ottawa in order to ask Ottawa to assume its fair 

share of the responsibility of seeing the wheat producers through this present critical situation. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move this resolution, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Nollet, Minister 

of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Leader of the Opposition): 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion has just been put on the Order Paper, this morning. I don‘t think it is our 

purpose to oppose the motion, but we would like have time to give it consideration in view of the fact 

that we might be able to add something to what the Premier has said. For that reason I would like to 

have the privilege to adjourn the debate until Monday or some other day. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 



 

Friday, March 26, 1954 
 

 

10 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 85 – An Act to amend The Trade Union Act 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an Act to amend The Trade Union Act. The first point refers to a section that has 

been taken from one of the Federal Acts. which does not permit an employer to withdraw any benefits 

the employees may have had, in the event of a strike or a walkout or anything of that kind; the 

employees may have had pension privileges or sick leave benefits or coffee periods even. So we want to 

insert that in the Act and make it impossible for the employers in this province to withdraw those 

benefits in the event of a strike. 

 

The second point has to do with regulation No. 13. That has been in the regulations now for a number of 

years. It refers to the Labour Relations Board and how they operate, and we feel it is necessary that this 

regulation be now put into the Act itself. As I say, it has contained this section for a number of years 

whereby the Labour Relations Board could not hear any evidence in regard to anything which had 

transpired between the date of application for certification made to the Secretary of the Board and the 

actual time that the Board would meet, at which time such application would be made. This might vary 

from a few days to maybe two or three weeks. The validity of this section was challenged in the courts, 

about three months ago, resulting in a finding to the effect that the Board did not have the power to limit 

such evidence as being admissible. The case in point was one where a majority of the employees had 

signed cards requesting union membership, and when the application came to the Board, a number of the 

employees indicated they wished to withdraw and claimed the organizer had given false and deceptive 

information during the period of organization. It was alleged that these employees had also been 

interfered with during the period referred to, and the Board refused to hear the evidence but went ahead 

and certified the Union. The courts later quashed the certification, and as previously stated, claimed the 

Board had no power to refuse to hear the evidence. 

 

Other cases have arisen where the employees have been interfered with by the employers or their agents 

during this period, with the result that employees have changed their minds and indicated to the Board 

that they did not now wish to be represented by the Union. There have also been cases where both 

parties, or their representatives, have taken action during this period which could prejudice the Board. 

 

Cases have also been brought to attention whereby union organizers have been charged with unethical 

methods during the organization period, and have misled employees in securing their signatures to 

application cards. There is no suggestion that information along these lines may not be heard by the 

Board, because these things have happened previously to the date of application to the Secretary of the 

Board. 

 

It might be said here, Mr. Speaker, that any union organizer who uses such questionable methods should 

be discharged or not employed in this capacity, because these tactics can create bad feeling among the 

membership, be a detriment to the union itself and to the cause of labour in general. Any union organizer 

who organizes in an open and aboveboard manner (and most of them do, Mr. Speaker) will have no 

difficulty. 

 

Clause 3 of this Bill gives the Board absolute discretion as to whether or not the evidence of happenings 

during the period referred to may 



 

Friday, March 26, 1954 
 

 

11 

be heard, and we consider it is comparable to the issuing of a writ, which means that nothing that 

transpires from that date on can be heard by a court. We feel the Board should not be given the power, 

by statute, which the courts found it did not have by regulation. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the details could best be discussed in committee, and with that explanation I would 

move that Bill No. 85 – An Act to amend The Trade Union Act, be now read a second time. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next 

sitting. 

 

Bill No. 88 – An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act 

 

Hon. L.F. McIntosh (Minister of Municipal Affairs): 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 88 is an effort on the part of the Government and the Rural Municipal Association 

to recognize the trends and developments that have taken place, and the responsibilities as the result 

thereof, of local governments throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We find that, in some instances, members of rural municipal councils, for example, live at least a portion 

of the year outside of the municipality in which they are elected as representatives, and there are cases 

when they find it necessary to travel further, as a result of the place in which they live, than they would 

if they were living within the municipality. We also find that the municipal governments are setting up 

more committees of council to assist in accepting the responsibilities relative to municipal government. 

 

There is also the question of the co-operation insofar particularly as the voting takes place, as between 

school units and municipal councils, and the S.A.R.M. have suggested that this particular section of the 

Act be clarified. 

 

The Saskatchewan Power Corporation is moving its services and facilities into what were considered at 

one time as remote corners of the province; and again it is suggested that more adequate provision be 

made in The Rural Municipal Act to take care of this situation. 

 

The question of roads arises from time to time and an increasing number of municipal governments are 

of the opinion that the old 66-foot road allowance is not wide enough to enable them to build an all-

weather road. Also, municipalities find that some of the land which they possess carries the mineral 

rights and they, in advertising or in disposing of the mineral rights, found it necessary, according to the 

courts, to advertise the mineral rights lease in the same manner as they would advertise the surface rights 

when they come to dispose of that portion of the title that they may have to land. 

 

Municipal governments also find that there are an increasing number of district or group meetings of 

municipal men, and it is suggested that some provisions be made to defray the cost of their delegates 

attending district or group meetings of municipal men, which, as I stated before, are much on the 

increase. 

 

Municipal men, being also responsible to a very substantial degree for the controlling of the noxious 

weeds in their respective municipalities, have come to the conclusion that probably more adequate 

cleaning machinery 



 

Friday, March 26, 1954 
 

 

12 

designed for the purpose of seed cleaning, might be made available, or should be made available, to their 

ratepayers; and provisions are made for the rural municipalities to participate in any municipal or any 

co-operative or community cleaning plants that might be located within their municipality. 

 

Another principle involved in the Bill has to do with the question of assessing property. Again, in 

hamlets located in municipalities, there are times when an increased activity takes place, and this 

increased activity may be taking place at the time the assessment roll is made up, or between the time 

the assessment roll is made up, in any given year, following around to the time when it is made up in the 

next year. Consequently, they have asked that provision be made whereby they might be able to assess 

properties that are under construction between the time in which the assessment rolls are certified and 

finalized. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that anything else that might be said in connection with the proposed Bill can be 

said in Committee. Therefore, I take pleasure in moving Second Reading to Bill No. 88 – An Act to 

amend The Rural Municipalities Act. 

 

Mr. R.A. McCarthy (Cannington): 

 

Mr. Speaker, I gather from the reading of this Bill that it covers things you are adding to the Act. I was 

wondering if you have had any representations made to you with regard to some regulations to control 

snow-plows on municipal roads. They are increasing at a very fast rate. I am very much in favour of 

them myself. I think they are the coming thing – they are much cheaper than bombardiers. But I find, in 

talking to municipal men, that they are very much at sea to know just what to do about it. That is, they 

give a snow-plow permission to go up a particular road and they are wondering about the liability and all 

the rest of it. 

 

I think it is high time that we had some investigation into this thing. It is something that, I think, is going 

to increase and of course it is new; and there is no provision made for it in the Act at the moment – or at 

least I don‘t think so, from the conversations I have had with municipal men. They do not appear to 

think there is anything in the Act that covers snow-plows, and I just wondered if the Minster had 

representation in this regard and if he would care to give us his thoughts on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, we have had representations relative to the question raised 

by the hon. member for Cannington, and we have discussed this on several occasions with the executive 

of the S.A.R.M. I pointed out to them some of the problems involved in municipalities having, or 

exercising, control over snow-plow clubs that are operating in various sections of the province. 

 

If the municipalities should go out to license the snow-plow clubs, then that suggests that they are going 

to accept some responsibility for anything that might occur by way of accident as a result of the 

operations of the snow-plow. That places quite a responsibility upon the municipality and, up to the 

moment, the executive have not indicated that they would be prepared to recommend that the 

municipalities accept that liability as a result of licensing. 

 

We also suggested to the municipalities, or to their association, that another approach would be to enter 

into a contract with a snow-plow club 



 

Friday, March 26, 1954 
 

 

13 

that would be legally constituted, enter into a contract with that club, the contract giving you the same 

protection as a contract would give you if you entered into one with a contractor for the building of a 

road. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Aren‘t there quite a few organized under The Co-operative Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — Yes. As the Premier pointed out, quite a number of clubs have organized under 

The Co-operative Association Act, so they become a legal entity; and the municipalities could enter then 

into an agreement with a club that is a legal entity, and probably take out some insurance so that each 

group may have adequate protection in the even of an accident or some unforeseen contingency. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that by the time the next Session rolls around, we may have a concrete 

recommendation from the Rural Municipal Association. But the hon. member from Cannington is quite 

correct. We have had representations; it has been under study and under advisement, and we think we 

will probably get a definite recommendation by the time the next Session rolls around. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Thank you, I am glad to hear that explanation. I think I might, if I am permitted, say 

this, in connection with the snow-plow clubs. I think we must recognize that our municipalities cannot 

plow all the roads, and that is reason we have the snow-clubs. They are not undertaken as a municipal 

responsibility, nor do I think they should be; nor do I think they want that responsibility. I think that lies 

with the snow-plow clubs. But there is a dual responsibility about who is responsible for anything that 

happens on these roads, and I think that is the part that should be clarified. I know it is a difficult 

situation, and I think it should be clarified as soon as possible because there are a lot of these clubs. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next 

sitting. 

 

Bill No. 89 – An Act to amend The Homesteads Act 

 

Hon. J.W. Corman, Q.C (Attorney General): 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a proposed amendment to The Homesteads Act. 

 

The Homesteads Act, shortly speaking, provides that every transfer, agreement of sale, lease or other 

instrument intended to convey or transfer an interest in a homestead, shall be signed by the owner and 

by the wife. 

 

There is a change of principle involved in the amendment contained in the Bill. The Homesteads Act, 

Mr. Speaker, was passed, originally, in 1915. The protection given the wife was a very narrow one at 

that time. It protected the interest of the wife only so long as the homestead remained a homestead. If a 

new home was acquired by the husband, within a week she lost her rights in the old homestead. 

 

After the Act of 1915 was passed, it was found that some owners (that is, husbands) were leasing their 

homesteads for short periods, moving into rented premises, and the wife lost her right to be consulted 

about the sale or mortgage of the homestead. So, in 1920, the Act was amended to require 



 

Friday, March 26, 1954 
 

 

14 

the consent of the wife if the homestead had been a homestead at any time within one year. After the 

passing of that Act, it was felt that the amendment did not go far enough, and did not afford the wife 

sufficient protection in the home that she had helped establish, and so, in 1928, the Act was amended to 

require the wife‘s consent to a disposition of any property, and I quote: ―Which had been a homestead at 

any time.‖ Well, as the pendulum very often does, it started going back the other way and, in 1936, the 

Act was again amended to provide that the wife‘s consent was necessary only in cases where the 

property had been a homestead within a period of seven years. 

 

It is hard to discover the reason for that change. Before 1936, or at least during the period 1928 to 1936 

– it could be called the ‗golden days‘ of government in Saskatchewan, by some people; but during that 

period, the wife was entitled to exercise control over the disposition of a homestead that had, at any 

time, been a homestead. I do not know the reason for the change, but, in any event, in 1936 they cut 

down the time to seven years. A number of reasons were given. There was a case of Burn vs. Burn – if 

anyone is interested it will be found in 1935 2WWR, page 336. That case was relied on for the change in 

the law based on the fact that the judges in that case held that a wife‘s right, given by this Homesteads 

Act, is a right only to veto the decision of the husband, but is not a substance of right. For instance, in 

that case, the wife was applying for possession. The judges held that her right was only a right to veto. 

Then it was argued that, if that was the only right she had, it was an unnecessary restriction on the so-

called, or presumed, right of the husband to run his own business; and so they cut down the time and 

said they would put in the seven-year period. 

 

It is our opinion that, as most homes are built and established by the joint effort of the husband and the 

wife (and that is true of homesteads, or homes, more than other property), it is the opinion on this side of 

the House and I believe it will be unanimous, that the wife is entitled to a voice in the disposition or the 

mortgaging of any property which has, at any time, been a homestead. We do not think it unduly 

interferes with the right of the husband to run the so-called ‗show‘, and it was the law of this province 

from 1928 to 1936. I do not know that I need say any more. We think it was good law during those 

years, and we think it will be good law for the future. 

 

I therefore move Second Reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Robert Kohaly (Souris-Estevan): 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is very difficult to criticize the hon. Minister when he puts things so fairly about the 

‗golden age‘ and some of these other ages that we have had. But I do want to speak (and I think I am in 

order) on the principle, to point out to you that the hon. Minister, in explaining to the members what 

‗homestead‘ actually meant, used the word ‗home‘; and that indicated to him better than anything else 

could what provision was involved in The Homesteads Act, what the Homesteads Act really means. 

 

I think one of the points we want to bring to the attention of the House (and it is the considered opinion 

of the Law Society of the province) is that the use of the word ‗homes‘ rather than ‗homesteads‘ would 

have tremendous value in continuing to protect those people which this Act envisages to protect. It has 

been the request of the members of the legal profession, through their society, that the use of the word 

‗homes‘ be adopted; however, the Bill presently before us does not appear to take this into 

consideration. 

 



 

Friday, March 26, 1954 
 

 

15 

It was most pleasing to me to hear the hon. Attorney General explain to this House what ‗homestead‘ 

actually and truly meant, so that everybody would understand it, by using the word ‗home‘, and that is 

what we would like to have in the Act. I think it should be in there – the use of the word ‗home‘ so that 

when a woman is confronted with the problem of the leasing, mortgaging or sale of a piece of property 

which, in fact, is ‗homestead‘ in law, she will know exactly what she is doing. We do not need to 

explain to her the long, careful rigmarole that is necessary in order for her to understand and to know 

what rights and privileges she has. And that is the first point that I would like to raise. 

 

The second is that we appear to be taking this move – and I am not objecting to it, but pointing it out for 

what it is; we appear to be moving closer to the system of dower that we have in some of our 

neighbouring provinces. This tends to get us part-way over there. The question is, do the members 

recognize that that is what we are doing, and if so, is that what we want? I have no great objection to it. I 

think it has some serious merits where it has been practised. But I want it to be perfectly clear that that is 

where we appear to be going; and that, of course, is the major principle. 

 

The hon. Attorney General, when he first spoke, said there is a change in principle; but I did not get the 

point where he said this is the principle; he never did mention that. I submit that what the principle is is a 

step by step transition to the dower system; and this is the first Act that is necessary in order to get there. 

 

I may be incorrect, and, of course, I will stand corrected by my learned friend, who has had much more 

experience than I, and much more ability with this; but it appears to me that this is the opening of the 

door to the dower system. 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — What do you understand by that system? I just want information. 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — The dower system gives, in my opinion, the right for a woman to have a positive 

interest in the property involved; that is to say, she has in her own right an interest in it. Actually, today, 

when you take a homestead declaration from a wife you say, ―Did you do this of your own free will?‖ 

That is consent. There is a section in The Homesteads Act, and I think it is repeated here: ―I, Mary 

Smith, wife of the above named Joseph Smith, do hereby declare that I have executed this transfer for 

the purpose of relinquishing all of my rights in the said homestead in the favour of ‗so and so‘.‖ She is 

consenting to what her husband has, in fact, done. Under the dower system, as I understand it, the wife 

has a positive interest. It would not be a matter of consenting; she and her husband together would make 

transfers, agreements, or leases to some third person. And this is the first move in order to get that; and I 

submit that is the principle involved. I am not arguing against it; I am just pointing out that it is there so 

that all will know. That is where we appear to be getting to, and I would like to be corrected if I am not 

correct in my assumption. I, of course, would be bound by what the hon. Attorney General has to say in 

reply, if he does so. 

 

There is a third point I want to raise here. I cannot understand why the Government, in bringing this Bill 

in, have continued to penalize and to look down their nose at the legal profession. It is an honourable, 

longstanding profession and, of course, well recognized by all. However, they insist that we must not 

draw up and sign the Homesteads declaration ourselves. 



 

Friday, March 26, 1954 
 

 

16 

If my student draws up a transfer, then I cannot take the Homestead declaration; yet if the man across 

the street, a student, draws up the transfer, brings it across to me and I question the wife and she says, 

―Yes, my husband didn‘t twist my arm‖, or whatever is involved, I can sign it. It borders on the 

ridiculous just a bit, that we have not enough integrity to draw up a transfer, which is merely a 

conveyancing document, and at the same time be trusted to explain to the wife what rights she has. It is a 

most inconvenient and a most onerous business, that doesn‘t appear to have any validity or any good 

reason. 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — That is in the old Act, isn‘t it? 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — That is in the new Act, too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — Yes, but I mean we are not putting it in now, are we? 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — Well, it is a question of principle that, on second reading, I can discuss. 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — Oh, I am not quarrelling with you. I am in the legal profession, too; but I mean, 

it isn‘t anything we are doing. 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — That‘s what I mean, Mr. Speaker, when I say it is most difficult to criticize the Bill 

brought in by this particular hon. Minister. However, those are the three points that I wished to point 

out: the matter of principle involved, the word ‗home‘, and some possibility that it can be made easier 

for us to implement The Homesteads Act in our offices, for the consideration of the Minister and the 

Government. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): 

 

May I say a few words, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — I only wish somebody would, because I don‘t know what to say. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I am not a legal man, I am just an ordinary individual; but I do know 

that I have gone with people to Justices of the Peace and, of course, to the legal profession, with the 

Homestead Certificate, and the woman has been asked, as mentioned here, ―Did he twist your arm, or 

not?‖ But they sign the certificate, and I am quite sure that in all cases I have ever gone, it was never 

explained to the wife of the husband who has been asked if she is agreeable to sign away her rights, 

what her rights were. I think, seeing that this amendment is dealing with the subject, it might be very 

proper that something be put into the Act in which it would say that, whoever takes that homestead 

affidavit, whether it is a man in the legal profession or a Justice of the Peace, he be required to explain 

what those homestead rights are, or home rights are. And probably they should be outlined in the Act. 

 

I would also suggest that in the appendix there, on page 3, that instead of saying . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Might I suggest to the hon. member that this could better be taken up in Committee of 

the Whole, if you want to suggest some amendments to the Bill. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — May I just mention this one thing, it won‘t take half a minute. Instead of having 

the person who signs this certificate say, ―I am satisfied that she knew what her rights were‖, that it 



 

Friday, March 26, 1954 
 

 

17 

should say, ―I have explained to her what her rights were.‖ I certainly agree with the principle and the 

ideas suggested in the Bill, that the woman should have some rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Does the hon. Attorney General want to make any more explanations on it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — In reply to the last speaker, whether we have succeeded or not, we did try to put 

in the certificate that has to be signed by the person who examines the wife; we attempted to cover that 

ground. Previously there was no certificate to the effect that the woman was aware of her rights. I 

believe it has been suggested that we should have said, ―I explained her rights.‖ Well, it was taken and 

this was put in here at the suggestion of our Law Society. I believe it is a good idea, and we think it does 

cover that ground. If we find it doesn‘t, we will just have to re-word it. 

 

Now about whether we are moving in the direction of the dowerage system, I don‘t know. Frankly, I do 

not know what that system is. I thought it was something the old man threw in with the bride. I am 

serious about that . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — One of those ‗give-away‘ programmes! 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — But I believe it is something that might be considered, as to whether we should 

move toward that. What I have suggested, this afternoon, I do not think moves us in that direction. We 

are simply taking out that seven-year period; we do not change the principle. But I am afraid my hon. 

friend has put some ideas in the head of the junior member for Regina that she is going to take out on me 

after this Session – that is not an invitation. It may be that this House should move in the direction of 

joint property; but please, I am not advocating that – I do not know; but I believe that is partly what you 

had in mind; we may be going in that direction. And it may be that a wife should have some control, not 

only of the home, but over your bank account, for instance. I don‘t know. 

 

And about ignoring the wishes of the Law Society, we try to meet their wishes as much as we can; we 

have confidence in them. They did make the suggestion that we call this ‗The Home Act‘ and use the 

word ‗home‘. The law officers worked on it for a long time. They don‘t do that in Alberta or Manitoba. 

We know there is some confusion between what is the home and that 160 acres you bet the government 

you could live on for three years. There is some confusion whether the mentality of the people of this 

province is such that we have to call it a ‗home‘ and not a ‗homestead‘ so that the wife – I believe most 

wives know what they are doing, not only in respect to this Act, but in other respects; but we did try to 

meet the wishes of the Law Society and get rid of the word ‗homestead‘ and call it a ‗home‘. The boys, 

so far, haven‘t been able to do it. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next 

sitting. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11 o‘clock p.m. 


