



















































Hansard: February 12, 1954


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Second Session — Twelfth Legislature 

 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, February 12, 1954 

 

The House met at three o’clock p.m. 

 

MOTIONS OF CONDOLENCE 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — It has been the custom on the day immediately following the opening 

of the Legislature that members take a few moments to pay their respects to former members of the 

Legislature who have passed away since the Legislative Assembly last met. 

 

I have three names here to bring to the attention of the members and I am asking the Assembly to join in 

paying tribute to them at this time. The three members are Mr. Hassard who formerly represented the 

constituency of Biggar; Mr. Hutcheon who formerly represented the constituency of Arm River, and Mr. 

Shortreed who was a member for Happyland constituency. I will just say a few words regarding the life 

and public service of each of them, according to the short biographies which I have here. 

 

MR. ROBERT PELHAM HASSARD was born at Macdonald, near Portage la Prairie, Manitoba, on 

March 7, 1888. Educated at Dauphin, Manitoba, he migrated to Biggar, Saskatchewan, in 1908, where 

he operated a farm, a garage and a hotel for 38 years. He then went to Eastend to engage in the hotel 

business, and later to Saskatoon. Two years ago he moved to Calgary, where he died suddenly on 

September 28, 1953, at the age of 65. 

 

While a resident of Biggar, Mr. Hassard interested himself in community affairs and was mayor of the 

town for several years. Prominent in Masonic and other fraternal circles, he was also a keen curler and 

an active member of the Anglican Church. 

 

First elected to this Assembly in the general election of 1925, he represented the constituency of Biggar 

as a Liberal from that year until 1929, and again from 1934 to 1938. Though not an aggressive 

participant in House debate, Mr. Hassard proved himself an effective member of the more active 

Committees, and was held in high esteem by his contemporaries on both sides of the House. 

 

Surviving to mourn his loss are Mrs. Hassard; a daughter, Mrs. G.H. MacDonald of Regina; one son, 

two sisters, two brothers and three grandchildren. 

 

The second member whose passing we mourn is MR. DUNCAN SELBY HUTCHEON who was born at 

Milton, Ontario, on February 16, 1879. Educated at public schools in Halton County, Ontario, he came 

west in 1902 to take up a homestead in the Davidson district. Later he began operation of a grain 

elevator for the Wells Land and Cattle companies. In 1911 he started a hardware business in Davidson, 

which he operated until his appointment as secretary-treasurer of the Rural Municipality of Willner. In 

1913 he was elected mayor of the town of Davidson, holding that office until 1923. 

 

During his 45 years of service to the Davidson community, he had been Chairman of the local school 

board, hospital board, Red Cross and 



 

February 12, 1954 

 

2 

 

curling club. He was one of the few men who have served as Chairman of National War Finance 

organizations in their communities in two wars. An elder and secretary of Davidson United Church for 

several years, he was also active in fraternal orders. As an Oddfellow he was at one time master of the 

Grand Lodge of Saskatchewan. He was also a 32nd degree Mason and a Shriner. He died in Vancouver 

on January 11, 1954, in his 76th year. 

 

Mr. Hutcheon was elected to this Assembly in 1929, representing Arm River as a Conservative until 

1934. He was greatly respected by all members of the House, serving throughout the Seventh 

Legislature as Deputy Speaker and Chairman of Committees of the Whole. 

 

He is survived by Mrs. Hutcheon, two sons and a daughter, and six grandchildren. 

 

The third member who has passed away since we met last is MR. FRANKLIN ROBERT SHORTREED 

who was elected as Liberal member for Happyland constituency in a by-election in 1922, and served 

until the general election of 1925. He was born at Salem, Ontario in 1875, of Scottish parentage, and 

educated at Morden, Manitoba. He was a resident of the Sceptre district of Saskatchewan at the time of 

his election. He died in Winnipeg yesterday, February 11th. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that members of both sides of the House will want to take this opportunity to 

pay tribute to these men who served their constituencies and served this province in the Legislature of 

Saskatchewan in days gone by; and in paying tribute to them to pay tribute to all the pioneers who in 

various capacities and at various levels of government have sought to serve their day and generation. 

 

I, therefore, should like to move, seconded by Mr. Loptson: 

 

―THAT this Assembly records its sincere regrets at the passing, since last Session, of two former 

Members, namely, 

 

MR. ROBERT PELHAM HASSARD who represented the constituency of Biggar in the Sixth and 

Eighth Legislatures, and 

 

MR. DUNCAN SELBY HUTCHEON, Deputy Speaker of the Seventh Legislature, in which he served 

as member for the constituency of Arm River. 

 

In paying tribute to their memory and to their devoted service to the communities in which they lived 

and to the province to which they came in early youth and left only in retirement, this Assembly 

extends its deepest sympathy to surviving members of the bereaved families. 

 

This Assembly also desires to record its regret on learning of the death, yesterday, of FRANKLIN 

ROBERT SHORTREED, member for Happyland in the Fifth Legislature, from 1922 to 1925.‖ 

 

(CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY) 



 

February 12, 1954 

 

3 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Leader of the Opposition): – Mr. Speaker, in seconding this motion I would like to 

concur in the words of the hon. Premier. 

 

I know two of the three men mentioned, particularly Mr. Hassard – ―Bob‖ Hassard, as we used to know 

him. I sat in this House with him and I knew him as a man very much devoted to the service of the 

people, a man who was a friend to everybody he met. I do not know a man who was more popular 

among the members than Bob Hassard was, and I do not know of a man who was more willing to 

contribute his services to the good of the community, wherever he lived. 

 

I also sat in the House with Mr. Hutcheon. A man with a quiet disposition he was one of the popular 

members of this House and from the record that has just been given I think we can visualize that he also 

dedicated his services to his community. 

 

Mr. Shortreed was unknown to me, having been here before I came to this House; but I take it for 

granted that he would not have been here had it not been for his popularity in this community and the 

services that he rendered. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): – I probably knew the late Duncan Selby Hutcheon longer than 

anyone in this House; as a matter of fact he was one of the first men that I met in 1904. He came to 

Davidson as an ordinary settler and immediately branched out in framing; I know he broke up his farm 

with a team of oxen. He also engaged in business, operating a grain elevator (as the Premier has said) for 

the same Company that I operated a farm for. He took a very active part in community affairs. He was 

Chairman of the School Board and I was associated with him myself in the work of building the War 

Memorial that they have in Davidson. He was Chairman of the War Finance Committee in both wars, 

and we sat on the Davidson Town School Board together for about eight years. I saw him last summer 

just previous to harvest time when he came to Davidson from Vancouver, and I did not expect that he 

would be passing away so soon. However, his health had been none too good for several years and his 

passing was not altogether unexpected. 

 

I know that the province of Saskatchewan, and particularly the community in which he lived is much 

better off for having had him as a citizen in that particular locality. 

 

Speaking of Mr. Robert Hassard who also passed away, I sat in the House with him from 1934 to 1938 

and he was a man who was well posted for the work he had at hand; he was a very active member of the 

House, was a good speaker and a first-class citizen and a gentleman. He was a person one liked to 

associate with, and he had a lot of good friends; I do not think he had any enemies in this House when 

he was here. I attended his funeral in Saskatoon just a short time before Christmas, and I would like to 

associate myself with the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition here in paying my tribute to these 

two men. 

 

I did not know the other gentleman, although I believe I met him once and recollect that meeting very 

well. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Minister of Education): – Mr. Speaker, I did not have the privilege of knowing two 

of the members referred to this afternoon, but I did of course know the late Bob 



 

February 12, 1954 

 

4 

 

Hassard. Having lived in the town of Biggar and having been a member for that constituency I am in a 

position to concur with what has been said in regard to his record of community service. I think the 

Leader of the Opposition referred to the very friendly type of person he was and certainly no truer thing 

could be said about Bob Hassard. He was in business for many years in the town of Biggar and one can 

hear many speak of the accomodation, frequently at his own expense, which he provided for the people 

of the community in a business way. He had a very wide circle of friends all throughout the constituency 

of Biggar and, always, whenever one visits any part of it there were questions asked with regard to Bob 

Hassard. It is a tribute to the man, I think, that many of his best friends were among those who did not 

agree with him politically. He was held in very wide esteem and I speak on behalf of myself, Mr. 

Speaker, and, I know, on behalf of many people in the constituency of Biggar when we voice approval 

of his service and regret at his passing and extend our condolences to members of his family. 

 

Mr. Speaker: – I think it would be in order if we would all rise in respect of the departed members of 

this House. 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), seconded by Mr. Loptson: 

 

―Ordered, That the Resolution of regret and condolence just passed, together with the transcripts of the 

oral tributes in memory of the deceased former Members, be communicated to the bereaved families, 

on behalf of this Assembly, by Mr. Speaker.‖ 

 

(CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY) 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): – Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with 

there is one action of the Premier and this Government that I would like to comment on at this time, and 

that is their action with regard to one of Saskatchewan’s most distinguished citizens in the personage of 

Mr. Harry Mullin, our Sergeant-at-Arms. I would like to say that the Opposition were only too pleased 

to see this Government take the action they did in making it possible for Major Mullin, V.C., and his 

good wife to attend the Coronation of our Queen last summer. I am sure that it is an action that all the 

people of Saskatchewan were very happy to see and especially the returned men. I know we, in our area 

of Moosomin, like to claim Harry Mullin as ours, but as he is the only V.C. we have in Saskatchewan I 

suppose we have to share him with all the people of this province; but I did want to say how pleased we 

in the Opposition were and how pleased we were at Moosomin to see this action taken by the Premier 

and the Government, and we certainly thank them for it. 

 

Premier Douglas: – I would like to thank the hon. member for his words of agreement with what was 

done. I am sure that having Mr. Mullin go to the Coronation as a representative from the province would 

meet with the commendation of all the people of the province. As has been said by the member from 

Moosomin, Mr. Harry Mullin, our Sergeant-at-Arms, is the only V.C. Saskatchewan has, and a meeting 

was planned of the V.C.s from all over the Commonwealth of nations. A special stand was set up for 

them just across from Buckingham Palace so that they would have a good view, also a number of 

functions were arranged for them. When the invitation came to Mr. Mullin we thought it would be 

unfortunate if Saskatchewan were not represented in that gathering of V.C.s, and I can say that Mr. 

Mullin went 



 

February 12, 1954 

 

5 

 

there, that he was a good representative for Saskatchewan, that he was a good representative for the 

veterans of this province and a good representative for Canada. Since I travelled on the same boat with 

him I can vouch for his good conduct and the fact that he didn’t get the ship going in the wrong direction 

or anything of that sort; I know that both he and Mrs. Mullin enjoyed their trip to the Coronation. I was 

especially glad that they were able to go to the Continent and visit some of the battle scenes there as I 

believe Mrs. Mullin has a relative buried there. 

 

I am sure that what the member from Moosomin has said will be generally accepted throughout the 

province; that most people were glad that our only V.C. was able to represent Saskatchewan so ably at 

the centre of the British Commonwealth of Nations. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:30 o’clock p.m. 


