



















































Hansard: March 02, 1954


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Twelfth Legislature 

14th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 2, 1954 

The House met at three o‘clock p.m. 

 

FINANCIAL AID TO PROSPECTIVE FARMERS 

 

Moved by Mr. Swallow, seconded by Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): 

 

That this Assembly urge the Federal Government to give consideration to the setting up of a 

loaning agency, or alternatively, to the improvement and extension of present loaning agencies, 

in order to provide the necessary financial assistance whereby young men who are qualified and 

wish to farm, may be given the opportunity to establish themselves on economic farm units. 

 

Mr. A. P. Swallow (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, this resolution asking for financial assistance to start 

young men up on farms raises a very important matter. I am sure that all members can think of young 

men who are very anxious to start farming on their own; who will never have the opportunity unless 

there is some form of a loaning agency set up to supply the necessary credit. Otherwise, many good 

prospective farmers will never have the satisfaction of owning homes of their own and becoming 

members of our many farming communities. 

 

It is not only important for the sake of these young men themselves, but it is very important for the 

economy of this province and the country as a whole because, when they become purchasers of 

equipment and all the supplies that are necessary to operate a farm, it will naturally create more 

employment throughout Canada in all the rest of our national industries. We are thinking of this 

programme as a national programme. 

 

Some young men are fortunate in the fact that they have parents who can either give them land or assist 

them to purchase land. On the other hand, there are many smaller farmers who only have sufficient land 

of their own, who are not of the age of retirement, and who have sons who wish to farm, but the parents 

themselves are financially unable to assist them unless there is some agency, with the result that these 

young men float away to the East to work in our industries and are lost to the West. 

 

Some years ago, a young man, if he could become the owner of four horses, a plough, a set of harrows 

and a drill and a binder, even if they were secondhand, could then go out and rent land in his 

neighbourhood. That is a thing of the past, Mr. Speaker. The method of farming has so changed that the 

old-fashioned machinery won‘t do the job. To cope with the weed problem, which is increasing each 

year, and the general conservation of our soil, it is necessary now to have the most modern machinery, 

the wide-level discs and the one-way disc. Being a former Massey-Harris agent for many years, I would 

say they should have a Massey Harris wide-level disc, naturally, and I imagine the member for 

Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Wahl) will agree with me. There is land to be purchased, Mr. Speaker, 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

2 

But the same thing takes place in regard to land; the prices are very, very high. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. gentleman knows he must not advertise in the Chamber. 

 

Mr. Swallow: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, that land is available but the price is very high, 

so the average young man cannot purchase land unless he has a lot of capital. To compete with the 

established farmers and those who have money and can purchase land, he simply cannot get land unless, 

as we are asking, some financial assistance is available. 

 

This resolution is not asking for something new in principle, because there are many national loaning 

agencies that give credit to farmers in one form or another, but the regulations under which they operate 

are not broad enough to assist the men that we are thinking of; that is, the young man with a limited 

amount of capital. We have the V.L.A. national agency which has done a good job in establishing young 

men, and within this province I believe there are 4800 young veterans who have been established on 

farms. It seems that the V.L.A. (as you check over these agencies) is the nearest to the type of agency 

that is needed to establish other young men, apart from veterans. The supervision carried on under the 

V.L.A. seems a very good feature of the plan and is well accepted by the veterans. But the maximum 

amount of the loan is far too small to start a young man off from scratch, and the terms of repayment are 

far too short. 

 

Another national loaning agency that we have is the Farm Improvement Loan Act. This, we know, is 

pretty well limited to the purchase of equipment and, in general, acquiring facilities to operate the land 

that a farmer already owns. We also have the Canadian Farm Loan Board. This assists present farmers to 

expand their holdings, or consolidate their debts. It is not designed to assist the farmer who has not got 

any great assets. 

 

When thinking of assistance to farmers, this Government is to be commended on the policy of making 

Crown lands available to farmers on a 33-year lease, and approximately 15,000 farmers have been 

assisted in one way or another, involving 8½ million acres. This includes straight crop leases, partial 

crop and grazing leases; also grazing leases alone, and, as I said, 15,000 farmers are affected. 

 

I think it was two years ago in this House that the Opposition brought in a resolution trying to force the 

Government to abandon that policy. If that resolution had been carried the Crown lands of this province 

would have been thrown open on the market. That was what they asked, and, as we know, it would have 

come into the hands of the highest bidder. We also know that the highest bidders would have been the 

established farmers, the speculators; it could be businessmen with money who wished to invest in land, 

and others. And the present holders of these leases would have been out of luck. 

 

The interim report on Agriculture and Rural Life indicates that mistakes have been made in the 

allocation or the administration of this land; but even if mistakes have been made, it is better than that 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

3 

the land should come into the hands of speculators. We want to remember that the part of the land which 

this report refers to is a very small percentage of our Crown lands. 

 

I remember reading, last summer or last fall, an account of Manitoba where large financial interests in 

the States were buying land in northern Manitoba at low prices. They were sending large outfits in there 

and clearing the land, breaking it up, and then selling it for high prices. That is what would have taken 

place in Saskatchewan if the resolution brought in by the Opposition had been carried. That cannot 

happen in Saskatchewan. 

 

It is hard to estimate how many young farmers could qualify or would qualify under this plan of loans. It 

is also hard to estimate what size of loan, what minimum or the maximum loans, should be made. It 

seems that the smallest economic unit that would be considered an economic unit would be a half-

section of land for mixed farming – and I am sure that all of us in here, including the Minister of 

Agriculture, I know, would agree that that is the safest type of farming, the most secure and also the 

safest to make loans to. Now, there are some sections of this province, that is the heavy clay areas (and 

some members in the House are fortunate to have land in those areas; the Minister of Highways, the 

member for Lumsden and I believe the member for Milestone are fortunate), in which I don‘t think it 

would be possible to purchase land and sell it to young men to get started. We have areas where land is 

more reasonable, however. Up in the Yorkton country we have areas where you can get a goof half-

section of land today at from $12,000 to $51,000, with buildings. That is more what I think the young 

men would have to start on. A new line of machinery would possibly cost around $8,000 or, if he was 

using secondhand machinery (which would be possible) it would be half of that, $4,000. So, making a 

rough estimate, it would seem that a young farmer, to start up, would need a loan of approximately from 

$15,000 to $20,000. 

 

The most important thing in such a loaning plan would be selection of the right kind of men that would 

be qualified farmers. They need to have a real love for farming because, if they are going on to a mixed 

farm, they really have to have a love for farming to do the work and to put in the hours that they have to 

do. I often think that some of the members here who farm on the heavy clay land, who only farm for a 

short period in the year, don‘t know what mixed farming is. But that is the only kind of farming, I think, 

that would be profitable and would be safe in advancing money on. 

 

The experience of the V.L.A. has been that among their failures it has been those who were not in the 

first place qualified and did not have that real love for farming I mentioned. They have had failures 

among that class. 

 

The next important step would be that the loans be payable over a sufficiently long period to take care of 

the fluctuating returns that we know farmers have, so that the man getting the loan could make the 

yearly payments, and could also keep his holdings up to an efficient standard and at the same time enjoy 

a decent standard of living, because the terms of these loans have been suggested up to about 30 to 40 

years, 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

4 

so that would be a long time out of a man‘s life. 

 

A national loaning agency like this, Mr. Speaker, with careful selection of the applicants, with the proper 

control and supervision, should prove to be a successful plan. It also should prove to be self-liquidating. 

So I have pleasure in moving this resolution. 

 

Mr. E. H. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to associate myself with 

the hon. member of Yorkton (Mr. Swallow) who has moved this motion and, although he has covered it 

very well, I hope to bring out a few figures and facts which will help to convince the hon. members of 

the House that such a programme is very necessary, and if we can convince the Federal Government at 

Ottawa that it is very desirable. 

 

I am very happy to associate myself with this resolution since it affects me directly, and it affects a good 

many of my constituents. First of all, I want to remind you that there are, generally speaking, five groups 

of people owning or holding land in this province. First, we have the established farmers whom we are 

not too much worried about in this particular resolution. They are established on economic units; a good 

many of them have larger than what are commonly known as economic units. Then we have the farmers 

who are established on uneconomic units who have not sufficient land to justify the investment which 

they have to put up for their capital, for their machinery, for their operating expenses. Then we have the 

young farmers, or the people who wish to become farmers. Those people are going to need quite an 

extensive agency to control and operate this programme, and it is going to take a considerable amount of 

money, because to be effective it will have to be a very long-term loaning basis and a low interest loan. 

 

Then we have the retired farmers, or farmers who would like to be retired who feel that they no longer 

wish to carry on farming operations, and a good many of them have a very good unit of land. Some of 

them have what would be called an economic unit; some of them have units which could be split up and 

probably make two or three economic units. Those people are in rather a predicament because, as I 

suggested, they wish to quit work. They wish to retire and live on the earnings which they have made 

throughout their lives. A good many of them have no way of selling their land; they have no way of 

getting the money out of the land which they have invested, simply because the young people who 

should be buying the land have not got the capital to buy it with. Then we have the landholding 

companies – absentee landlords; people a good many of whom are not interested in selling their land. 

However, if they had an opportunity to get a cash sale they probably would let their farm go, and I think 

it would be to the interest of all concerned if a farmer who wished to farm that land could get assistance 

to buy it from those holding companies or absentee landlords. 

 

First of all, I want to remind you that one of the most important things in the economy of Saskatchewan 

is to get the people back onto the land. That statement should not be taken too flatly. It should be 

remembered that, if we are going to put people back on the land, they must be established on economic 

units; they must be established in a financially sound business manner. We do not want to see land 

which the Crown may hold thrown open to speculators, and we would like to see land which is held by 

large farmers who 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

5 

wish to retire made available to young people, who want to establish themselves in the business of 

farming. 

 

It has been suggested that in a good many districts, such as Rosetown and Milden district, as much as 80 

per cent of the land has never been held by resident farmers of those districts. That is a very sad state of 

affairs, but unfortunately it does not apply in too many districts. However, there is in most districts far 

too great a percentage of land held by absentee landlords. 

 

The financial assistance to the farmers in this group – I want to include all farmers. I know the resolution 

has suggested young farmers who are qualified and wish to farm. We are suggesting in the resolution 

that it be given to young farmers, but I don‘t think any loaning agency could separate young farmers and 

probably all the rest of the farmers, except by examining each individual case. I don‘t think we would 

want to try to separate them too distinctly. We have suggested young farmers there, because we think 

that they are probably the most important group. They are the group that are feeling the disastrous 

effects of the present setup. 

 

We know that the cost of farming in the last few years has risen tremendously. The former speaker 

suggested that, a few years or a generation ago, a farmer could get some old machinery, a few horses 

and he could start farming. I think someone suggested in the House, the other day, that if a Liberal 

government was in office he probably had to get oxen. However, that does not matter here; we are out of 

those days and I hope we will go at this in a new and positive approach. The demand for credit for 

farming operations in Saskatchewan has risen. In 1936, operating expenses were estimated at $132 

million; in 1951 it has risen to $270 million. That would indicate that just for operating expenses alone, 

even the established farmer needs some form of cheap and readily available loans. 

 

In 1938 the retail value of new machinery was estimated at about $10 million. In 1951 that had risen to 

$75 million. That is due partly to increased mechanization of farms, due to farm labour shortages, due to 

the fact that farming is changing from a non-mechanized industry to a highly mechanized industry, to a 

highly competitive industry, to one which a person on the farm must have modern machinery and the 

proper machinery; otherwise he cannot make a living. The annual demand for working capital is 

estimated at $350 million. That is a tremendous figure, for the farmers of this province have to carry 

sometimes two or three years, if it happens as it is happening right now, they cannot sell their wheat; if a 

crop failure exists sometimes in particular districts those farmers have to carry their working capital, 

their operating expenses for sometimes a year or two years and sometimes more. Some form of capital 

should be available to those people. 

 

If the 1926 figure is taken at 100, investments for livestock are now 202; investments for machinery are 

209; for land and buildings, 147. We can readily understand that. In 1926 the farmers of Saskatchewan 

had pretty well established their buildings. There has been considerable building since then, but they 

were much better established in their buildings than they were in their machinery, or even in their 

livestock. 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

6 

In 1926 the expenses expressed in a percentage of total investment were 9.8 per cent; that is their 

expenses were about 9.8 per cent of their total investments. In 1951 that had risen to 12.4 per cent, a 

considerable increase, which again indicates the extent to which mechanization has taken place on the 

farms of Saskatchewan. 

 

The demand for mechanization has been tremendous, as we all know, in the last few years. It is expected 

to stay reasonably high if the farmer can get enough money for his products because, first of all, the 

machinery which is being produced today is not built to do the amount of work that the machinery was 

built to do a few years ago. Then, too, farm machinery, at least in the past few years, has been changing 

rapidly, and we have every reason to believe that it will continue to change rapidly. We know also that a 

good many of our farm machines are not doing the job that they should be doing. Therefore we can 

expect some mechanical changes which will improve them to do a better job, a more efficient job. There 

are still some areas in the province which are still not very highly mechanized, particularly in the fringe 

areas of Saskatchewan. A good many of the farmers there are still using horses or secondhand steel-

wheeled tractors and the like. 

 

The prevailing drive for greater productivity is, over a period of years, going to be on the increase. Right 

now we may be experiencing surpluses in a good many of our livestock and grain products; but over a 

period of years, we can expect that we are going to have to increase our output. Certainly we are going 

to have to increase the efficiency of our methods. 

 

We know that the stores and implement agencies and fuel dealers have experienced considerable 

difficulty in the past few years. The statistical summary of the Bank of Canada gives us some indication 

of that where they point out that, in 1949, the cash in personal loans was about $297 million; in 1953 it 

had risen to $547 million. That includes consumers, because farmers are also consumers and some of 

them fairly large consumers. We can realize that their consuming spending has increased quite rapidly as 

well as their farming operation expenses. A good many businesses in Saskatchewan realized that they 

were in a very dangerous position, this fall, when they looked over the credit which they had extended to 

the farmers and found that their customers were not going to be able to pay all or very much of the credit 

which they had extended. The Bank of Canada estimated that consumer credit buying jumped to over 

$500 million in the last year. That is a tremendous increase which the farmers also have to finance for 

themselves. 

 

Credit, as I suggested before, is needed to help to break up some of the larger farms to help to get young 

individual farmers on that land to farm it either individually or co-operatively. If they wish to form a 

co-op, I think the credit which is extended to them should be extended to them whether they form a 

co-op or whether they farm individually. 

 

The amount of machinery sold in Saskatchewan has increased quite sharply and so has the amount of 

financing which went on that machinery. Of tractors and combines sold in Saskatchewan from 1948 to 

1951, approximately 43 per cent of the tractors and 82 per cent of the combines were 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

7 

financed through Farm Improvement loans. In 1951, approximately 42 per cent of the tractors and 85 per 

cent of the combines were financed under the Farm Improvement Loan Act. 

 

The Farm Improvement Loans Act, we all recognize, is doing a fairly good job. We don‘t complain 

about the job they are doing. We simply point out that we don‘t think they are extending their loaning 

facilities far enough. We suggest that the Farm Improvement Loans Act should lengthen their term of 

loans and make them available to more farmers, including the farmer who is not on necessarily an 

economic farm unit. Sometimes he needs assistance to buy more land to get onto an economic farm unit, 

and sometimes he simply needs money to take off his crop. To do that the Farm Improvement Loans Act 

would have to investigate the individual case and see whether the particular farmer was over-borrowing. 

We suggest that any extension of loaning facilities, or the setting up of a loaning agency, should 

investigate to see if the farmer is over-borrowing; first on his ability to farm and secondly on the unit on 

which he is farming. 

 

The Canadian Farm Loan Board has been doing, I think, an excellent job since they were re-established 

in 1935 after the Saskatchewan Farm Loan Board ceased operations. One of the big improvements 

which they made was that they took politics out of the making of loans. They now make them purely 

from a business point of view. They have quit giving loans to uneconomic farmers and to giving loans 

far larger than the farmer needed, and things like that. They are now being a little conservative in 

making their loans. The adjusters or assessors have to go out and assess the property on which a loan is 

to be made, and the biggest complaint seems to be that the assessors are evaluating the property a little 

too low. We don‘t complain about that too much, because we want to see anything such as this setup 

successful not only through good years, but through depression years. The Canadian Farm Loan Board 

had a big advantage in that it allowed the farmer to do some refinancing; it allowed him to consolidate 

his loans so he knew exactly where he stood; and so that the Canadian Farm Loan Board knew exactly 

where it stood. The Canadian Farm Loan Board has always had sufficient funds, which, of course, may 

indicate that they were a little bit conservative in making some of their loans, and, of course, they 

always make a careful appraisal of the repayment ability of the individual getting the loan. They tend to 

be a little over-cautious. For instance, they generally refrain from making loans to farmers unless they 

are actually living with buildings on the land. 

 

Now, a young farmer buying some land, sometimes he cannot afford or cannot get the capital to build 

his house immediately, or to build all of his buildings on that land. Nonetheless, if he is a conscientious 

farmer and if they are satisfied he is conscientious, I think they could be justified in making certain loans 

of that nature. The Canadian Farm Loan Board will not help ‗beginning‘ farmers. They can only borrow 

a percentage of the appraised value of the property which they have. They will loan 50 per cent of the 

appraised value, with a maximum of $5,000 on a first mortgage and 60 per cent with a maximum of 

$10,000 on a second mortgage. 

 

Now, I would like to see the Canadian Farm Loan Board or some other agency loan money to help those 

farmers get hold of their first bit 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

8 

of land. The Canadian Farm Loan Board, along with the Farm Improvement Loans Act, the loans by 

Banks and any other private loaning companies, have one other big disadvantage, particularly to the 

beginning farmer and that is that they require equal annual repayments. We all know the experiences of 

the farmer during the 1930‘s in which the loaning companies experienced severe difficulty. The 

governments of the day had to put in debt adjustment boards to give protection to the farmers to prevent 

seizure of their property because they could not repay a loan. We think that any loans which are made 

should be made with an equal responsibility to the loaning company as to the farmer who takes the loan, 

in that the loaning company must recognize that loans will be repaid when they can be repaid according 

to crop conditions. 

 

The V.L.A. has had some very good experience in that they have found, generally speaking, that any 

farmers who were on a crop repayment share basis met their payments better and from an overall point 

of view they made their payments quicker than those who were on a straight equal repayment basis. It 

should be as much the responsibility of he Canadian Government to assume economic disaster as it is 

for the farmer to expect to assume that economic disaster. The Federal Government is the only one that 

is capable of controlling our borrowings, our spending, our markets and, therefore, control the very 

economic lifeblood of Canada and, because of those facts, must assume the responsibility of credit to the 

various businesses in this country. 

 

The V.L.A. has some limitations with some of the features of their assistance to young farmers. First of 

all, they were limited to veterans. We would like to see that extended now to include any young farmer, 

who has the ability and who can find the land. The V.L.A. provided a maximum of $6,000, providing 

the veteran put up 10 per cent, plus anything extra that was necessary. If the land which he was buying 

cost him $8,000, he would have to put up 10 per cent of the $6,000, plus the extra. If it only cost him 

$3,000 or $4,000, he would still have to put up the 10 per cent and any of the extra he could borrow to 

make improvements on the land, to buy machinery, or to build buildings. Those features, we think, are 

very good but not large enough. If the veteran remains 10 years, he has to repay only two-thirds of the 

total amount borrowed. 

 

The V.L.A. had fairly good success in buying suitable farming land. They attempted to buy land which 

was similar to the other farm land in that district. In some cases they did get some poor land, simply, I 

suppose, but of not quite enough supervision in the particular veteran or in estimating what the land was 

– whether it was good land or poor land as to its productive value. They had fairly strict regulations as to 

the suitability of particular veterans. Sometimes they made the veteran who applied, and who appeared 

to be fairly qualified, get some experience on a farm or go to agricultural college and get some 

experience there. We think all those features are good features and should be kept in any loans that are 

made, whether it be to the veterans, or through the Canadian Farm Loan Board, or loans through Banks. 

We think they are good features and they should be adopted. I think that is one of the main means of 

preventing over-borrowing by farmers, and it can be very useful in preventing catastrophes such as 

happened in the 1930‘s when the farmers found they could not begin to meet the repayment of their 

loans. 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

9 

The V.L.A. had one other particularly good feature and that was a follow-up, or supervision of the 

operations of the veteran. Veterans appear to like it all right. They don‘t seem to object to the Veterans 

Department coming out and supervising and suggesting that they do such and such a thing, or suggesting 

that they do not do it. They seem to get along very well, and I think the veterans who were under V.L.A. 

realized that it was their responsibility to meet the loans which had been made to them if they possibly 

could. Most of them were prepared to accept the advice of the officials of the department. The Federal 

Government paid all administration costs in the supervision of V.L.A. loans, and they only pay a part of 

the administration costs in the Canadian Farm Loan Board. 

 

The Canadian Farm Loan Board has been able to keep their interest rates fairly low but they have been 

experiencing some difficulty in not being able to raise sufficient funds for the administration costs, and 

yet keep their interest rates at the low figures at which they are now. I think it is very important that they 

do keep their interest rates low and I think on the other hand, the farmer who is taking advantage of this 

loaning agency, or agencies, should be prepared to pay for most of the administration. 

 

I think I have mentioned a few things which should at least stimulate some interest in the matter, and I 

hope that hon. members of this House will support this resolution because I think it is certainly in the 

interests of young people who wish to get established on farms. I think it is in the interest of farmers 

who are already established on farms. Further, and I think more important, it is in the interest of the 

economy of this country to keep the agricultural land of Saskatchewan in the hands of the people of this 

province, to be used in the manner in which it should be used; people who have an interest in the farm 

and interest in Canada, from a point of view of making a living, not from the point of view of making 

money. I hope all hon. members will feel free to support this resolution, and I think we have a 

responsibility to our constituents to support this resolution in every way we can, not only in voting for it 

in this House, but I think we should urge our M.P.‘s and our Government of Ottawa to press this matter, 

to get it as soon as we can. 

 

Mr. R.A. McCarthy (Cannington): — I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

FEDERAL AID FOR HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION 

 

Moved by Mr. Howe, seconded by Mr. Gibson: 

 

―That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recommend to the Government of Canada that 

more assistance is urgently required for the ever-increasing need for highway construction in 

Saskatchewan.‖ 

 

Mr. Peter Howe (Kelvington): — Mr. Speaker, we are going to have quite a variety here, this 

afternoon, by way of resolutions. I think, however, that the one I am moving this afternoon, 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

10 

is as important as any resolution that we have ever had before this House. It has to do with Federal 

assistance for construction of highways. 

 

There are two problems which, generally speaking, people feel really affect agriculture in western 

Canada. We find a lot of people move into towns or into cities, and yet continue to farm. We feel that 

there are two things that possibly contribute to that. One is the question of rural electrification on the one 

hand, and good roads on the other. We know that many people move into town because of the road 

conditions in the wintertime, the difficulty of getting the children to school and what-have-you. 

 

The problem facing the province in regard to roads is a much greater problem than that confronting any 

other province in Canada. We have figures that indicate that, in Saskatchewan, we have something like 

37 per cent of all the road allowances or surveyed roads in Canada and only 7 per cent of the people. In 

other words, 7 per cent of the people have to carry the burden of building roads on 37 per cent of the 

surveyed roads in Canada. That is quite a burden to undertake. It is not that the Government of 

Saskatchewan has relaxed in any way in spending money to extend our highway system. The first year 

we were in office, I think we spent something like $3½ million on highways, whereas the last year under 

review, we spent something over $17 million on highways. The province is using all its resources the 

best way it can in expanding in the field of highway construction. 

 

We do make a lot of comparisons with our neighbours to the south of us. I think that most of us here in 

this House have probably, sometime or other, been across the border and travelled on American roads. 

We see such a vast difference between the road conditions down there and those in this Canada of ours. 

 

Well, to start with, Mr. Speaker, we are probably 50 or 60 years behind in development in this country 

as against the United States. I think it is fair to say that they had started their development in every way, 

about 50 or 60 years ahead of us and yet, on the other hand, in methods of transportation, the way that 

people travel on the Canadian side or on the American side, there is really no difference. It looks, to me 

at least, that the kind of trucks and transports and the means of travel in the United State are just about 

the same as here in Canada. That is why we feel it so much, and recognize this tremendous need for 

more money for highway construction, because we are so far behind in the development of our highway 

system on this side of the border. 

 

It is true that the Federal Government is making contributions to the Trans-Canada Highway. They have 

already started by entering into an agreement with the various provinces (except Quebec, I think) to 

share in the cost of a Trans-Canada Highway. This is to be shared roughly on a 50-50 basis, so that a 

start has been made. I feel, Mr. Speaker, that we have got to go much further. The Federal Government 

today should assume a much greater responsibility than they are doing at the present time for the 

construction of highways throughout Canada. When we were negotiating with the Federal Government 

to participate in the cost of this Trans-Canada Highway I felt (and I know that many people felt) that the 

cost of the 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

11 

Trans-Canada Highway should have been borne entirely by the Federal Government and that the 

provinces should not have had to pay a part of that cost. However, the province of Saskatchewan, like 

other provinces, felt that half a loaf is better than none, so they entered into these agreements with the 

Ottawa government on the Trans-Canada Highway. 

 

The increase in automobile traffic, the increase in numbers of trucks and transports, is tremendous in this 

Canada of ours. Take in Saskatchewan alone the new cars and trucks and buses that were sold in 1939. 

There were 5,900 automobiles sold in Saskatchewan in 1939 as against 19,800 in 1952, a tremendous 

increase. In trucks and buses, there were a little less than 3,000 sold in Saskatchewan in 1939, but by 

1952 there were over 13,000 sold in the province of Saskatchewan. So this machine age and the modern 

means of transportation have been moving forward so rapidly that we in Canada particularly have fallen 

behind in trying to provide the type of roads that this type of transportation demands. In the first place 

our roads, unfortunately, are not built to the standards that they ought to be. Consequently, when these 

heavy transports and trucks of all kinds travel on our highways the deterioration is tremendous, 

depreciation is tremendous, and it needs a tremendous amount of repairing and upkeep. 

 

In the province, generally speaking, we feel (I think) that the moneys we get from licences and 

registrations of cars, and from the gasoline tax, belongs to the roads and the highways of this province. 

While it is not earmarked, we are nevertheless spending that money on our roads in this province – and a 

lot more than that. 

 

I got some figures in regard to the amount of excise and sales tax that the Federal Government is 

collecting on the sale of automobiles and buses and trucks and so on. In 1950, the excise and sale taxes 

collected was $91½ million, but in 1952 that had increased from $91 million to $138 million. This is 

something we should look upon, I think, as a fund that should be used to help to build and construct and 

maintain a highway system in Canada. I think it belongs there because of the fact that every time we buy 

a car or a truck, we make a contribution by way of an increased price on the car or the truck, which goes 

to the Federal Government and little or nothing comes back except, we might say, in regard to the 

Trans-Canada Highway. This is a very small contribution that is being made by the Dominion 

Government, it does not really amount to very much. But I do think that we have a just claim on the 

moneys the Federal Government is collecting on the wholesale prices of cars, trucks and buses and so 

on, for the building of highways and roads in our province. 

 

According to the annual report of the Bureau of Public Roads in Washington, Department of Commerce, 

they passed an Act in 1921 which is termed the Federal Highway Act, and they give various types of 

assistance to building roads in the United States. They have four headings here, and I just want to go 

over these headings to show you the variety of support they give to roads down there. Federal aid 

primary highway system is No. 1; federal aid on secondary highway system is No. 2; federal aid or 

urban primary systems No. 3; and then No. 4, a national system of inter-state highways. One paragraph I 

took out of that report I want to quote to you, because it does show the many types of assistance that 

they give. Before that, however, I want to mention that, in 1953, the federal aid funds in 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

12 

the United States amounted to $500 million and on the programme for 1954 and 1955 authorizations 

have already been made to provide $575 million for each one of the years 1954 and 1955. Here is the 

paragraph I want to quote to you: 

 

―Twenty-three thousand miles of highways completed during the year of 1953 included 600 

miles of highways and 999 bridges on the federal aid primary highway system outside of cities 

and so on. And 758 miles of highways and 390 bridges on urban portions of the federal aid 

primary highway system. 15,403 miles of highways and 1535 bridges on secondary or farm-to-

market roads in the United States and 784 miles of highway in national forests, parks, public 

lands and flood relief projects.‖ 

 

Another very important undertaking they have contributed to is in regard to safety. ―Advancement of the 

long-term programme of eliminating hazards to life at railway-highway crossings included completion 

of 125 crossing eliminations, reconstruction of 22 inadequate grade separation structures, and protection 

of 356 crossings by flashlights or other safety devices.‖ You can thus see they are giving assistance in a 

good many ways across the border in regard to highway construction, and on main market roads and 

also on the rural and country roads. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think I‘ll not labour this any more. It is a resolution that is going to be very 

acceptable, I am sure, to every member of the House. I don‘t think there will be any disagreement. 

Therefore I move this resolution, seconded by the hon. member for Morse, (Mr. Gibson). 

 

Mr. James Gibson (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to second this motion, I would like first to 

congratulate the mover for his presentation of the case for Federal aid for highway construction in 

Saskatchewan. I may not be able to add anything new to what has been said, but I think that I should at 

least give re-emphasis to some of the points that have been brought out. 

 

I think, for example, that we in Saskatchewan should remind the people of the rest of Canada, and 

constantly keep reminding them, that, as the hon. member said, we have got only 7 per cent of the 

population of Canada in Saskatchewan, but that we have within our provincial borders over one-third of 

the total road mileage of Canada. We have 24 miles of surveyed road for every man, woman and child in 

this province and, on a per capita basis, we have three times the mileage of Manitoba and twice that of 

Alberta. With such odds against us, Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder, with 24 miles of road for each and 

every one of us to build and maintain, that we have not got the roads, nor the highways sufficient for our 

needs, and is it any wonder that we are now asking the Federal Government to assume a proper share of 

highway costs on this province? 

 

Everyone knows there is an insistent demand for more and better highways, and the wear and tear on 

highways because of the increase in the number of vehicles, has been great in recent years. The speed of 

all cars has increased as well as the weight and size of all trucks, and truck 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

13 

transportation has expanded rapidly and, too, the number of school buses has increased materially. As a 

result, accidents have mounted and traffic congestion occurs on rural as well as on urban highways, and 

this has created a demand for wider and a heavier type of highways, with all the safety features of a 

modern highway. We would like, I am sure to build heavier, wider and safer highways. I am sure the 

Minister of Highways would like very much to be able to do that, for we know it is the most economical 

kind of highway we can build. We know it would save money in maintenance cost; it would save money 

in wear and tear on motor vehicles; it would save money on gasoline and insurance costs, and, most 

important of all, it would save lives. 

 

At the moment we haven‘t money enough to build enough of the highways of the type we are presently 

building, without embarking on a wider and heavier type of highway, much as we would like to do so. It 

is just a question of money – money that we haven‘t got; money that we are now trying to get and expect 

to get from the Federal Government in the form of aid for highway construction. 

 

In the past nine years in Saskatchewan the number of licences for cars and trucks issued has more than 

doubled, and during that time, we have been devoting an increasing portion of our budget to highway 

construction. We have now reached the point where we have just about got to the limit of the amount 

that we feel we can allocate for that purpose. Let it not be said that the people of Saskatchewan are not 

doing everything they can to finance highway construction. Saskatchewan is doing its full share. If we 

look at the per capita figures for highway construction based on provincial, municipal and urban 

expenditures, we will find that, taking the United States, their capital expenditure is $22.00; in Canada 

as a whole, our per capita expenditure is $20. In Saskatchewan it is $29 per capita, so surely it cannot be 

said that we are not doing our share towards highway financing in this province. 

 

The sad thing about it is that, although we are spending $9 per capita more than the rest of Canada is 

spending as a whole, we are not spending half enough to meet our highway requirements; and the reason 

is obvious. The reason is that we just don‘t have the money to spend. In 1953-54 we spent on highway 

construction alone $6 million, plus $2 million, our share of the Trans-Canada Highway. Our total budget 

for roads and highways this last year was, as the hon. member stated, $16 million. And incidentally, Mr. 

Speaker, that is just six times what it was in the fiscal year 1943-44. If we have any hope of 

Saskatchewan‘s economy continuing to expand as it has expanded in the past few years, then we will 

just have to have more and better highways. We need them now, and we feel that it would be better for 

our own economy, as well as for our national economy, if we did have them now. But the only way I 

know of that we can hope to get those highways is through Federal aid and, certainly, we should be 

getting that now. We feel we should have got it long since. 

 

It has been truly said that you pay for good roads whether you have them or not, and we pay less if we 

have them than if we do not. Our whole economy suffers from the lack of adequate highways. For this 

reason alone, I feel that we are not asking too much to expect the Federal Government to assume a larger 

share of highway transportation construction costs. The Federal Government of the United States have 

long since recognized this responsibility. Last year, they paid in grants to the state governments and 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

14 

to the rural and municipal governments over $3/4 billion for highway construction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my figures, you will notice, may not gibe with the figures that my hon. friend has just 

given, because I have taken into account all of the money the federal government paid for road 

construction, last year, in the United States. The hon. member for Kelvington just mentioned $500,000 

and that was for certain grants to municipalities. But in the United States, in addition to this sum, they 

assume responsibility for a lot of other roads, as my hon. friend said. For example, the Pan-American 

Highway within the borders of the United States is the total responsibility of the United States. In 

Canada of course, the Trans-Canada Highway is a 50-50 proposition. 

 

Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member said, possibly we are 50 years behind the United States in 

development. Well, I think maybe he is just a little out. I think we are only 42 years behind, because it is 

only 42 years since the United States assumed responsibility for assisting to build main market roads – 

that is farm to market roads – and highways. Surely now, Mr. Speaker, 42 years later, it is not too soon 

to expect that our Federal Government will do likewise. 

 

I would like to point out that highway transportation is big business. To prove that it is big business, I 

would like, with your permission, Mr. Speaker, to quote just a few figures showing what they think 

about the highway transportation business in the United States, according to the Brookings Institute: 

 

―Highway transportation, as we know it in the United States, is the greatest single combination 

of economic activities in man‘s history. It pays one-sixth of the nation‘s taxes and provides over 

10 million jobs. Six million workers, for instance, are truck drivers. More people are employed 

in all branches of highway transportation than on all the nation‘s farms. Individual business 

establishments directly connected with highway transportation number 700,000. The people of 

the United States pay over $50 billion a year on highway transportation services. Motor trucks 

account for 15 per cent of freight ton miles and 77 per cent of freight tonnage hauled yearly. 

Highway transportation also accounts for 95 per cent of all passenger miles of travel in the 

United States. In some states the automobile, together with the highway system, has made the 

tourist industry the single most important producer of wealth. It is also an important arm of 

national defence.‖ 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would like you to pay attention to this part, if you would: 

 

―In the words of President Eisenhower next to the manufacture of the most modern implements 

of war as a guarantee of peace through strength, a network of modern roads is as necessary to 

defence as it is to our national economy and personal safety.‖ 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

15 

There is one other quotation here. It says, ‗The Nation wants and needs Safe and Adequate Highways.‘ 

But, in reference to what President Eisenhower said about the importance of a network of highways, I 

just want to say, in connection with our Trans-Canada Highway that one of the reasons, I understand, we 

are getting assistance at all to build it is because it is thought necessary in the interest of national 

defence. But in the United States such roads are the total responsibility of the federal government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, may I point out the overall problem of roads in Saskatchewan. Actual construction of 

roads now totals nearly a hundred thousand miles including 50,000 miles of market roads, and 43,000 

miles of local roads. In addition there are 8,300 miles of gravelled highways and, in view of the 

magnitude of the problem of highway construction facing the Saskatchewan Government in comparison 

with our neighbouring provinces of Manitoba and Alberta, I submit there is a good case to be made for 

increasing the amount of Federal aid to our highway programme. I am pleased to second this motion. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to unanimously. 

 

RE INDIANS AND METIS 

 

Moved by Mr. Berezowsky, seconded by Mr. Feusi: 

 

―That this Assembly requests the Federal Government to take necessary steps to grant the Treaty 

Indians of Canada full rights of Canadian citizenship without abrogating any privileges and 

rights provided by Indian Treaties; to modernize and expand existing educational and hospital 

facilities for Treaty Indians and thus enhance their security and provide equal health and 

educational opportunities for these people; AND FURTHER, that this Assembly urges the 

Federal Government to give favourable consideration to sharing with the Provincial 

Governments the costs of a comprehensive rehabilitation and re-establishment programme for 

Indians and for Metis, in order that the social, economic and racial problems of these 

underprivileged people may be solved at an early date and thus expedite their assimilation to and 

integration with contemporary Canadian society.‖ 

 

Mr. W. J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, this motion asks for the rehabilitation of our 

underprivileged native Canadian people whom we sometimes call Indians and Metis. 

 

I feel rather inadequate in moving this motion. I wish we had a native Canadian member here in this 

House, who I am sure would be able to do a much better job but although they were here before my 

forefathers came and probably before any of your forefathers came, they are not represented and I regret 

that exceedingly. However, I will do the best I can to present the problem as I think it faces these people 

here in Canada today. 

 

Before dealing with the problem of rehabilitation, I think it is necessary to give some time to the 

background of these people, and I am quite sure that we all realize that the people of native origin, the 

Indians and the Metis, follow a life completely different from that followed by those of 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

16 

us who have come from Europe and settled here. The aborigines were essentially hunters and fishermen; 

they were traders in furs; they led a nomadic life, travelling from one place to another; they at no time, 

with the exception of a few of the southern tribes in the United States, living in communities such as we 

know. The Metis, of course, were the children of the immigrants – the Scotch, the Irish and English 

fathers and native mothers; but to some extent the life of the children of these fathers was very similar to 

those of their Indian forbears, and they were as nomadic in their habits, trapping and fishing for a 

livelihood. It is to be remembered that during the hunting seasons they left their small settlements, 

separated out into the forests or the prairies and there carried on the work that they used to do. Each man 

provided for his family as best he could. 

 

When we talk about free enterprise, those people were free enterprisers; but they did realize that to 

struggle against the difficulties of survival they had to follow a law of survival and so, when one of these 

hunters obtained game and others were hungry, they following the policy of co-operation and divided 

the animal among all those who required food. Conservation, of course, with them was a natural thing, 

and we find that in 1850-1860 and prior to that time, there was no difficulty so far as obtaining food was 

concerned. The buffalo were plentiful, the deer were many as were the animals such as the fur-bearers 

which provided the peltries which these native people could trade to the Hudson‘s Bay Company and the 

Northwest Company. Furs were plentiful and was the product from the sale of which the natives 

obtained their ammunition and other necessaries. In some ways, I would submit that these people had a 

happy life which gave them a certain amount of satisfaction. 

 

Then we come to the time of the Selkirk settlement – I think it was about the beginning of the nineteenth 

century, 1815, 1817, or thereabouts. We find the white man migrating into western Canada and it is 

rather remarkable as we look into the history of western Canada we find there was actually no conquest 

of the native people. I would like to go into this matter for a minute or two because, when we look at the 

settlements in the United States – when the white people moved into the west we find there was 

conquest; the Indians were slaughtered, and in return the Indians of that country had to slaughter the 

whites to try to protect themselves in their survival. We find when we look at New Zealand that there 

was a conquest there, and we find today when we look at South Africa that the conquest is still going on 

in that country. We find when we look at South Africa that the conquest is still going on in that country. 

Fortunately, I think it can properly be said that as far as western Canada is concerned, and for that matter 

eastern Canada, although the natives surrendered their lands and their rights, yet there was actually no 

conquest in the sense that I understand it, or a struggle such as a war with those people. And that is 

rather important. 

 

Stemming from this statement, I think it is also necessary for us to look to the matter of how the 

different countries solved the problem of the natives‘ assimilation into the society that has developed. 

We find that, in New Zealand, for example, I think it was Sir George Grey who developed a policy 

whereby they followed the idea of having the native institutions amalgamated into the institutions that 

the white man brought in. They had no segregation such as we know in Canada or as we have known in 

the United States. As a result of this particular policy we find that, in New Zealand, there is today no 

problem of amalgamation of the New Zealanders into the society of the whites; the problem is settled. 

 

In the United States, for example, and South Africa, as I see it, we find that there were actually two 

steps. The first step was conquest, as I pointed out, and some of it, as you know, has been very bitter. 

Some histories misrepresent that conquest, making the native Indian (who has 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

17 

always been a very peaceful individual) into a villain, and, of course, anybody who knows his history 

takes exception to that. But there was a conquest, and there was destruction. There was an attempt to 

annihilate the native people of those countries and to some extent, in South Africa, I think the attempt is 

carried on today, as I have previously pointed out. After the conquests we find segregation in those 

countries has been the policy. In the United States, there has been segregation until very recently. I am 

happy to report that now, I understand from a very recent Bill, President Eisenhower has given the 

Indians of the United States the same rights as their whites have, and I think the United States should be 

commended for that particular step. That is the least they could do for the injustices that were committed 

against the Indian people in the past. 

 

In South Africa they still have segregation. They are still trying to take the coloured people and enclose 

them in concentration camps, the reservations. Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, as we look into Canadian 

history we find that Canada adopted a different policy from that of New Zealand and from that which 

was followed in the United States. Our policy actually is two step, and so it was, I think, enunciated by 

our Government. The first step was segregation and the second step was to be amalgamation. In trying 

to get to the first step of segregation it was decided by the Government of Canada at the time (that would 

be about 1870 or 1871) that it would be necessary to have discussions with the native people of the west 

and try to persuade them to give up their rights and their lands to the government and in return they 

would be provided for to a certain extent as well as granted certain reservations. There was a certain 

intention at that time, which I think this House should know. We find that, in the signing of the first 

treaty in Manitoba, Mr. Simpson, who was Indian Commissioner at that time, said this to the Indian 

chiefs: 

 

―Your Great Mother wishes the good of all men under her sway. She wishes her children to be 

happy and contented. She wishes them to live in comfort. She would like them to adopt the 

habits of the whites – to work land and to raise food and store it up against the time of want. She 

thinks this would be the best thing for her Red children to do, that it would make them safer from 

famine and distress and make their homes more comfortable. But the Queen, though she may 

think it good for you to adopt civilized habits has no idea of compelling you to do so. This she 

leaves to your choice and you need not live like the white man unless you can be persuaded to do 

so of your own free will. Many of you, however, are already doing this.‖ 

 

He goes on and says: 

 

―I drove yesterday through the village below the fort; there I found many well-built houses and 

many well-filled fields of wheat and barley and potatoes growing and giving promise of plenty 

for the winter to come. The people who till these fields and live in these houses are men of your 

own race and they show that you 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

18 

can live and prosper and provide like a white man can. What I saw on my drive is enough to 

prove that even if there is not a buffalo or a fur-bearing animal in the country you could live and 

be surrounded with comfort with what you can raise from the soil.‖ 

 

At that time the government of the day (and that is just about 100 years ago) felt, in the experiences they 

had with the natives, that the native could live in the same way that a white man could live; he could 

cultivate the fields, he could live a civilized life. And I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the government of that 

day was right. Yes, Mr. Howe and others who were in the Federal government at that time were right; 

they have been proven to be right. Then what is the difficulty? Since the first treaty was adopted in 

1941, I believe, it has been 80 years, and we still have the problem of the native Indian and his Metis 

brother; and I think it is not due to the fact that the native cannot be assimilated. It is not because he does 

not want to be assimilated. It is due to the fact that somebody failed – and I submit that it is the 

governments of Canada and of the provinces that have failed those people. 

 

Going back to the time when these treaties were first signed, and I point out to this House that there 

were plenty of buffalo, and the Indians, being simple people, and not the foresight that perhaps they 

should have had. So they did not make the demands upon the government of the day to the extent that 

they should have. I shall indicate to you how very little they obtaining in ceding all their rights and lands 

to Canada, by quoting a few figures that I obtained the other day. Here is all the Indians were given as 

far as acreages were concerned, in reservations; this is for giving up all of western Canada and a 

considerable amount in the east. We find that, in Nova Scotia, there was set aside a reservation of only 

30 square miles; Prince Edward Island, only 4 square miles – that is all the Indians got there; in New 

Brunswick, only 59 square miles; in Quebec, only 281 square miles; in Ontario, 2,435 square miles; in 

Manitoba 821 square miles; in Saskatchewan, 1,000 square miles; in Alberta, 2,296 square miles; in 

British Columbia, 1,274 square miles and 9 square miles were reserved for the Indians in the Yukon – a 

total of only 9,089 square miles, out of millions of square miles of Canada. That is all they received, 

and, Mr. Speaker, when you consider that the Canadian government at that time granted 55 million of 

acres of land, for free, to the Canadian Pacific and other railways, you can see what a grave injustice was 

done the native people. 

 

I point this out for the simple reason that often we hear of people of Saskatchewan, and I presume of 

other provinces, saying, ―Well, why don‘t they go and farm on their reservations?‖ I don‘t know, but I 

believe that, today, if you gave every native who lives on a reservation a parcel of land, I doubt if there 

would be a quarter-section for each one of them. There is not enough land; so something must be done 

about the rehabilitation problem. 

 

Going back to the point I made at the beginning – that we did not have any conquest – I would like to 

make a further point, and it is that one of the reasons we had no conquest, and no conquest was 

necessary is because of the fact that we had men in between – the Metis – who, being 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

19 

partly native and partly European in origin, desired peace. They wanted trade, desiring to see 

development in Canada. The Metis wanted to make a home; and he was always the man, when Indian 

treaties were being considered, who was called in and who influenced the native Indian chiefs and the 

Indian people to cede their rights and privileges so as to avoid any trouble or wars in this country. So I 

submit it is a debt of gratitude that we owe to the Metis people, and it always irks me when I see any 

person assuming a superior attitude and calling a man a ‗half-breed‘, branding him as something not 

equal to the white man. When I consider how they were responsible for assisting the Government in 

settling this country on a peaceful basis, I am aware how wrong such people are in making statements of 

this kind, and how much greater it would be if they tried to do something to see that these people were 

re-established, re-habilitated and guided to live a modern and model life as the white man envisions it to 

be. 

 

At this point I would like to mention something about the Riel rebellion It is often thought, often said 

and often taught in the schools that the man responsible for all the trouble, the revolutionary, the man 

who had to be hanged, was Riel. Yet, when you delve into history, you find that he was only one during 

that time who was trying to obtain justice from the government of the day for the west. We find that 

there were other men – for example, Mr. Jackson of the Prince Albert district – who was very active in 

trying to obtain rights for the people in western Canada on the plains; and here is what we find in the 

declaration that was made at that time. I am quoting from the book ‗The Birth of western Canada‘ on 

page 300. This is a reference to the movement of trying to get, as I said, fair play and justice for the 

people of that area. This is directed to the citizens of Prince Albert, and here is what it says: 

 

―Gentlemen: we are starting a movement in this settlement with a view to obtaining provincial 

legislation for the northwest territories and if possible, the council of our own resources, that we 

may build our railroads and other works to serve our own interests rather than those of the 

eastern provinces. We are preparing a statement of our cause to be sent to Ottawa as a matter of 

form. We state the various evils which are caused by the present system of the legislature . . .‖ 

 

Here is another quotation from the same book, on page 504, referring to Riel and the Metis in and 

around Prince Albert. It says this: 

 

―Although Prince Albert and St. Laurent were the centres of Riel‘s political sections among the 

whites, Metis and Indians, other sections (mind you this) of the northwest territories were also 

carrying on an agitation for northwest rights. At Qu‘Appelle a Settlers‘ Rights Association has 

been pressing for the reform of the land laws and for legislation in the interests of the settlers. 

During the summer of 1884 a series of meeting were held throughout Assiniboia to discuss the 

commercial and political situation of the territories. Demands were forwarded to Ottawa for 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

20 

representation in the Dominion parliament and for the construction of a railway to Hudson Bay. 

In December a meeting was held at the town of Wolseley and a committee appointed to take the 

necessary steps to organize a deputation to press their case personally before the Dominion 

cabinet. 

 

―Commenting on this meeting, the ‗Northwester‘ of Calgary declared that it was a war whoop 

which it was determined should be heard in Ottawa . . .‖ 

 

And it goes on in this tenor. I am trying to point out, Mr. Speaker, that today, when we blame the Metis 

for the rebellion up in the north, they were no more to blame than the whites in the south; they were all 

asking for the same rights. They wanted to have a local government here; they urged to have a railway 

built; they desired to have the right to settle on land of their choice. Yet we have blamed the Metis and 

today, up in my country, it is often referred to that they are the revolutionists and the people who would 

not live in conformity with the laws. That is not true. It is not true that they did not wish to conform with 

the laws of this country. They wanted laws; they wanted the country to be opened up; they wanted to 

make it a great northwest. 

 

Thus we keep the natives on the reservations or, as somebody said the other day, in concentration camps 

– and that is all it is; segregated when they should not be segregated. On the other hand, you have the 

problem of the Metis. The are partly people of the same origin; they were often Indians who did not 

wish to reside on the reservations. For example, you find one of the Indian chiefs, Big Bear, who made 

the statement that he was being forced to stay on the reservation, but as a free man he would not stay on 

the reservation; and there are people of that type, of native Indian blood, who left their reservations. 

Now let us see what the government of the day did for them. For those who left the reservations and for 

those who had native blood in their veins, scrip was granted. That is how the Government dealt with 

them. They were given scrip, originally (think it was in 1885) and the scrip amounted to the value of 

$240; and for that $240, or land equivalent to $240, the native was expected to give away all his Indian 

rights forever. Yet, on the other hand, we see that the government of the day promised, as we look 

through the treaties, to see that as long as the sun shone and the rivers ran they would be given the 

necessary assistance. Because they refused to go into concentration camps they were required to accept 

$240 which at a later date was reduced to $160, or 160 acres. As late as 1921, for example, up in the 

north they were paid $160, and that meant that their rights were ceded forever – for $160. 

 

Now it may be all right for a government to make deals of such a nature, and if the people are 

rehabilitated then none of us need object; but the difficulty is that $160 or $240 cannot rehabilitate 

anybody. Nor can it do that today up in the Beauval district where we have natives, Metis people, who 

were offered on the average $100 to give up their trapping rights and fishing rights. That will not 

rehabilitate the native Indian or the native Metis. Something more must be done, and I think it is time 

that the people of Canada realized, just as I think we realize in 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

21 

this House, that the most important resources that we have is the human resource; it is people. I think 

somebody mentioned, the other day, ―What is the value of all these – our natural resources, our 

agricultural land and forests and everything else – if we haven‘t the people to put such natural resources 

to use, to utilize them, to provide people with a higher standard of living?‖ All resources are secondary, 

people come first. We recognize the principle, and the nations of the world recognized it when they 

considered the Colombo plan. Today we are trying to rehabilitate the people in India and Pakistan and in 

Indo-China and elsewhere. We would like to rehabilitate all the people of the world, wherever they are 

underprivileged and underdeveloped. But if we are to do so then why can‘t we start at home? 

 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that today any person standing on a platform has a right to indict the government 

of Canada and the governments, I will say, of the provinces (it works both ways) for not having done 

what they should have done, for not having started charity at home, for not rehabilitating those people 

who can help to make our country great. Further I will say that, to me, the matter of how much it is 

going to cost does not mean anything. Certainly the cost at the moment will be high; but after the job is 

done we will have accomplished the aim. There is no reason, today, why we should say those on 

reservation are Indians, these are Metis; somewhere else Dukhobors are pointed out. Why can‘t we all 

be called Canadians, working for the common good of our country? But to achieve that goal we have to 

spend money – this Government has to spend money and the Dominion Government has to spend 

money; but not only money, Mr. Speaker. I submit that the governments of this country, and particularly 

in reference to the treaty Indians the government at Ottawa has to recognize, as it recognized back in 

1870, that the people on the reservations have the same pride and the same dignity that any white man 

has, or any man anywhere in the world. They have the same rights, and we must recognize these rights. 

But as long as they are going to keep those people in those concentration camps, as on those reserves; as 

long as they do this the natives will not have the dignity, they will not show the dignity they have by 

right of birth. They will always feel as they feel today. When you associate with them, unless they know 

you, they mistrust you; they say ―we cannot believe the white man; we cannot trust the white man.‖ 

Why? For the simple reason that we have created conditions as a result of which they cannot trust and 

believe in us, and it is time we did something about it. This is not a political issue. This is something that 

we must do for our country and for the people living in our country. 

 

I do not want to take up too much time, Mr. Speaker. I feel very touchy on the question. I would feel 

very touchy on the question if it concerned any other people – Indians or any other racial origin. I have 

always believed that if you give people an education, if you give people an opportunity to attain a better 

standard of living, then you find that you can associate with them, then you will find out, very 

surprisingly, that they have as much brains as we have. They are just as good in every way; but they are 

underprivileged economically and from the point of education. Yes, this Government has done 

considerable, particularly in the north, and I understand they are doing considerable among the Metis 

people here in the south. I hope we will be able to do 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

22 

as much for the Metis people in the north in this coming year. But the fact still remains that this province 

of Saskatchewan cannot do the job itself. It has to be a programme that will be worked out between the 

Federal Government and the Provincial Government, because, as I said, it is going to take a considerable 

amount of money; it is going to take a staff and a long-term programme. 

 

I do not intend for a minute for anybody to think that I am suggesting any paternalistic programme, 

because all underprivileged people hate paternalism. It has to be a programme of the nature whereby we 

can go to these people and say now we will help you to help yourselves. 

 

How can that be best achieved? It can be achieved, for example, by trying to get these people established 

on farms. The Dominion Government, I think, through their agents, are doing that in some cases, but in 

too few cases, and the objection I think is that the people are complaining that somebody is always 

telling them what to do. They would like to do these things themselves, and I think they are right. They 

should be given an opportunity to do things themselves, but they need to be trained. The governments 

can step into the picture in providing personnel and the equipment and the accommodation for the 

training of these people, for those of them that would be farmers. 

 

Among the native people and among the Metis people there are those who will never be farmers, just as 

some of us will never be farmers. They might make good schoolteachers; they may make good 

engineers. I know of a case in my own district where a lad left the reservation, and under a private 

individual he trained himself to be a welder and, Mr. Speaker, you can‘t find a better welder anywhere 

in Canada than that man is. Now there is a boy who could have been given training in a school. He 

didn‘t get any training in school; but having ambition he got his own training, and he is living today in 

the city of Prince Albert, is married happily, has a lovely family and is doing very well. Those are the 

things we have to do, not only, as I say, to make agriculturists out of them, but try to get them into 

certain professions and industries. 

 

Therefore, when this resolution suggests first of all ―that the natives of Canada get their full rights and 

privileges without the abrogation of their rights under the Treaties"‖ it means just that. We have to give 

them the right to vote – not only in Saskatchewan. We can easily do that right now, but that doesn‘t 

mean anything. They should have Canadian rights as citizens, rights such as I have and you have, Mr. 

Speaker, in order that we can restore to them that pride and dignity that people must have. But some will 

say ―if you do that, some will spend all their time in the liquor stores.‖ I will stand by my belief that if 

the native people of this country are given the same rights and privileges that we have, they will be no 

worse than we are. Not only that, when I heard Mr. Brass speak in the city hall, the other day, when I 

read Mr. Kennedy‘s article in the ‗Leader-Post‘, when I speak to the natives of the north and they say 

they want these rights. I challenge them with ―What are you going to do in connection with the liquor 

problem?‖ They replied ―You leave the problem for us to solve. It is time that you were not paternalistic. 

We want to be like you and we won‘t be any worse than you are.‖ So that is the first suggestion in the 

resolution. 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

23 

The second thing in my motion is that, in order to do something for the other group, the Metis, whose 

problems are similar and also Indians who are non-treaty, the governments get together (and I hope this 

Government will be favourable to that idea) and work out a programme for the rehabilitation and the re-

establishment of those people. Now you will not be able to rehabilitate them all, you won‘t be able to re-

establish them all; but it will be much better than waiting another 100 years or 80 years to see if the 

problem will solve itself. 

 

I would just like to point out to the House that there were underprivileged people who came from 

Europe and from Asia to this country and they settled in communities and today they have made 

progress. Why? Because they were not on a reservation. At first they built their churches, they built their 

halls – yes, they didn‘t even try, perhaps, to speak the English language. But as time went on and when 

the realized that the rights and privileges were there for them to adopt and to accept, those people went 

out into Canada and today you find them fully assimilated into Canadian society and, being one of them, 

I am proud of their accomplishments. 

 

I am not going to take any more time, Mr. Speaker. I hope this House will give full support to this 

motion. I think it is a good step in the right direction. It is a good step for the native people, the Metis 

people, and all of Canada. I am happy to sponsor this motion, seconded by Mr. Feusi. 

 

Mr. Arnold Feusi (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, this resolution has been very ably presented by the member 

from Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsy), and I feel that he elevated it to a very high plane. My contribution 

here probably will be a little more earthy in that I have three reserves in my area and I know them quite 

well. 

 

Recently, in the papers of the province there was a pitiful problem that was before the courts, and most 

citizens of Saskatchewan are familiar with this problem; but it has given my area, particularly the town 

of Kamsack, very grim advertising. I do agree that we are a little bit of a ‗Chicago‘ insofar as our 

electioneering is concerned, but there have been problems that we have been faced with in our area 

probably mainly due to the Indian reserves, that we are not altogether proud of, but it is beyond the 

scope of the community itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Cumberland and my deskmate (Mr. Wahl) gave very good contributions 

on the subject matter of this resolution, one in the Throne Speech debate and one directly preceding my 

address, but I believe that I will have to probably give the Federal Government some credit for some 

attention in the solution of this matter. They haven‘t been altogether to blame, and when I say that I will 

have to be earthy. I am going to go right into the Indian problem as I know it, because I have been quite 

familiar with Indian dealings. I have been a game warden and my territory took in the three Indian 

reserves. 

 

One of the things I would like to point out is the fact that many people consider the Indians all bad. 

There is the thought in a lot of our minds that the only good Indian is a dead Indian. Mr. Speaker, 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

24 

there are many fine Indians. I would like to call to the attention of this House the contribution made by a 

lot of our young Indians in the war just past and in the war of 1914-18. These young fellows were put 

into Canadian uniforms; they took pride in that uniform, and their part as a soldier was a very good 

contribution. 

 

I have in mind a little story that took place – it was a sergeant in the S.S.R., a friend of mine who told 

me of it. In field manoeuvering that soldiers had done as part of their training, they came off the field 

very brown and healthy and I believe a number of them were given leave and they hit out for London. 

Of course, at the first train stop they boarded the trains (the trains in the old country are a little different 

than they are here), and there was barely standing room; but there, for some strange reason foreign to us 

here, anybody with a bit of money could take possession of an entire compartment that would probably 

accommodate six or eight people. Our lads there just crowded into a compartment much to the 

resentment of a dowager who probably didn‘t understand our Canadian way of life and she wanted the 

conductor to expel the fellows from the compartment. But when the conductor came in and saw the 

soldier shoulder patches he excused himself, and said he had business elsewhere; he wasn‘t going to stir 

up a hornet‘s nest. After about a half-hour ride in the train the lady sort of warmed to the situation and 

she started a conversation and her first words were: ―Oh yes, you are from Canada; you are all Indians 

aren‘t you?‖ And, of course, all the fellows agreed, much to the amusement of the few Indians present; 

but to her eye there was no difference between us and the Indians in uniform. 

 

I would like to point out that they have given a very good contribution through past wars, but as soon as 

they got back from the war they lost their privileges as free citizens. They had the rights to the ‗pub‘ and 

the rights to the liquor store; but as soon as they were out of uniform they lost those rights; and, of 

course, they got back to the Indian reserve which was previously classed as a ‗concentration camp‘ and 

there their pride went. Today, I find young fellows who probably wore a uniform some years ago; today 

they line up with the rest of them, for handouts – handouts of pork which comes from a heavyweight 

animal which is roughly classed as ‗sowbelly‘. And they have lost that pride, Mr. Speaker, that they did 

have. 

 

I would like to go a little further and point out what is actually happening to a lot of our young folks. 

Before I do, I want to give credit to some of the older folks who still have a great deal of pride. I 

happened to be in hospital, a few years back, with a couple of elderly Indians in adjacent beds, along 

with one or two old-timers, and I recall them speaking. One oldtimer had homesteaded from to 50 to 60 

years ago in an area about halfway between Kamsack reserve and the reserve south of Yorkton, and 

evidently the Indians, in their travelling back and forth, used his farm as more or less of a stopping 

place. The Indians in those days were very trustworthy evidently, because he said he never had a lock on 

his door. If he wasn‘t home they made themselves at home, but the place was always left in good order. 

To me that sounded very strange when I know of our Indians, and more so, our white behaviour, in these 

days. My friend, the member for Cumberland, tells me that that is common practice up in the north; you 

are more or less an outcast if you use somebody else‘s cabin and do not leave it in fit shape for the 

owner when he comes back. 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

25 

I would like to pass on another little story in this connection, to show the pride and some of the decency 

that is inherent in some of the older Indians, before they were corrupted by the habits of probably our 

lesser whites. This story takes place in southern Alberta, when the first great cattle drives took place 

from the central and western states up into the ranchlands of central Alberta. It seems that one young 

cowboy had a saddle that he valued very much. Evidently it was embossed with Mexican dollars, and he 

was very much worried about it. They drove across an Indian reservation where they had to stop for the 

night, and chose a place where there was water after obtaining permission from the Indian chief. The 

young fellow went up to the Indian chief and asked him if his saddle would be safe there. The old chief 

looked down his nose, across the horizon, and his words were: ―Mm, saddle safe; no white man for 50 

miles.‖ This sort of points out, Mr. Speaker, that they had pride and dignity, and they have lost it, to a 

certain extent, by their contact with white people. 

 

I would like to point out that the greatest problem that I find on the reserves is the problem of the 

younger folks. We have a great many of our prideful older folks, and the younger ones have picked up 

the bad habits of the whites to quite an extent. Here are some of the bad habits they have: cheating, 

shiftlessness, untidiness, immortality, and one of the very bad habits they have is ‗common law.‘ 

Marriage as we know it is not a fixed ideal with the Indians, and the exchange or taking on of a new life 

partner is done quite readily. Probably it is the state they are in on the reserve that is to blame for it, 

because, in going back in the history of the Indian, I find it was not as bad as it is now. They had much 

greater respect for family life long before the time of the white man. They did not have the habits that 

they have today. 

 

With common law goes ones of the great problems we have today – illegitimate children. There is 

hardly an Indian family on the reserves in my area that you don‘t find in that situation. I had occasion to 

deal with several families recently, and I must say that they deserve credit for the way they look after 

these illegitimate children. We would throw them off on to society and have the state look after them; 

they take them into their homes. I had one parent come to me. He had six children of his own; his elder 

daughter has two illegitimate children. He was a little worried because he had rations for the six of his 

own children but no rations for the extra two; but he was dividing the rations in order to feed these 

illegitimate children. 

 

My deskmate here mentioned the fact that on his reserve the Federal Government had not provided good 

schools. On my reserve it is the opposite. We have probably as fine schools, set up by a religious order – 

the St. Phillip‘s Indian Mission – as there are anywhere. We have another mission, an Anglican mission 

or school on another reserve. Then on Cote reserve, within the past couple of years, the Government has 

built a very fine public school for the Indians. It compares very favourably with out modern schools. I 

am going to deal here with the St. Phillip‘s Indian School. 

 

These boys and girls who go to that school are taken out of the family life and they remain in the 

mission for the duration of the year, other than for the summer holidays. They are given, probably, better 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

26 

training, a better practical education, than our own children get in our schools, up to the age of 15, or 

grade eight. They learn butter-making, dressmaking and so forth; they look after the setting of tables, 

and home responsibilities go hand in hand with the care those children get. But for some strange reason, 

as soon as they are through the public school and go back to the reserves, all that training was for 

nothing; they drift back into the habits of the reserves. I believe a great part of education is missing 

there. Those youngsters are not ready for the shiftlessness of reserve life. At the age of 15 they go to the 

reserve, they drift hither and yon; they are not wanted more or less; because the reserve is not very much 

more than a concentration camp. We find immorality creeping in, and it is a very sad situation insofar as 

the young girls are concerned. By the time they reach the age of 20, when they are supposed to know 

better, their lives are ruined. 

 

The newspapers, recently, have given us examples of this immorality. The Indians are not to blame. I 

would like to go back to the school again and tell you just that the school has done insofar as the young 

boys are concerned. This year, St. Phillip‘s Indian School had a first-class hockey team. They didn‘t get 

more than the good Father there could give them, but they are keen in sports, they are given good care 

and good food in the mission and they are healthy. The St. Phillip‘s Indian School had a very fine 

hockey team – in fact, so good that on all occasions when they met Mr. Kusiak‘s ‗Boston Bruins‘ they 

trimmed them and trimmed them handily, up until recently. But it is a sad thing that as soon as they 

leave school they probably last a few years and then they burn out as athletes; possibly through improper 

diet in their homes. They become unhealthy through drinking and bad habits, long hours hanging around 

the town; and bad habits probably that are common to our own society. Anyway, Mr. Speaker, they burn 

out physically; you don‘t find an Indian athlete that lasts very far into the 20‘s or 30‘s and it is a sad 

state of affairs. 

 

I mentioned idleness on the reserves, Mr. Speaker. I believe idleness is the greatest problem. For some 

reason they drift back and forth without any direction. That is the greatest fault. Education is carried on 

just until they leave school and then we forget about them. I find that on my three reserves there are 

hardly any of the skill or the crafts the Indians were noted for in the past. They have lost that; they have 

taken on white men‘s ways and they have taken on white men‘s bad habits. 

 

I have had occasion to check; we did have a very capable teacher, a young lady, in one of the schools, 

and I did check to find out just what our Indians were doing with education. I found that none had gone 

further than public school, none of them had gone into the professions; there were no teachers, no 

doctors, no nurses, plumbers, or what have you. Their education ended there, and they went right back to 

reserve life and all the fine teaching they were given was practically lost to them. Probably the 

knowledge they had gained through their years in public school was used to try and ‗beat the game‘ 

insofar as the help that the Government is giving them at the present time is concerned. 

 

I would like to point out one instance here. Last fall I did some work on the Indian reserve on behalf of 

my neighbour. He had rented a half-section from two Indians who each had a quarter-section. I believe 

they were given 40 bushels of wheat for themselves, for the winter. There 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

27 

is a mill in Kamsack. They took the wheat to the mill and had it ground. This wheat was supposed to be 

for their own use; but I understand that a lot of them didn‘t keep it for their own use. They peddled and 

sold it for probably half-price to conniving whites. That is what some of the education is used for today, 

and I must say that I bring this to your attention because I hope it will get into the papers. Our Indians 

are partly to blame; probably our Federal authorities haven‘t gone far enough and there must be, as 

previous speakers mentioned, a more or less correlation of activities between the Provincial Government 

and the Federal Government as well as our Indian people. 

 

People might think that probably our Indians haven‘t the ability to follow the rest of society into 

professions. The Minister of Labour is sitting next tome, and I would like to say that, last winter, in one 

of the trade schools, a young man with Indian blood went through the final course in the plumbing trade, 

and he did a very good job of it, I am told. There is no reason why more and more of our Indians should 

not be taken into the trades and into the professions, but for some reason or other they hold back from it. 

They feel they are sort of outcasts; that there is a class barrier between them and us, and that should not 

be. I think if there was any activity on our part, or any work done together with the Federal people, we 

have to encourage those people, pick the better ones out of the schools and put them into schools where 

they can take advanced training for the professions and take their proper place in our society, so they 

could go back to their reserves – not to stay, but to show their own people that there is a higher plane for 

them to work for. 

 

It is very necessary, Mr. Speaker, that we assimilate our Indians at an early date. On my reserves the 

Indian population has reached a pitch that is going to lead us into difficulty shortly. On some reserves 

there are more families than they have quarter-sections for. Two years ago, when I was a game warden, I 

got the rights for some wild land for the Indians, giving them sole rights for trapping on wild Crown 

land. There is only a small bit, but I do know that the Indians owned that land many years ago, and they 

did tell me that through some conniving of the whites they lost that land; and they tried to do some 

research work to find the record of the loss of that land but they were told that a fire had destroyed the 

records. 

 

I mentioned over-population. It is a serious problem that we are going to be faced with, provincially. We 

are going to have to take some of those young folks and give them occupations. 

 

I want to get now to a point that is interesting, but where the Indians are probably going to have a little 

problem in fitting into our way of life. I would like to mention the word ‗potlatch‘. It is a word that is 

used in B.C. Evidently the Indians there had a habit, in the past, that whenever one of them accumulated 

a little more Indian wealth, he divided it up among his neighbours. I think it would be a very good thing 

if we had a ‗potlatch‘ among the members; I know it would help a few of us. It is a very good habit, 

from my point of view anyway; but with it goes a lack of thrift – you do not find the Indians hoarding 

like we do. Hoarding can be a bad habit as far as the whites are concerned, because you will find that 

some of them will be starting and others will be living in great wealth. Much of our society and our laws 

are being utilized to this day to try and bring about an equilibrium. The Indian has that right in his 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

28 

makeup, much more so than the white; but there lies a problem in this respect that it is difficult to get the 

Indian to save or to look into the future; to plan. They will live in plenty and later starve, because they 

haven‘t looked and planned for the future. 

 

I would like to go into a matter that was brought to our attention by an Indian chief, in the ‗Leader-Post‘ 

of February 8, and I shall read a small part of the item he had in there. It was a very fine article, and it is 

an example of what an Indian can rise to. That man has a very fine mind and Indians, in general, can be 

proud of him and the contribution that he is making to the welfare of the Indians. Here is the excerpt 

from an article by Dan Kennedy: 

 

―I had occasion to pay a brief visit to Fort Peck Indian reservation in Montana, this fall. I could 

hardly believe my eyes at what I saw. Every Indian home had modern facilities and electric 

lights, refrigerators, washing machines and other electrical appliances. Most of the Indians lived 

comfortably from the revenue derived from the proceeds of the crop share lease of their 

allotments; others operate their own farms. With the exception of the superintendent, the head 

office of the reservation is staffed by the Indians. I don‘t find that down our way. I worked in the 

office of this agency in 1896-97 and at that time the Canadian Indians were more progressive 

than their American cousins; but in the intervening years they have outstripped us, whilst we 

Canadian Indians are marking time they have forged ahead. What is the answer to this Indian 

problem?‖ 

 

And he goes on: 

 

―The Indian reserves could be made self-supporting and lighten the burden of the taxpayer.‖ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my Indian reserves are in probably some of the finest farming or agricultural land in 

all Canada. That area north of Kamsack is beautiful farming land, and I feel that my Indians could be in 

better circumstances than they are today. I blame them partly. It isn‘t the Federal Government altogether 

that is responsible. The Federal Government has gone quite a way on my reserves in providing them 

with assistance, but I question the administration of that assistance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I mentioned that my Indians could be well off. During the thirties they had fine cattle herds, in fact 

several of the Indians had fine herds of purebreds and the Indians ran a very good ranching setup; but 

then with the change, with the value of grain rising in comparison with that of cattle, land was broken up 

and today I believe it is more than 100 acres per quarter-section that is broken on the Indian reserves in 

my territory. The Federal Government has given some of the returned Indian veterans a ‗break‘ by 

giving them a chance of farming their own land, and they were provided with machinery through 

veterans grants; but for some reason or other I believe it was a little previous, and it hasn‘t worked out 

too happily. I believe the Indians are partly to blame for it. 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

29 

Perhaps I should go a little more into reserve life, Mr. Speaker, and endeavour to find out why they 

failed, particularly our veterans, after being out in so-called civilization for a number of years. I want to 

mention the home. Back in the first world war, the Federal Government did send across the reserve a 

few skilled builders, axemen. I know on my reserves this was done and the mark of their passing is the 

two-storey homes of that day. These were log homes and plastered homes. They were fairly comfortable 

but they are not modern; but they were quite an improvement on the homes that the Indians had before 

that time. Earlier, they had rough log homes of their own construction, and the average Indian hadn‘t 

taken too much pride up till then in the quality of his home. It was an improvement and a change then, 

but from that time until now the homes haven‘t altered at all; in fact they have gone back. 

 

I find very little pride in the homes today. I know they have built frame houses, and some of them could 

be fine homes if they had been painted and if proper chimneys had been put into them. I believe there 

were Indians who got a building grant – I am not sure of that; but they have fairly comfortable little 

homes. Of course they lack modern conveniences, and I believe modern conveniences could have been 

provided by the Indians had they co-operated. I know of some of them who could have worked along 

with the farmers that do now farm their quarters, and I know that farmers who are farming the Indian 

land have to be qualified farmers. They have to provide results, and they are providing good results. Had 

the Indian worked along with the farmers, I believe they could have earned good wages during the 

summer months, and probably could have put into their homes the earnings of their crop, but they have 

not done so. They have sort of drifted on the fringes of society and have taken to the bad habits of the 

whites. Therein lies their problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Concerning the matter of health, today we have a public health nurse provided, I think, through the 

Indian Department. They are qualified nurses, but I would like to see them go further than just 

examining the Indians in the schools or at the agency. I would like to see them go into the homes. I 

would like to see some activity towards stimulating the Indians to building and maintaining better 

homes. We have a forestry area adjacent to the reserves where timber can be obtained very easily by the 

Indians, and good homes can be built with very little cost, good homes that would provide the comforts 

they require, but we find very little direction given them in that way, Mr. Speaker. There should be that 

direction. There should be some stimulant given them to have better gardens, yards, to improve their 

places, paint them up and so forth. I know, for instance, in my own town they have prizes given for the 

best street, the best yards and so on. That could also be carried out on the Indian reserves but I do not 

find anything like that being done. It appears they care for them and are responsible for them until they 

are out of school and from then on they are allowed to shift and all the good done in the schools is 

practically lost. There has to be an incentive given to the Indians to improve from the present conditions. 

A lot of their homes are just a one-room shack and families live in that one room; and with Indians 

visiting back and forth there are probably two or three families living in the same room for a time, 

making for increasing immorality, and ill-health. 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

30 

In the matter of democracy, I think the Federal Government is failing us very badly. We also probably, 

provincially, if we had some rights on the reserve, are failing to put across to the Indian the meaning of 

democracy. I know of a young teacher who had spent some years up in the Arctic on Baffin Island 

among the eastern Eskimos in Northern Saskatchewan and northern Alberta, and she made a life study 

of the native Canadian Indians and Eskimos and, like the member for Cumberland, she took very deeply 

the failings of society to put across to the Indians, what we should be doing, an idea or a grasp of a better 

life. She went into the Indian homes. They respected her and she in turn respected them, and through 

discussions they told her they would like to study the Indian treaties and our Game Act. There was much 

that went on in the laws of the day that they were unfamiliar with, so she arranged that they would have 

evening study groups, and she started off a class. The first thing that happened, the first night, the Indian 

agent came down like a ton of bricks: ―Oh no! Your place is in the classroom; that is what you are hired 

for. You have no business here teaching the adults.‖ She held her ground, Mr. Speaker, but they brought 

the weight of the entire Indian Department in western Canada down upon that girl and she finally had to 

give up the idea that the Indians had advanced. We have failed dismally in putting democracy across to 

them. They haven‘t got as much right in the handling of their affairs as they should have. 

 

I was interested in Dan Kennedy‘s article where he said the Indians staffed their own reserve – there was 

only one white and that was the agent. We haven‘t got that today. A lot of the Indians on the reserve do 

not know what is being done with their own affairs. They are shoved here and there, and they should 

have that knowledge; in fact, for the general good we should know, because we do not know just what 

the agents are doing with the Indian property. I mention that, Mr. Speaker, because I haven‘t too much 

respect for the agents. I find that the chief qualification is that he is a good political ‗heeler‘; that is the 

chief qualification required. The agent in our territory has neglected the reserve to a certain extent; he is 

in every committee that he can find his way into in our territory. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — The man now in Meadow Lake? 

 

Mr. Feusi: — That is the same gentleman, yes. I could point out incidents where he is far from 

democratic. He doesn‘t know the first principles of democracy and if he is going to sell to the Indians 

the principles of democracy, if the Federal Government intends to put across their programme, they have 

the wrong people to do it. 

 

Just to prove that to the gentlemen opposite, Mr. Speaker, let me give you an example. This gentleman 

gets into all the organizations around town; he does neglect the reserve. Indians, who have the right to 

ask him for information, meet him on the street, and he ignores them completely; they are just like so 

much dirt beneath his feet. They resent it. Last fall, the chiefs and councils of the three reserves united 

and sent a petition to Ottawa, but nothing has come of it. 

 

I would like to give an example to my friends opposite, as to what is in the mind of the man as far as 

democracy is concerned. In one of the organizations – the Film Council at Kamsack – our political 

organization has a membership in it. We like to use films for public meetings. 



 

March 2, 1954 

 

 

31 

It is a privilege to use the films – national films as well as our provincial films, Mr. Speaker. He had the 

gall, at one of the meetings, this winter, when our representatives were not present, to bring in a motion 

that our political organization be banned, be not given the privilege of rights to the Film Council. Now 

we do not disturb the Liberals at all that way, Saskatchewan, we respect their rights insofar as their 

rights are concerned in the Film Council and they know it. If they want to improve their brains, their 

minds, by using national and provincial films, all the more power to them but they are not going to take 

away our rights. I believe the Federal Government deserves a strong warning in this matter, that the 

democratic rights of people cannot be abrogated or taken away. But these are the kind of people that 

have the wellbeing of the Indians before them, and I contend they cannot do justice to the Federal 

programme or to any democratic programme. 

 

One more item I would like to mention, in passing, is the matter of truth among the Indians. As a game 

warden I was connected with Indian matters for about seven years. I had occasion to take them into 

court many times and, Mr. Speaker, during those seven years I had them ‗over a barrel‘ many times but 

not once during those seven years did I have an Indian lie to me. I thought that was a wonderful thing. 

Yet I have had many of our own people, in similar circumstances, use every evasive tactic possible. I 

just mention that to show that they have qualities, qualities that we should be building up on, and I think 

society is the poorer not having assimilated them into our group. 

 

Many years ago the Indian had a habit of scalping his enemies, the white man had the habit of ‗skinning‘ 

his friends. Today, the Indian has changed. He doesn‘t scalp his enemies any more; but the white mean 

still skins his friends. 

 

I would very strongly support this resolution that more attention and urgent attention be given to Indian 

problems because it is a shame to modern society that we haven‘t assimilated them sooner. 

 

Mr. Dunfield (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5.55 o‘clock p.m. 

 


