



















































Hansard: March 10, 1954


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Twelfth Legislature 

20th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 10, 1954. 

 

The House met at three o‘clock p.m. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed from Tuesday, March 9, 1954, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of the 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): That Mr. Speaker, do now leave the chair. (The Assembly to go 

into Committee of Supply). 

 

Mr. T. R. MacNutt (Nipawin):  Mr. Speaker, at this time I want to congratulate the hon. member for 

Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) for the very excellent manner in which he criticized the budget. He did a 

very good job, and I am sure that, if the Government would take his criticism seriously, a better job of 

financing this province would be made. He must have made a good speech, Mr. Speaker, because every 

government speaker, so far, has endeavoured to pull him to pieces through a great part of their various 

speeches. And when a speaker makes his opponent do that, he must be hitting pretty close to home. 

 

I was surprised and disturbed when, yesterday afternoon, the Provincial Secretary went after our new 

members of the Legislature, especially the hon. member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. Kohaly). I have always 

understood, Mr. Speaker, that at least at his first session unless he asks for it, a new member is pretty 

well left alone to give him a chance to find himself. The member for Souris-Estevan has conducted 

himself in a very excellent manner during this Session and has contributed generously to the work, and 

for a Cabinet Minister to say the things that were said, yesterday, and they are on the record, Mr. 

Speaker, it places the dignity of this House, in my opinion, at a new low. 

 

Some Opposition Members:  Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. MacNutt:  Mr. Speaker, a week ago today, I listened with a great deal of interest to the 

Provincial Treasurer when he made his annual budget speech, which is supposed to tell us something 

about the amount of money that we expect to spend in the coming fiscal year, and also about the amount 

of money that we hope to take in. We heard that the economy of Saskatchewan is excellent; so good 

indeed that, without raising taxes, he should be able to collect a few more million dollars from the 

taxpayers of this province. This most satisfactory state of affairs of course, in the eyes of the hon. 

members on your right, is no doubt due to the efforts of the C.C.F. Government. Very little credit was 

given to Divine Providence for the bountiful crops that we have had over the last number of years; very 

little credit was given to the hard-working people of the province for their share in providing this very 

excellent state of affairs. And, Mr. Speaker, no credit was given to the Liberal administration at Ottawa 

for providing the best policies this country has ever known to make the good times that we now enjoy 

possible. And who did contribute, during the year 1953, funds in excel of $64 million to the Government 

and to the people of the province. 

 

Policies affecting the economy of the country are not always made in the various provinces of our 

country; the overall policy is made in Ottawa. Because these policies have been so good we have been 

able to climb on the 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

2 

bandwagon and improve our position, but not to the extent that I believe it could have been improved. 

Had we had anything but a Socialist Government in power during the last ten years, we might have been 

in the happy position of our sister province of Alberta, which, this coming year, expects to spend 

something over $200 million for the benefit of the province, without hurting their people too much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  A Social Credit government. 

 

Mr. MacNutt:  We in Saskatchewan, with a Socialist Government, expect to spend around $78 

million and, in my opinion, we are going to hurt our people. It has been said by people who should know 

that there is as much oil under the province of Saskatchewan as there is under the province of Alberta. 

With a free-enterprise government in power, they have been getting that oil out; while we, with a 

Socialist Government in Saskatchewan, have been playing around with it and are now just getting 

started. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy:  The Liberals didn‘t find much! 

 

Mr. MacNutt:  I did not hear anything in the budget speech, Mr. Speaker, regarding the tremendous 

raise in automobile rates. Of course, the Government will contend that this is not a tax. Perhaps when 

the people go to buy their licences, this year, there could be some argument about that. I do not like 

compulsion, but we do have to have a certain amount of it, and what I am going to say, Mr. Speaker, I 

think is constructive. 

 

I take no exception to paying a compulsory tax or rate (if you like to call it that) for property damage 

and public liability. That is put there to protect my neighbour against me, and I think that is only right 

and proper. But I do not see any reason why anybody should tell me that I have to insure my car against 

fire, theft and collision. If I want to go and turn my car upside down and smash it all to pieces, that is my 

business, and if I do that and cannot afford to buy another car, not having taken out any insurance, then I 

should be made to walk. Let us carry on with the compulsory property damage and public liability, but 

let us strike out the fire, theft and collision. With a $200 deductible clause in there, it does not mean too 

much anyway. This, I contend, should make the rates reasonable, and within a reasonable period we 

should be able to pay off that deficit which was allowed to accumulate prior to the election of 1952. I am 

satisfied this would meet with the approval of the people and, Sir, I would not be surprised if something 

like this is not brought in, possibly in a few years – say about 1956. Of course, the C.C.F. do not do 

things like that just prior to an election! 

 

My thoughts take me back to the ‗thirties, when revenues were not as buoyant as they are today. 

Saskatchewan was having quite a struggle. Taxes were not being paid and schools were in a very bad 

way. The government of the day decided to levy a tax of 2 per cent at that time to be used for school 

purposes, and it was called the ‗Education Tax‘. Great exception was taken to that tax at that time by 

members of the C.C.F., but it was felt by the government of the day that the people could pay a few 

pennies a lot easier than they could pay larger amounts and, in the aggregate, it would amount to a fairly 

reasonable sum of money. I well remember that, during the campaign of 1944, while the C.C.F. policy 

did not claim they would abolish the tax, it was intimated in no uncertain terms that, if the C.C.F. were 

elected, that tax would go. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  No, no! 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

3 

Mr. MacNutt:  Even the Provincial Treasurer said, in a later speech, that the tax was regressive and a 

nuisance. The policy was, after they were elected, that as soon as new fields of taxation could be found 

to take its place the Education Tax would be abolished. Well, they did abolish it. They abolished the 

Education Tax, the tax of 2 per cent, and I suppose by doing that they can say they kept their promise. 

They immediately replaced it with the Education and Hospitalization Tax of 3 per cent. Mr. Speaker, I 

am not opposed to this tax; I never have been. I feel it is a tax that can be paid fairly easily by the people 

of this province. The point I am trying to make is that there is not a doubt in the world but that the 

people felt, and were given to understand, that if the C.C.F. was elected that tax would be out. 

 

On various occasions when I have been on my feet in this House, I have spoken of that north country in 

which I live. I will probably say something about that great country every time I get on my feet, because 

I can see the possibilities there, and I can see what a great asset it is not only to the people of the north 

but to the people of the whole province of Saskatchewan. No wonder the Saskatchewan Government 

chose the north in which to settle ex-servicemen, a few years back! 

 

I do want to dwell, for a few moments, on the settlement of ex-servicemen at Smoky Burn and the 

Connell Creek area. When that project was started a very rosy picture was painted. Co-ops were formed, 

heavy machinery purchased, leases were issued, a few roads were built, land was cleared and the crops 

were seeded. Then the rains came. There was no proper drainage system, a lot of the land was flooded 

and the crops were ruined; roads were inadequate. Do you wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the people got 

downhearted? They were ready and willing to work but, due to the bungling and mismanagement of the 

Government at that time, there was little they could do about it. The story of Smoky Burn co-op farms is 

a very dismal one, not due to the failure of the people up there, who went up there to do their work in 

good faith, but due to mismanagement on the part of the Government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy:  What about Divine Providence? 

 

Mr. MacNutt:  Is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the Royal Commission on Agriculture takes this 

Government to task and criticizes them soundly for their part in it? 

 

I have been asking a few questions in this House, and I find that on December 31, 1949, there were 48 

leases issued in the co-op farm at Smoky burn. In 1950, the number went up to 78; in 1951, it went up to 

84; in 1952, 86, and at December 31, 1953, it was down to 41 in the co-op farms – 36 of those people 

have taken individual leases and are going on their own. That speaks for itself, I think, Mr. Speaker. I 

will say that since the Department of Agriculture has taken over that project things are improving, and I 

sincerely hope that the Minister of Agriculture will carry on with the work even a little faster than he is 

doing at the present time, and that in a few years those people will be able to have a chance to make the 

living that they so deserve. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  Well, don‘t vote against the budget then! 

 

Mr. MacNutt:  Mr. Speaker, we did not hear too much in the budget address about assistance to rural 

municipalities. In 1952, the rural municipality of Nipawin and the rural municipality of Moose Range 

(both in my constituency) were granted certain sums of money to build roads through 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

4 

their municipalities. That road was east of Nipawin through the R.M. of Nipawin, and it was to go 

through the municipality of Moose Range and then on out to the co-op farms. The R.M. of Nipawin 

spent their money and built the road; the R.M. of Moose Range had some trouble with their contractors 

and were not able to build the road that year. 

 

During the last session of the Legislature, I interviewed the Minister of Highways in this Chamber just 

before the sitting started one day. I explained the circumstances to him, and asked him if it would be 

possible to get that money re-allocated for the R.M. of Moose Range. He told me he could not see any 

reason why it should not be re-allocated, and I think he meant what he said. When I went back to Carrot 

River, I advised the municipal authorities there that they had better write in and ask for that grant again, 

and I understand they did. The next thing I heard, Mr. Speaker, was that the grant had been refused. That 

went along for a while until 10 days or two weeks before the Federal election of 1953, when the 

Provincial Treasurer, according to the papers of that town, advised the people there that that grant would 

be made and the road would be built. Now, Mr. Speaker, is that the proper way to make grants to rural 

municipalities? We were glad enough to get the money and glad enough to get the road, even if it did 

have a political flavour to it. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  That would be just like old times if it did. 

 

Mr. MacNutt:  Mr. Speaker, rural municipalities have only one method of taxation. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas (Minister of Highways):  I will give you all the facts on Monday. 

 

Mr. MacNutt:  . . .and the burden is enormous. The land is carrying more than its share of the tax, 

and I think we will all agree on that. One farmer said to me, a short time ago, ―I don‘t pay taxes, I pay 

rent.‖ And he wasn‘t too far out. We receive large sums of money from Ottawa to help finance this 

Province. We, in turn, should take a reasonable share of the burden that is now shouldered by the rural 

municipalities. True, it is not as spectacular, possibly, as building highways, but it is just as important to 

have those main market roads built. I do not expect that this Government will be able to hand over as 

much money to the municipalities and schools as the Province of Alberta is doing – something around 

$90 million they are giving; but I do think we can make a better showing than we are making, and I 

believe it is time we went after it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the budget speech by the Provincial Treasurer, I found no mention of our senior 

citizens. We have had old-age pensions for quite a number of years and, while the responsibility is ours 

and always has been, the Federal Government has always given us some assistance. A few years ago the 

Federal Government again increased their assistance to the point where every person 70 years of age and 

over now received a cheque of $40 a month from the Federal treasury. We all realize that if a person has 

no other means of livelihood that $40 is not enough. Now, Mr. Speaker, the responsibility is still ours, 

and what are we doing about it? Not very much. 

 

I notice that both Alberta and British Columbia have increased the supplementary pension from $10 a 

month to $15 per month. These two provinces have free-enterprise governments, while we, in this 

province, with a Socialist government, a so-called ‗humanity first‘ government, tag along with a 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

5 

measly $2.50. I say shame! Surely our senior citizens who have done so much for our country and who 

have worked so hard to make possible the good times that we now enjoy, should have better treatment 

than that. I am disappointed that provision for an increase in the supplementary old-age pension has not 

been included in the budget of this year. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg):  Why don‘t you write to Ottawa? 

 

Mr. MacNutt:  Mr. Speaker, hon. members on your right will tell us that we on this side of the House 

are always asking for a reduction in taxes and more expenditure, and are, therefore, unreasonable. I 

recall a prophecy of Socialist speakers, some years ago, that these wonderful Crown corporations when 

they got going (and they have had ten years to get going), would supply enough profit to pay for these 

social services that we are enjoying. We hear wonderful stories from my good friend, the Minister of 

Mineral and Natural Resources (Hon. Mr. Brockelbank) about the wonderful finds of oil and gas. If 

these are as good as we are led to believe, there should be no difficulty in financing the few paltry 

dollars that would be required for the suggestions that I have made, today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to support the motion. 

 

Mr. R.A. McCarthy (Cannington): Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate, I first want to 

compliment the Provincial Treasurer on his very dramatic presentation of the Budget. I think the 

Provincial Treasurer missed his calling – he should have been in vaudeville; but nevertheless, he did do 

a dramatic job of presenting the budget. It was pleasant to listen to, although there was not too much in 

it. 

 

Next I would like to compliment my seatmate from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) on his effort in the 

budget. He did a wonderful job, in my opinion, in plain language and in language that the average 

people of this people speak, and I think they understood him. It is a tribute to him that the speakers over 

on the other side, when they start to answer those criticisms, have not refuted very many of his 

arguments. The majority of the criticism he has received, as far as I have been able to make out, was 

personal criticism. 

 

I also want to compliment the member for Rosthern (Mr. Carr). He is not here at the moment, but I am 

going to say it anyway: I want to welcome him to this side of the House. He is a young man with a 

wealth of experience in municipal affairs; he has a great personality, and I am sure he will, in days to 

come, make his mark in the parliamentary activities of this province. 

 

I also wish to congratulate my good friend from Souris-Estevan (Mr. Kohaly). He has given a good 

account of himself in this House since he has been here. He is a member of a national Party, a Party with 

a proud record with us. I do, again, rather deprecate some of the personal remarks that have been 

directed towards him by members of the Government, and more especially when it comes from Cabinet 

members. The duty of the Opposition is an important function of democracy, and ―Bob‖ has already 

demonstrated his ability to keep this Government on a straight track. I think he will be of great 

assistance to this Government. 

 

There is no doubt this Government‘s large majority is a liability to it. They are using that majority, at 

Cabinet level, to throw their weight 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

6 

around, failing to listen to the opinions and needs of the common people who elected them. In doing so 

they are sowing the seeds of their own destruction. We have had evidence of that in this House both last 

year and this year. Since coming to this Session, the pattern of the speakers from the other side of the 

House has followed the same line. they have four main topics. They criticize the actions of the United 

States government, the actions of the Alberta and British Columbia governments, and they even go over 

to Europe – with a notable absence of criticism of Russia. Why? I ask you, why? I will leave that to the 

members on the other side of the House to answer. 

 

In my opinion, a great many members of the Government side have little or no factual knowledge to 

base their criticism on. It is just pure propaganda. I would suggest to the Ministers of Government, when 

they get up to speak, that they give us a history of what their departments are doing. That is what we are 

here for, and that is what we are interested in. They have some wonderful departments over there, and 

the story of them would be interesting. Some of them are well-managed, some of them are not so 

well-managed; but let us have the story of them  that is what we are here for. 

 

When I say that, I want to say that I hope, when they are giving us the story of those departments, they 

will not do as the Minister of Telephones (Mr. Kuziak) did. I am sorry that he is not in his seat, but I am 

going to say it anyway. Yesterday, I sat here and wondered if my hearing was bad. I did not think a 

Minister would make such a statement; but I checked it up in the ‗Leader-Post‘ this morning, and 

apparently I was right, because, taking it from the ‗Leader-Post‘ this morning, this is what I heard and I 

couldn‘t believe I was right: ―Mr. Kuziak stated that there had been no general increase in. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! The member must not refer to another member by name. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  I am sorry, I called him the Minister of Telephones. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  No, you called him by his name. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  I am very sorry, Mr. Speaker, I hope you will pardon me. What I was reading here 

was a piece from the paper that does give his name. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  That is all right. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  In the ‗Leader-Post‘ this morning, this statement appears: 

 

―Mr. Kuziak stated that there had been no general rate increase in telephones since 1919.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, that statement is not only untrue, it is stupid, and that is all I am going to say about it. 

 

Premier Douglas:  It couldn‘t come from a better source! 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  The second noticeable trend was that the speakers from the Government side, with 

very few exceptions, accused us on this side of the House of ‗throwing mud‘ and ‗wallowing in political 

mire‘. There are very few exceptions to that – there have been a few, but they are very few. They all 

follow that same trend. Mr. Speaker, I resent that. I have never in my life resorted to that sort of thing. 

The people of my district have honoured me with almost every position of trust it has been possible to 

bestow 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

7 

upon me. During my long career in the municipalities I have had but one election, and that was the first 

one. One does not have those honours conferred on him by throwing mud and wallowing in political 

mire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure the most active C.C.F. member in my constituency would tell you that my 

political conduct, both on and off the platform, has been fair and above board. I say to the people 

opposite who indulge in mud-and-wallow tactics that they are not only casting a slur on the hon. 

members who have gone before us in this House, but they are also making it more difficult to get the 

proper kind of public-spirited men and women to represent us in this House in the future. Let us have 

less of it in all political parties, in the interest of this fair province of ours and in the interest of 

democracy. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that all the virtue and all the knowledge in this House is not 

contained on the other side of the House. I am reminded of that verse in the old fourth reader that goes 

something like this: 

 

―There is so much good in the worst of us and so much bad in the best of us, that it ill behoves any of 

us to speak evil of the rest of us.‖ 

 

The third notable trend in government speeches was their effort to take credit to the C.C.F. for every 

good thing in this province and to blame the Dominion Government for every little difficulty that arises 

in the administration of the affairs of this province. Look at the resolutions on the Order paper of this 

House, moved by C.C.F. members, Mr. Speaker, all asking the Dominion Government to do something 

– something they should be doing themselves. In my opinion, a great many of those resolution are 

political, placed on paper to embarrass someone either here or at Ottawa. Even the Provincial Treasurer 

(Hon. Mr. Fines), in his budget speech followed the same line when he was talking about possible 

recessions and depressions. He said, talking about recessions and depressions: 

 

―It goes without saying the prime responsibility here rests with the Federal Government with its 

unlimited powers over fiscal and monetary policy.‖ 

 

Well now, Mr. Speaker. . . 

 

Premier Douglas:  That is what the member from Nipawin just said. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  That is typical C.C.F. propaganda introduced into the budget speech. I suggest to 

you, Mr. Speaker, that the Federal Government has not unlimited power. The Federal Government is 

surrounded by the same restrictions as our provincial governments. . . 

 

Premier Douglas:  Oh! 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  . . .on a larger scale, Mr. Speaker, but they are surrounded by the same restrictions. 

Governments do not create wealth. The only money governments have is the money they collect from 

you and me in the form of taxes, licences, levies, etc., and to say there is no limit, that a government can 

go on taxing the people, whether it is in the provincial or federal field, is just simply tommyrot. That is 

especially true in Canada where we depend on our export market for 75 to 80 per cent of our products. 

We can tax ourselves right out of those markets because other people, without 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

8 

taxation burdens, will undersell us. 

 

I would like for a few minutes to talk about the periodic recessions and depressions that we are subject 

to. I have lived through three of them in my life, and they are not pleasant experiences. If you read 

history you will find that we have always had expansions and recessions. In the early days these 

recessions caused famines, disease and death. Today, with our improved methods, they cause us mental 

anguish, loss of property and personal inconvenience; but we in Canada do not have famine, disease and 

death. So we are progressing to some extent. Everyone has his own particular idea of the reasons and 

causes of these depressions, and his own particular solutions as to how they can be avoided. The C.C.F. 

will tell you that the Federal Government can wave a magic wand to prevent them. The labourer will tell 

you that industry is to blame. Industry will tell you that labour is to blame. The pacifists will tell you that 

war is to blame. Some will say our financial institutions are to blame. The businessman will tell you that 

taxes and credit beat him. The farmer will tell you the weather and markets are to blame for his 

condition, and so on administration infinitum. My own opinion is that we are all to blame. We forget the 

common law of gravity – that what goes up must come down. We forget that. It is possible some of 

these recessions are a blessing in disguise as they tend to put our economy on a sounder basis; but I do 

hope we will never have one as severe as the ‗thirties. 

 

I don‘t think anyone can deny that, in the last 10 or 12 years, we have come through a period of 

expansion unparalleled in our history. This expansion, in my opinion, was not because we had a C.C.F. 

government in this province, but in spite of the fact that we had a C.C.F. government. That expansion 

has been common all over the western world. What attitude do we find our C.C.F. government taking to 

meet the impact of a recession? Are they adopting a prudent policy in public expenditure? If you look at 

the budget you will find that they are increasing expenditures in every department, except grants to rural 

municipalities. They have increased the public debt; I am not going into the argument as to whether it is 

net debt, gross debt, deadweight debt or any other kind of debt. To me, a debt is a debt. It is something 

you have to pay, and there is no doubt the increase in debt has been made in the most prosperous times 

we have ever seen. 

 

I would like now to discuss some of the problems that face our rural municipalities. As this provincial 

government is a creation of, and is under the jurisdiction of the Federal Government, so our rural 

municipalities were created by, and are under the jurisdiction of this government. I would like, for a 

moment, to compare the treatment the Federal Government gives to this province and what the province 

gives to our municipalities. The Federal Government pours millions into this province to assist this 

Government in carrying on its activities. There is $26 million of a straight grant under 

Provincial-Dominion agreement, with no strings attached; it can be spent for any purposes this 

Government sees fit to spend it on. That is more than double the entire provincial budget of a few years 

ago. Then there are highway grants. . . 

 

Mr. James Gibson (Morse):  Is the member reading his speech, Mr. Speaker? I think he is reading it 

word for word. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  That‘s too bad, Jim, isn‘t it? We have a Speaker in the House, you know. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

9 

Mr. McCarthy:  Then we have highway grants for No. 1, family allowances, P.F.A.A. grants, 

P.F.R.A., old age pensions – all paid for by the Federal Government. then the Dominion Government 

gives assistance to this province for such things as education, pensions and partial payment for those old 

age pensioners between the age of 65 and 69. that, Mr. Speaker, amounted to approximately $60 or $70 

million that the Dominion government poured into this province. Yet the C.C.F. over there are always 

harping that the Dominion Government should do more. 

 

I would like now to discuss our school problems as they affect the rural areas of this province; and when 

I say rural areas I include towns and villages. First, I want to make my position clear with regard to 

larger units. I have been accused, both in this House and out of this House, of being opposed to larger 

units. That is not so. I am not now, and never was, opposed to larger units. We have approximately 85 or 

90 per cent of our schools now in the larger units, and it will only be a very short time, in my opinion, 

until they are all in larger units. I recognize in larger units a sign of the changing times and an effort to 

improve our educational system. they are a new thing, in the experimental stage. 

 

Some weaknesses of this system are becoming apparent as time goes on. I am not critical of that. It is to 

be expected; but I do not agree with some members on the other side of the House who think that, 

having set up the larger units, we have reached the utopia in educational needs of our rural children and 

that nothing more is necessary. 

 

In discussing this important matter I think we should try and do it above the level of party politics. I am 

far more interested in the education of our children than I am in the political future or the political 

fortunes of any political party, including the one to which I have the honour to belong. All my life I have 

been interested in education. I have educated a family of seven, and I have served on a School Board for 

a long time and believe I have some knowledge of what I choose to call the practical mechanics of 

education. 

 

It is the opinion of many that our rural schools are being treated as poor relations as far as this 

Government is concerned. They are not receiving a fair share of government money being spent on 

education. I listened with a great deal of interest to the Minister of Education (Hon. Mr. Lloyd) the other 

day. I am glad to know that a million dollars more is being put into education. But he was very careful 

not to give the break-down between rural (and in that I include towns and villages)( and higher 

education. He was very careful not to do that. The Minister is an artist at juggling figures, but I doubt if 

he gave a true picture. He took the lowest assessed unit and broke down their grants into mill rates. That 

sounded big over the air, but he didn‘t fool me. Why, if he wanted to give a true picture, did he not take 

a school with an average assessment? 

 

Latterly, when it served his purpose, he used a school unit with a high assessment. Meadow Lake has an 

assessment of $5,300,000 – that was the first one he used. The next one he used, for a different purpose, 

had an assessment of $23,800,000. He may have fooled a lot of people, but I still think our rural schools 

are not getting a fair share of government money being spent on education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot agree with the Provincial Treasurer when he said, in his budget speech: 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

10 

―At the local level education is supported by property taxes, a source of revenue far more stable than 

sales taxes, which will fluctuate widely. . .‖ 

 

That, to me, is a rather queer thing to appear in the budget. It shows either one of two things. Either the 

Provincial Treasurer does not know the history of land tax with regard to schools in this province, or he 

is trying to apologize for the very small amount that is there. While it is true that grants to schools have 

increased and are increasing, the fact remains that they have not increased nearly as fast as the mill rate 

on rural property. The result is that rural taxation is carrying a much greater share of education costs 

each succeeding year. You could take a look at the mill rate in rural schools (and again I want to include 

village and town schools in that classification) and you will find that, since ten years ago, the mill rate 

has increased each year from 1 ½ to 2 mills, so that now we have a mill rate two and one-half or three 

times as large as it was ten years ago. While I know that large amounts of money are being spent by the 

Government on education, the rural people are paying a larger proportion of the share of the cost of 

education than they were ten years ago. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  Oh no, nonsense! 

 

Mr. McCarthy: Mr. Speaker, less than 15 years ago a large portion of the land in my municipality 

reverted to the municipality for tax arrears. The total taxes on a quarter-section, at that time, did not 

nearly equal what the school tax is today. That is, 15 years ago, the total tax on some of my land was not 

as large as the school tax is, today. And yet a large portion of those farms reverted to the municipality 

for taxes – and the Provincial Treasurer calls that a ‗stable base‘ for taxation. 

 

During one of those years the only cash that my local school had was $300 which they received as a 

government grant, and less than $100 from the municipality. We carried those schools on our backs in 

those times. We (the local people) went to the bush and drew wood, brought it to the school yard, sawed 

it up and put it in the basement, and the only chap that got any money out of it was the chap who sawed 

it, and we paid for his gas. I wonder what would happen, today, under similar conditions. I point out to 

you that we have, today, the same land, the same class of farmers and we could run into the same sort of 

weather and economic conditions; and yet the Provincial Treasurer says that is a stable source of 

revenue. 

 

Again, in his budget speech, he said it is insulated from economic fluctuations. Has he insulated our 

schools from economic fluctuations? I don‘t think so. I say we would be in a much worse position today 

under similar conditions than we were then, because our tax bill is three times as great and the 

Government is paying a smaller share – probably more money, but still a smaller share of the rural 

budget than it was then. So he is not in any way insulating our schools from economic depression. 

 

The other day the Provincial Treasurer did me the honour to say that I was more interested in politics 

than I was in the welfare of the farmers of this province. I say to him, now, that I was in this province 

working in the interests of the farmers before he ever saw the province, and it is just possible I may be 

here, after he is gone, working in the interests of those same people. 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

11 

I would like now to revert to those mill rates I was talking about a few minutes ago. The mill rates in 

larger units (and I want to include town and village schools in that) are approximately three times what 

they were a few years ago. I know that everything has gone up, and we cannot expect to run our schools 

on the same money that we did. Insofar as those increases have gone to pay teachers‘ salaries I am in 

favour of them, and I am going to have something to say, a little later on, about teachers‘ salaries; but I 

do think we will have to do something to stabilize our mill rate for school purposes. We cannot continue 

to allow our rural mill rate to go up 2 mills each year, and that is what it has been doing the past few 

years. It is not fair to the municipalities that more than one-half the rural municipalities‘ tax budget 

should be spent for educational purposes. I think you will all agree with me that the rural municipalities‘ 

taxing field is limited, limited to the land only, and they cannot be expected to carry all the duties of 

bridges, roads, sanatoria, health, hospital, etc., on less than half their budget. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer boasted that he had turned back the two mills of Public Revenue to the schools. 

Well, I would point out to him that, on the average, the mill rate for larger units has gone up two mills, 

this year, so that that two mills he has supposed to have turned back to the municipality has been 

cancelled out in the form of larger mill rates for schools. The rural municipalities‘ position is exactly the 

same as far as the money they have to spend on roads and bridges, etc. is concerned as it was before he 

turned this back, because that money went to schools – or an equal amount. 

 

A little later on, when he started to talk about roads and road grants, he said – well, I don‘t know that he 

said it; but when he started to figure out his road grants he again used that two mills to figure out the 

system of equalization grants. So he spent that two mills twice – and that makes four mills he has spent 

on it now. And I want to say a word about those road grants. 

 

Ever since I can remember, all the rural municipalities in this province received a $500 basic road grant. 

Now there may have been a few years in the ‗thirties when they did not get it, but after the gasoline tax 

went on they started to pay a basic grant to municipalities of $500. They did not do it during the ‗thirties, 

I am prepared to admit that. But they did pay $500 to each municipality basically. A few years ago, this 

Government put, on top of that basic grant of $500, an equalization grant and that brought it up. That 

was all right, and I was quite in favour of it, I was not so much in favour of the source of the revenue, 

because he used $1 ¼ million that was left here by another government for the purpose of paying those 

grants; but nevertheless they did go to the municipalities. 

 

It was rather amusing that, at just about the time that $1 ¼ million fund played out, we had a change in 

policy. Now we have another policy. In this past year, according to the address of the president of the 

S.A.R.M., 138 municipalities received no grant at all. I presume that is correct. So they are not giving 

the municipalities more. They are giving them less; and in this new formula they worked out they 

actually made themselves $70,000 and I will tell you how. In 1951, the rural municipalities got $351,830 

in road grants; in 1952, according to the statement of the president of the Rural Municipalities‘ 

Association (and I think he is correct), they got $281,899 in grants; so they are $70,000 less than they 

were last year. They made themselves $70,000 at the expense of the municipalities. Mr. Speaker, this 

Government should be ashamed of their treatment of the rural municipalities! 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

12 

Hon. J.T. Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, that statement, of course, is not correct. There was more money 

paid to the municipalities than quoted by the hon. gentleman. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  I said road grants, Mr. Speaker. I said that, in road grants, they made themselves 

$70,000. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas:  That‘s not right. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  The unfortunate part of this is that I cannot see – wait a minute, you gentlemen over 

there get me kind of ‗balled up‘ sometimes. I suppose you do it intentionally, do you? But never mind, 

we have a lot of fun anyway. 

 

The unfortunate part of this mill-rate increase is that I cannot see any end to the increasing mill rate the 

R.M.s are going to have to collect for school purposes. It looks to me as though it is going to continue to 

go up and up, and I will tell you why. Due to the policy of transporting pupils to the town schools – and 

I will tell you why. Due to the political of transporting pupils to the town schools – and I am not critical 

of that, I will have something to say about it a little later on; but owing to that policy we find that our 

town and village schools are overloaded; that is, they haven‘t enough schoolrooms to hold the pupils. 

they are overloaded now, and we have only started to transport our pupils. The larger units are going to 

have to engage in an enormous building plan to provide the necessary schoolrooms. And here is what 

has happened. There is a school out in the country, and they decide to transport the children from that 

school into town. The old school is either torn down, or sold, or moved away, and the School Board gets 

probably $500 or $600 for it. but they have to construct schoolrooms in town to take care of the extra 

pupils. These schoolrooms cost, on an average, from $10,000 to $12,000 each. That is only an estimate, 

but that is what I would estimate; and the School Board will have to raise the money to build these new 

rooms. They have only two ways to do that. They either have to raise the mill rate or borrow the money, 

and I think they will have to do both. That is why I said I could not see any prospect that our rural school 

rates will decrease. I think they are going to continue to go up unless something is done about it. 

 

In addition to the fact that the annual mill rate has risen from 1 ½ to 2 mills, these schools are not paying 

their way. They are creating a debt in the form of bank overdrafts, they are borrowing from the 

Provincial Government and all that sort of thing; and I just want to read to you, if I may, Mr. Speaker, an 

article that appeared in last night‘s ‗Leader-Post‘. I am not going to give the dateline on this because, if 

any of you want to see what school it is, you can look on the second page of last night‘s ‗Leader‘ and 

you can see it. The only reason I am giving it here is because it bears out exactly what I said – that these 

schools were continually raising their school rates and they are going to have to continue to raise them 

probably at a faster rate, and that they are not, even at that, paying their way as they go. I am just going 

to give you some items of the budget of this school to show you that what I said was true. As a matter of 

fact, when I wrote these notes – and they are notes; they are all my own, I assure our honourable 

member over there – I did not know this situation; I knew the general picture, but here is something 

definite: 

 

―These rates for 1954 are in increase of five mills on rural rates and six mills on urban supporters; one 

mill was added to the rate to cover 1954 payment of $1,300 borrowed in 1953. . .‖ 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

13 

that was one debt they had not paid and they have a lot more behind them – it isn‘t true of them all but it 

is a general picture. 

 

―Other debts, a portion of which are to be paid in 1954, through debenture and interest amount to 

$32,000. This total includes past borrowings by the unit for several years, as well as debentures passed 

on to the unit by the old school district. The budget provides for an increased conveyance cost in the 

unit from $32,000 in 1953 to $40,000 in 1954.‖ 

 

That is all right. I can understand that – they are probably conveying more children: 

 

―These costs are concerned with the closing of rural schools and the transportation of pupils to larger 

centre urban schools.‖ 

 

That is the pattern. This was up five mills. Another thing they have to do is put $8,000 in the sinking 

fund to pay for their buses, and I think that is a good thing. But the whole picture is this: I cannot see 

any prospect that these charges are going to be less. I think they are going to be more; and in prosperous 

times like this, the most prosperous times we have ever had, and with the highest mill rate we have ever 

had, we are not carrying our schools even at that. We are piling up a debt on nearly all the larger units – 

not all, but the general pattern is – through borrowings from the Provincial Government or bank 

overdrafts. 

 

Those debts may be hard to pay in times less prosperous than they are now. I have had that experience. 

You talk about depressions. I said a little while ago, we are contributed to them and that is the way we 

contribute to them. If any of the members here remember 1929, everything was going up and nobody 

ever thought of things coming down. Taxes increased, wages increased, we went into debt and 

everything else, and then the recession came and caught us. I am not criticizing these School Boards; 

don‘t think that for a minute, I know what they are up against. But what I do want to point out is that 

with this increased rate and, as far as I can see, no prospect of controlling it, if we do run into a recession 

our education system is going to be in a much worse position than it was, say, 15 or 20 years ago when 

we ran into that terrible depression. 

 

Let us have a look, for a minute, at the type of schools we are building. Any that I have seen are of the 

single storey low-type building. They are very nice buildings, nice to look at, but any architect will tell 

you they are the most expensive type of building that can be built. Any architect will tell you that for an 

equal number of square feet you can build a two-storey building for a third less than you can a 

one-storey building, and I think that is right. I think you can heat it for less, too. I inquired about this. I 

asked why this type of building was being built, why they did not put on another storey and have the 

same number of square feet at much less expenditure, and I was told that was what the Department 

recommended. They said two-storey buildings were old-fashioned, out-of-date, and we should not have 

children running up and down stairs . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd:  Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I know the hon. member doesn‘t want to be 

wrong. I would submit that there are 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

14 

more schools being built in the province which are not one-storey than otherwise. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  Rural schools? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd:  Well, in rural schools there is only one room and naturally there is only one storey. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  No, eight and nine rooms. I am talking about rural schools; I am talking about the 

village and town schools, and I think I am right. If you go down through my constituency I don‘t think 

you can show me one new school that has two storeys. That is another interruption, but it is all right. 

 

I say they said they did not want to have these children running up and down stairs. Well I say, Mr. 

Speaker, that if our children are getting that soft we had better take them out and give them some 

physical training. I believe that public buildings should be well built, just as well built as they can be, 

and I believe they should be as fire-proof as possible; but I do not think that public buildings of that sort 

should be built at a greatly increased cost just to suit someone‘s particular fancy. 

 

I would like to look, for a minute, at the relations of School Boards to rural municipalities with regard to 

the collection of taxes. I believe we have a situation here that will have to be corrected. It is a sound 

principle of taxation that those who collect taxes should have some say in the expenditure of those taxes. 

It is equally true that those who spend tax moneys should have some responsibility for the collection of 

them, and when you depart from that principle you are not going to get efficient expenditures of public 

moneys. That is a sound principle of taxation. I am sure the Provincial Treasurer would not want to send 

money to Saskatoon for someone to spend that he had collected for this province, without having some 

control over the manner in which it was going to be spent. That is the position in the schools, today, 

however. The people who are spending the money have no responsibility for the collection of it, and the 

people who are collecting it have no say in the spending of it, or very, very little. As far as ordinary 

teachers‘ expenses are concerned, they are more or less static, and money that is devoted to that purpose, 

of course, causes no argument. I am going to have something to say about that a little later on, too. But I 

do believe that other school expenditures should come under the scrutiny of the Local Government 

Board or some similar organization; at least there should be some ceiling somewhere so we will know 

where we are going, and there should be a much closer connection between them. 

 

Neither the school boards nor the municipalities are satisfied with the present set-up. It could be said that 

it was always the case that the rural municipalities had no control over their school boards, and that is 

partially true; but when we were in the municipalities collecting the money for the 10 or 12 school 

boards within the boundaries of our municipalities, we did consult with the school boards and the school 

boards did consult with us; but that is not true, today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like, for a few minutes, to review the teacher situation, as it affects rural 

schools – and again I want to make it quite clear that when I am speaking of rural schools I am speaking 

of rural, town and village schools, because they all come under the same category. I am glad to see that 

teachers‘ salaries have gone up to where they compare 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

15 

more favourably with our sister provinces of Alberta and British Columbia; but I do not know whether 

they are high enough yet to prevent the exodus of our teachers to those other provinces. Unless the 

Minister of Education does as he did, last year, and adds the hospitalization and the automobile 

insurance to it, they might come pretty close to it then. 

 

It is estimated that well over 1,000 teachers have left our province in the last four years, and most of 

them have gone to British Columbia and Alberta. That is an unfortunate loss to our province, and it 

would have done much to relieve our teacher shortage if they had stayed here. Our teacher shortage is 

still with us and I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the Government is not pursuing a vigorous enough 

policy to overcome it. We had, last year (that would be 1951), 600 supervisors approximately in our 

rural schools. These young people were first put in charge of our schools as an emergency, but 

apparently it is becoming a habit now. I believe the situation has improved somewhat in the past year; 

the teacher supply has improved somewhat. We have less of those people teaching in our schools. It was 

not improved by training more teachers, however. It was improved by the fact that we transported more 

pupils, and to that extent it has improved and I am glad to see it. But I don‘t think that as we go on 

transporting our pupils, it is going to have the same improvement on the teacher situation, as by the fact 

that we are transporting pupils. We have 300 buses, I believe, running now (that is from the last report I 

saw; there may be more now), and naturally those buses started out to run from the schools with the 

lowest pupil enrolment. As far as I am able to judge in my own district, and I suppose it is true in other 

places, as we go along we are going to start to transport from schools that have a larger pupil enrolment; 

consequently, when those children arrive into the town they are going to have to have more teachers to 

look after them. I don‘t think that any great number of teachers are going to be saved by our 

transportation policy, after the first two or three years. Certainly, it helped us last year, and it may help 

us to a certain extent this year; but as time goes on the effect on the teacher supply of transporting 

children is going to become less and less, in my opinion. 

 

Also, our population is increasing rapidly, and experts tell us that our school population is increasing 

faster than our adult population – that is, that more of the percentage of increase are of school age or will 

be of school age shortly than the adult population. In addition to that, we have a large army of married 

farm women who are teaching in our rural schools, and I want to pay tribute to those people. they are 

among the best teachers we have in our rural schools today. A great many of them – in fact the great 

majority of them, I think – are doing that teaching as a patriotic duty. They are neglecting their homes 

and their farms to see to it that their children and their neighbour‘s children receive an education, and we 

are deeply indebted to them. But a great many of these people have told me that they are anxious to be 

relieved of teaching duties, that they want to go back to their homes and their children, and I can 

understand that. So if you add it all up, I think we have 500 supervisors, today, or approximately that 

number – I am not saying it is just that but I imagine it is right around there; and I think it is quite safe to 

say we have 500 of these other people I have just been talking about – those married women who are 

teaching who would like to be relieved of their teaching duties. 

 

I submit that we need, in this province, today, 1,000 more teachers. It is true that we have a small 

increase in the pupils who are attending our normal schools, but it is not nearly sufficient to take care of 

the teachers who are leaving the profession. I have suggested before, and I still think, that the Minister 

should open the Regina Normal School. I went past that 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

16 

building the other day and I see a sign ‗Museum‘ up in front of it. Well now, museums are nice places. I 

like to mull around in them, I get a lot of fun out of it; but I don‘t think anyone will suggest that a 

museum is as important as educating teachers to teach our children. I am sure if that school were opened 

it would increase our teacher supply. Today, if a girl or boy from this city of Regina, with over 70,000 

population, wants to train for a teacher, they have to go to either Moose Jaw or Saskatoon at an expense 

to their parents of between $800 and $1,000. Not many parents living in Regina feel like putting out that 

much money, nor, in a great many cases, do they have that much money to put out. The consequence is 

that a great many of these young people go into commercial courses, which they get at a very much 

lower cost; and consequently, by having this school closed, we lost a great many potential teachers. 

 

The last time I brought this matter up in the House the Minister ridiculed my suggestion. That is his 

privilege. I still doubt if his attitude is in the best interests of education, however. I still doubt that. This 

Government tried to sell us on its great planning abilities and its ability to look into the future. If they 

would look ahead in this matter I think they would see an opportunity to greatly reduce our teacher 

shortage. That would be especially true if we ran into a recession and these grade XII pupils who are out 

of school would be in less demand in the labour market; and if we ran into a recession and that school 

was in operation, I feel quite sure that that school would be filled, and that would be a blessing to 

hundreds of rural children, because, as I said before, I estimate that we need 1,000 more teachers. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to say a few words about our student aid fund and, in this connection, I 

am sorry that I am going to have to disagree with our lady member. I know from experience that is not a 

good think to do, because I have tried it and got into a lot of trouble. She gave us a wonderful talk on 

this student aid fund and I agree with her as to the purpose of it; but I think from there on we part 

company in our thinking. 

 

My criticism is that it is too little, and possibly too late; something should have been done about it 

before. Someone on the other side of the House has said that, today, no student need be kept out of 

college because of lack of funds. Mr. Speaker, that is not true. All you can borrow out of this fund, 

today, I think is $300. I hope I am right on this; if I am wrong I want to be corrected. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. member said he wanted to be corrected. He is quite incorrect. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  I am talking about the normal school students. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd:  Normal school or other students, he is still incorrect. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  How much is it, Mr. Minister? How much can a normal school student get? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: That depends upon the need of the student, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  Well, all right, I will put it another way, Mr. Speaker. The average amount given to 

a normal school student is $300, and I have had some experience with that two years ago – unless it has 

changed since. We won‘t argue on that, it is not material; but the average amount they can get is $300. 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

17 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd:  Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege again, the average amount that they can get is 

not $300. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  All right, let it go; I will argue it out with you privately, Mr. Minister. I will say this 

– probably the Minister will let me say this – that it is not sufficient. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd:  Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege again, the way it operates is that the amount of 

money which they need may be obtained from that fund. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  That is quite all right. It still averages out – I asked this question. Now just a 

minute! Don‘t get too funny over there, boys. I asked the question the other day in the House as to how 

many pupils were in the Normal schools and how much money they got; and if you divide the amount 

by the number of pupils, you will get just about $300. 

 

As I pointed out before, it costs them $800 to $1,000 to send a student to normal school; that is; if they 

don‘t live in the city. If they lived in this city and we had a normal school here, I think the fund would 

be sufficient to do that; but it isn‘t sufficient when they have to go to Mr. Speaker, or Saskatoon. 

 

There is another thing about it – if you haven‘t changed it, but this was true two years ago. You make 

that loan and a parent or guardian has to sign an application for it. Now that application form reminds 

me of the old relief forms that we signed in the ‗thirties. I think you could take it and find that it is 

almost word for word; and of course, as you know, a person was not supposed to get relief unless he was 

indigent. I think you could take this form, and it is almost word for word, affidavit and all. I suggest to 

you that you make the terms of this loan a little more liberal. Get rid of that form and make it so that in 

reality the deserving students will be able to go to school 

 

I might note that this student fund, which you people over there are talking about, was set up by a 

Liberal Government. . . 

 

Premier Douglas:  Oh, no! 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  Well, all right, all right; I knew a lot of you fellows did not know that. I doubt if the 

member from Regina knew it; but it was actually set up by a Liberal Government in 1943. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  Check back again! 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  And when it was set up, it was set up that 75 per cent of it was a grant to the student 

and the other 25 per cent was a loan. That is the way it was set up, and that is what they had to pay back. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, those are my opinions. I have attempted to deliver them without malice, and I hope 

they will be accepted in that spirit. I want to say that I am proud to be a citizen of Saskatchewan. I am 

proud of the great neighbour to the south of us – the United States of America; and I say to the great 

nations that, with all their faults, I love them still. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall not support the motion. 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

18 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley):  Mr. Speaker, it is customary in entering this debate to say some nice 

things about the previous speakers and I will bow to that custom. I feel that I should give credit where 

credit is due, and I want to sincerely compliment the member for Nipawin (Mr. MacNutt) on the brevity 

of his speech. I think that other hon. members might well have taken a leaf out of his book, and for a few 

minutes, this afternoon, I was hoping maybe they would; but the clock beat the hon. member for 

Cannington by just a nose. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  Pretty good timekeeper. 

 

Mr. Walker:  Well, I could not help but notice that every time I looked at the clock the hon. member 

for Cannington looked at the clock, and then he read about 10 per cent slower than he had been doing 

before. 

 

Premier Douglas:  He ran out of ideas before he ran out of time. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  In analysing a budget, Mr. Speaker, there is really only one basis on which to 

come to an intelligible conclusion as to whether it is a good or a bad budget. It should be done by a 

comparative analysis with other budgets. One budget by itself in a vacuum cannot be intelligently 

assessed and, therefore I think, if we are to make a worthwhile job of analysing this budget, we should 

compare it with the budget of last year and compare it with the budgets of other provinces for the same 

year. 

 

I find on looking at the estimated revenue, that next year we expect to raise approximately $8 million 

more than we did in the present fiscal year. The test of the budget is what do we propose to do with that 

$8 million. After all, in previous years – last year in particular – we settled the question of the 

distribution of the $70 million which we voted that year. Now the prime question before us is – are we 

making the best, most prudent use of the additional $8 million which we propose to spend this year? 

 

First off, Mr. Speaker, I would like to compare some of the estimates contained in this budget with those 

for last year. I find on looking over the estimates some very significant and worthwhile improvements. I 

find, on page 14, that we are this year spending $1 million more out of revenue account on highways. 

One cannot help, as one travels about Saskatchewan, marvelling at the tremendous improvement that has 

taken place in our provincial highway system. Saskatchewan‘s roads were an epithet in all parts of 

Canada only 10 short years ago. Everywhere we heard about the disgraceful condition of Saskatchewan 

roads. Other provinces managed to escape that condemnation, but Saskatchewan was the acme of 

imperfection so far as its highway system was concerned. Saskatchewan has now come up to the point 

where motorists passing from one coast to the other make favourable comparisons between 

Saskatchewan‘s highway system and those of our neighbouring provinces. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  They always have. 

 

Mr. Walker:  And my hon. friend from Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) does not remember 10 or 12 

years ago apparently. I suggest that some of his other conduct in this House is just as naïve. . .And so 

that extra million dollars will be one more jewel in the crown of the Minister of Highways and this 

Government. 

 

Then, of course, there is not only the million dollars extra spent on revenue account, but I find that on 

capital account there is another million and a half appropriated for highway construction. 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

19 

Perhaps the member for Cannington and myself share the opinion that education is one of the most 

important functions of local and provincial government. I never was so firmly convinced of it as I was 

after listening to his speech in this House, this afternoon. Education is something which no community 

can afford to neglect. I find in Saskatchewan we are assisting local school units, school districts to the 

extent of exactly a million dollars more than last year. That, of course will be welcome. . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. Did he say he was assisting local districts to 

the extent of a million dollars more? That is not true. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  Well, Mr. Speaker, I am sorry that my hon. friend did not look at the 

Estimates before he chose to get up and make an hour‘s harangue about them. If he would look on page 

15, vote 21, sub-vote 7, he will find that the estimated expenditures for grants to schools, last year, was 

$8,803,000 and this year $9,903,000, a million dollars increase to the local costs of education. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  That‘s for all schools. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): These grants to schools represent a replacement by the provincial revenues of 

local revenues which would otherwise have to be levied. Then, of course, there is the increase in grants 

to the University of Saskatchewan of approximately $300,000, an increase of 20 or 25 per cent. I am 

glad to note that the budget does not neglect this important centre of secondary education in this 

province. 

 

I hope the Provincial Treasurer and the Minister of Education will find some way, in the course of the 

next year or two, to appropriate a part of this University grant, or an additional grant, to encourage the 

attendance at University of young people from the rural areas of Saskatchewan. I find that, 

notwithstanding the very splendid assistance that is being given to young people to attend our University 

by the scholarship fund, of which something has been said this afternoon, there is still a disparity 

between the percentage of rural young people who attend the seats of higher learning and that of the 

urban young people of this province. I think I would commend to the Minister that some consideration 

be given, either by financial means or otherwise, to encouraging young people from our rural areas and 

our small towns to make up that disparity to which I have referred. 

 

Then I notice that in this budget the total amount to be expended on Public Health is again to be 

increased. I could itemize a number of instances of increase: their ambulance service is up from 

$143,000 to $162,000; the total budget is up from $18,671,000 to $20,632,000, or practically $2 million. 

I think that that increase in the public health vote illustrates, more than anything else this Government 

has done, that its heart is in its pledge ‗humanity first‘ 

 

Mr. McDonald: Call it six o‘clock. 

 

Mr. Walker: It is rather interesting to note that Opposition members denounced the Speech from the 

Throne, claiming that no adequate provision is made for agriculture. I do not propose to enter into any 

debate on the Speech from the Throne at this time, but it should be noted that, in spite of Opposition 

claims, the Provincial Treasurer has provided for an additional $600,000 for Agriculture. We are 

constantly being told that this Government is neglecting agriculture. I propose in a few minutes to make 

a comparison 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

20 

between the appropriation which this Government makes in its agriculture department and that made by 

the neighbouring province to the west. There again this year is an increase of more than half a million 

dollars. So, Mr. Speaker, in these times of rising costs and falling efficiency in most enterprises, we have 

here just the opposite situation. We have here practically the entire $8 million increase going into those 

things which show up in a better material standard of services for the people of Saskatchewan. We have, 

I think, in that budget, a tribute to the soundness and efficiency of the people who administer our 

departments. They have succeeded in squeezing out waste and inefficiency to the extent that practically 

the entire $8 million, which this Legislature is being asked to vote, is going into increased services for 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Let up compare the budget which we have here with that of the Province of Alberta. We should always 

remember the fact that Alberta, getting into the race of industrial development and development of her 

natural resources a full 20 years ahead of us while the government of this province was warming its 

stools, and we must make allowance for the fact that today in Alberta, they have more means with which 

to do the things which we are trying to do here. Let us then look at the Alberta Government‘s budget, 

bearing in mind the extra gifts of fortune which have been bestowed upon them. 

 

I have here the Estimates for the current fiscal year in the Province of Alberta, and I have compared 

them with the Estimates for the same year in this province. While the total amount that Alberta will 

raise, this year, is larger than in Saskatchewan, I would draw to your attention that the things upon 

which we place great store in this province are being more generously treated by the Saskatchewan 

budget than they are in the budget in Alberta. We hear a good deal of talk by the Premier of Alberta that 

they won‘t need any taxes very soon because of the realizations from their natural wealth. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  Sure, because you have got a C.C.F. Government here. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  My hon. friend says ‗they have got a Social Credit government there‘ — isn‘t 

that what he said? 

 

Mr. Loptson:  No! I said because we had a C.C.F. Government here in 1944. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  One would think that Alberta was a land of milk and honey, and I ask you to 

look at these Estimates. You will find that, in the current fiscal year, leaving out the revenue from mines 

and minerals, the Alberta Government levied and raised $86,621,000 compared with $65,787,000 in this 

province. It is true that Alberta got $46 million from its mines and minerals while this province only 

estimated for $4 ¾ million during the current year. Leaving out the bounties of nature, Alberta levied 

and collected $86,621,000 compared to $65,787,000 in this province, and I say they did it be means of 

higher taxation. I have here from their estimates some of the items of tax revenue. They are not all 

higher, but some of them are significantly higher. For one thing – my hon. friend from Cannington will 

be interested in this – the amusement tax in Alberta is $850,000; in this province we give that $850,000 

to the municipalities, but we don‘t get any credit from the member from Cannington. From the 

pari-mutuel tax, Alberta received $315,000; in this province we estimated $50,000. 

 

An Hon. Member:  And we get it back. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  That‘s right. And they have their fuel oil tax, $16 million, compared with our 

gas tax of $12 million. It is 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

21 

one-third higher in Alberta than it is here. And so I say that Alberta may look like a land of milk and 

honey to my hon. friends who cannot see very far, but if they will get the figures and look at them, they 

will find that things are not all free in Alberta. 

 

You might be interested to know how some of their estimates of expenditures compare with the 

estimates of our expenditures. I said a moment ago that in Saskatchewan in the current fiscal year, we 

estimated for $3,825,000 on Agriculture; Alberta in the same year, $2,365,000 – about one-third less 

than we have budgeted for in Saskatchewan. 

 

Their public health department, including hospital payments, is only $15,600,000 compared with 

$18,270,000 here. I have here some of the details of their public health expenditures, and there you can 

tell what kind of services their department of public health is providing. Grants to hospitals, hospital 

bills paid, polio hospitalization, cancer hospitalization, maternity hospitalization, pensioners‘ 

hospitalization and care, grants to local authorities and northern outpost hospitals: in Alberta 

$7,448,000; in this province $16,533,000. Alberta gives nothing whatever by way of grants or assistance 

to its health regions; in this province estimates were $570,000, approximately two-thirds of the cost of 

bringing health services to the rural areas of this province. but my friend from Cannington never gives 

any credit to this Government for that assistance to the local authorities. And so we can continue the 

comparison. On Air Ambulance, for instance, we spend an estimated $143,000 and Alberta nothing. 

 

Something was said in this House once about the incidence of mental illness in Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the fact that there are more patients being treated in our mental hospitals is something about 

which we in Saskatchewan should be very proud. It is estimated that, in the North American continent, 

there are more people with mental illnesses free in society than there are in hospitals receiving treatment 

for that condition. We, in Saskatchewan, by the fact that we have more patients in our mental hospitals 

are clearly demonstrated to be doing more for that class of people than they are in other jurisdictions. 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that is not something about which we should smile. That is something for 

which we should give the Department of Public Health in Saskatchewan a great deal of credit. 

 

You cannot win a reputation for having the best mental health programme in the world without spending 

a little money to do it, and I remember back in the early 1940‘s when our mental institutions were 

nothing more than pestholes because of the penny-pinching attitude of the previous government. Of 

course then, when anyone had a member of their family afflicted with mental illness they were reluctant 

to allow their friends or their relatives to go for treatment to the mental hospitals. I have people today 

come to me and tell me what a wonderful service this is. Their relatives, their loved ones, who have to 

go for treatment, the people at home feel that they are really getting something; they are really benefiting 

from this health programme. Alberta spends $3,622,000 on its mental health programme; and this 

province $7 million. I say that it is no credit to any province with the revenues that they enjoy to carry 

on a mental health programme less than the best. Here in Saskatchewan, with much less in revenue, 

much more is being done. 

 

However you compare the budget of 1954-55 you cannot help but come to the conclusion that it is a 

sound progressive budget. If Alberta is doing so much more for the municipalities, as suggested by the 

hon. member for Cannington, it certainly does not show up in the financial statistics of municipal 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

22 

government in the survey done by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics in 1953. In that survey of 

municipalities it appears that the total consolidated liabilities of all municipalities in each of the 

provinces was as follows: British Columbia had the highest of the four western provinces with $326 

million; Alberta had the next highest with $276 million; Manitoba had the third highest with $233 

million; and Saskatchewan the lowest with $218 million. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  May I ask the hon. gentleman, is that including all municipalities? 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  All liabilities of all municipalities. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Cities and rural? 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  Exactly. And if my hon. friend wants the rural figures he can get it out of the 

address delivered by the Provincial Treasurer, which he gave to you here the other day. 

 

Then we were told that the thing that was wrong with this budget was that it was too big. I think the 

member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) said: ―Here was a government committed to expenditures, 

supported by crushing tax structures not thought possible a few short years ago, a commitment of heavy 

expenditures requiring heavy borrowing.‖ 

 

I am only sorry that the member for Nipawin and the member for Cannington had not heard his speech, 

because the member for Nipawin (unless I misunderstood him) said that if we were so fortunate in 

Saskatchewan as not to have a C.C.F. Government, we would probably have a budget as big as that of 

Alberta, $204 million. . . 

 

Mr. Loptson:  That‘s for sure. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  That is quite possibly true. If my hon. friends were in office that is quite 

possibly true. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  If we hadn‘t had a C.C.F. Government we would have had some development. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  They could get rid of $204 million quite easily. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  We could have had money to pay for it. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  Then they say heavy expenditures and heavy borrowing. Well, they don‘t 

listen very carefully. Of course the member for Maple Creek spent the whole summer preparing this 

speech, and then he did not read it over after he came down to Regina. Certainly he did not read it over 

after the budget had been presented because, if he had listened he would have heard the Provincial 

Treasurer say, as reported at page 22; ―It will not be necessary to borrow any further amount during the 

present fiscal year since the balance of the capital programme is being financed from current revenues 

and surplus.‖ 

 

So that is the sort of statement they make – ―a government committed to expenditures supported by a 

crushing tax structure not thought possible a few years ago, a commitment of heavy expenditures 

requiring heavy borrowing.‖ That is the sort of irresponsible, wild loose statements that are made in this 

House which are published in the ‗Leader-Post‘ and ‗Star Phoenix as passing for intelligent criticism. 

We in this House, Mr. Speaker, are hard put to 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

23 

correct all these misstatements and the misinformation that is broadcast to the public. I suggest that, if 

the member for Maple Creek really wants to render a service to the people of Saskatchewan, he should 

give some serious consideration to the importance of his position. He should exercise some degree of 

responsibility in making the criticisms which he does. 

 

This isn‘t the only instance of utter irresponsibility and nonsense talked by the member for Maple Creek. 

Here is another one I happened to notice as he was delivering his speech: 

 

―A study of the total taxes levied in 1944 and the total taxes levied in 1952 on the rural municipalities 

for both municipal and school purposes will reveal that in 1944 the total was $14,800,000 and in 1952 

the total was $28,355,000.‖ 

 

Then he went on and tried to prove that the percentage was up 140 per cent or something like that. 

 

Well, the hon. member for Maple Creek could have taken just a little pains in getting his information 

right and he might just as well have told the whole story. He could just as easily have presented the true 

picture. If he will look at the annual report for 1945 of the Department of Municipal Affairs, he will find 

it is true that the Government collected of current taxes approximately $13 million in that year, but they 

collected in that year of current taxes and arrears, $23,827,000, so that the increase is actually something 

in the order of 25 per cent, and not 125 per cent as my hon. friend tried to leave the impression with this 

House. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  That‘s a novel way of reading it: 100 per cent out. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  If it is true – if my hon. friend from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) does not 

know what arrears are, I will tell him. Arrears are taxes which were not collected in previous years 

which come in along with the current taxes and which will buy goods and services just the same as the 

current taxes will do. If my hon. friend wants it in any clearer language than that I will give it to him by 

sign language outside. 

 

Then he says in regard to Power and Telephones that 85 per cent of the net profits of all the corporations 

were obtained from Power and Telephones. Well, that is rather an interesting statement; I think we 

should examine it. 

 

Let us look first at the report of the Government Finance Office and we find that they had a total at the 

end of their last fiscal year of $10,239,000 invested in the so-called ‗C.C.F.‘ Corporations. At the same 

time there was a total of $81,400,000 invested in Power and Telephones so that while the C.C.F. 

Corporations produced only 15 per cent of the total profit from Crown Corporations, they actually used 

only 11 per cent of the total capital invested in Crown Corporations. While Power and Telephones 

produced 85 per cent of the total profit earned by Crown Corporations, they used 88.7 per cent of the 

total capital. So, when the whole picture is before the House, it is obvious that the C.C.F. Corporations 

have enjoyed a higher average return on the money invested than have Power and Telephones. I am not 

saying that with the idea of holding up the C.C.F. Corporations as being any more successful than Power 

and Telephones; but I do object to this continuous attempt of members of the Opposition to paint only 

half the picture and then expect people in the country to give them credit for statesmanship and 

leadership. 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

24 

Something has been said about the Public Debt. I know the member for Maple Creek gets confused 

easily when it comes to figures, but he tried to leave the impression that the administration of the public 

debt of Saskatchewan was not as good a picture as was painted by the Provincial Treasurer. I am not 

going to quote the Provincial Treasurer; I am going to quote from the financial statements consolidated 

by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics and issued under the authority of the Hon. C.C. Howe. If you will 

look at the report issued in 1941 and the report issued in 1951, you will get a fair comparison between 

Saskatchewan‘s financial position and that of the other three western provinces. 

 

First of all, in 1941 Saskatchewan had the highest total net direct debt of any of the four western 

provinces; it had $263 ¾ million – I am not going to give the hundred thousands, because it is simpler 

for the member for Maple Creek if we give it in round numbers; $263 million, the highest of the four 

western provinces. This year on March 31, 1952, shows Saskatchewan, $163 million, or the lowest of 

the four western provinces. 

 

As a matter of fact I will give you what the other four western provinces are. In 1941, Saskatchewan was 

the highest with $263 million; British Columbia came next with $230 million; Alberta came next with 

$194 million; and Manitoba next with $138 million. Here are the figures as of 1951: British Columbia, 

the highest, with $256 million, an increase from $230 to $256 million; Alberta has reduced it from $194 

million to $104 million, a reduction of $90 million; Saskatchewan has reduced its figure from $263 

million to $163 million, a reduction of $100 million; Manitoba has increased their figure from $138 

million to $140 million. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it does not sound very well to hear hon. members opposite, the people who came closer 

to running this province into bankruptcy and did run this province into bankruptcy, to be criticizing the 

financial management of this province under the present administration. I think that when the citizens of 

Saskatchewan know all the facts, they will give credit to this Government for being moderate in its 

expenditures, moderate in its borrowings, moderate in its taxation; they will give credit to this 

Government for being progressive in all of its financial and fiscal policies. I am sure that the people of 

Saskatchewan when they look at the $205 million budget in the neighbouring province – and make no 

mistake about it, it does not all come from oil; a large part comes from the taxpayers of Alberta; and 

when they see heavier tax burdens on their municipalities than those we have in this province, or when 

they look at the financial condition of the province of British Columbia, I am sure the people of 

Saskatchewan will pay little heed to these criers-in-the-wilderness who sit across on your other side, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I suggest that the people of Saskatchewan look to the Liberal Party for better things, and if I may do so – 

and I do this with some deference; if I may give some advice to my hon. friends opposite. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson:  We don‘t need it. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  Well, somebody needs to give you some. 

 

Premier Douglas:  Don‘t charge them for it, either. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  I won‘t send a bill. If I may give you some advice it is this: The Liberal Party 

is having a convention, I understand, in the near future, and it would be my earnest wish for the Liberal 

Party that they would toss out the ―old guard‖ completely. When I 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

25 

looked at the ―old guard‖ sitting across there and hear them still fighting the battles of 1930 and the 

election battle of 1944, still seizing every opportunity they can to criticize the auto Accident Insurance 

and to criticize the larger school units, as my hon. friends across the way do, they are living in a by-gone 

age. The people of Saskatchewan have accepted those things as part of the established institutions of this 

province. As long as my hon. friends opposite continue to be on the wrong side of all these issues, the 

people of Saskatchewan will continue to accept the C.C.F. as a permanent institution in Saskatchewan. 

Maybe I should charge them for this advice. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  On a point of privilege, I want to extend my congratulations to the Hon. Minister of 

Wisdom from Hanley for his advice. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  I‘m not finished yet; I‘m not through yet. I think those of us who sat here, 

Mr. Speaker, through the debates of this House and saw the futile attempt of one or two of the members 

opposite, ―the old guard‖ still try to win on the issue of mud and dirt and slime as they did in this House, 

will agree with me that the most progressive and sensible thing that their convention could do, next 

summer, is to completely purge the old guard from the Party. I see in the eyes of some hon. members 

opposite that they agree with me. I could not help but note the profound look of displeasure and disgust 

in the eyes of some hon. members opposite when the member for Arm River and the member for 

Saltcoats were revelling in the gutter here not long ago. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  You started it. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  So, may I just conclude with this, Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan 

expect us on both sides of the House. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Clean your shirt. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley):  The people of Saskatchewan expect members of this House on either side to 

make an honest analysis of the budget, and the Throne Speech, and of all the things that come before 

this House, to forget about their preoccupation with partisan advantage, and to deal with the affairs of 

Saskatchewan in an honest, forthright and intelligent manner. 

 

In conclusion I want to say that I believe that those words apply fittingly to the address of the Provincial 

Treasurer and to the contents of the present provincial budget. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour):  Mr. Speaker, as is customary, may I first congratulate 

the Provincial Treasurer on his excellent budget address, well delivered. At the same time I would like 

to commend the staff of his department, together with the Budget Bureau, and the staffs of the various 

departments, all of whom did something in connection with the budget we now have before us. 

 

Looking at the figures here I see where we are after a slight increase, $146,000. I don‘t think we will 

have too much trouble in getting it through. However, we will go into the details later. 

 

I have enjoyed the debate up until the present time, Mr. Speaker, and might commend all members on 

both sides of the House, and have been quite interested in what they have had to say. Having been head 

of the Department 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

26 

of labour for the past 10 years, I thought it might be of interest to this House if I brought in some figures 

showing the percentage of wages labour has earned in connection with the farm implement industry; 

both farmer and labour are greatly concerned in that very incidence. My source of information is the 

Agricultural Implements industry from the Dominion Bureau of Statistics, and I have no reason to doubt 

any of these figures. 

 

Going back to the year 1945, we find there were 41 plants in Canada employing a little over 13,000 

people. The salaries and wages of those employees amounted to 42.4 per cent of the gross selling value 

of the products at the works – (I presume we in the West would say ‗plants‘, but ‗works‘ seems to be the 

accepted term) – 1.9 per cent went for fuel and electricity; 45.8 per cent for materials, and the profits 

amounted to 9.9 per cent of the gross selling value at the works. 

 

We will skip a few years. You will realize, of course, Mr. Speaker, that that was just after the war, and 

possibly there had to be retooling and differences in technological changes and so forth. We will skip 

then and get on to 1951. We find that the number of plants have doubled; there were 81 of them in that 

year, with 17,000 employees; but we find the salaries and wages of labour down to 30.5 per cent; fuel 

and electricity, 1.2 per cent; material, 56.3, and the gross operating profit had gone up to 12 per cent. 

The last year for which we have complete figures is 1952. The number of employees was up to 18,000; 

the salaries and wages 30.3 – down a little more; the material, 53.3, and the gross operating profit was 

15.2 per cent. So there we have the difference. In 1945 the percentage received by labour was 42.4 per 

cent; seven years later it was 30.3 per cent. In 1945 the gross operating profit was 9.9 per cent and seven 

years later it was 15.2 per cent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  Better send that over to the Leader of the Opposition; he needs it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams:  Yes, I would be glad to do that, although I couldn‘t refer to it directly as it was 

in a different debate. 

 

The member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) made some suggestion that the Ministers on this side of 

the House should get on with some of their departments. Well, I am going to take him at his word and 

do some of that, this afternoon. First I am going to refer to the Theatres Branch. Sometimes I think some 

of the branches in the Department of Labour should be referred to as Santa Claus as far as the provincial 

treasury is concerned, because with fees, licences and so forth, we bring in a considerable amount more 

than we find necessary for administration: I think around $470 or $80 thousands a year. 

 

The Theatres Branch continues to enjoy progress through new science and development within the 

industry itself. Substantial expansion is in evidence through the number of new theatres completed and 

58 plans for new theatres have been approved for next year – 25 of them, by the way, are for drive-in 

theatres. Among the 25 new ones opened, last year, were drive-ins at Assiniboia, Humboldt, Melfort, 

Swift current, Wynyard, Wakaw, and so forth. Plans for 15 new public halls were submitted and 

construction approved, as well as a number of the older halls which are going to be renovated. The 

inspection staff endeavour to cover all these buildings, theatres, drive-ins, public halls and so forth once 

a year and give every assistance they can to those in charge as far as construction problems, safety and 

so forth are concerned. In the past year, two theatres and two halls were destroyed by fire, but 

fortunately, at a time when the theatres were empty, so there were no casualties. 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

27 

The use of gasoline lamps is considered a very dangerous practice and an effort is being made to 

discourage people from using these lamps in public halls, schools and theatres located in rural areas. We 

are receiving good co-operation. I think we should all realize that just s good a light can be got from 

these lamps – you know the ones you pump up with a mantle in them – I presume they would have to 

have a change made; but coal oil will produce just as good a light as gasoline and is not nearly so 

dangerous. 

 

Our Saskatchewan censor is located in Winnipeg. He has been down there the last four or five years, and 

he sits with the Manitoba censors in viewing the various pictures which are brought to his attention. 

Following that line of thought I was pleased to see by the press, a few days ago, where a distributor of 

‗yellow journalism‘ in Ontario was fined and jailed for handling magazines containing a story of a 

murder which was still before the courts. Too much of this so-called literature is brought into Canada 

from the United States. I spoke on this matter just a year ago, Mr. Speaker, and do not intend to repeat 

what I said at that time, except to refer to a quotation from ‗The Anglican Outlook‘, the official organ of 

the Church of England in Canada, which claims that the comic-book industry is a $52 million a year 

enterprise. Here is the extract I refer to: 

 

―Eight years ago 10 million comic books were sold each month. Today that many are sold each week. 

A literary critic has described this traffic as ‗cultural slaughter of the innocents‘. These books bought 

with the nickels and dimes of children and with the money of older people and the rest of adolescents, 

portrays sadistic torture, sexy situations and sordid crimes. The men who publish and distribute this 

kind of rubbish are dominated by the money motive. They are completely unconcerned with the 

effects upon the readers.‖ 

 

My own description of those who write and print such trash – so-called comics often of a horrible 

nature, sex-books or pornographic magazines, crimes of all kinds – is that they are maggots feeding on 

the sores of a nation and will do anything for money regardless of the corruption to young minds. So 

much for the Theatres Branch, Mr. Speaker. We feel that that is in good hands. 

 

For the past five years I have made some reference in my budget speech to the older workers and the 

policy of compulsory retirement at the age of 65. There is a great deal of support now for this group 

which should be given a ‗break‘, and not forced out of unemployment, or, as I have put it on occasions, 

it seems to be a dismissible offence to reach the age of 65. This Government is to be commended on 

granting in the neighbourhood of 50 extensions over a period of yeas to these employees, and I feel that 

both they and their families have been most grateful. 

 

I have a number of clippings here of which I will read one or two: Several from the ‗Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix‘, ‗Moose Jaw Times‘, ‗The Commonwealth‘, ‗The Health Newsletter‘, ‗Winnipeg Free 

Press‘, articles by Mr. Mosher, President of the C.C.L., and Dr. Arthur McNamara, former duty of 

Minister of Labour at Ottawa. And here is one that was rather unexpected. It was in the ‗Leader-Post‘ of 

March 2nd, ‗K.M.K.‘s column‘ – bless her heart! She goes overboard for the older people, and refers to 

a group of insurance companies in the east who set up some sort of an office and advertised for men 

over 65. 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

28 

They got them all right! In fact, one man at 62 applied and was told that he could not have the job, that 

he was too young. However, she ends up with this thought: 

 

―They (that is, the insurance companies) know that more and more people are living longer. They 

know how terribly necessary it has become to make old age a rewarding conclusion to life rather than 

a dull marking time to the end. They see the tragedy in the waste of men in their prime at 65, one day 

actively productive in their jobs, the next day retired with no preparation for retirement and no 

unwinding process between, and they know how appalling often death and retirement link 

unnecessarily.‖ 

 

A short one here from the ‗Winnipeg Free Press‘. this is a quotation from Ian MacDonald, Chief of 

Service Medicine at Toronto Sunnybrook Hospital, and this is what he says: 

 

―We have to use our human material or we are going to be in trouble with the rest of the world in 24 or 

30 years, he told an annual meeting, Tuesday, of the Health League. ‗Many persons are actually older 

at 50 than their counterparts at 65,‘ he said. ‗There is a high death rate during the first three years of 

retirement, partially because of unnatural inactivity. Old people today are being forced to lead more 

and more unnatural lives, because the aid given them does not allow them to contribute to their own 

support‘.‖ 

 

I have another here from the ‗Star Phoenix‘ along similar lines, which adds another thought and refers to 

the employment of persons over 45: ―Many industries today are reluctant to hire anyone who is more 

than 45. They have many reasons, most of which seem valid to the business organization which adopts 

the policy. Yet the growth of this reluctance to hire anyone over 45 is damaging to the person who needs 

a job and to the economy of the country.‖ 

 

I have in my hand, here, Mr. Speaker, a newspaper – ‗Labour‘ is the name of it – printed in Washington, 

D.C. every week, and it is quite interesting to note that not one line of paid advertising appears in this 

paper. It is edited and printed entirely by some of the larger railroad organizations. One page is always 

devoted to Canadian news. When I opened this paper, Tuesday morning, I was quite pleased to see first 

a picture of Mr. Coldwell on page two. He was speaking in Ottawa and it carries a very good report of 

what he had to say. I will just quote some of it: 

 

―For the purpose of directing capital into socially desirable channels, M.J. Coldwell, C.C.F. leader 

urged, in the House of Commons, this week, establishment of a national investment board. He said, 

‗With the large funds accumulated by various organizations in this country, I believe the time has 

come when we should endeavour through an institution answerable to Parliament, to direct the flow of 

funds into fields that are socially desirable into the development of our resources. The 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

29 

The board might be used, he suggests, ‗to divert investment funds into housing and projects such as 

the St. Lawrence seaway and the South Saskatchewan River dam for building up of Canada‘.‖ 

 

I was quite interested to see that article in a paper from Washington, D.C., which we ordinarily would 

not expect to see up in this part of the country. 

 

Following that, a little higher on the page is an article which originated in Ottawa. It says: ―Protection 

Increased under Provincial Pay Measures‖ and I will quote what they say there. It is from their staff 

representative in Ottawa: 

 

―An increase in the protection provided for workers under minimum wage laws particular in four of 

the 10 provinces was provided during 1953. Provinces in which important changes were made were 

Saskatchewan, Quebec, Newfoundland and Nova Scotia.‖ 

 

The next paragraph, Mr. Speaker, is in heavy type. I am not wearing a vest or perhaps one of the buttons 

would pop off. Here is what it says: 

 

―In Saskatchewan, the provincial Minimum Wage Act was expanded to cover the entire province. In 

the larger centres the minimum wage is now $26 a week, while the minimum wage for the rest of the 

province is $24.50.‖ 

 

Here it goes on about Quebec: 

 

―In Quebec, the minimum rate for workers in the smaller centres was increased. The general minimum 

rates are 51ȼ, 46ȼ and 41ȼ an hour for the three zones in the province. 

 

―In Newfoundland, the first order under the Minimum Wage Act went into effect and established a 

minimum rate of 50ȼ an hour for male workers 18 years of age and over, in all occupations except 

farming and market gardening.‖ 

 

―Nova Scotia set a minimum rate of 35ȼ an hour for women workers in the fish processing industry. 

 

―Other important changes during the year were made in benefits under the provincial Workmen‘s 

Compensation Act. The monthly allowance for widows in Ontario was raised from $50 to $75 and 

children‘s allowances went up from $12 to $25. In Manitoba children‘s allowances were raised from 

$12 to $20 and in Nova Scotia they increased from $15 to $20. For orphans the allowance is now $30 

a month in Manitoba and Nova Scotia, and $35 in Ontario.‖ 



 

March 10, 1954 

 

 

30 

Just in reference to the $75 for the widows of the men killed in industry in Ontario, we went from $50 to 

$60 last year. It is a little late perhaps in the Session for me to bring in an increase for this year, but I can 

assure the members on both sides of the House I will be after it next year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of material here, but I am going to be on the air tomorrow and 

with that short talk, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 6 o‘clock p.m. 


