



















































Hansard: February 17, 1954


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Second Session — Twelfth Legislature 

 

5th Day 

 

Wednesday, February 17, 1954 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed, from Tuesday, February 16, 1954, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

Mr. Wooff for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in the first debate of this Session, I 

would like to extend my most sincere congratulations to the new members who have taken their seats in 

this Assembly — Mr. Carr, the new member for Rosthern; and Mr. Kohaly, the new member for 

Souris-Estevan. They are both following men of high capabilities. I am sure both of them will try, and 

will be successful, in being worthy successors to the men whose places they have taken. 

 

I would like to extend my congratulations to the mover and seconder, who did an excellent job of 

moving and seconding the motion for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. I feel that 

both Mr. Wooff, the member for Turtleford and Mr. Harry Gibbs, the member for Swift Current, did 

credit not only to themselves but to the constituencies which they represent. 

 

I would also like to extend my congratulations to the Leader of the Opposition on the very high honour 

which has been conferred upon him by his colleagues who have selected him as the Leader of the 

Opposition in this Assembly. In our democratic form of government the Opposition has a most 

important and vital part to play. Being Leader of the Opposition entails very heavy and onerous 

responsibilities. I would like to say to the Leader of the Opposition that the members of the Government, 

and I am sure all members of the House, will be glad to co-operate with him in every way that we can to 

help him in the discharge of the heavy duties which he has now assumed. 

 

I am sure my honourable friend, the Leader of the Opposition, will not expect me to follow him all over 

the field which he traversed yesterday. However, I would like to set his mind at ease at the very outset 

by telling him that the story which he heard about the C.C.F. being in league with Dr. Haldeman and 

making a deal in the 1948 election is pure and unadulterated fiction. I can assure my honourable friend 

and the people of this province that the C.C.F. have never had a deal with the Social Credit party in the 

1948 election or in any other election. 

 

My friend spent considerable time yesterday going over newspaper reports of what I had said at various 

times and in various places. I have absolutely no objection to the quoting of statements that I made as 

reported in the press. But I would like to say to my honourable friend that the statements I have made 

have been received a little more kindly by 



 

February 17, 1954 

 

2 

 

the press than some of the ones which he has had the misfortune to make more recently. I notice that 

when he spoke at Swift Current and said that my statements about the large surplus of wheat in Canada 

had resulted in a drop of five cents a bushel in the price of wheat, the Rosetown Eagle (which is hardly 

noted for being a C.C.F. newspaper) described this statement as “the silliest explanation of the year.” 

When my friend was asked by the press to comment on Mr. Blackmore‟s proposal to set up a Royal 

Commission to investigate communism, he suggested that the best way to get rid of communists was to 

dissolve the C.C.F. party. I notice that the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix (also not noted for being a C.C.F. 

paper) described this statement as “fatuous and downright stupid.” My friend hasn‟t done too well on 

press statements! I was intrigued with one part of the statement of my honourable friend. He is reported 

to have said: “We never had any communists in this province until the C.C.F. party was formed in 1933. 

Since that time, communism has become very popular, for communism is right here in Saskatchewan.” I 

couldn‟t help but compare that with a statement which the honourable member made in this Chamber 

some years ago when he said that the communists had started the Wheat Pool. I find it very difficult to 

understand how the communists could have started the Wheat Pool in the early 1920‟s if there weren‟t 

any communists here prior to 1933 when the C.C.F. was formed. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Leader of the Opposition): — There weren‟t very many then — there were some. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The main burden of the speech given by the Leader of the Opposition yesterday 

was to suggest that the government should appoint a judicial commission to re-investigate the charges 

contained in a so-called affidavit drawn up by Mr. J.O. Rawluk. Mr. Speaker, I hardly need remind the 

members of this House . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, it has never been suggested that there be another trial 

of the Rawluk case — but just a perusal of the evidence that is already on file. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Whether my honourable friend had in mind a trial or not, I would suggest that 

once a judicial commission were set up, it would reserve the right to call witnesses if it saw fit. No one 

could deny it that right. I want to remind the House, Mr. Speaker, that it was the Opposition who made 

the choice as to how the Rawluk charges should be investigated. They had the so-called affidavit as 

early as June, 1952; they had eight or nine months in which to decide how they wanted these charges 

investigated. They made their selection. They wanted an investigation by a committee of this House. It 

was Mr. Tucker, then the Leader of the Opposition, who drafted the motion calling for such an 

investigation. As a matter of fact, had he followed proper procedure and come into this House, which is 

where the motion should have been made, we would have had an opportunity of suggesting at that time 

that the investigation could be carried out either by a judicial commission or a Royal Commission. But 

the Opposition decided that they did not want an investigation by a judicial commission or a Royal 

Commission but an investigation by a committee of the Saskatchewan Legislature. When Mr. Tucker 

moved that motion, my colleague, the Provincial Treasurer, seconded the motion. As a consequence, we 

had a five-week investigation conducted by a committee of this House. That was the decision of the 

Opposition. It was the decision of the entire Committee. I want to draw attention to the fact, Mr. 

Speaker, that the members of this House were much more willing to allow a legislative 



 

February 17, 1954 

 

3 

 

inquiry into the Rawluk charges than were the members of the Federal Parliament to investigate the 

charges of “kiting” cheques, of which Mr. Dewar was accused in Ottawa over a year ago. There was no 

parliamentary inquiry, no judicial commission, no Royal Commission. The Federal government used its 

great majority in the House to prevent any investigation at all. Here we said, “If you want an 

investigation by a committee, you may have it,” and the investigation went on through five long weeks. 

The majority of the committee found that the charges were completely without foundation and that Mr. 

Rawluk, who made the charges, was both irresponsible and unreliable. Now my friends do not agree 

with the findings of the majority of the committee. That, of course, is their privilege. But I want to 

suggest that even if we set up a judicial commission they wouldn‟t be satisfied with that report either, 

unless they thought that it would do some damage to someone on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — How do you know? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Then there would be the suggestion that we should have a Royal Commission. We 

would go on ad finitum. Mr. Speaker, I say that a committee of this House investigated the charges; that 

the majority of the committee came to the conclusion that the charges were not substantiated; and that 

the main witness was completely discredited and unreliable. The responsibility for any further action lies 

with those who do not agree with the decision of the majority of the committee. If the members opposite 

want a further investigation, they have the remedy in their own hands. There is nothing to prevent them 

or Mr. Rawluk or any of those associated with him from commencing a civil suit under Sections 13 and 

16 of the Legislative Assembly Act. If the Provincial Treasurer is sitting in this House illegally, he can 

be fined $100 per day for every day he has sat here illegally. The Act further states that one-half of the 

fine will go to those who commence the action. There is an excellent opportunity for somebody to make 

a lot of money. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that the Opposition themselves do not believe these charges. 

They are vainly striving to keep this matter alive because really they have nothing else to talk about. 

 

When this matter was being discussed last year, it was said the highest tribunal in the land was the court 

of public opinion. I agree with that. But my friends opposite just will not learn that simple lesson. In the 

session of 1951, and again in the session of 1952, we sat here day after day listening to veiled charges 

and insinuations about oil permits and mineral permits and about a Mr. Rubbra and Mr. Hershorn. In the 

election of 1952 from every public platform and over every radio these veiled charges were tossed 

about. We went to the court of public opinion. The Liberal party went into that election with 21 seats 

and came out with 11. Now they are down to 10. In 1953, not yet satisfied, they trotted out Mr. Rawluk, 

and we went through that long investigation. On August 10th last, we went once more to the court of 

public opinion. The Liberals went into that election with 14 seats and came out with 5. One would think, 

Mr. Speaker, that the Opposition would learn that dirt does not pay. One would think they would have 

learned by this time that the public of Saskatchewan expect their elected representatives to devote their 

attention to some of the great constructive issues and to help to solve some of the fundamental problems 

that confront the people of this province. 



 

February 17, 1954 

 

4 

 

My friend yesterday read extensively from an editorial written by the publisher of the Yorkton 

Enterprise. Well, he represents only one man‟s point of view. Here is an editorial which appears in the 

Grenfell Sun of April 23, 1953. I think it represents the point of view of a lot of people. The last part of 

the editorial says this: 

 

“It is generally recognized that Mr. Fines has done a very efficient job of handling the finances of this 

province. It is a crying shame that such a man should have his name dragged through the mire, and be 

asked to prove that he did not, on any day during two summer months, accept $100 or $200 from a 

man in a purple coat, on Eleventh Avenue. No specific day was mentioned in the charge, to allow the 

accused to present an alibi. 

 

“One would not need to be of the same political stripe as Mr. Fines, if one possessed an ounce of 

fairness in one‟s makeup, to feel that the onus of proof should be on the one making such a vague 

accusation. 

 

“To fair minded people, Mr. Fines stands absolved, and let us hope that in the weeks ahead 

Saskatchewan may get back to normal, after weeks of crawling in the gutter.” 

 

My friends opposite want to get back to the gutter. I do not think the majority of the people of 

Saskatchewan are desirous of going with them. I had hoped, Mr. Speaker, after the painful lessons of the 

election of 1952 and the election of 1953 that my friends opposite would have realized that the people of 

this province would like us in this Legislature to come to grips with the real problems, rather than spend 

time trying to undermine the character and the good name of our colleagues. I do not propose to spend 

any more time dealing with that question but shall go on to what I think are much more important issues 

facing the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province is passing through exciting and historic days. Sometimes we are told by those 

who do not agree with the government in office that Saskatchewan has “missed the boat” insofar as the 

prosperity which is present in the rest of Canada is concerned. I quote now from an extract in an 

editorial in the Toronto Saturday Night of January 16th, 1954. The editor of this newspaper (which is 

frankly Liberal), in commenting on Saskatchewan, says this: 

 

“. . . (Saskatchewan) has failed to share as fully in the post-war boom as most of the rest of Canada — 

not enough to reverse the downward trend in the population of Saskatchewan, which dropped from 

895,922 in 1941 to 831,728 in 1951.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the first place, I would suggest that population is not necessarily any certain sign of 

prosperity. But let us deal with the question of population because it has been a political football in this 

province for a long time. The fact is (and we might as well face 



 

February 17, 1954 

 

5 

 

it frankly) that we have been losing population in Saskatchewan ever since 1936. We have been losing 

population for two reasons. Firstly, the mechanization of agriculture has made it possible to produce 

more food with less manpower. Secondly, we have lacked industrial employment opportunities and 

consequently those looking for jobs have often had to go elsewhere. The census shows that we were at 

our peak in 1936. Our population then was 931, 547. From 1936 to 1941 we dropped 35,555, plus our 

natural increase. From 1941 to 1946 we dropped 63,304, plus our natural increase. The largest drop in 

population was from 1936 to 1946. 

 

There is a very excellent article which appears in the November 1953 issue of the Canadian Journal of 

Economics and Political Science. It is called “Perspective on Change in the Prairie Economy.” It was 

written by Professor G.E. Britnell, head of the Department of Economics, University of Saskatchewan. I 

shall be referring to this article from time to time. It was written by a man who is a recognized authority 

on the prairie economy. This is what Professor Britnell says on page 451: 

 

“The attraction exerted by more favoured areas with higher rates of industrial development was 

reflected in the population loss for the prairies between 1941 and 1951 of more than a quarter of a 

million persons to which Saskatchewan contributed 200,000, Manitoba 60,000, and Alberta only 

7,000. By far the greater part of this migration out of the area took place between 1941 and 1946.” 

 

We lost nearly 200,000 people, most of them before 1946. The census figures show that from 1946 to 

1951 we lost less than a thousand — 960 to be exact — plus, of course, our natural increase. From 1951 

to 1952 the Dominion Bureau of Statistics estimates show that our population went up 11,000. But that 

was not enough to offset the natural increase. Actually we still lost a little population because we did not 

retain more than 72 per cent of our natural increase. But from 1952 to 1953 our population went up 

18,000, which was more than enough to offset our natural increase. In other words, from 1952 to 1953 

we retained our natural increase plus 1,666 additional. From 1951 to 1953, according to the D.B.S. 

estimate, our population went up 3.48 per cent. 

 

That is not large, but I point out, Mr. Speaker, that it is the first time in almost twenty years that we have 

reserved the trend. We have not only retained our natural increase but have had a slight influx into the 

province. No person can say whether or not that will be a permanent trend. It will depend very largely 

on whether the mechanization of agriculture continues to displace manpower. It will also depend on the 

speed with which we can develop our other resources in order to provide employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I contend that population is not necessarily a criterion of prosperity. Whether or not 

Saskatchewan has shared in the prosperity of Canada can only be measured by our wealth production in 

relation to the rest of Canada. Here we have a most amazing situation. The gross value of production in 

Saskatchewan in 1945 was $568,000,000; in 1949 it was $950,000,000; in 1952 — the last year for 

which we have figures — it was $1,400,000,000. If we take personal income, what do we find? Personal 

income in 1945 in this province was $541,000,000; by 1949 



 

February 17, 1954 

 

6 

 

it had gone up to $832,000,000; by 1952 it had gone up to $1,182,000,000. If we take the personal 

income on a per capita basis, this is what we find. In 1945 our per capita income (that is, the income for 

every man, woman and child in the province) was $649. It should be remembered, Mr. Speaker, that that 

$649 was 15 per cent less than the average per capita income across Canada. By 1949 our per capita 

income had gone up to $1,000 or 5 per cent above the national average. And in 1952 our per capita 

income was $1,402, or 18.5 per cent above the average for all of Canada. As a matter of fact, in 1952 we 

came within 1 per cent of having the highest per capita income within the Dominion of Canada. The per 

capital income of Ontario that year was $1,408; Saskatchewan was $1,402 — only six dollars less; 

British Columbia was $1,372; Alberta (about which so much is spoken) was $1,290; Manitoba was 

$1,145; and Quebec was $972. 

 

We acknowledge very readily that this phenomenal increase in personal income and in gross production 

is due to the fact that we had good crops and relatively stable prices for cereal grain. If one looks at the 

cash farm income, one can see how it has grown. In 1950 our cash farm income was $408,000,000; in 

1951 it had gone up to $631,000,000; in 1952 it had gone up to $698,000,000; and in 1953 it had gone 

up to $711,000,000. It is significant that the cash farm income for Canada in 1953 was 4 per cent below 

1952 and 5 per cent below 1951. Only Saskatchewan and Nova Scotia in all of Canada had a higher 

agricultural income in 1953 than in 1952. As a matter of fact, in 1953 Saskatchewan had the highest per 

farm income in Canada. The national average cash income per farm (i.e. the total farm income divided 

by the number of farms) was $4,293. In Saskatchewan the cash income per farm was $6,351; Alberta 

was $5,787; Ontario — $4,617; Manitoba — $4,158; British Columbia — $3,807; and Quebec — 

$2,701. 

 

Yesterday the Leader of the Opposition asked how it was that we kept talking about the huge 

agricultural income and at the same time kept pointing out that there were serious dangers in the 

agricultural economy. Mr. Speaker, it is not difficult to understand that. The figures that I have just 

quoted are due to the fact that in 1952 and 1953 we had very large quantities of wheat and coarse grain 

and other farm products for sale. The high income was due to the volume rather than to the prices which 

were being obtained. As a matter of fact, because farm costs have been going up to a greater extent than 

prices have been going up (and in some cases prices were actually going down) the net return to the 

farmers in recent years has been considerably less. That is, it was costing him more to grow a bushel of 

wheat and to raise hogs or steers. After paying his expenses, the amount he has left for himself has been 

relatively less. 

 

Again I will refer to the article by Professor Britnell to which I have already made reference. On page 

444 of the Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science, Professor Britnell says: 

 

“Since August, 1945, the price of No. 1 Northern wheat to the producer, basis in store at Fort William 

— Port Arthur, has moved within the narrow limits of $1,833 to $1,855 per bushel, yet between 

August 1945 and August 1952, the composite index of western farm costs rose 87 points, from 141.5 

to 228.6, and the important 



 

February 17, 1954 

 

7 

 

farm equipment and materials group rose 90 points, from 123.2 to 213.2 — representing a decline of 

approximately 40 per cent in the purchasing power of a bushel of prairie wheat.” 

 

As Professor Britnell stated, from 1945 to 1952 we had a decline of approximately 40 per cent in the 

purchasing power of a bushel of wheat. We are glad that the agricultural income is up. However, any 

person would be blind who failed to recognize that if the farmer‟s costs of production are going up, his 

net return is bound to be affected. One must also recognize the storm signals on the horizon. One has to 

recognize that our overseas markets for farm products have been declining. One has to recognize that in 

the first five months of this crop year our sale of wheat for consumption outside of Canada has dropped 

by about 30 per cent. One has to recognize that there are tremendous stores of wheat in elevators and on 

the farms. While I agree that the wheat on the farm is an insurance against future crop failure, that wheat 

also represents an investment. The farmer has spent money growing that wheat and putting it in the 

granary; and his debts have to be paid even though he cannot realize any cash on that wheat. 

 

One has to recognize, too, if one is looking at the agricultural situation, that the drop in the price of 

cattle and the large surpluses which are indicated dictate the necessity for some adequate marketing plan 

for livestock and livestock products. The yearly weighted average prices per cwt. for hogs (dressed) in 

1951 was $30.85; 1953 — $27.82; for cattle (all grades) in 1951 — $27.40; 1953 — $14.70, or almost 

half. For sheep and lambs (all grades) in 1951 — $28.61; 1953 — $17.02. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we contend that while we have had buoyant revenues as a result of the 

favourable climatic conditions, any government, provincial or federal, which fails to recognize the 

danger signals would be derelict in its duties. 

 

Some of my honourable friends may say, “Well, we know, of course, that agricultural income is up, but 

Saskatchewan has „missed the boat‟ in business activity.” I ask my honourable friends to look at the 

business activity in this province. In 1944 there were 78 companies incorporated with a capitalization of 

$2,895,000; in 1949 there were 155 companies with a capitalization of $23,199,000; in 1953 there were 

346 companies incorporated with a capitalization of $36,962,000 — more than four times as many 

companies with eight times the capitalization. I would point out that the total assessment of land and 

improvements in this province in the last five years has gone up by $115,000,000. I would point out that 

there are signs of increasing industrial development. Reference has been made in the Speech from the 

Throne to the pulp and potash agreements. These agreements will be tabled and discussed at greater 

length by the Minister of Mineral and Natural Resources. The pulp agreement is the first definite 

indication we have of a pulp industry. If the company with whom the agreement has been signed takes 

up the option, as it must before September 30th of this year, then a plant must be started before June 1st, 

1955, with an expenditure of not less than $5,000,000. We have every reason to believe it will be much 

more. 



 

February 17, 1954 

 

8 

 

The same is true of the potash agreement. A company has come in and is doing serious work. By May 

1st, 1956 it will be required under the agreement, if it takes up the option, to put down a shaft. 

 

I am not going to go into the report of the Industrial Development Office now. That will come up later in 

the Session. But in almost every city of the province small industries have been coming up, such as the 

Canaday plant in Moose Jaw for the making of men‟s slacks, coats and uniforms; the Panther Oil and 

Grease Company, also in Moose Jaw; in the city of Saskatoon, a company for the making of land 

packers and another company for the making of building materials and concrete blocks; in the city of 

Prince Albert, the large extension of the Northern Wood Preservers Plant. We have just made the final 

arrangements with reference to currency exchange for a German firm to come in and open up a furniture 

factory in Prince Albert. The Royalite Refinery was built last year at Coleville. In the city of Regina, 

announcement has been made with reference to the $2,000,000 Ford warehouse and more recently an 

announcement has been made with reference to the Pioneer Electric Company, which will manufacture 

transformers in this city. With reference to that announcement, I was interested in an editorial which 

appeared in the Grenfell Sun of February 11th, 1954. After commenting on the construction of this new 

plant to manufacture generators, the editor says: 

 

“This new industry, together with the millions currently being spent in oil developments by outside 

interests as well as other large scale investments, should assist in dispelling the old bogey of complete 

socialization as waved over the heads of the blissfully ignorant by those more vocal but equally 

ill-informed.” 

 

As a matter of act, Mr. Speaker, the best indication of the business activity taking place in the province 

of Saskatchewan is to be found in the little booklet put out by the Department of Trade and Commerce 

called “Public and Private Investments in Canada.” That little booklet shows that the amount of capital 

invested in Saskatchewan in 1948 was $243,300,000; 1950 — $346,000,000; 1952 — $391,300,000; 

1953 (preliminary estimate) — $424,100,000; 1953 (revised estimate) — $458,000,000 or 8 per cent 

higher than the preliminary estimate. In other words, in the period from 1948 to 1953 there has been 

invested in Saskatchewan the staggering figure of $2,109,700,000. The interesting thing is that 

investment in Canada from 1952 to 1953 went up 6 per cent but investment in Saskatchewan from 1952 

to 1953 went up 10 per cent. That hardly looks at though the prosperity of Canada is passing us by. 

 

Again I refer to the article by Professor Britnell, page 450. After examining the table to which I have 

just referred, this is what Professor Britnell has to say: 

 

“Thus over the five year period, annual capital expenditures exactly doubled in Alberta, increased by 

71 per cent in Saskatchewan, but by only 21 per cent in Manitoba, as compared with 61 per cent for 

the whole country.” 

 

I ask the members to examine that. The total investment in Canada from 1948 to 1953 went up by 61 per 

cent but in Saskatchewan it went up by 



 

February 17, 1954 

 

9 

 

71 per cent, or ten points higher than the national average. If one needed any clinching argument, I refer 

you to the Monetary Times, The Annual Revue, 1954, which I received on my desk this morning. I saw 

an advertisement on page 108, and since the word “Saskatchewan” was in it, it instantly caught my eye. 

This is what it says: 

 

“FINANCIALLY SASKATCHEWAN IS STRONGER THAN EVER BEFORE! 

 

“In wheat production . . . in oil, uranium and base metals . . . in lumbering . . . in retail sales . . . in 

savings . . . indices are climbing to new heights, to make Saskatchewan the „Utopia‟ of business 

enterprise. Definitely money grows from the ground up in this Province . . .” 

 

When I read that I thought of my friend from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) and I thought that this must 

have been put in by one of the “propaganda agencies” of the Saskatchewan Government. So I looked at 

it again and found it was inserted by the Saskatoon Star Phoenix and the Regina Leader Post! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — That was contradicting the treasurer. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I think any person who will examine the facts that I have placed 

before the House will admit that there has been a tremendous upsurge of economic development and 

production in this province. In the first speech which I made in this House back in 1944, I indicated that 

it would be the policy of this government to have development take place along three lines — 

development through private capital and private companies; development through the co-operative 

movement; and development through public ownership and public utilities. 

 

I would like to take just a few minutes to draw the attention of the House to the contribution which each 

of these forms of enterprise has made to the development I have been outlined. Let me first of all deal 

with the part played by private industry in Saskatchewan‟s development. Let us take the oil and gas 

development of the province. I need not go into this in detail because it is in the press almost every day. 

But the best indication of the interest of private companies in Saskatchewan‟s oil and gas potential is the 

amount of money which they have been investing. In 1951 they spent $18,000,000 in exploration and 

development; in 1952 they spent $31,000,000; in 1953 they spent $52,000,000; and the estimate is, on 

work already committed, that they will probably spend in excess of $68,000,000 this year. That means 

that in a four year period there will have been spent in this province in the search for oil and the 

development of oil and gas wells a total of $169,000,000. The returns have been worth while. In 1952, 

477 wells were drilled — last year 674. Examine the facts on producing wells and potential producers 

(i.e., wells that have been drilled but capped because there was not an available market). In 1952 there 

were 483 oil wells; in 1953 there were 818. In 1952 there were 49 gas wells; in 1953 there were 80. Let 

us examine oil and gas production. In 1949 our production was less than a million barrels (793,000); last 

year our production was 2,788,000 barrels. In 1949 our production of gas was 813,000 MCF (thousand 

cubic feet) and in 1953 it was 1,537,000 MCF. 



 

February 17, 1954 

 

10 

 

There are some fourteen oil fields now being delineated in the province. The most encouraging find so 

far has been the Smiley field, because it is the first large light oil field that has been discovered. In the 

last four months some fifty wells capable of producing oil have been drilled. I think one of the best 

indications of the interest is the fact that one company is now prepared to put in a pipeline from the 

Smiley oil field to the inter-provincial pipeline so that the light crude oil from the Smiley field can be 

brought to Regina. The fact that oil companies paid $2,223,000 for a section of school land in the 

Fosterton medium gravity oil area is an indication of the wealth potential of that area. 

 

Alongside of the growing exploration for oil has been the necessity for expanding our refining capacity. 

In 1944 this province had facilities to refine 17,000 barrels of oil a day. By 1952 this had gone up to 

56,000 — more than three times as much; and by June of this year we will be capable of refining 66,000 

barrels per day. 

 

I might say a word about mineral production. In 1944 our mineral production in this province was 

valued at $22,292,000, and in spite of the fact that prices for minerals have dropped in the interim, our 

mineral production in 1953 was valued at $48,136,000 — more than twice as much as in 1944. 

 

Salt production has gone up from 31,000 tons in 1951 to 35,000 tons last year. Our sodium sulphate 

production is the only item which is down. We produced 87 tons in 1943; we reached a peak of 154,000 

tons in 1948; we are down to 112,000 tons last year. 

 

Our coal production is steadily increasing. In 1944 — 1,390,000 tons; 1949 — 1,870,000 tons; last 

year‟s estimate is something over 2,000,000 tons. 

 

Our base metal production in 1952 was valued at $37,690,000. Manitoba in the same period produced 

metals worth $15,881,000; Alberta only $3,023. In other words, our base metal production in 1952 was 

twice as much as that of Albert and Manitoba combined. I will not go into details of the mining activity. 

I am sure the Minister of Mineral Resources will refer to that, but the number of licences issued, the 

number of companies coming in, the number of claims staked are going up by leaps and bounds. The 

great development at Uranium City is one of the most outstanding developments in Canada today. I had 

the privilege of going in on the inaugural flight of the plane flying between Prince Albert and Uranium 

City just a few weeks ago. The last time I was in Uranium City, or where Uranium City now stands, 

there were a few shack tents for surveyors laying out the town site. If you go there today you will find a 

hotel with thirty rooms with running hot and cold water, picture show, three churches, a hospital just 

about completed and a four-room school in operation. This is a thriving community. Three mining 

companies are in operation. Five shafts are down. The Eldorado plant is in operation, working at its 

capacity of about 500 tons per day. It will now have to expand its capacity if it is going to be able to do 

custom work for some of the other mines. 

 

The Gunnar Gold Mines, which are said to have uncovered an ore body worth about $100,000,000, are 

now planning to put up a plant of their own at a cost estimated anywhere from $7,000,000 to 

$15,000,000. It is expected this will be started some time late in 1954. 



 

February 17, 1954 

 

11 

 

I have not done more than touch on a few of these things — oil, gas, base metals, salt, sodium sulphate, 

uranium — all of which indicate that in this province very large sums of money are being spent by 

private corporations in the development of our natural resources. 

 

Let me say just a word about the part that has been played by the co-operative movement. The 

co-operative movement represents a very large percentage of the rank and file of this province. The 

combined membership of all our co-operatives numbers 525,027. In the last fiscal year they did a 

volume of business of $490,000,000, which is $92,000,000 more than the previous year. In addition to 

what the co-operatives in Saskatchewan did, the inter-provincial co-operatives did another $48,000,000 

worth of business in Saskatchewan, so that actually $538,000,000 of co-operative business was done in 

Saskatchewan during the last fiscal year. These co-operative organizations, representing the rank and 

file of our people, now have combined assets of $191,000,000. This tremendous expansion by the 

co-operative movement has been made possible because they have built up their own banking facilities, 

their own credit society and their own credit unions. They have been able to extend their refineries, 

because of the loyalty of their membership and also because this Legislature, last year, by legislation 

placed the guarantee of the Saskatchewan Government behind their bond. This, I think, has assisted 

materially in a strengthening of their credit and enabled them to extend their facilities. The co-operative 

movement is playing an important part in the development of this province and I submit to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that it is destined to play an even more important part as the years go by. 

 

I come now to the part which public utilities are playing in the development of our province. Public 

utilities, after all, are simply universal co-operatives. They are co-operatives in which all the citizens of 

the province have a share. They are services which the people of the province provide for themselves 

co-operatively on the basis of service at cost and they know that any surpluses will be used to extend the 

facilities to an ever greater number of people. I can only make very brief reference to these various 

public utilities. I refer first to the Telephone Corporation, which last year made capital expenditures of 

over $6,000,000 and added 10,000 new subscribers to the telephone system. The progress we have made 

in ten years in Telephones is worth looking at. In 1944 this Corporation had capital assets of 

$16,524,000; in 1953 it had capital assets of $42,500,000. The number of telephones has gone up from 

46,900 to 104,900 — nearly two and one-half times as many. 

 

The Power Corporation made a capital expenditure last year of $10,000,000. That $10,000,000 enabled 

them to do many things. It enabled them to build 104 miles of 69 kv lines and 245 miles of 24 kv lines. 

They set out last year on the greatest farm electrification programme ever attempted in this country. 

They went out to extend power to 5,500 farms, and they reached and passed that objective. That rural 

electrification programme affected 138 Rural Municipalities and one Local Improvement District. Power 

was extended to 50 villages, and 114 oil wells were electrified last year, bringing the total of oil wells 

electrified to 190. The generation of power was increased by just a little short of twenty per cent. 

 

Again, let us look at the expansion in the last ten years. In 1944, the total number of customers the 

Power Corporation had was 



 

February 17, 1954 

 

12 

 

12,989; it is now over 100,000. In 1944 — farm customers numbered only 137; now there are over 

18,000. The number of towns electrified in 1944 was 146; now 667. In 1944 the total assets were worth 

$8,950,000; the total assets now are worth $68,000,000. The Power Corporation has also been doing 

important work in the matter of bringing natural gas to the people of six communities as well as to the 

city of Saskatoon. There has been an expenditure of some $7,000,000 and 5,000 customers are now 

receiving natural gas service. There are some who have been attempting to stir up a little discontent by 

saying that probably people are paying too much for gas. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the 

engineering company who did the preliminary survey estimated that we would probably lose money on 

selling gas in Saskatoon and in the towns en route for the first three years or until a load could be built. 

The load may grow faster than we think and it may take less time, but certainly it will be a losing and a 

marginal proposition until the load is built up. However, it is building up very fast and I can say to the 

people who use natural gas that the same principle will apply to them as has applied to the selling of 

power, and that is, that in the aggregate it will be sold as close to cost as possible and the surpluses will 

be used to expand the services to an ever-widening number of people throughout the province. 

 

An inter-provincial pipeline from Alberta through Saskatchewan and Manitoba and down into Ontario is 

to be built. This will mean that Saskatchewan will be able to buy gas from that pipeline and to put gas 

into the pipeline. This Legislature passed legislation some time ago to make the Power Corporation the 

sole purchaser of gas. It is our intention to maintain the principle of an integrated system so as to make 

possible the extension of the natural gas service to as many communities as possible. It is unlikely that 

the inter-provincial pipeline will come down through Saskatchewan much before the fall of 1955 and we 

are hoping that by that time it will be possible to have distribution systems in some of the communities 

in southern Saskatchewan ready to make use of that gas. As the government has already announced, the 

same principle will be followed as was followed in Saskatoon. The Power Corporation will either sell 

natural gas in bulk to the city council or it will offer to retail natural gas to the consumers in the cities 

concerned. 

 

I do not need to say that heavy expenditures are involved in putting in a pipeline from the 

inter-provincial pipeline to the communities and in putting in the distribution system if the city councils 

ask us to do so. Heavy expenditures will be necessary, later on, to take gas to Prince Albert and North 

Battleford and to other communities. Yet we feel that the expenditure of this money is justified, firstly 

because it is self-liquidating; secondly because it will give to our people a cheap and dependable fuel; 

and most important of all, because it will prove an attraction to industry in our province, thus making 

more industrial employment available to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I have only time for a passing reference to the other Crown Corporations. I would like to say that the 

other Crown Corporations and public utilities have had a very successful year. All of the Crown 

Corporations will show a surplus. One operation — the box factory — will show a loss, but the Timber 

Board, to which it belongs, will show an over-all surplus. These Crown Corporations are rendering an 

important service to the people of the province. The Bus Company, the Government Airways Service in 

the north, the Timber Board, the Fur Marketing Service, and so on — these services are important to our 

people. They are helping to develop 



 

February 17, 1954 

 

13 

 

our industry and are giving employment to some 4,400 people in Saskatchewan. The Crown 

Corporations of this province last year did $45,000,000 worth of business and although all the financial 

statements are not audited, a preliminary survey shows that they will have surpluses of between 

$5,500,000 and $6,000,000. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the policy of the government will be to continue to use these public 

utilities to serve the needs of our people, to integrate the services and to expand these services to 

communities that otherwise could not get them in order that the benefit of these public utilities may 

accrue to the largest possible number of people. 

 

I have said something about the industrial and economic development of the province, with reference to 

private enterprise, co-operative enterprises and public enterprise. I wouldn‟t like any person to think that 

just because I dwelt so much on statistics and on development that we consider industrial and economic 

development an end in itself. It is not. Economic and industrial development is only a means to an end. 

The philosophy of this government is “Humanity First”. We believe that the measure of any community 

is the amount of social and economic security which it provides for even its humblest citizen. We know 

that we cannot build up social services beyond our capacity to maintain them. We are now laying a 

heavy emphasis on strengthening our economic base and increasing our wealth production in order that 

we may provide ever-expanding health, educational and social welfare services to the people of this 

province. These services are being expanded, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Take, for example, our hospitalization plan. In 1947 this plan cost only $7,560,000; last year it cost 

about $16,500,000, or $9,000,000 more. In 1947, the first year the plan operated, 121,951 persons plus 

20,415 new-born babies received hospital care; but last year it took care of 165,410 persons plus an 

additional 21,606 new-born babies. In other words, last year we handled 45,000 more patients than we 

did in the first year of the plan. The plan has been responsible for bringing hospital care to an increasing 

number of people. The results are evident. In 1946, 86.7 percent of live births took place in hospital; last 

year, 96.4 per cent took place in hospital. In other words, only 3.6 per cent of the babies born in this 

province were not born in hospitals. What is the result? The result is that the infant mortality rate per 

thousand live births has declined. The average from 1941-1945 was 46.5; last year it was 30.8 — a drop 

of about one-third. The maternal mortality rate per thousand live births has declined. In 1941-45 the 

average was 2.8; in 1953 it was 0.5, a reduction to less than one-fifth. I believe that is the real measure 

of a community. When we can reduce the number of mothers who die in childbirth, when we can reduce 

the number of children who die at birth and when we can make it possible for more and more people to 

get hospital care and go out strong and well, we have the real measure of the use to which economic 

development is being put. Our tuberculosis rate in the last ten years has dropped from 29.6 per hundred 

thousand of the population to 12.3, or considerably less than one-half. 

 

The same story could be told in education. There is the story of larger school units, of composite 

schools, of school bus systems set up, of children today being given educational opportunities in rural 

areas such as they never had before. I spent a day at Sturgis and there I saw their dormitories, their boys 

and girls being brought in by buses to take courses in mechanics, in interior decorating, in carpentry and 

in 



 

February 17, 1954 

 

14 

 

tinsmithing — courses that ten years ago were denied to children in rural areas. There are increased 

services and facilities at the university. The scholarship fund provides money to assist students to go on 

from high school into university and into teachers‟ colleges and into hospitals to train as nurses. Money 

is being provided as loans and grants to school districts to build new schools and to expand their school 

facilities. All of these are an indication that this government considers increased wealth production as 

only a means to enable our people to move forward to a better way of life. 

 

The same thing is true of social welfare. We are constantly increasing the nursing home capacity for old 

people. As has been indicated in the Speech from the Throne, the nursing home at Melfort will be 

completed this year and a nursing home in Regina will be commenced. Moreover, we have been 

entering into agreements with communities, private organizations and church organizations to put up 

nursing homes for old people who are able to get around but who do not require bed care. There are six 

agreements signed already and there are fourteen more in various stages of negotiation. I believe we will 

be able to assist communities all over this province to put up homes where elderly citizens who 

pioneered this country may spend their last days in comfort and in security. 

 

The same is true of housing. Under Section 35 of the National Housing Act, we are giving assistance to 

any communities that want it. We are trying to get an increasing number of communities to avail 

themselves of the offer to build homes under Section 35 in order to make housing accomodation 

available to the people in the low-income group. 

 

As has been indicated already, we have signed an agreement with the Government of Canada respecting 

the rehabilitation of the physically handicapped. A great many people who are physically handicapped 

can be trained to become self-supporting. This will enable them to regain their feeling of belonging to 

the community and that sense of dignity which comes from having some important role to play in 

society. 

 

An agreement is being negotiated between the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of 

Canada regarding pensions for the disabled. This is something about which members in this House have 

spoken many times. I am sure we are all glad that it is now going to be possible to provide pensions for 

those who are physically handicapped and who probably cannot be rehabilitated and who need the 

security that a pension will provide. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel that before I close I ought to say something about the very important event which 

will take place in this province next year. I refer to Saskatchewan‟s Golden Jubilee. I want to commend 

all the members of the committee who have worked on this programme, and all the members of the 

sub-committees who have done such an excellent job in preparing the programme for 1955. It is going to 

be a historic year. Already arrangements have been made to have a postage stamp commemorating the 

establishment of Saskatchewan. The jubilee day itself will be Wednesday, July 20, 1955. A provincial 

day of prayer will be held on Sunday, July 17. I am not going to go into the many projects that have 

been prepared by the Golden Jubilee Committee because that would take too long and those who are 

responsible will be reporting at the proper time. As most members know, Mr. Justice E.M. Culliton is 

the Chairman, and my colleague, the Honourable Mr. Lloyd, Minister of Education, is the vice- 



 

February 17, 1954 

 

15 

 

Chairman of that Committee. Mr. Fred McGuinness is the Director and Mr. John Archer is the 

Secretary. Already a Jubilee choir is being trained which will represent Saskatchewan this year at the 

Minnesota State Fair and at other important functions. They will sing Saskatchewan songs and tell 

people something about the province of Saskatchewan. A Saskatchewan Musical Revue written by 

people in Saskatchewan is being prepared for presentation. There will be music competition awards, 

handicraft and literature contests. School broadcasts are being prepared; a jubilee pageant is being 

prepared; mobile display units will be available; a number of national conventions have been arranged 

for Saskatchewan; and in a score of more communities throughout the province historic sites are being 

prepared and marked for Golden Jubilee Year. 

 

An official history of the province is being written by Mr. J.F.C. Wright, and history for use in the 

schools is being prepared by Mr. John Archer and Mr. A.M. Derby. I do not think there is any doubt 

about it that all the various sections of the province represented on the Golden Jubilee Committee have 

put their hearts and their heads together to make sure that this will be a year that we will long remember. 

I would like to say to all the members of the House and to all the people of this province, irrespective of 

what our differences may be about other things, that this is one thing we can work together to achieve 

because the one thing we have in common is our sense of reverence and respect for our pioneers, our 

pride in Saskatchewan and our faith in its future. I hope that all members will work together to that end. 

 

I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that as we look forward to the Golden Jubilee year, there is one ideal I 

cherish for this province. We live in a time when hysteria and suspicion have gripped the hearts of 

millions of people on this continent. No person can look at the situation without a heavy heart. One sees, 

in the United States, a congressional committee calling witnesses and condemning men by association. 

Men wake up in the morning to find that their name has been blackened and their reputation ruined — 

not by anything they have done but because some man who professes to be a former communist goes 

before a congressional committee and reads off a long list of suspects. I will take second place to no one 

in saying that those who commit treason and those who are disloyal to the country to which they belong 

ought to be punished. But to condemn people because they believe certain things, to condemn people 

because they associate with certain people, to condemn men without trial and without the due processes 

of law, is to destroy the very democracy that they profess to defend. We need not think that an 

international boundary protects us. Already some member in the House of Commons (I believe a Social 

Credit member) wants a parliamentary committee in Canada, and if he can‟t get that, he will take a 

Royal Commission, to go out witch hunting and red-baiting. In the province of Quebec there is 

legislation giving the Attorney General of that province the right to restrict freedom of worship. This is 

supposed to be designed to curb the Jehovah‟s Witnesses, but it doesn‟t say the Jehovah‟s Witnesses. It 

could curb the religious freedom of any person or any group in that province. In the same province there 

is legislation to allow the same Attorney General to de-certify trade unions and to deny men the right of 

association and the right of collective bargaining. At the other extreme of Canada we have someone else 

talking about burning books. Mr. Speaker, in a free country the only thing any man has to fear is that he 

cannot defend his own ideas. Those who want to burn books are either afraid of the ideas contained 

within the covers or they haven‟t the courage to stand up for the views which they themselves profess to 

hold. 



 

February 17, 1954 

 

16 

 

My hope, my plea for Saskatchewan is that we shall keep hysteria out of this province. I hope that this 

province will be an island of tolerance and good will in a sea of turbulent hysteria and suspicion. I hope 

that in this province there will be a haven of neighbourliness in which we shall give to all men, and to all 

classes, and to all creeds, and to all colours, the same rights and the same civil liberties that we ask for 

ourselves. I want to say that as long as this government sits here, there will be no infringement of civil 

liberties in Saskatchewan and there will be no witch hunting and there will be no red-baiting. But unless 

we are prepared to defend these liberties that belong to other people, we ourselves will not enjoy them 

very long. Mr. Speaker, unless we are prepared to defend these liberties — freedom of speech, freedom 

of the press, freedom of religion, freedom of association, freedom of all the things that are necessary to 

maintain human dignity — unless we are prepared to defend these freedoms, then we are not worthy to 

stand up and sing, as we often do, 

 

O Canada, Glorious and Free 

O Canada, We Stand on Guard for Thee. 

 

I shall support the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to 

welcome another fine group from our University at Saskatoon. It is a university of high educational 

standards, is headed by a very fine and outstanding president and is serviced by a very efficient staff. 

 

We do welcome you to the Legislature. I am sure that you have enjoyed the address you heard this 

afternoon. You are invited to join us, as guests of the Speaker, at a banquet in the restaurant downstairs 

at 6:00 o‟clock and I extend to the members of the Legislature and to their wives, on your behalf, Mr. 

Speaker, an invitation to be present at the banquet. 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Opposition I would like 

to concur in extending a welcome to the students of the University who are here this afternoon. 

 

I might say that I happened to have the pleasure of being present at the opening of your Forum last fall 

and the experience I had there made me a little bit fidgety in case something might happen to our 

Premier here — and I wouldn‟t like that to happen. However, now that it is all over; his speech has been 

delivered — I am sure you enjoyed it as I did — we hope to meet you this evening at dinner and 

continue our visit with you. 

 

Mr. Robert Kohaly (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:35 o‟clock p.m. 


