



















































Hansard: February 22, 1954


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Twelfth Legislature 

8th Day 

Monday, February 22, 1954 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed, from Friday, February 19, 1954, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of 

Mr. Wooff for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. W. J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): – Mr. Speaker, first I would like to congratulate the mover and 

seconder of the Address in Reply. I have never heard submissions better rendered. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the two new members in this House. The member for Rosthern (Mr. 

Carr) has made his contributions; as a matter of fact, in common with the Leader and the rest of the 

members on the Liberal side, he has spoken many words but has said nothing. I think that the stack of 

meaningless words will pile up during this Session on the other side, and so I can say that, in my 

opinion, there has yet been no contribution from the Liberals advising the Government on this side. On 

the other hand, I do wish to congratulate the young member from Souris-Estevan (Mr. Kohaly). I think 

his is doing a very good job; he has made, in his initial speech, valuable recommendations which I think 

deserve some consideration, and I am sure that he will make contribution in this House from year to 

year. 

 

The Throne Speech has given this Assembly a very concise yet full account of the excellent performance 

of this Government. It has ably pictured existing problems and the needs of Saskatchewan people which 

will be given proper attention by the Government. I hope that this House will give full approval to all the 

amendments and acts and regulations that need to be put into effect, as I will, so long as they are going 

to be of benefit to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

However, the Throne Speech, in my opinion, has left something out. It has not dealt at all with the 

international situation, and I feel that we may get the false feeling of riding on a calm sea in the world 

today. I could not help but think, just yesterday, when I happened to be attending a Legion banquet and 

after we drank a toast to Her Gracious Majesty, that we in Canada are situated between two tremendous, 

powerful and dangerous forces. On one side we have the people to the north who have, during the past 

hundred years, expanded themselves into Asia. It has been a constant expansion, and where it will end I 

do not know. On the other hand, I cannot help but realize that to the south of us we have another great 

imperialistic nation that has been continuously expanding during the past 40 or 50 years. So as a citizen 

of Canada and whose loyalty is to the Crown, I am deeply concerned. I dread and fear the consequences 

to us of a clash between these two nations, and I think such matters should be mentioned in this House; 

because after all, what will it benefit us to give our people security, protections on a local basis, to 

develop our natural resources for greater economic gains, or in general to bring about a higher standard 

of living, if the jealous and powerful monsters of this world bring about a holocaust in which 

civilization, including that of Canada, may be destroyed. 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

2 

I have not the time, today, to discourse on international affairs. I am no specialist on the subject, but I 

recognize, as I have said, that on the one hand we have the technocrats to the north, on the other hand, 

we have the capitalists to the south, and I am not quite sure whether war is inevitable. However, we must 

do what we can, to try and keep the world in peace. 

 

In case anyone does not agree with me I would refer him to the following excerpts concerning the 

expansion of the United States in the past few years. It was brought to my attention, Mr. Speaker, by an 

article in the Prince Albert „Herald‟ of February 1, this year: 

 

“The State and Defence Departments . . . (referring to the United Stated departments) have told 

congressmen at a private session that they expect no problem about the use of Spanish gases in an 

emergency, but they said an agreement with Spain would be necessary first.” 

 

This is in reference to the Americans who are trying to get bases in Spain. 

 

“Last week Air Secretary Harold Talbot made it plain that the United Stated would expect to use the 

bases in the event of war. „Who is going to stop us?‟ he asked, and later he issued a formal statement 

that the United States will live up to its agreement with Spain. These provide that wartime use is 

subject to mutual agreement. The State Department had no comment on Talbot‟s remark at the time.” 

 

It is very clear that while on the one hand our statesmen are meeting in Berlin, on the other hand, there 

are preparations made for war. 

 

I would like to quote from a book called “Bases of Empire” on page 167, in order to show the House 

some of the expansion as far as bases are concerned, by the United States. It says here towards the 

bottom of the page: 

 

“Thus in the course of World War II the United States acquired or consolidated de facto dominion 

over 96,495,000 square miles of ocean and put in claims to domination and control of 13,825,000 

square miles of land, with a population of 645,815,000 inhabitants. The bulk of this population is not 

merely dwelling in territories strategically dominated by the United States, but is largely included in 

the military projects of American strategic planners. These figures represent expansion alone. Adding 

pre-war possessions and early empire, the strategic dominion of the United States, as indicated by its 

military or other de facto controls, extends to 14,725,000 square miles outside our own borders and 

embraces a population of 667,815,000 subjects.” 

 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

3 

As I pointed out, just recently the U.S.A. is trying to acquire bases in Spain and when somebody asked 

what would happen if Spain refused, Talbot said, “and who is going to stop us?” Now that is a 

dangerous statement for any man to make. 

 

I would like to read another excerpt: 

 

“When American journalist, Anna Louise Strong interviewed Mao Tze Tung (he is the head of the so-

called Communist Government in China) a few years ago, Mr. Tung drew a map of the United States‟ 

influence in these terms: „In the Pacific America now controls more than all the former British sphere 

of influence. She controls China, Japan, half of Korea and the South Pacific; she controls also the Near 

East and Western Europe and Canada and most of South America. America – not Russia, takes British 

bases, markets, influence spheres. All these air bases and naval bases that America set up all over the 

world are on other people‟s territory – in Iceland, in Arabia, in China, and in other places that do not 

entirely want them‟.” 

 

Since 1948, America has expanded her bases into the polar regions and is now trying to invade Pakistan 

and Spain. 

 

I do not wish to say any more on that subject. I just want to leave the thought with this House, that we 

have some responsibility to the people who elected us, to speak openly on a subject which today is 

probably more important than anything else. It is the problem of trying to bring about peace and 

understanding in the world; and to do that we will have to give assistance; we will have to trade and do 

everything that is necessary to be done in order to bring about an international peace. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I will get down more to earth. The other day the hon. member from Athabaska (Mr. 

Ripley) spoke in this House. He represents a considerable area of the north, and sometimes I wonder 

whether he does not represent my area also, because he makes statements in this House on matters that 

originated in Cumberland constituency. So I feel it is my duty, today, to correct the hon. member, 

because not only were his statements misleading, but they were very close to falsehoods. Now I do not 

blame the member if he gave the wrong figures in this House, but I do feel that before a member makes 

statements, he first of all should make sure that they are correct. 

 

The first thing I want to touch upon is the statement in connection with the Saskatchewan Fish 

Marketing Service and the sale of sturgeon. My understanding is that the hon. member said that all 

fishermen obtained for the sturgeon was an initial payment of 50 cents and that no further payments 

were obtained. Now I knew at that time the statement was false, but I was not in a position to challenge 

the statement. So forthwith I got in touch with the manager of the Fish Marketing Service and he 

advised me that, as far as the initial payment is concerned, there was an initial payment of 50 cents per 

pound for sturgeon, but following delivery the Saskatchewan Fish Marketing Service paid another 50 

cents, which made $1.00 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

4 

per pound f.o.b. Sandy Bay. I was further advised, so there would be no misconception, that in Manitoba 

a private firm that bought sturgeon, paid from 80 cents to $1.00 per pound, at the point of delivery. The 

rumour is at the present time (I have heard it from fishermen), that this company who bought this fish – I 

think it is called the Keystone – has the fish on hand and does not know what to do with it. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Leader of the Opposition): – They may have paid the 50 cents after the hon. member 

had spoken. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: – Now, as to the other charge which has been brought out in this House, that we only 

permitted a catch of about 8,000 lbs of fish, I would like to point out to the hon. member, and surely he 

knows, that the Saskatchewan Fish Marketing Service does not decide on the poundage to be caught in 

any lake. This is decided by the Fisheries Branch who have in mind the conservation of a natural 

resource – fisheries. They can only allow a certain catch, because, if the hon. member studied up the life 

of sturgeon he would find that it is one species of fish that can very easily be lost to us as they only 

spawn once in so many years. I think it takes about 20 years before they are actually matured, so it is 

very easy to have a large catch in one year and then have nothing for the next 15 or 20 years. I think 

probably that is the answer as to why we permitted less of a catch than Manitoba, yet I do think it was a 

very wise move, because like everything else, if you catch too much then the market suffers. But as I 

pointed out, the Saskatchewan Fish Marketing Service was able to dispose of all of the product that the 

fishermen brought in while the people on the Manitoba side, if the rumour is correct, still have their fish 

on hand, and it may affect the future market prices on sturgeon. 

 

The other day I noticed in the „Leader-Post‟, which always give a lot of publicity to statements of 

Opposition members whether they are true or otherwise – and I would say, Mr. Speaker, at this time, 

that I hope they will give as much publicity to members on this side of the House – but I noticed in the 

„Leader-Post‟ on the third page the other day, a photograph of the hon. member and also some 

statements he made. I am not interested in the photograph – I think he is a very handsome gentleman; 

but I am interested in the statements he has made. He is quoted to have said this: 

 

“There is no socialism among these miners up in the north, says Mr. Ripley, all are rugged 

individualists with a great faith in private enterprise, and they have no time for the milk-and-water 

doctrine of socialistic theory.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few months ago I did have hopes that the hon. member from Athabaska, being a 

Northerner like myself, would be able to look at himself and if he were a true northerner then I thought 

that perhaps he would do like a former member from the north did, and cross the House; but now I see 

that he has made progress in another direction. In one year‟s time he is just about as good as the hon. 

Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Loptson). The reason I so charge, Mr. Speaker, is this: Whether the hon. 

member knows it or not I have been through the North and I have been in his constituency – not during 

election time or pre-election times, as the hon. member has visited in my constituency, but after 

elections, and after he was elected – and I have done my best to see that some steps were taken to help 

the people in his constituency. I did not intend ever to take credit for some of the things I have done, or 

asked for, but now I cannot help 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

5 

myself in view of the situation which has arisen. The people of Snake Lake, for example, came to me; 

they wanted a T.B. survey. I did all I could to see that they were helped. Lately I had fishermen coming 

to me with their problems. 

 

Down at Patchunak the fishermen and trappers, those rugged individuals who do not want Socialism, 

asked the Saskatchewan Government Trading to put up a store because they could not stand the 

exploitation of the Hudson‟s Bay Company in that area. It so happened that the Saskatchewan 

Government Trading for some reason or other did not see fit to establish a store in the area, and so a 

private trader who now lives in Maple Creek put up a store there. He stayed in the area for about a year 

and, of course, prices went proportionately down for the people at that point. They are not a very 

wealthy group, believe me. But what happened after this private dealer left the area? When these people 

went back to the Hudson‟s Bay Company to get $20 or $30 or $40 worth of groceries so they would be 

able to go out on the trapline and catch fur, or go out on the lakes to catch a few fish, the Hudson‟s Bay 

Company, I am informed, refused to give them any credit. Thus private enterprise – “you can starve. 

You have dealt with this private dealer; now you cannot get anything.” So, these people went down to 

Snake Lake to the Government Trading store and obtained provisions there and were able to start out on 

their traplines and on their fishing ventures and they pulled through the winter under Socialist assistance. 

 

Recently these same people in the same area down around Patchunak and Beauval, I am informed and I 

vouch for what I say, again went to the stores to try to get nets in order that they might be able to fish 

(for there was commercial fishing there). I understand there is one large firm that has a filleting plant 

and then there are half a dozen private purchasers of fish. But again, Mr. Speaker, they were refused 

nets, and these people had to patch up their nets and do the best they could. When they came to sell their 

fish to the trading store, the store refused to buy their fish. 

 

Now these are situations that the hon. member for Athabaska has not explained. It is in his constituency. 

He gets around, as it is pointed out here in this article, by plane, by boat and by other means. He should 

have been in that area and found out how those people are living. That is what is happening there today 

and shows free enterprise in action. 

 

Note also that in that same area, around Buffalo Narrows and Beauval, the operator of a filleting plant, 

unless he gets the jackfish and the pickerel, refuses to buy the whitefish. It is not our fault that the people 

there did not decide to ask the Saskatchewan Fish Marketing Service to handle their product. But there is 

the situation! Now what do fishermen do? If anyone is interested and should go out into that area, here is 

what he will find. During the night time the fishermen are digging fish out of the holes in the lake where 

they have hidden the jackfish and the pickerel, and private dealers buy these fish and take them out, and 

in that way fishermen are able to sell most of the whitefish to the owner of the filleting plant. Those are 

situations that exist in that area. 

 

Now talking a little more about Socialism and the statement that miners are not interested in it – will the 

hon. member, or anybody on the opposite side of the House get up and make the statement that this 

Government should not assist prospectors with the Prospectors‟ Assistance Plan; 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

6 

should not give them the services of the air; should not give them the services of evaluating the minerals 

that they find, which we are doing today; should not give them any assistance whatsoever to prospect 

and develop the north country? Will they stand up and say that they are against such programmes? Well, 

if they do, then they are against Socialism and against this Government. Are they not in favour that we 

go into the north, as we have done, and build schools? We have built, I think, 22 schools in the last few 

years. Are they against that? That is a form of Socialism, too. Are they against us putting up hospitals, as 

we have done at Stony Narrows, at Sandy Bay and other places? Are they against that? If so, they had 

better stand up and say so because people will be making a decision two years from now. 

 

When I was up in the north about two years ago I was locating for the Department with Mr. Manning, a 

townsite for Uranium City. When I was in the Goldfields area and when I spoke to the people they were 

happy to know that this Government was coming into the region to build roads, to lay out a model 

townsite, would be doing the things that would make the north great. No shack towns here, yet the hon. 

member comes out and says: “Why, they are rugged individuals; they don‟t want to have anything to do 

with Socialism!” Today at Uranium City you have a hospital, you have a school, you have a beautiful 

townsite, and the north is going ahead because of the policies of this Government. 

 

A little over a year ago I flew into the north towards Reindeer Lake, and I think the people of 

Saskatchewan should know that the people of the north are co-operative-minded. Before I got to 

Reindeer Lake I could see from afar a shining building. When I came closer I was informed that this was 

a co-operative filleting plant. The fishermen had put their money together and, with the assistance of the 

governments – yes, the federal and the provincial governments – they were able to put up a modern co-

operative filleting plant. It is the pride of those people today, the whites and Indians and others. That, 

Mr. Speaker, is Socialism in action, in Co-operative action, and if the hon. members opposite say they 

are against Socialism and they don‟t want its benefits in the north; if they so say that, then they don‟t 

want any development of any kind in the north. 

 

The kind of development they support is the kind that we have had. The kind we had at Moose Point 

where a private company sat on the copper find, which the hon. member mentioned the other day – sat 

for 20 years, from 1929 until 1949. We may not get some action. The kind of development the hon. 

members would like to see in the north is the kind that you see at Waddy Lake. I am assured there is a 

gold mine there, but there will be no development until the company is ready to go ahead and develop 

that area. It is one of the richest in Canada, I am informed. 

 

Mr. Loptson: – Till we get another government – that is what is holding it up. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: – And right now I am going to recommend and I am going to challenge this 

Government to have courage to get out and do something about the situation insofar as mining is 

concerned. I would like to see what was suggested by the hon. member on the Conservative opposition 

urging this Government to take the moneys out of royalties that we obtain from the oil companies, from 

the hard-rock mining companies, set these aside in a special fund for the development of our natural 

resources of Saskatchewan. I would like to see this Government hire able prospectors who would get out 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

7 

in the field and where it would appear in the interests of the people of Saskatchewan, to develop and 

build its own mines. Eldorado did it. They were forced, of course, by the fact that uranium was a mineral 

necessary for the defence of this country; but whether it is a mineral necessary for defence, or any other 

mineral, if the mining companies can do it, we can do it. I think as the hon. member for Bengough (Mr. 

Brown) the other day pointed out, we are going to do it; and we are coming towards that climax, as 

indicated by our Premier. I suggest that the Government should do this. 

 

While I am on the subject I would further suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this Government should give very 

serious consideration toward upping the royalties on hard-rock mining because everything else has gone 

up. When you compare the investment necessary to find a mine with the cost necessary to develop an oil 

well, I have the opinion that it costs less to develop a mine than develop an oil field. Therefore I suggest 

to the Government that it is high time that the matter be looked into. Let us not just look at Manitoba 

and, because they charge up to 5 per cent royalties, that we have to do the same. I think we should give 

some leadership to the people of Canada, and if it is fair to charge a mining company 15 per cent, let‟s 

charge that mining company 15 per cent. I repeat, as I have on previous occasions, that any royalties we 

do charge are a proper expense against the mining operations of a company and to the extent of say 40 

or 50 per cent, the corporation tax of those companies will be reduced. In other words, what I am trying 

to point out is that, when we collect larger royalties than we do today from these mining companies, it 

will not be totally charged to profits of a company, because their corporation tax would be reduced to a 

considerable extent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have discussed the north broadly. I could speak for three or four hours on the subject, but 

I want to get closer to home now and speak about certain situations which require attention in my 

constituency. As I pointed out previously, Cumberland constituency, I think, has the oldest settlement in 

Saskatchewan. I am very proud of that. I am also proud of the fact that we have some of the finest 

people to be found anywhere and I will repeat that again. We have people who came to the north during 

the ‟thirties when there was drought in the south and they made new homes; they hewed out farm homes 

for themselves; they opened up the farms, and today we have fine farm settlements. Due to the fact that 

in most cases my people reside on the farms – quarter-section farms – we must have cars and trucks for 

transportation, and we have, of course, need for roads and power. I want to point out to some of the 

members – yes some on this side of the House who may have misconceptions – it has sometimes been 

thrown out to us in the north that the south is subsidizing the northern people; and by north I mean the 

people throughout Meadow Lake, Prince Albert, ‟way down towards Yorkton. I wish to argue that it is 

not so, because in the north we reside, as I said, practically on every quarter section. We pay licences for 

vehicles; we burn a lot of gasoline. It is not the same as when you come to the south. Here is high land 

assessment, it is true, but you have one farmer sometimes holding five or six sections of land. So it is 

evident that northern people are making a considerable contribution towards the treasury in gasoline tax 

and in licences on vehicles. My people in the north feel that this Government has, to some extent, failed 

them; that we are not getting our fair share of consideration. 

 

Believe me, Mr. Speaker, if some of the Cabinet Ministers went up in the north and saw some of the 

roads that we have, they would agree that my people are right. I am stressing this point for 

consideration, so that when the budget comes around, maybe our very kind-natured Minister of 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

8 

Highways will give the northern parts of Saskatchewan a little more consideration, particularly for the 

building of market roads. I don‟t think the hon. member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Dunfield) would object 

to what I have said; I am quite sure he would not – and for that matter, the hon. member for Nipawin 

(Mr. MacNutt) – who have been interjecting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my radio time is running out, and I should really allow someone else to get up and speak. I 

should not take up too much time of the House. But I do have one more matter which I think I should 

mention before I sit down and it is a matter concerning a policy of this Government. I have fought this 

issue for a long time, and the reason I am bringing it up in this House is because of what the Premier 

said, the other day. The hon. Premier said this: “we don want a government that is going to govern by 

order-in-council; that all members in the Legislature should be advisors to the government.” So I am 

going to advise, as far as I am able to, I hope I am right – if I am wrong, I hope the Minister concerned 

will tell me so. 

 

I am going to refer to the Saskatchewan Forest Products. It is quite generally thought that the 

Saskatchewan Timber Board is socialized. Now, to the extent that we have the Box Factory it is 

socialized, and it is doing a good job; to the extent we have the Big River Mill it is socialized; but there 

is one aspect of the organization which my people cannot consider as satisfying their needs, they cannot 

agree that it has been socialized though it is operated by the Crown Corporation. I have to go into detail 

to describe the situation. 

 

The Timber Board of the Saskatchewan Forest Products goes to the Department of Natural Resources 

and pays dues. Well, if I was contractor in the past I could have done the same thing. I could have gone 

down to the Natural Resources and paid my dues. There you have a comparison. Then the Saskatchewan 

Timber Board advertises that it wants certain material such as pulpwood, poles and so forth, and the 

Board pretty well gets the price, the lowest and the highest, that it will pay – take it or leave it! Well, it 

was exactly the same when we had contractors in the past, who hired small operators to cut pulpwood 

and posts, or produce lumber, and the contractors pretty well set the price they would pay. The only 

difference that I can see between the capitalistic procedure that we had in the past, when the contractors 

operated in the north, and the Timber Board operating now is that the contractor made himself $600,000. 

He paid his income tax and probably had $400,000 left and then could go to Bermuda to spend his 

profits. When the Saskatchewan Timber Board made $600,000 it spent $60,000 on roads and the rest 

went into the treasury of the province. 

 

My people do not complain about this too much, but I think that the hon. members will realize that 

maybe the operators have a point. They say why should we as operators in the north subsidize all the 

people of Saskatchewan? Why don‟t the people of Saskatchewan who have farms, have agricultural land 

and so forth, not subsidize us also? I think they have a point, and I am going to suggest to the 

Government that it should look into this matter and see if it cannot evolve some kind of a policy 

whereby these operators would benefit in the same way as a co-operative would benefit them. In other 

words, I do not like to see men such as I have up there (I could give you names) who operate two or 

three years and then go bankrupt. It is hard for me to criticize the Government, but I am going to do it, 

because I do not like to see my people suffer losses. It is not always because of their inability or poor 

operations that losses occur. 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

9 

The price enters the picture also. 

 

I do not want to say any more on this subject. I am going to leave it now, but I am suggesting that 

something be done to change the policy insofar as that programme of the Saskatchewan Timber Board is 

concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I, of course, will support the motion. 

 

Mr. J. Walter Erb (Milestone): – Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate I should first like to 

associate myself with other members who have spoken to congratulate the move and the seconder of the 

Address in Reply for their most excellent presentations. They have able demonstrated that they are fully 

cognizant of the problems besetting not only Canada but the rest of the world, and one cannot help but 

be convinced of their dedication to the fundamental principles and a social and political philosophy that 

has brought new hope to countless thousands of people throughout the world. I am confident that their 

demonstration here and their devotion to duty outside this House has evoked a sense of pride on the part 

of their constituents whom they so ably serve. 

 

I should also like to congratulate the newcomers to this Legislature – the member for Souris-Estevan 

(Mr. Kohaly) and the member for Rosthern (Mr. Carr). Their public-spiritedness in seeking to serve the 

people of their respective constituencies is, of course, commendable, especially when that service is not 

infrequently given at a personal sacrifice. I should also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the 

two members upon their maiden speeches which they so ably presented. 

 

My congratulations go also to the hon. member for Saltcoats (Mr. Lopston) upon his becoming House 

Leader of the opposition. I had hoped that his more or less genial caprices during bygone sessions would 

be subdued by the more onerous responsibilities to which he had been called, but I must say that I was 

rather disappointed because, listening to his speech the other day, I could not help but think that it was 

an effort of a composite Don Quixote, Marco Polo and Baron Munchausen. But I am sure I speak for 

everyone on this side of the House when I say that we wish him well in his execution of his 

responsibilities. 

 

The Speech from the Throne is an outstanding document on the state of Saskatchewan. It presents a 

most encouraging panorama of an expanding economy in this province. People, I believe, in all walks of 

life and in every part of the province will heartily endorse the Speech from the Throne not only that it is 

in keeping with the „programme for progress‟ upon which this Government was given a mandate in 

1952, but also with those fundamental principles upon which a C.C.F. administration was first elected 

ten years ago. When the history of Saskatchewan is written years hence, Mr. Speaker, it will, 

undoubtedly, I am sure, record the first ten years of a C.C.F. administration as the finest and most 

progressive in the annals of the province. Our friends of the „Leader-Post‟ whom I presume speak for the 

Liberal party, in an editorial of February 12, 1954, choose to classify the achievements of the C.C.F. 

Government as „razzle-dazzle‟. They say: 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

10 

“There is an impression abroad that in its ten years in office the C.C.F. Government has neglected 

these hum-drum tasks while it reached for grandiose achievements to dazzle the rest of Canada. 

 

If the true purport of what is perhaps the most prosaic Throne Speech since the C.C.F. took office is 

that there is to be less „razzle-dazzle‟ and more down-to-the-earth administration and greater attention 

of the normal responsibilities and unspectacular routine details of a democratic government.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if razzle-dazzle is the interpretation given by the „Leader-Post‟ to what has become 

the most progressive legislation on the continent, then I am afraid our friends of the opposition are still 

doing their thinking and their interpreting in a vacuum. The editorial goes on to say: 

 

“The cost to the taxpayers has been staggering. Ten years ago, before the C.C.F. advent, the provincial 

government spent $32 million on revenue account; this year government will cost $70 million, plus the 

supplementary estimates, in addition to $8 million collected in direct hospitalization tax and in 

compulsory auto insurance premiums, a total of approximately $78 million.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, by making a comparison of the amount spent by a Liberal government of ten years 

ago to the amounts that are being spent by the present administration, it would appear that an attempt is 

being made by the „Leader-Post‟ to portray the Liberal government as a „frugal‟ administration. If, under 

a Liberal government of ten years ago, $32 million was spent as they say „on the more down-to-earth 

administration‟ and greater attention to the normal responsibilities and unspectacular details of 

government, then I submit that the cost to the taxpayers was staggering, for never was so much spent on 

so little, nor spent so unspectacularly! As everybody knows, the value of the dollar in terms of 1944 is 

roughly 50 cents; therefore, $32 million spent by a Liberal government 10 years ago on routine 

administration is a fantastic and staggering sum indeed. I venture to say that no one will be impressed by 

any attempt to hang the halo of frugality over a Liberal administration of ten years ago – or for that 

matter, the Federal Liberal Government at Ottawa. 

 

I would remind my friends of the opposition that when the C.C.F. first took office, ten years ago, this 

province had a staggering debt of some $214,235,000. Saskatchewan bonds were worth only about 90 

cents, and the average interest rate on bond issues was about 5.6 per cent. The farm mortgage debt was 

close to $90 million and the municipalities were burdened by an accumulated debt of some $75 million 

on behalf of the farmers for seed-grain advances and general relief. Now this financial picture of ten 

years ago hardly rates as one to reminisce about as being the halcyon date – it may have been for the 

Liberal administration – for I submit only politicians of that day presiding over the affairs of this 

province could 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

11 

find tranquillity among the social and economic doldrums presented by the financial picture of 1944. It 

has been able demonstrated by the C.C.F. Government that a wise and well-planned expenditure of 

public funds, designed to implement specific programmes and carried on with consistency throughout 

the life of a government, can place the government in a sound financial position, provide security for the 

people and foster and encourage economic development. I submit that the lack of such an approach by 

the Liberal government in meeting the social and economic needs of the people at that time contributed 

materially to the adverse financial position of this province in 1944. It is quite evident that the Liberal 

party had and still has a morbid aversion to a planned economy. 

 

How well we remember the gloomy predictions by the Liberal intelligentsia that Saskatchewan, under a 

C.C.F. government of “socialistic planners and backroom boys,” would wreck the economy of the 

province; that they would involve this province in a debt from which we would not be able to extricate 

ourselves; that the farmers would lose their land, presumably by the sinister machinations of an 

agricultural commissariat; that business enterprise would not come into the province, and that general 

woe would prevail until the C.C.F. was wiped out and a Liberal administration re-elected. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the predictions by the apostles of gloom utterly failed to materialize. Instead, a new and better 

day was dawned for the people of Saskatchewan as a result of the vast social and economic changes that 

have been wrought by the C.C.F. administration. 

 

Having set its financial house in order by a systematic reduction of the staggering debt of $214 million, 

resulting in greatly lowered interest rates on borrowed money, and by cancelling some $75 million of 

direct relief and seed grain debts incurred by the municipalities on behalf of the farmers, the province 

was in a position to undertake a series of programmes which since have become the envy of the civilized 

world, notably such services as the Saskatchewan Hospital Services plan, the mental health programme, 

the cancer programme, all of which have touched the lives of our citizens most intimately. No one can 

speak more eloquently of these humanitarian programmes than those people who have had the 

misfortune of a protracted illness necessitating hospital care, and particularly members of families in the 

small income group with incomes that have been made smaller by our unwarranted inflation. Each 

passing year increasing numbers of our citizens have availed themselves of these services provided by 

the programmes. As was pointed out in the Speech from the Throne, during the past five years one 

person out of every five received hospital care. 

 

I want to reiterate some statistics that the Premier had given in his speech – that in 1941-45, infant death 

rates per thousand live births amounted to 46.5 per cent; but in 1953, infant mortality had dropped to 

30.8 per cent per one thousand live births. Maternal mortality per thousand live births dropped from 2.8 

per cent, in 1941-45, to .5 or one-half of one per cent in 1953; and live births occurring in the hospitals 

increased from 86.7 per cent, in 1946, to 96.4 per cent in 1952. This remarkable picture reflects the great 

progress in human welfare in this province in the past ten years; and much of the credit for this truly 

remarkable progress and improvement in such a short space of time must be given to the C.C.F. 

administration for the implementation of the province-wide hospitalization programme. 

 

Our mental health programme is famed throughout the world as one of the most advanced to be found 

anywhere. It has brought a new hope to the mentally ill and the families thereof. It has brought that new 

hope 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

12 

because first, more patients are being returned to society than we had ever dared imagine a few short 

years ago; and secondly, that the stigma of mental illness, through an enlightened and educated public, 

has been removed, so that today, at least in Saskatchewan, no distinction in the social implications 

between mental illness and physical illness is made. This understanding has helped immeasurably in the 

rehabilitation of the mentally ill. 

 

The great advance in the treatment and care of the mentally ill is, of course, the result of a carefully 

planned programme which features, among other things, an adequate number of competent psychiatrists; 

second, the psychiatric aid training programme, designed to train young men and women to assist in the 

treatment, care and cure of mental illness; and third, the establishment of diagnostic clinics, two of 

which are in Regina and Saskatoon, and part-time clinics in Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Assiniboia, 

Weyburn, Yorkton, North Battleford and Prince Albert. The province is fortunate indeed in being able to 

acquire the services of outstanding doctors in the field of psychiatry – men to whom the conquering of 

mental illness is a challenge, and who desire to serve humanity transcends the glamour and the monetary 

consideration of other branches of medicine. To them and their helpers we are deeply indebted. 

 

Like our mental health programme our cancer programme has become established as one of the finest on 

the continent, if not in the world. The cancer clinic in Regina and the one in Saskatoon are equipped 

with probably the finest and most modern diagnostic and treating equipment to be found anywhere on 

the continent. When one considers that approximately 16.000 people annually make use of the services 

offered by the clinics, one is immediately impressed by the magnitude of this magnificent programme 

and conscious of the magnificent contribution that is being made by the outstanding personnel that staffs 

our cancer clinics. 

 

I shall not take time to discuss other services such as the air ambulance service. It has long since become 

a symbol of mercy to the people of Saskatchewan and it has retold and retold its story by a thousand 

missions of mercy and a million miles of flight. 

 

Our social welfare programme, with its varied sub-programmes, through a planned and scientific 

approach to the social and human problems, by highly-trained staff of social workers, has made a most 

outstanding contribution for the caring of the underprivileged and the unwanted. I believe that in this 

programme humanitarianism has found its finest expression. 

 

These are, briefly, some of the outstanding programmes inaugurated by this Government – programmes 

designed and scientifically planned to meet the needs of our people; designed too, in such a way that all 

our citizens, whether rich or poor, old or young, enjoy the same privileges in availing themselves of the 

services rendered. The people of this province indeed stand shoulder to should on a great humanitarian 

front against the onslaught of disease and insecurity. 

 

These are the programmes, Mr. Speaker, to which the „Leader-Post‟ refers as razzle-dazzle; and they say 

further “that the dazzle technique hasn‟t paid off for the C.C.F. party; its vote in the last Federal election 

was the smallest since it achieved office. If the rest of Canada has been impressed by the C.C.F. 

performance in Saskatchewan it obviously was in the opposite way to that intended.” Well, Mr. Speaker, 

the 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

13 

Liberal party has always been conscious of only one thing, and that is votes; and in the process of 

getting those votes they have made the hopes and aspirations of the people of Saskatchewan and of 

Canada in general the pawn for their political aggrandizement. Over the past three decades the Liberal 

party rode to victory after victory on promises that they never intended to implement. We remember 

such promises as a national health insurance, promised in 1919, again in 1945 and again in 1949; the 

South Saskatchewan dam promised in 1935, 1945 and 1949; and a national housing programme. We 

were promised, in 1945 price control, just during a national election. We say appearing in our daily 

papers from coast to coast, during that election campaign, “Vote Liberal – A Liberal Government held 

the price line; and that housewives soon will be able to go back into the stores and purchase goods at the 

1941 prices.” And yet the hon. Leader of the Opposition stood up in his place the other day, and 

exhorted the C.C.F. to tell the people of Saskatchewan the truth! 

 

You know, I am often reminded, Mr. Speaker, of the late Rev. Dr. Marshall, one-time chaplain to the 

United States Senate. In one of his daily prayers he once asked, in effect, “Lord have mercy and forgive 

us for we know there is a lot of lying going on in this Chamber.” 

 

Mr. Danielson: – You ought to know! 

 

Mr. Erb: – Well, Mr. Speaker, the programmes of the C.C.F. Government have paid off. They have 

paid off in healthier bodies and healthier minds and happier people Yes, we got the votes too, but where 

the C.C.F. differs from the Liberal party is that this Government considers the vote of the people a trust, 

and that trust has paid off to the people of Saskatchewan in a new concept of co-operative living . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: – Some of them anyway! 

 

Mr. Erb: – Yes, it has paid off in a new concept of co-operative living in a very tangible way. We have 

many families in both rural and urban areas on whom fortune has not bestowed a great deal of the 

world‟s goods; yet these people toil as long and as arduously as anybody. They have the responsibility 

of feeding and clothing their children; they make every effort to contribute to their communities, and 

when it is all said and done, there is little left for life‟s amenities. I submit that it is these people whose 

votes paid off for them, because if you speak to them they will tell you that without these humanitarian 

programmes their lives would have been haunted by the fear of insecurity. 

 

Not long ago a friend of mine gave me an excellent illustration of what security in Saskatchewan really 

means. A Wheat Pool buyer, originally from Manitoba, was superannuated; he had paid a little money 

and had a small insurance and so felt, that with his superannuation and the odd jobs he thought he could 

do, that he might manage fairly well. He was born and raised in Manitoba, and it was his intention to 

return there among his relatives and old friends; but he didn‟t, for he was a practical man. This was the 

reason why: he held a Saskatchewan Hospital Services card which cost him $30 for himself and his 

wife, a card which would provide him with hospitalization anywhere in Saskatchewan for as long as he 

or his wife would require hospital care. He knew, of course, that at their age their chances of staying out 

of hospital were not as good as they were several years ago. He owned a small car which was 

automatically insured by the Saskatchewan Government Insurance, so he sat down with his wife and 

computed what the loss of this protection would mean to them, financially, 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

14 

were they to move to Manitoba. Well, Mr. Speaker, they quickly came to the conclusion that they could 

not afford to leave Saskatchewan. 

 

We have made great strides in this province in providing for our citizens a great measure of security in 

health and welfare during these past ten years. The amount of money spent on health shows the extent of 

progress we have made. In 1943-44, for instance, the total cost to the provincial government of a health 

programme amounted to $947,000. In 1953-54, the expenditures amounted to over $18 million. 

Enviable though this record is, it does not suggest for one moment that this Government will slacken in 

its efforts to bring even greater security and welfare to the people of this province. With the ever-

unfolding wealth of resources and the continuing application of the policies of this Government, in 

commensurate measure will the benefits to our citizens increase. 

 

The development of gas and oil and mineral resources has made a tremendous impression all over the 

American continent. Our resources represent untold millions of dollars in potential and present wealth. 

However, impressive as these figures are, or may become, our greatest resource for many years to come 

will remain the topsoil of our agricultural land. The Government, of course, in full realization of the 

importance of the agricultural economy, adopted a number of programmes designed to improve and 

stabilize this great industry. 

 

In respect to our land tenure policies, Mr. Speaker, the inflation of land values all out of proportion to 

the productivity of the land has been a heritage, of course, of the past. Speculation and land profiteering, 

resulting in inflated land prices, have forced many farmers to mine the soil in vain attempts to repay the 

large debts incurred at the time of purchase. It was this that prompted the C.C.F. Government to adopt 

the use of a 33-year renewable lease. In the case of a veteran settler, a purchase option after ten years has 

been written into the agreement. Such action, as we know, evoked a great deal of criticism on the part of 

the opposition. They claimed that this would lead to farm tenancy. Well of course we know that nothing 

could be further from the truth. Farm tenancy in Saskatchewan actually had been increasing rapidly 

since 1911; since 1911, 90.6 per cent of the farms in Saskatchewan were wholly owned by the operator, 

whereas, in 1946, only 55.6 per cent of the farms were wholly owned by the operator. Since 1946, under 

a C.C.F. Government, farm tenancy has actually declined. The 1951 census shows that 65.5 per cent of 

all the farms are wholly owned by the operator. 

 

The advent of mechanized farming has, as everybody knows, increased the amount of capital required 

for one to equip a farm and to begin the operations of farming. It is obvious, of course, that a long-term 

renewable lease is far more advantageous to the young farmers than an outright purchase. On Crown 

lands the farmer retains, as we know, five-sixths of the crop share; with equivalent private rental he 

retains one-half to two-thirds share. Under these favourable terms of a 33-year renewable lease the 

young farmer can invest any surplus that he might have in better machinery, fertilizer or in any other 

method that would increase the productivity of his land. Any expenditure that the farmer makes on 

improvements, such as building and breaking and so on, is paid for by the provincial government. This 

long-term lease insures proper land use practice, so that the productivity of the land is maintained 

throughout as a heritage for succeeding generations. 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

15 

Re-settlement is another programme and another problem. As you know, that is also a task that had been 

inherited by the C.C.F. Government. The C.C.F. Government was indeed conscious of the need to re-

establish farmers living on submarginal units. It is estimated that approximately 20,000 farm units in 

Saskatchewan are submarginal in size for their particular area, and as there are only some 2 million acres 

of arable land not yet brought under cultivation, the importance of properly planned use of existing 

Crown lands is apparent. 

 

Since assuming office the C.C.F. Government has developed a long-range programme for re-settlement 

of farmers presently located on the submarginal areas of Saskatchewan, locating them on new farms in 

northern Saskatchewan or on the irrigated lands where development programmes are in progress. Each 

year, new farm units from 40 to 100 acres and 320 acre parcels are being prepared, ready for cropping, 

and are being established in the northern areas. 

 

Our Conservation and Development Branch, which is doing such an outstanding job, was founded in 

1949 as part of the Agriculture Department. It enables the government and the people and the 

municipalities to become equal partners in a programme of conservation for permanent farm 

improvement. To show how this branch has progressed in the short time since it has been established we 

need only look at what has been spent. In 1949, the first year of the branch, $807,000 was spent in 

capital and revenue; in 1953-54, the estimated cost of expenditures on conservation and development 

had risen to $1,477,250. 

 

There is also our Agricultural Representative service, which has become so well known throughout 

Saskatchewan, and which has made such an excellent contribution to individual farmers. It is in this 

programme that the Department of Agriculture is in direct contact with the farmer, helping him to solve 

his problems thereby improving his living conditions and increasing the level of prosperity on his farm. 

This programme, too, has been greatly expanded. In 1943-44, we spent $43,512, whereas in 1953-54, we 

spent $385,550. 

 

Then there is our Lands Branch. The Lands branch as we know administers the Crown lands of the 

province. It also administers The Land Utilization Act and The Provincial Lands Act, and this branch 

can release Crown land which comes under its jurisdiction for such projects as irrigation, community 

pastures, grass seed plants and so on; or it can dispose of the land by lease or exchange. In 1944, the 

expenditures on the administration of The Land Utilization Act amounted to $18,375; in 1953-54 the 

estimated expenditures under the Act amounted to $591,550. 

 

We have also a programme of assistance to the livestock industry. This item of expenditure includes 

assistance to the dairy and poultry industries as well as to cattle and hogs, and again here we notice a 

great expansion. In 1943-44 estimated expenditures were $215,913, whereas in 1953-54 estimated 

expenditures amounted to $598,820. 

 

Then we come to the Field Crops Division which has made such an outstanding contribution in the 

development and better practices of our field crops procedure. This includes weed control, grasshopper 

control, forage crops and horticultural improvements. This department also administers the government 

seed plant. In 1943-44, the total expenditures amounted to $60,000, while in 1953-54, the estimated 

expenditures amounted to $338,490. 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

16 

It is interesting to note that in every case the programmes in the Department of Agriculture have been 

expanded in the past ten years; and as a matter of fact the present Government is spending about three 

times as much as was spent by previous administrations: in 1943-44 (to illustrate) $1,239,904 was spent; 

in 1953-54, $3,825,000. 

 

With the application of these programmes resulting in better land use and with unusually favourable 

conditions during the past three years, Saskatchewan farmers have produced a record amount of wheat. 

Due to favourable weather conditions in the United States and the other provinces large quantities of 

wheat were also produced, so that in the aggregate, today, all this has resulted in huge surpluses. Of 

course the condition of surpluses always gives rise to some very unrealistic talk to the effect of “why 

assist agriculture and encourage it to produce more when we are already faced with huge and mounting 

surpluses?” Well, Mr. Speaker, I contend that food surpluses of the world are the result of distribution 

and not of record production. In a world where two-thirds of the population are hungry, where hundreds 

of millions of people from the time they are born until they die have never known what it means to be 

anything else but hungry, and they die of hunger, any talk of curtailment in food production is sheer and 

unadulterated nonsense. The entire world production is not nearly sufficient to adequately feed the 

world. It has been estimated that, if it were possible to divide all the food equitably among all the 

people, the average amount of food per individual would be about 1,500 calories, while 2,000 calories 

represents a starvation diet. I must admit that I have availed myself of considerably more! 

 

There are, of course, and admittedly so, barriers to the distribution of food surpluses; but I submit they 

are, in the main, man-made barriers – barriers of tariffs and anti-dumping duties and so on. The fact is 

that hundreds of millions of people are hungry and they need not be! Surely, Mr. Speaker, with our 

accumulated experiences of cause and effect, with the great scientific and technological advances that 

we have made, should we not have already materially raised the living standards of the teeming millions 

of the world? I submit that it is not because we lack the mental capacity to do so; surely not all the 

ingenuity of the human race was dissipated in working out the complicated processes of atomic energy. 

Or, is it that we are simply stockpiling – stockpiling our genius, like the atomic missiles? 

 

It is elementary that there is no better basis for peace and prosperity among all nations than free-flowing 

trade and exchange of ideas. We are increasingly becoming isolationists in our trade policies, 

particularly our good neighbour to the south of us. And it is equally elementary that if our food 

surpluses, with resulting falling prices, precipitate an agricultural depression, then all other industries of 

Canada to which agriculture is basic, will inevitably crumble in economic ruin. The danger signals are 

already out, because surpluses, falling prices, factory layoffs and unemployment are upon us. 

 

I contend that there is no panacea for our domestic and international problems, bur we have put into 

reverse the very processes by which these problems must be solved. Free-flowing trade cannot function 

with trade barriers or tariffs or anti-dumpling duties and general protectionist policies. Neither can we 

provide democratic leadership in the world unless democracy becomes a positive and dynamic 

expression in the lives of all the people. 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

17 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I want to say that all of us on this side of the House shall close ranks behind 

the hon. Premier in his forthright and eloquent stand in respect to what has become in the United States 

and in Canada, a negation of democracy. What has developed looks like a pincer movement on 

democracy in Canada: McCarthy, McCarran and Jenner to the south, Duplessis in the east, and a 

potential book-burner in the west. It is not the first time that similar paranoical demagogues have 

threatened the very foundations of democracy. But when they carry on their activities in the name of 

democracy they become doubly dangerous. I believe it was Cassius, who one said: “These growing 

feathers clipped from Caesar‟s wings will make him fly an ordinary pitch.” I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 

the Canadians and American people must clip the growing feathers of these incipient sawdust Caesars, 

for we do not want an American Gestapo Reich to the south nor a contemporary Franco-Spain in the 

east. 

 

Mr. Loptson: – You‟d better not go across the line or they might nab you! 

 

Mr. Erb: – I believe it to be profoundly true that we and our American friends cherish democratic 

freedom in all its aspects and that together we shall survive this strange interlude of demagoguery and 

finally, by our united efforts, make our contribution for the kind of world to which the human race 

aspires. 

 

I shall support the motion. 

 

Mr. W. H. Wahl (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): – Mr. Speaker, the members of this House are always 

congratulating someone, and I am going to congratulate you. I consider you have the most difficult 

position which requires a lot of patience. You must listen to the arguments; you are never able to reply. 

 

This afternoon I am going to speak very briefly on the subject of Indian Reserves and their effect on the 

communities in which they happen to be situated, and the conditions on Indian Reserves in Canada. 

 

As you know, all municipal planning stops at the boundaries of the Indian Reserves; all community 

planning stops there, too. And this is right (I am not blaming the municipalities) because the Indians are 

wards of the Federal Government and as such, the Federal Government are responsible for all their 

needs and their welfare. 

 

Before I go any farther, I am going to answer the question that I know is in your minds. Many of you are 

saying, “Indians are not good, why waste your time on them?” Well, I am going to answer that question 

by reading from a letter I received from a man who was connected with the Indians for many years, and 

this is just a brief paragraph out of his letter. Here is what he has to say: 

 

“I had occasion to pay a brief visit to Fort Peck Indian Reservation in Montana this Fall (and that is 

1953). I could hardly believe my eyes at what I saw. Every Indian home had modern facilities, electric 

lights, frigidaires, washing machines and other electrical appliances. Most of the Indians lived 

comfortably and operate their own farms. With the 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

18 

exception of the Superintendent, the head office of the Reservation is staffed by Indians. I worked in 

the office of this agency in 1896 and 1897. At that time the Canadian Indians were more progressive 

than their American cousins.” 

 

I think that will answer that question. 

 

Late this Fall, I had occasion to have a visit from an Indian who lives on the Fort Peck Reservation in 

Montana. He had his family along with him and I noticed they were nicely dressed. They were driving a 

new 1953 Mercury and I could see that he had been well educated. In conversation with me – and I am 

sorry to say when I first talked to him and told him I was a member of the government, he associated me 

with the Federal Government and I corrected him, because he said that in the United States the 

Canadians consider that most American politicians are corrupt and after visiting several of our Indian 

Reserves up here he had decided that probably these Reserves should be inspected probably as to – he 

said criminal practice or criminal intentions on the part of Indian agents. And it is that that I am going to 

speak about. 

 

Now the Indians, as you know, have no roads. For six months of the year they are isolated either with 

mud or snow, and if they require a doctor it is physically impossible for the doctor to either get out or for 

them to get to the doctor. Their main source of income at the present time is the sale of firewood, and as 

you know, most of these small communities have now converted their stoves, their heating 

requirements, cooking requirements, to oil, and it is very difficult to sell that wood and if you do, it is at 

a reduced price. So they are forced on semi-relief. I know this because I have been on these Reserves. 

When they are forced on this relief they are at the tender mercy of the Indian agent who is a political 

appointee, and naturally, when he is appointed by politicians, it is to them that he must look and not to 

the Indians whom, we think, he is supposed to serve. 

 

I am going to speak for a minute about the newsreels back in late December and early January. You 

probably noticed the Canadian soldiers stepping off the ship in Vancouver. There were several hundred 

of them and they looked very well and I, as a Canadian, was proud of them. No doubt when these men 

were on the parade squares and in lecture halls of Korea they were told that they were fighting for the 

four freedoms – that, freedom from want, freedom from fear, freedom of speech and freedom of 

religion; and they were told that they were defending our Canadian democracy, which in the main was 

true. They were told that when they came back they would enjoy all the freedoms that you and I enjoy. 

But when they stepped off the ship on Canadian soil in Vancouver, there was a difference. The Indian 

boys, who represented quite a large number of that contingent, found out that what they had been told – 

their freedom from want and fear, and their freedom of speech and religion – that right was denied them. 

When they got back on the Indian Reserve they must have been rather confused because they had 

noticed in Korea the elaborate barbed-wire fences and machine-gun nests that they had used to keep the 

prisoners that they had taken in custody, and when they got back here they found out that they were kept 

in custody on the Indian Reserve – not by barbed-wire fences of machine guns, but for economic reasons 

and for social reasons. They noticed that these economic and social barriers kept them in captivity far 

easier than the barbed-wire fences and machine guns had kept the Chinese and the North Koreans in 

captivity in Korea. 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

19 

I heard a traveller talking in my town about an experience he had in Sintaluta, and that is a little town 

north of the Indian Reserve. He said he had noticed one of these soldiers come off the train from Korea 

and try to enter the beer parlour there. He was denied that privilege. I know that some of you are going 

to say that it is not a privilege to go into a beer parlour; but nevertheless he was denied the privilege to 

go in that beer parlour, and, as this traveller said, he soon found out that he was just another „Nitche‟ 

from the Reserve south of Sintaluta under the domination of the Indian Agent. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am going to speak on conditions on the Reserve south of Sintaluta, and they re no 

different from the other reserves out of Fort Qu‟Appelle or the one at Carlyle Lake. You probably have 

driven along the highway going into the Carlyle Lake Resort, and you have noticed the Indians driving 

along in their wagons with their children in the ditch, and living in their mud huts by the side of the 

road. I have been in many of these homes and they are mud huts. Or you have probably noticed in the 

paper the Federal Government are very proud of these wooden houses they recently built; but let me tell 

you they are just a wood hut and very little different from the mud hut they had been used to. 

 

When you enter these homes the first thing you notice, Mr. Speaker, is that there is nothing in these 

homes that your wife or my wife would have. The first thing I noticed that was missing was a power 

washing machine, and today on every farm, every home there is a power washing machine of some 

description, whether they are electric or gas. I thought when I was in one of their homes before 

Christmas that the Indian woman‟s back was probably no stronger than, say, the wife of the Deputy 

Minister of Indian Affairs, and no doubt she has an electric washer – or the Minister of Indian Affairs – I 

don‟t know what his name is. No doubt they have an electric washer. No doubt she wants her children to 

be clean, and she is just as proud of them, and they have just as much right to enjoy the same privileges 

as we do, as Canadian citizens. 

 

Nevertheless, as you examine their homes you notice that everything else that you see in the average 

kitchen is missing. You do not see these chrome chairs and table sets, these elaborate chrome cook 

stoves, probably the propane gas stoves or the electric stoves, or refrigerators, or built-in cupboards, or 

anything of that nature. There are no chesterfields. They have no sewing machines. You never see a 

piano or a bedroom suite, and you can go on naming everything you see in the modern home. And I 

thought what this would mean to these neighbouring towns if these Indians had the purchasing power 

that you and I had. It would be a businessman‟s paradise. There would be no doubt about it that he could 

pay the overdraft that he will have at the bank at the present time. 

 

If you go out into the yard of these Indian homes, the first thing you notice – you would think you were 

on one of the old homesteads; you see the old gang-plow and the old disc and probably two or three 

harrows and, if there is a tractor there, it is probably a 15-year-old tractor that some white man had 

discarded. Again, I though this would be an implement dealer‟s paradise, and he could most certainly, if 

the Indian had purchasing power, pay the overdraft that he has at the bank. 

 

Then you look at their means of transportation. Most of them drive with the horse and buggy, but the 

odd one owns an automobile. But, again, it is a 15-year-old model, something that the white man had 

discarded. But here, regardless, they have no roads to drive on, because the Federal  



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

20 

Government have neglected completely the responsibility of building any roads for the Indians. You can 

travel the length and breadth of any Indian Reservation I was ever in and, unless it was fortunate enough 

to have a provincial highway through it, there are absolutely no roads. 

 

You can go a little farther on the Indian Reserve, and you will notice that they have no curling rink; they 

have no skating rink; they have no community hall. As you know, the curling rink is the social centre in 

all these small towns in the winter time, and I have wondered why these Indians should be denied the 

right to participate in this sport, or why these Indian boys in the winter time cannot play hockey and 

have hockey teams and participate in the sport of hockey with the neighbouring towns. 

 

The Department of Indian Affairs have absolutely stopped all social life on Indian Reserves. I spoke in 

the school house at the Indian Reserve north of Montmartre before Christmas, and I was rather amazed. 

I had been invited to go there, I thought, just to witness the handing out of one of the Queen‟s 

Coronation medals to one of the Chiefs of this particular tribe; but nevertheless I was asked to speak 

there. I noticed in the school that it was the same old school, or looked the same, as the one I had gone to 

in a country point in Saskatchewan about 40 years ago. These new schools you will notice are painted in 

the new pastel shade and they have added so many improvements that you would have thought the 

Department of Indian Affairs would at least have improved the school house. 

 

I noticed on this Reserve – and it is the same on all Reserves – that the only decent living quarters was 

the Indian Agent‟s house. Everything else looked like the old shack that was on the original homestead 

in this province and the other three western provinces. When I was asked to speak I thought, “Well, I 

cannot tell these people anything because there is nothing to say about them; they haven‟t got anything.” 

So I thought, “There has been a new Liberal member elected to this constituency and I am going to tell 

them that he is going to do something for them”. And that is exactly what I did. I wrote the new Liberal 

member and told him what I told these Indians, and I said I expected him to keep the promise that I 

made. 

 

I am going to go a little further and quote what the churches think of conditions on these Indian 

Reserves. I clipped this out of the paper. I noticed the late Archbishop Monahan, speaking in a 

centennial celebration in Lebret in 1944 – and I am going to quote his exact words; he said this: 

 

“Remember, in the eyes of God this country belonged to the Indians and when we took it over from 

them we assumed great responsibilities and obligations.” 

 

I have every reason to believe that there were officials of the Department of Indian Affairs at that 

celebration and they either did not understand what the reverend gentleman was saying, or they did not 

hear – they were not listening. Probably they did not care. 

 

I was talking to an Anglican minister who had done considerable work for the Anglican Church on an 

Indian Reserve, and this is what he said to me: “The Department of Indian Affairs make our work very 

difficult on these reservations.” So evidently the churches do not approve of what the Department of 

Indian Affairs are doing for the Indians. What would the politicians think of the situation on these Indian 

Reserves and, by the way, they are all alike. 



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

21 

Well, I am sure the C.C.F. – and I am going to speak for them; I am sure that they realize that these 

concentration camps in the midst of our prosperous community do not add anything to our way of life. 

They are a black eye, and we would want this changed. I know the people that live around these reserves 

want these things changed too, because, if you happen to live at the south side of one of those reserves, 

in the centre and want to travel to the north, you probably have to go 50 miles around; there is no way 

you can get across. So I know not only the C.C.F. but the people who live around the Reserves want 

conditions changed on these Reserves. 

 

What would the Social Credit say? Well, the Social Credit are always talking about credit and money. I 

am going to give them credit and say they would like to see things changed too. 

 

Then, we have the Conservative –we have them representing the Conservative party in this House – and 

a prominent C.C.F.er I was talking to, the other night, said this about the Conservatives: He said if they 

had had a Prime Minister in Canada in the last 25 years with a quarter of the vision of Sir John. A. 

MacDonald, we would have had a trans-Canada highway from coast to coast ten years ago. I am going 

to say that probably if they were going to do that (and I know they would), they would like to see 

conditions changed on the Indian Reserves. 

 

Well, what about the Liberals? Well, they had a meeting in Regina two or three weeks ago (it was 

reported in the „Leader-Post‟) and they had about 300 people attend this meeting, and they wrote a very 

nice editorial and I am going to quote from that editorial. This is what they say: 

 

“Liberalism has a political philosophy which in its essence believes in the dignity of the individual, 

and in the preservation of individual freedoms is the very basis of our democratic system of 

government.” 

 

Well, I am going to have to apologize for the Liberals, because I am sure that they never told the 

Department of Indian Affairs what they stood for. A very serious oversight. 

 

I would not want you to misunderstand me in talking about them that I think that you should give the 

Indians money. I am just going to quote something here: 

 

“Happiness is not in our circumstances, but in ourselves. It is not something to see like a rainbow, or 

to feel like the heat of a fire. Happiness is something we are.” 

 

Well, I maintain that these Indians should be allowed to have the same rights as you and I enjoy – and 

one of them is the vote. As one federal M.P. told me, “No one will ever pay any attention to the Indians 

until they have the vote,” and I believe that, too. But, nevertheless, they could probably start them in a 

co-operative farming enterprise. That would be my suggestion. Allow them to develop themselves, and I 

am sure they would develop every bit as rapidly as the Indians across in the United States, where all the 

political rascals are supposed to live. 

 

I am going to leave the subject at that, and I am going to speak about something else that is of 

importance. This grain stored, or in the  



 

February 22, 1954 

 

 

22 

farmers‟ hands, on the farms, as the Premier has said, is probably the best insurance policy the farmer 

has ever had, but it presents some problems – one, you could say, of storage; and another, of marketing. 

Mr. Wesson, in a speech reported in the „Western Producer‟, said that this would test the Wheat Board 

method of marketing grain. I am going to say that I do not think it will even test the Wheat Board 

method of marketing grains as long as they keep to the quota system and don‟t get the initial price too 

high. But, nevertheless, in 1953 and the start of 1954, the farmer has not been able to market enough 

grain to pay his current bills, and this has caused some very serious repercussions and that is to the 

businessman. 

 

The small businessman and the small co-operative in this province is going through a very serious time. 

As you know, in the last 12 years they have had to expand very rapidly in order to provide the goods and 

services that were required to build up our economy. If you look on the streets of all these small towns 

and in the farmer‟s yard, you will see they have done this job very well, and if you look at the 

businessman‟s bank account – or shall we say, his overdraft – you will see that they have not charged 

too much for this service. At the present time the businessman is carrying tremendous amounts of 

accounts receivable and, in talking to a bank manager (and I have talked to several bank managers) they 

tell me, and I know it is true, that the small businessman has not the assets to continue to carry these 

huge amounts of accounts receivable and finance the current operations of the farmers this Spring. 

Modern farming requires a tremendous amount of financing and these people cannot continue to do it 

because they have not the assets. The bank managers have told me that if the Federal Government is 

willing to pass the enabling legislation and allow them to take security on the farmer‟s grain, they would 

advance the money to finance these operations. I believe something like this is going to have to be done 

because I have been told by wholesale houses that 70 per cent of all small businesses in this province 

and the three prairie provinces are in money trouble at the present time and cannot continue to do 

business. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I see the hour is getting late and I will have a chance again to talk on some subjects 

that are related to my constituency of Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley. The reason I spoke about Indians, this 

afternoon, was because there are two Indian Reserves in the constituency of Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley and 

they present some terrible road problems. One of them is directly in the centre of this constituency, and 

the large towns on the main line, on the blacktop highway, are separated from the southern part of the 

constituency by this reserve. The other reserve at the north-west corner presents similar problems, and 

unless we can get the Federal Government to assume their responsibility and build roads in these Indian 

Reserves, when the market road grid – this inter-connecting road system that the Minister of Highways 

is working on – is completed, it is going to leave large gaps all over the province where there will be no 

roads, and that is going to be a very serious thing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, needless to say, I am going to vote with the Government. 

 

Mr. J. W. Horsman (Wilkie): – Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 6 o‟clock p.m. 


