



















































Hansard: February 15, 1954


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Second Session — Twelfth Legislature 

 

3rd Day 

 

Monday, February 15, 1954 

 

The House met at three o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

Death of MISS AGNES MACPHAIL 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — It is with deep regret that the members of the Saskatchewan 

Legislature, in session, have learned of the death of Miss Agnes Macphail of Toronto. While she was not 

a member of this Legislature nor did she represent any Saskatchewan constituency, she was the first 

woman in Canada to be elected as a member of Parliament, representing an Ontario constituency, and 

very rapidly becoming a national figure. At the time of her death, yesterday, tributes were paid to her all 

over Canada as a great Canadian. 

 

I had the privilege of first meeting Miss Macphail when she attended the first national convention of the 

C.C.F. Party when it passed its Manifesto here in the city of Regina in 1933, when Miss Macphail was a 

representative of the United Farmers of Ontario. I had the privilege of sitting in the House of Commons 

with Miss Macphail, and I know how much she was admired and respected by members in all parts of 

the House. All her life she brought to the attention of the people of Canada the rights of women. She 

presented the case for the underprivileged, fought the battles of the farmers, was noted for her long fight 

on behalf of penal reform, and was largely responsible for the Royal Commission set up to investigate 

the jails and penitentiaries out of which came a report which has resulted in a good deal of penal reform 

in this country. 

 

It seemed to me most appropriate that upon the death of this great Canadian, there should be something 

placed on the record of this Legislature paying tribute to a woman who has done much to advance the 

welfare of the women of this country and to speak, as she always did, on behalf of the underprivileged 

and the needy people of Canada. 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Leader of the Opposition): — I wish to concur in the remarks of the Premier. While I 

did not have the pleasure of knowing Miss Macphail, I have read a great deal about her and her 

activities, and I am sure that all women, even if they did not believe in her political philosophy, were 

proud of her activities. In view of the fact that women are so important in our public life and carry so 

much influence, I think we can all be proud of Miss Macphail’s record. She certainly was honest and 

sincere in her activities and, as far as I know, she never spared herself in promoting what she thought 

was for the welfare of the common man. I have great pleasure in concurring in the remarks of the 

Premier. 

 

Mrs. Marjorie Cooper (Regina City): — There is very little I can add to the fine tributes that have 

been paid to Miss Agnes Macphail. As has already been said, she pioneered the cause for women at a 

time when it took a great deal of courage to do so. Many of us 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

2 

 

have come in since, but she led the way, and she led the fight for women not only in political life but she 

also led the fight in very many fields and pioneered the cause of women to have the right to enter careers 

that previously had been left just to men. She constantly encouraged and exhorted women to take their 

proper place as a citizen in a democracy. She was a brilliant woman but, what was even more important, 

she was a woman of very great integrity; she was a woman who never sacrificed principle for popularity 

or for expediency, and she could stand alone when she had to and when she believed there was a 

principle worth fighting for. As has already been pointed out, she fought the cause of the 

underprivileged all her life. She worked for prison reform, for health education, for a health plan for 

Canada, for helping the needy countries of the world. That was the first thought in her life and, after 

spending very many years in the service of her country both in the Parliament of Canada and in the 

Parliament of Ontario, she died a woman who was very very poor in this world’s goods, but she left 

behind her a life that is an inspiration to us all, and she has left Canada a better place because she lived 

and worked here among us. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Motion for Address-in-Reply 

 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, in rising this afternoon to move the Address in Reply to 

the Speech from the Throne, I am conscious of the honour to me and especially to the constituency it is 

my privilege to represent. 

 

Without doubt the highlight of the British Empire for 1953 was the colourful Coronation celebration, 

and our Province was ably represented at that time by our Lieutenant-Governor and our Premier. 

 

I have lived for 48 years in the province of Saskatchewan, and 47 of those years I have spent within the 

boundaries of the Turtleford constituency. The Turtleford area first became a constituency following the 

Redistribution Bill of 1916, and our first member sat in this Legislature in the year 1917. Prior to that 

time we were a portion of the old Lloydminster constituency. 

 

During the time when the pioneers were moving into the northwest corner of the province, and again as I 

covered the area as one of its candidates and its member, it has been my privilege to meet people of 

many languages and many cultural backgrounds who have those sterling qualities of fine citizenship. It 

is worth noting, Mr. Speaker, that, though Turtleford constituency may not be able to boast many large 

urban centres and as yet no gas or oil fields, that portion of the province was settled much earlier than 

many others. For some time now we have been gathering material for the archives of Saskatchewan 

covering the early history of the province, and if you come to Turtleford constituency you may stand 

upon some of Saskatchewan’s historic soil. For instance, should you visit Frenchman’s Butte you can 

still find the trenches dug by the Indians some 70 years ago in preparation for one of the major 

engagements of the Riel rebellion. Or go a little further along the north bank of the North Saskatchewan 

river, you come to Fort Pitt, the site of one of the early Hudson’s Bay trading posts. In fact there is a 

graveyard still to be found there with a stone cairn now marking it as the resting place of some of the 

victims of the Frog Lake massacre. 

 

This Hudson’s Bay Post was founded in 1829 and was burned to the ground in 1885. During the 

rebellion it was in charge of one Francis Dickens, the son of the immortal Dickens of ‘Christmas Carol’ 

and ‘Little Nell’ and 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

3 

 

 the ‘Tale of Two Cities’. You may go a little further to Onion Lake, which is the site of another of the 

early Hudson’s Bay trading posts of pre-rebellion days. 

 

The history of Saskatchewan, important though it is to you and me, is but a fragment of the great story 

of human progress — the rise and fall of kings and emperors, of kingdoms and empires, but always with 

the masses of humanity chained to the chariot wheels of the Pharaohs, the Alexanders and the Caesars, 

and fettered alike to the money chests of the King Midases, the Scrooges and the Silas Marners of the 

human race — those people who, for the most part, viewed their fellowmen as mere pawns in the great 

game of economics and high finance. And yet, Mr. Speaker, all down the ages like gleams of sunshine 

through a broken storm cloud we have had those brave souls who dared to dream, who dared to love and 

to live and to die, that sometime, somewhere down the years men might be free — free to have 

something to say about their destiny, free to choose who would sit in the seats of government and to 

have a voice regarding the conditions under which they lived and toiled, raised their families and cared 

for their sick and aged. 

 

To some extent, Mr. Speaker, that dream has come true. The day that some refer to as the day of the 

common man is here — democracy — the greatest good to the greatest number; the sharing of the 

privileges and the responsibilities of human society. And we have great privileges and great 

responsibilities which go hand in hand, though too often we are tempted to shirk the responsibilities and 

to push them over onto the shoulders of our fellowmen. I would like to say to everyone in this 

Legislature, to everyone within the sound of my voice, this afternoon: not all the enemies of democracy 

are behind the Iron Curtain, nor are they under the control of the Kremlin. It would be much easier if 

that were so. There are still those fascist-minded individuals in this fair land who pay lip-service to 

democracy when it suits their purpose, and even sometimes wrap themselves in the Union Jack, whose 

sole purpose in life is to marshal and to march and to manage their fellowmen for their own selfish ends 

and often for sinister purposes. 

 

I wish to turn to a sketchy review (time would not permit any more than that) of the record of this 

administration. I know, in doing so, mistakes have been made. Being human, it is impossible for it to be 

otherwise; and in breaking so much new ground, in meeting new problems and in meeting old unsolved 

problems from new approaches, some mistakes were inevitable. There is one mistake, however, that has 

been avoided — the unpardonable mistake of doing nothing. The last ten years have been the best ten 

years that this province has ever known. More people have had more purchasing power than ever before. 

Provincial revenues have been buoyant and investments have been high. These facts alone, I think, mark 

this ten-year period as outstanding. It has also been ten years in which history has been made in the field 

of democratic legislation — legislation which touches the lives of the common people of this province in 

their work-a-day world. So much so that Saskatchewan, often looked upon as the poor cousin amongst 

the provinces, has set such an example of the use of its revenues on behalf of its people that it has 

profoundly affected every legislative body from coast to coast. 

 

The greatest accomplishment of the last ten years is not merely good financing, or good legislating. The 

greatest accomplishment to me is the fact that the people of Saskatchewan, out of the experiences of 

pioneer life with its privations, its exploitations, its successes and its failures, and out of the tragedies of 

the hungry ‘thirties with its depression and its drought and its ‘laissez-faire’ leadership, which produced 

so much poverty and suffering amidst such abundance; I say out of these experiences the people of 

Saskatchewan caught a vision of a better way and a brighter day, and they went out and built a 

Co-operative Commonwealth Federation and they elected a government and they handed it a 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

4 

 

charter and said, ‘these are some of the things that must be done’. And, Mr. Speaker, to me that is not 

just the greatest accomplishment of ten years — it is the greatest accomplishment in our history. 

 

I said a moment ago that revenues have been buoyant. I think they have. Every budget that this 

administration has brought in has been a balanced budget. Every budget has been larger; every budget 

has had its surpluses, and the finances of this province have been protected by more and larger sinking 

funds. Though we may not have reached all our objectives, the people of Saskatchewan have not lost 

their vision; they have not lost their determination; they still gather a thousand strong in annual 

convention — yes, to criticize and to amend and also to chart the future of the province. In spite of the 

gloomiest forecasts by those to whom the wish is father to the thought, investments in Saskatchewan 

have gone up by leaps and bounds. The year 1953 saw public and private investment in this province 

reach the phenomenal figure of $424 million, exceeding the hopes of the most optimistic. 

 

However, in a democracy, a government is not measured entirely by the success of its financial 

accomplishments good and necessary though they be. The acid test is the share of that revenue which 

comes back to the people of the province, to the various services for which an administration is 

responsible. I think most of us will admit that we have lived through an era of great scientific progress. I 

think quite a few of us have seen the ox and the horse perform the pioneer work of breaking up the 

virgin soil of this province. We have seen farming mechanized. We have seen the airplane developed for 

many practical uses. We saw wireless telegraphy commence, followed by radio, and radar, and last of 

all, the atomic bomb and the hydrogen bomb which seem to have filled our world with fear and 

suspicion. 

 

When Saskatchewan Government Airways set regular flight schedules through northern Saskatchewan, 

a new day dawned over the north and as the planes settled on the rivers, the lakes and the ponds, a new 

era alike settled as a mantle over that vast interland and a new day came to the white man and to the 

native alike. Distances which had taken weeks to traverse with either dog team or canoe were covered in 

a matter of hours. Regular plane service to given points, radio stations, cut the loneliness and the hazard 

of isolation by half. Ministers, and teachers and nurses and doctors, fishermen and trappers and 

prospectors, with great quantities of supplies were flown into the upper half of Saskatchewan; and fish, 

and fur and concentrated ores were flown out. The Department of Natural Resources assisted young men 

in training themselves as prospectors and flew them into the northland. Geological survey maps were 

made from aerial photographs which have assisted the prospectors greatly in their tireless search for 

Saskatchewan’s hidden riches. In 1953, an all-time record was set when 18,000 mine claims were staked 

within one year. The Department of Natural Resources also took a timber inventory in order that the 

annual saw cut might be based upon the annual yield. And that inventory, Mr. Speaker, was taken on 

wings! It revealed not only our saw timber, but great quantities of pulpwood upon which it is possible to 

base a pulpwood mill or mills, and the prospects are very promising for a new industry coming to our 

province. 

 

Wings have also played a tremendous part in keeping Saskatchewan’s forests green. They are used for 

fire patrol purposes, and our smoke-jumpers naturally are air-borne. A major role has been played by 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

5 

 

wings in the tremendous search for oil, involving an expenditure, last year, in that great search, of some 

$52 million — and that is in one season. 

 

Standing on a village street not too long ago, I watched an air ambulance flit back and forth through 

low-hung clouds and mist in an endeavour to land. Time was deciding whether the patient would go 

through the remainder of his days on one or both of his natural feet. And as I watched, a voice at my 

elbow suddenly said: “Well, the air ambulance belongs to us, anyway.” And what he meant was that this 

was democracy in action: the people sharing the costs and the services alike. 

 

I would like to digress just for a moment. I believe that the people of this province should take their hats 

off to the personnel who fly our air ambulances. They literally fly with their lives in their hands. They 

are the heroes of peace; the heroes of our wings of mercy. I believe that a good story could be written on 

the part that wings have played in the development of Saskatchewan during the last ten years; wings of 

progress; wings of development; wings of mercy — almost as good a story as some of the old ‘Arabian 

nights’, with their magic lamps and their flying carpets — only don’t ask me to write it. 

 

Did you ever stop and ask yourself how much good this popular air ambulance would be if every patient 

had to pay for their own personal flight? Did you ever ask yourself the question how much good it 

would be if, when the patient arrived, there had not been the finest hospitalization scheme on the North 

American continent to open the doors of the hospital; or free cancer, free treatment for the mentally ill or 

our polio cases, or those needy dependent people to whom these services are wide open? Or lastly, 

supposing no one had undertaken to expand our hospital bed capacity in this province from one of the 

lowest in the Dominion to the highest? I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the buoyant revenues of this province 

have been used on behalf of its people as never before in the province’s history. 

 

When we come to the question of highways and byways, it seems as though our appetites are insatiable. 

There is one sobering reflection — you may think it is ridiculous, but it serves the purpose of 

illustration. If the surveyed road mileage of this province were divided out amongst all the population, 

you and I would have to construct and maintain twenty-four miles of road apiece. It gives us some idea 

of the magnitude of the road problem in this province. In four years, from 1940 to 1944, we spent about 

$8½ million on our highways. In the first year of this administration, 1945, we spent $3¼ million; but 

last year, without any Federal revenues, this province spent $17,218,400 on its highway programme. It 

embarked on the biggest construction programme ever attempted in our history. I am very happy to note 

by the Speech from the Throne that, in spite of bad weather through the early part of the season, that 

programme was almost completed: 495 miles of highway grade constructed; 1,100 miles gravelled; and 

219 miles blacktopped. That brings the total blacktopping in Saskatchewan to something like 1,100 

miles. In 1944, we had 138. 

 

I am very pleased to note also that the Speech from the Throne indicates another huge road programme 

for 1954, including basic work in the planning for a main market road grid. I am very happy that when 

the season opens up, construction is going to go forward on No 55 west from Spiritwood. There are 

many roads I could mention. A road from Leoville to Spiritwood is needed. They are also asking for a 

road from Frenchman’s 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

6 

 

Butte west from Turtleford. I could also mention roads in the north, I am sure. I think the hon. member 

for Meadow Lake (Mr. Dunfield) would agree with me that a road from the junction of No. 26 at 

Peerless and Goodsoil east to Meadow Lake would be very much appreciated. People from Makwa are 

looking for a road to the east, and I think the people at Dorntosh would also like to see an all-weather 

road. I am not mentioning these particular projects, Mr. Speaker, because I think they are all No. 1 

issues in the province. I think other members could give you a similar list. They are extremely important 

to the people whose lives they affect. But, it gives us some idea of the tremendous problem that the 

Highway Department must face. If in constructing highways the Department only had to take care of the 

traffic of ten years ago the task would be comparatively easy. But registration of motor vehicles has just 

about doubled in that ten-year period. In 1945 we had something like 148,000 vehicles and last year we 

had almost 268,000, to say nothing of the thousands of vehicles that travel our highways from outside 

the boundaries of our province, and to say nothing of the tremendous increase in the weight of the 

traffic. This has not only laid a heavy burden on the Department of Highways; it has resulted in a 

tremendous upswing in car accidents and, incidentally, fatalities also. In 1949 there were 90 people 

killed on our highways; in 1952 there were 122 fatal accidents. Surely we can all co-operate in an 

attempt to curb this upswing. I note with satisfaction that the Throne Speech indicates amendments to 

the Vehicles Act will be brought into the Legislature. 

 

We have also, I believe, the only automobile insurance of its kind in the world. There is a great cost 

margin between this insurance and any other scheme comparable to it. Yet the increase in car accidents 

is placing an unbearable burden upon this insurance scheme. It belongs to the people of this province, 

and I submit that we, the people, have the answer in our own hands. If we wish to keep the costs down 

— drive carefully! I am going to suggest here and now — if you drink, don’t drive; and if you drive, 

don’t drink; and my personal advice is — don’t drink, period! There are plenty of road hazards, both on 

our highways and on the road of life without it. 

 

Never before in the history of the Department of Education have the people of this province been taken 

into the confidence of the Department to the extent that they have for the last three or four years, for the 

purpose of rewriting the public school curriculum and the health programme. I think the benefits to a 

large extent have been reciprocal. The Department has discovered what many lay people think about 

education, and certainly the laity have realized more than ever before the difficulties, the tremendous 

problems, of writing a school curriculum to fit all the various needs and mental capacities of our 

students. 

 

The Throne Speech indicates that improvements are to be made on behalf of our teachers, both in their 

contractual agreement between teachers and school boards and also in the teachers’ superannuation 

scheme. I note with pleasure, too, there has been some increase in teachers’ salaries throughout the year. 

There is one great problem that still continues to trouble, and that is the teacher shortage. And yet 

transportation, the conveying of some of our small rural school pupils to larger centres thereby making 

more effective use of our qualified teachers, has reduced the necessity of using study supervisors by 100 

during the past year. I hope transportation may continue to reduce the need for study supervisors. 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

7 

 

The speed and the dexterity with which the Power Corporation is carrying out and implementing its farm 

electrification scheme is, to say the least, phenomenal. A $10 million programme was carried out in 

1953; 6,000 miles of line were constructed — roughly about 2½ times from coast to coast of Canada; 

13,000 new customers came to the Power Corporation, and its objective of bringing power to 5,500 

farms last year was reached, bring the grand total to date up to around 18,000. A programme like that 

could not be carried out without a tremendous amount of material: 670 freight carloads of poles alone, 

and 85 carloads of cable and smaller equipment, to say nothing of the crews to take that great mass of 

material and turn it into transmission lines. Again the principle of democracy has been followed. In a 

given area the people say whether they want the power or they don’t. The thing that I like about it is that 

those who live close to the line pay the same as those who are back several miles. I fail to see how any 

farm electrification programme could be carried out with anything like justice at all in a province such 

as ours, without that being the governing principle. 

 

We have had many Royal Commissions in our history and I think the present administration has 

probably the best record in implementing the recommendations of its own commissions. The Royal 

Commission on Agriculture and Rural Life, I believe, can be one of the most important of all our 

Commissions. Its terms of reference are wide; its reception by the public has been extraordinarily 

gratifying; the response by the public, in general, suggests that thousands of our citizens are aware that 

grave problems face agriculture in Saskatchewan. They are conscious that we are in the midst of a 

transition period when wise and well considered decisions must be made if we are not going to have 

future regrets. 

 

We are finding oil and gas and minerals in ever increasing quantities and we welcome new industries to 

our province every now and then, which all adds up to a very bright picture for Saskatchewan’s future. 

Nevertheless, the fact still remains that, apart from our people, the top six inches of Saskatchewan’s soil 

is our greatest asset, and agriculture is, and will be, the foundation upon which our very existence 

depends. It is still true, in spite of the fact that only half the people today are engaged in agriculture, that 

the farmer feeds them all; and it is still true that if agriculture is prosperous, every other business 

flourishes, and it should follow that the greatest care should be exercised by all governing bodies to keep 

agriculture on an even financial keel. Agriculture faces tremendous hazards in Saskatchewan; natural 

hazards of climate and weather, of insects and disease and so on. Yet, I am convinced that the single 

greatest factor contributing to the uncertainty of farm income and security over the years has been the 

hazard of wildly and widely fluctuating markets, so-called surpluses and overproduction, which 

inevitably result in wide gaps between the cost of production and the net farm income. In a world where 

one-third to one-half the people are hungry every day, there should not be such a thing as surpluses and 

overproduction in food stuffs. 

 

I am happy to note in the Speech from the Throne that a new policy of cash payments for credits on land 

clearing and breaking is being brought before the Legislature. I think this should help young farmers 

who are endeavouring to clear virgin land on many of our Crown leases. It was to the good land that our 

pioneers came during the early years of this century. It was the abuse of that good land which helped to 

bring us to near to the brink of disaster in the 1930’s when Saskatchewan became another 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

8 

 

dust bowl. If you want some idea of what can happen to an agricultural area, read the article in ‘Reader’s 

Digest’ for December 1953, entitled “Poison Rides the Range” covering the cattle area in the western 

states; the difficulty that has arisen because there was not proper supervision of grazing lands. Or read 

the story of modern Libya where a fertile area has literally become a desert because there was no plan, 

because there was no utilization or conservation policy. I wish to commend this administration for 

starting so early with a land utilization and conservation policy with water conservation and control and, 

where necessary, drainage in order to make more agricultural land available for our young farmers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The forage crop programme has resulted in the seeding of some 275,000 acres to alfalfa and grass 

throughout the province. More forage crop seed was sold during 1953 through the Department of 

Agriculture than in any similar period in its history. The aim of this forage crop programme is to 

develop feed banks throughout the province against a day of need, as well as to keep up the fertility of 

the soil. 

 

The cattle improvement policy has also paid off. In 1943 there were about 7,000 to 8,000 registered beef 

cattle in the province. In 1952 registration was up to almost 16,000, and surely an effort like this on the 

part of the beef cattle breeders of the province should enlist the Federal Government in a long-range 

marketing policy void of these terrific fluctuations such as we have experienced again the last 18 

months. I am happy that the Throne Speech draws the Federal Government’s attention to that very thing. 

 

I wish to commend our Premier on his forthright denunciation of McCarthyism, revealing it for what it 

is, an outrage against decency, justice and democracy. It appears in many lands under many different 

names. It looks the same, it acts the same, and it smells the same. It is opposed to co-operative effort 

where there is any profit involved. It is opposed to all progress which interferes with its own selfish 

dictatorial purposes. I also want to commend the administration on its Bill of Rights, which guarantees 

to every citizen of Saskatchewan freedom of speech, right of assembly, freedom of worship, regardless 

of colour, class or creed. Sir Winston Churchill says: “Democracy is the worst form of government we 

have, except all the others.” If democracy is the best that we have, we should do everything in our power 

to see that it functions on behalf of everyone, from the least to the greatest and from the greatest to the 

least. There are those who think of democracy as a fixed point at which we have arrived, the same way 

that you might take a journey to Edmonton or to Winnipeg, and when you are there, you are there. But 

democracy is a star, a gleam which beckons us on to fuller interpretation of brotherhood and equally the 

world around. 

 

“New occasions teach new duties, 

Time makes ancient good uncouth.” 

 

So sang the great American poet, James Russell Lowell. I want to say to every member of this 

Legislature that if we are not going to betray the trust and the confidence of those who sent us here we 

must give a progressively fuller and broader interpretation to that great definition of democracy — 

Government of the people, by the people, but, Mr. Speaker, above everything else, for the people. We 

cannot do more. Dare we do less? 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

9 

 

“What makes a nation great and strong? 

Not architecture’s graceful strength, 

Nor factories’ extending length; 

But men who see the civic wrong 

And give their lives to make it right, 

And turn its darkness into light.” 

 

I wish to move, seconded by Mr. Gibbs: 

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor as follows: - 

 

To His Honour The Honourable William John Patterson, Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious speech which Your 

Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 

Mr. Harry Gibbs (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to second the Address in Reply to the 

Speech from the Throne I wish, first, to congratulate the mover, my hon. friend the member for 

Turtleford (Mr. Wooff), on the very fine speech he has just presented to this House. I am sure he 

covered pretty well everything that this good Government of ours has done in the past ten years, and I do 

not know what he has left me to shoot at. I honestly do not know what the Opposition is going to shoot 

at when they start tomorrow, for he certainly did a good job. 

 

I also wish to extend my congratulations to the two new members, the hon. members for Estevan and 

Rosthern. I wish them the very best. I hope they do not get too discouraged sitting with my friends in the 

Opposition, because I would like to point out to them that, in the last Session, we were pretty well 

‘tuckered’ out and maybe if we chew long enough this Session we could all get a ‘minty’ flavour out of 

it. However, time will tell. 

 

I also wish to congratulate the new Leader of the Opposition, the hon. member for Saltcoats (Mr. 

Loptson), on his promotion to that office — a tough job no doubt, although I feel assured that we on this 

side of the House are convinced of what will be the method and line of attack — the same old track 

record we have been listening to since 1944! 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, 1953 was a very happy fruitful year for our province, as was mentioned in the 

Speech from the Throne. It was the happy occasion of the Coronation of our gracious Queen, Elizabeth 

II, and the memory of her visit along with her husband, the Duke of Edinburgh, to our province; the 

bountiful harvest and all the good things that a state of prosperity can endow; and I sincerely hope that 

1954 and future years can assure the people of Saskatchewan continued happiness and comfort. 

 

I would like, for a few minutes, to talk about the constituency I have the honour of representing — the 

city of Swift Current. As most members will probably know, we are very proud of our Frontier 

celebration which takes 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

10 

 

place every July 1st and 2nd. Thousands of families from a radius of 100 miles are entertained by the 

wonderful exhibition of bronco riding and roping contests that are put on by some of the most celebrated 

riders on the American continent and the exhibition compares very favourably with the Calgary 

Stampede. I extend a hearty welcome and invitation to each and every one of you. 

 

Since the oil and gas strikes which have developed in the Swift Current area, the city of Swift Current is 

expanding and developing with great rapidity. We have had to build more schools to accommodate the 

increasing population and the children, and naturally these schools are being built and constructed on the 

most modern scale. More sub-divisions have been opened and, of course, quite a substantial number of 

new modern homes have been built, but still the housing situation is very acute. The Chamber of 

Commerce are doing some very commendable work on the housing problem and have undertaken at 

least one housing project which is in operation at present and, as was mentioned in the Speech from the 

Throne, the Provincial Government urges the urban municipalities to participate with the senior 

governments in the construction of low-cost housing projects. Legislation on matters pertaining to this 

type of housing project will be submitted during this Session. 

 

Last summer an artificial ice plant was installed in the curling rink at Swift Current and I can tell you it 

has made a wonderful improvement. For years past the annual bonspiel was played under very watery 

conditions, but this year we can laugh at Mr. Weatherman, and the bonspiel was carried out on schedule, 

even with considerably more rinks competing; in fact a record was established over previous years. So I 

would gladly invite members who curl to come to Swift Current and enjoy good curling. I might add 

you can leave your knee-high rubber boots at home — you won’t need them up there. 

 

Plans are in progress to construct an out-door open air swimming pool this summer, at an estimated cost 

of around $45,000, and I am sure both young and old will appreciate a good sanitary and safe pool 

where lessons will be given in swimming and the danger hazards eliminated. A committee has been set 

up to go into the ways and means of establishing a mental health clinic and I am sure my hon. friend, the 

Minister of Health (Hon. Mr. Bentley) will be very grateful for the co-operation shown in trying to 

develop this class and type of institution for the treatment of mental and nervous disorders. 

 

I have just outlined very briefly some of the projects the people of Swift Current and district are 

interested in, and I could go on for some considerable time in acclaiming the booming expansion and 

progress of our fair city. So in my closing remarks dealing with the constituency I represent I would like 

to sincerely bring to the attention of the Provincial Government the urgent needs for an old-age peoples’ 

nursing home similar to the one near completion in the town of Melville. I firmly believe that if such an 

institution were located in Swift Current it would most definitely take care of all cases in the 

southwestern part of the province, and would certainly be most advantageous to relatives and visitors by 

saving them many miles of travel and transportation with the city being on the main line of the C.P.R. I 

can assure the members of this House that is one thing that is sorely needed in the western part of our 

province. 

 

I would like, at this time, to extend my hearty congratulations to a young Swift Current couple — Miss 

Beverly Joan McIntyre and Michael Healy, Jr., who recently won the western Canadian Junior Pairs 

skating championship 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

11 

 

in Winnipeg. Miss McIntyre also won the Junior Ladies skating crown; also to the Earl Kelly rink, who 

won the grand aggregate of the Swift Current bonspiel. I can say with pride to my hon. friends, we can 

still turn out champions in the Frontier city of Swift Current. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year will be the tenth anniversary of the C.C.F. administration, and I am profoundly 

sure that the people in general throughout the province are mighty proud of the achievements and 

progress that has been made in such a short period. When we pause and review the work and vastly 

improved conditions this present administration has brought to the people of our province and the 

province as a whole, it is no wonder to me that my hon. friend, the Leader of the Opposition, wants to 

dissolve the C.C.F. I presume he is downright ashamed of what his Party, the Liberals, did prior to this 

Government taking office; and mind you Mr. Speaker, this from a stalwart of the Liberal Party, a Party 

who had professed to be the champion of free speech and association — well my friends, we can readily 

see what to expect if by any remote chance the Liberals should be returned to form a government in this 

province. They did enough to us in the hungry ‘thirties! The remark of the present Leader surely should 

be a distinct warning to us all because his remarks can only be computed as coming from a fascist 

theory. It also makes me wonder whether my hon. friend is anticipating the burning of books. Could be, 

you know! When we have our friends in the Opposition going around the country making fallacious 

statements, backed up by the Liberal press, there is only one conclusion and I believe the people of this 

province got wise to their manoeuvres long ago, because ever since we came into office their method 

has been to belittle and discredit the C.C.F. Government, by fair means or foul, in order to return to 

power; but with all the paid hirelings and Party press at their command they find it a pretty hard job to 

fool the public. 

 

The Provincial Government has a record to be proud of, and the people know that Saskatchewan, today, 

with its economic and social changes, along with scientific and industrial expansion, has relegated the 

outdated reasoning of the Liberals to the status of the dodo and rather than an epitaph their slogan should 

read “R.I.P.” Hon. members will have noticed that practically all throughout the Speech from the Throne 

the Government theme is, as always, development, expansion and getting on with the job of making 

Saskatchewan the best and most progressive province in Canada. I think I can say without fear of 

contradiction that in the ten years this Government has been in office, we have risen from a province 

that was in the lower-scale brackets to a province that is comparatively level with the tops. With all the 

progressive legislation we already have on the statute books we are continually trying to better our lot 

for the benefit of all. 

 

We all know that agriculture is our basic industry and probably always will be; but I think we all realize 

the terrific advancement and expansion that has taken place in the past two years regarding our natural 

resources in minerals, oil and gas. I would just like to quote, for a few moments, what we have done in 

the past two or three years. In mining and mineral claims: in 1952, there were 4,151 claims records; in 

1953, 18,316 claims recorded. The 1954 expenditures on mineral claims’ exploration in the 

Pre-Cambrian area is expected to be $5 million. The 1954 expenditures on mine development in the 

Pre-Cambrian area are expected to be $8 million. 

 

Oil and gas production: in 1951, our oil production was 1,248,000 barrels, and in gas it was 860,000,000 

cubic feet. In 1952, 1,697,000 barrels of oil, and gas, 1,139,000,000 cubic feet. In 1953, 2,788,000 

barrels of oil, and gas, 1,537,000,000 cubic feet. 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

12 

 

Expenditures on petroleum exploration and development: in 1951, $18 million; in 1952, $31 million; in 

1953, $52 million, and it is estimated in 1954 there will be spent on exploration and development $68 

million. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if that isn’t something for our Liberal friends to shoot at as far as progress and 

administration goes, I don’t know what is, because, ever since this Government has been in power, the 

people of this province know that we have been working, as my hon. friend said, for the benefit of each 

and all in the Province of Saskatchewan. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, sometimes when our Liberal friends 

can read the papers — not only the ‘Free Press’ but they want to get out and read a good paper, a good 

C.C.F. Paper, the ‘Commonwealth’, which has something of an intelligent editor, who will give the true 

facts once in a while — then probably they would know something and start to realize that at least we 

are doing the best we can. 

 

A year or two ago our hon. friends sat over there and said we would never find oil in Saskatchewan as 

long as we had a C.C.F. Government and, lo and behold, one day in my constituency an oil well blew in 

at Fosterton. And what have we, today, from that? No wonder these fellows are red in the face! We 

have, today, according to my hon. friend, the Minister of Natural Resources (Hon. Mr. Brockelbank), at 

least 14 established oil fields in the province of Saskatchewan. If only the people can realize what is 

going on, and in future years what they will have by maintaining a government that is going to work for 

them — not one who is going to have ‘heelers’ all over the shop like the Liberal party had all the time 

they were in. 

 

Naturally we are all looking forward to the proposed gas pipeline going through the province, and I 

think we can all visualize the tremendous benefit, both for domestic and industrial users, and despite 

what our opposition friends say it seems to me history is being made each and every year under C.C.F. 

administration. I don’t think the Liberals could ever say that when they were in. And taking into 

consideration what the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has accomplished in farm electrification — 

well my hon. friend mentioned that a few moments ago; he gave you a full history. But we know that 

from the Brock-Coleville fields Saskatoon and all the towns and villages around there are being served 

by natural gas. We are all looking to the day, and we know it is not very far away, when all the cities of 

this province will be served, and most of the large towns and villages too, by that product of natural 

resources that I am sure each and every one of us wish to see come in — even my opposition friends 

want to see that come in, because then they will be glad they are saving a dollar or two or something like 

that. But I can assure my friends that the future programme of the Power Corporation will be an 

eye-opener to the people of our province. We believe in getting things done, and great credit is due to 

the Minister in charge of the Power Corporation and the workers who laid the pipes and put the service 

into the homes and farms of our province. 

 

On the labour field, it is recognized throughout the North American continent that Saskatchewan has 

brought down legislation second to none in the labour history of Canada. I know my non-Socialist 

friends do not like to hear the word ‘emancipation’. They never did like that word. They are always 

crying that we are doing too much for labour and would like to put the blame for inflation, the high cost 

of living, high rental, transportation and every conceivable thing at labour’s door; but they know, right 

down in their hearts, 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

13 

 

that what they say is tommyrot and humbug; and they are desperately determined to split the agricultural 

and labour groups. Personally, I am pleased to see the farmers of the province lining up behind the 

Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union. They have done a splendid job since organizing three or four years ago, 

despite the destructive criticism which we hear from time to time over the radio, through editorials and 

news reports. I have a great deal of admiration for their leader and president, Joe Phelps, and I hope to 

see the day when every farmer in this province is a member of the S.F.U. We have heard a lot lately 

about the so-called Rand formula — well, that is a matter of conjecture. 

 

Personally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to see the Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union build up their 

organization under its own steam, get out and build it up under the membership which they can get in. I 

was discussing this with a farmer in my constituency, the other day, and he said, “Well Harry, you know 

the Farmers’ Union is not like you fellows in the labour movements — you have your superannuation 

and all this and that that goes with it.” I said, “well, can’t the farmers have their superannuation?” I 

believe that the farmers of this province could build up an organization that, if they wanted to, in a very 

short time could have enough finances to even own their own banks if they wished to, their own 

insurance organization and certainly they could put in a superannuation scheme if they wished to. It is 

only the will to do these things. Over in the States even in the boilermakers’ organization, we have our 

own insurance society set up. At one time there were unions over in the States which are amalgamated 

with trades over in Canada which even have their own banks. There is no doubt about it that it is being 

done under a more or less co-operative effort, and it is about time — I am awfully glad to see that the 

farmers are taking great interest in this because, as I have said before, the ‘powers that be’, through the 

paid press of this country of ours, have always tried to keep farmer and labourer apart. Because we as a 

C.C.F. organization that came into being through the force of necessity as you all know, years ago, took 

everybody, because we had everybody in our movement that believed in progressive ideas and 

progressive legislation, then our Opposition said, “no, that is not right, you shouldn’t do that.” They are 

scared of solidarity as far as organization goes because I can prove to my friends across the way that in 

any document, editorials of press of Liberal extraction I have yet to see them favour the side of 

organization; and they will do the same with the farmer of this province if they possibly can. 

 

On June 1st last, the Minimum Wage Board authorized an increase in the minimum wage for the cities 

and larger towns of $2 per week. I believe there is a question on the Order Paper today, something about 

which I am going to talk. It established the new rate at $26 per week and 130 smaller towns previously 

covered by wage legislation had the minimum wage increased from $21.50 by $3 per week, making the 

minimum wage $24.50 per week, the highest minimum wage that has ever been paid in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Also, on the same date, last year, the 130 towns came under the provisions in The Hours of Work Act, 

and this new coverage had the effect of establishing for the first time in this area a 48-hour week and 

minimum wage of $24.50 per week — some difference from the old Liberal times! Continuing the trend 

in evidence for some years, the standard work-week for non-office employees in manufacturing declined 

by more than one hour to an overall average of 42.1 hours a week. In other divisions standard weekly 

hours of work in the same category averaged 42.2 in the retail trades to 50.9 in grain storage with the 

exception of construction, telephone communications and railways 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

14 

 

where a 40-hour week is predominant. The standard work-week for office employees is, without 

exception, 40 hours or less, and I certainly would like to see a standard 40-hour week in effect at least 

for the cities of our province. I say that because I think definitely the trend, as far as labour is concerned, 

is for a 40-hour week. I am on a 40-hour week myself. I haven’t been on very long, but we got it through 

our last negotiations and I am sure that I would like to see each and every one get it. At long last the 

working people, not only in this province but throughout the world, are coming somewhere near into 

their own. They are beginning to get the ‘breaks’ that our fathers and our grandfathers fought for, and I 

sure am glad to see that the trend is for a 40-hour week, and probably our Government will give that 

some consideration. 

 

Under the Apprentice Training programme we now have under training approximately 460 apprentices 

which constitutes an increase of more than 400 over the number attending full-time classes in 1946 

when the programme was put into operation. There is no doubt that the programme will continue to 

expand in future years. 

 

While I am dealing with labour matters I would like the Government to consider very seriously The 

Workmens’ Compensation Act, by raising the present compensation from 75 per cent to 100-percent 

compensation. I think it is about time we did have 100-percent compensation in the labour field, and I 

hope our Government will give that very serious consideration. We used to have 100-percent 

compensation when the Anderson Government was in, many years ago; but when our great friends, the 

benefactors of labour and the farmer came into power, they cut that 100-percent down to 66 2/3, and 

they should be ashamed of doing that to the labouring people of our province. 

 

I would like to bring to your attention too, Mr. Speaker, that in the Federal House at the present time 

they are dealing with the Criminal Code and amendments to the Code. They are even (I believe it is Bill 

HH and Bill O) once again trying to take what little we have gained in labour and other organizations 

from us. If this Bill goes through it will certainly take our past gains all away from us, but I know there 

will be one group at least in the House of Commons down in Ottawa who will certainly fight for the 

protection of labour and farm groups in this province and all over the Dominion of Canada, and I don’t 

think I need tell you that group of people because you all know it will be that fighting-spirited group of 

C.C.F. members representing the people in the House of Commons in Ottawa. 

 

It says here — I am not going to read it all, but it says here, Mr. Speaker: 

 

“Section 372 leaves a Union member open to any penalties if he goes out on a perfectly legal strike 

. . .” 

 

The C.C.L. brief charged: 

 

“This section headed ‘mischief’ provides that anyone who commits mischief, who wilfully renders 

property dangerous, useless, inoperative or ineffective — maximum penalty under this section is 14 

years or where life is endangered, life imprisonment. 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

15 

 

“Under Section 372 a simple and streamlined method of preventing even peaceful picketing which has 

long been explicitly protected by the Code itself is provided,” 

 

said the C.C.L. It was suggested that the whole section be dropped and sections in the present Code 

specifying and defining the various offences should be retained. The C.C.L. also objected to this section 

and called for much clearer safeguards in the Act to allow for legal strikes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, those are the things we have fought for years for; our grandfathers and our fathers 

fought for the same things, and surely we do not want to see them thrown in the trash-can down in 

Ottawa because you have very few labour representatives in the House at Ottawa. They are mostly 

professional men and corporation lawyers, and when you get too many of them you had better look out 

because when you speak from experience and see what has gone on in the past in our country and in our 

province I think myself, Mr. Speaker, it is about time we got more C.C.F. members who understand both 

labour and farm problems, who understand the things the common men want and what they want to do 

and what they are striving for — not to protect big business, financiers, profiteers and what have you; 

but to maintain a decent standard of living and give something respectable to the common people of our 

provinces and the Dominion of Canada as a whole. 

 

A few days ago we learned, after all the good things of 1953, that on the horizon is that shadow, that 

spectre, of unemployment. It is true our Liberal friends and the editors of the Liberal press smirk and 

laugh because the C.C.F. came out and warned the people of our province what is about to take place 

and what is going to happen. We truly hope that nothing is going to happen, but when you get the 

excerpts from the papers which the Liberal press won’t print then we know there is something doing. 

You see they bring out cartoons which say, “Look out, here it comes!” And it shows a skinny C.C.F. — 

“little worker, blue-ruin talk” — I don’t know about blue-ruin talk, but the Liberals are putting out 

‘blue-skunk’ talk and they are looking up at recession and they say, “Oh, it will never come.” Let us see 

what they say: “Too much blue-ruin talk. Unemployment not alarming.” 

 

Let us just see what the statistics have on unemployment at the present time, and this is from Ottawa: 

 

“Unemployment at December 10 hits the highest total for any December since the end of the war. 

According to a report from the National Employment Service, 338,100 Canadians were looking for 

work.” 

 

In other words, one of every 40 members of the total labour force was seeking a job. 

 

“The Federal Labour Department admits that not all the unemployment is seasonable. Figures of 

unemployment for December in the years since the war have been as follows: 1945, 180,000; 1946, 

156,000; 1947, 117,000; 1948, 130,000; 1949, 221,000; 1950, 186,000; 1951, 208,000; 1952, 195,000; 

1953, 338,000.” 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

16 

 

But it has gone up considerably since that last figure, Mr. Speaker. It is up to over half a million now. Of 

course you know it is laughable to read some of the stuff the Editor of the ‘Leader-Post’ puts out. It is 

really laughable, Mr. Speaker! But I wonder if he would laugh if he had to go on the bread-line 

sometime; and don’t forget they have bread-lines right today in Edmonton. These are the chaps that 

laugh, and they put stuff in the paper — they think the public is gullible; but they have never been on 

that bread-line. They have always been fed by big business and the big fat-bellied capitalist down east. 

Maybe it would do some of you good to get on the bread-line; thin you down a bit! 

 

I am just going to read, Mr. Speaker, some of the excerpts that the Editor of the ‘Commonwealth’ gives 

to the people of our province. You won’t see this in the likes of the ‘Leader-Post’ or the ‘Star-Phoenix’ 

or the ‘Winnipeg Free Press’ or any of your Sifton papers. This goes on to say: 

 

“Socialists across Canada are pointing out that it is no coincidence that depression conditions in 

monopoly capitalism are looming up at the same time that the world is looking forward to a year of 

peace. The last time depression signs became evident was in late 1949 and early 1950; the waning 

prosperity at that time was revived by the outbreak of the Korean war. 

 

“Once again it appears that masses of Canadians are to be forced to suffer poverty, not because of any 

shortages but because farmers and workers have produced a superabundance of consumer goods. 

Again experience is demonstrating that under capitalism plenty is the mother of poverty.” 

 

The following are excerpts from recent speeches and reports of leaders of Canadian business and 

industry which show how profoundly the prospects of peace are disturbing the economy. 

 

“Prospects for the Canadian deep-sea fishing industry in 1954 are without doubt at their lowest ebb 

since the end of World War II.” 

 

That is from the president of the Canadian shipowners. 

 

“There inevitably will be soft jobs, soft spots in various industries and businesses, indeed some are 

apparent today” – 

 

the president of the Canadian Bankers’ Association stated. 

 

“There are a few disquieting signs for Canadian business in the new year” – 

 

from the general manager of the Dominion Bank. 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

17 

 

“Activity in the oil industry appears likely to level off in some branches in 1954” – 

 

said the president of the Shell Oil of Canada. 

 

“There is likely to be a slackening in our rate of progress” – 

 

the general manager of the North American Life Insurance stated. 

 

And all the way down, Mr. Speaker. There must be at least twenty of the big executives, bank managers, 

so on and so forth in big business, telling you to watch out, something is going to happen. They are just 

kind of smoothing it on a little gently you see, for the time being. And, Mr. Speaker, the whole output of 

that, the whole output of this recession if a recession does come, to my estimation in my own personal 

thoughts is because the wars are over. It is the cut-back in defence purposes that is causing all this 

unemployment, that is in general, and they are not going to make as much profit as they did when the 

wars are in progress. 

 

It seems to me, and I do not think there is a person in this Assembly who can today deny it, that 

throughout the many years we have lived in this province prosperity has been when we have been in 

conflict and bloodshed and wars and when we have had to kill-off humanity, devastate towns and cities, 

break up homes and everything that goes with it, and through the degradation of war it seems to me 

about the only time we have had prosperity; but once we start retrenching and not building up for wars, 

then sure our big business friends have to tell us to watch out, we are going to be out of a job; but it 

won’t hurt very much, the Editor of the Leader-Post said, because “there is nothing to worry about, you 

can get the unemployment insurance.” I would like to see him going on the unemployment insurance 

and trying to live on $21 a week. The audacity of the man! Yes, I would like to see him go on it. He 

says, “don’t worry.” They want to keep us underfoot, but, thank God!, through the C.C.F. Government 

we have shown them that we won’t be trampled into the ground. We proved it with the legislation we 

brought out for the benefit of our people. We will not be trampled into the ground by the Liberal 

opposition or any other opposition, and I hope that we can keep on doing the good work we are doing 

and we will if we can keep our grand Premier here because they won’t knock him around anyway. 

 

I would just like to read this to my friends. It is about prejudice and it says: 

 

“Prejudice is judging before you have the facts. Never judge till after you have the facts. Nothing is so 

utterly devoid of reason as a passionate hatred of any race or class. All men are much the same when 

you come to know them; class or race faults are superficial but human qualities strike deep.” 

 

That is a quotation by Dr. Frank Trane and I think he is right, too. But you know, Mr. Speaker, just prior 

to the last election and even during the last Federal election, they were all out for the big irrigation 

project for Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan River project. “Sure” they were saying, “put us back in 

there and we will get it for you right away. We won’t even wait; in fact they are going up there now with 

trucks and cars and everything.” Have 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

18 

 

you seen any? They are still at their old game. I doubt whether we will ever see it, Mr. Speaker, in your 

time or mine; but that is the sort of stuff they put on. I am glad to see that our Premier woke them up a 

bit down there and told them we are all ready, cheque signed on the dotted line and everything; but no, 

there is no word from them yet. I understand they had the shock troops into the Liberal Party last week, 

getting ready again. And when did they mention the irrigation project? I didn’t see anything in the paper 

about it. If they did mention it, it will stop there; there will be no action. 

 

I am glad to see, too, that our Government is joining in for the rehabilitation of disabled and physically 

handicapped persons. I am sure we are all glad to hear that and glad to hear that an agreement has been 

signed between this Provincial Government and the Federal Government. If we keep pushing them a bit 

we will get something, like we got the old-age pension; we pushed them a bit till we did get that. We 

have a good lad here in our Premier to do a bit of pushing, and we are ready to enter into these 

agreements that do something for our people. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have gone a bit too long but I could speak for quite a while longer although I do not 

want to do too much today because I might have another crack at you some other time. 

 

I would just like to read you two excerpts I have here, about what I have been speaking on. It says: 

 

“Profiteering was one of the causes of that disastrous war which we recently passed. Hundreds and 

thousands of fortunes were made out of that war not only on this continent but also on the continent of 

Europe, and that is the menace of the world today.” 

 

That was W.S. McLean, speaking in the Canadian House of Commons, in 1926. 

 

Mr. Speaker, repetition — it is here again today, the very same thing. When the profits stop coming in 

the labouring man has to be laid off. Men, women and children have to suffer when the breadwinner 

hasn’t got the wages to turn in while the profiteers laugh and they uphold wars. Well, I am glad to say I 

sit on this side of the House with the present Government who do not believe in that sort of thing. As far 

as I am concerned, they talk about elimination, yes — I would eliminate every profiteer there is in the 

Dominion of Canada. They are our unseen enemies, my friends, whether we like to admit it or whether 

we don’t. I will just read you what Albert Einstein, the great scientist, said: 

 

“The world is power mad. The craving for power which characterizes the governing class in every 

nation is hostile to any limitation of the national sovereignty. This political power hunger is . . . on the 

activities of another group whose aspirations are on purely mercenary economic lines. I have specially 

in mind that small but determined group active in every nation composed of individuals who, 

indifferent to social considerations and restraints, regard warfare, 



 

February 15, 1954 

 

19 

 

the manufacture and sale of arms simply an occasion to advance their personal interests and enlarge 

their personal authority.” 

 

And that was from Albert Einstein. So you see, my friends, people all over the world and in every class 

of life are thinking along the same lines as the C.C.F. Government in the Province of Saskatchewan is 

thinking. I know we are condemned for having these progressive and forward thoughts. We are called 

Socialists; we are called Communists, we are called everything that is rotten and bad; but we try to do 

everything we can and we will continue to do so in spite of what you fellows think, because the way you 

fellows are thinking and acting I think you will be eliminated about the time the next election rolls 

around. You will be eliminated! People do not want that antiquated thinking any more. The dodo has run 

out long since, and they do not want that kind of thinking. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in winding up I am glad to see that something has been done with regard to world 

powers on the atomic and hydrogen bomb, and I am glad and I know that every member, at least on this 

side of the House, is glad that they are at last getting around the table of intelligence in thought and 

doing away with that foolish destruction of human life and property. I think we can all realize and 

recognize what would happen if one of those monstrous, infamous bombs ever dropped on the city of 

Regina. It would be something terrible to think about, and I am glad at last that some of the leaders of 

the world are beginning to look at warfare as a game for nobody. It is a thing we have to abolish. We 

have got to think in future years of providing people with food, housing and clothes and a decent 

standard of living, and I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that as long as we have a C.C.F. Government in 

the Province of Saskatchewan, those are the things that we are continuing to think about — the 

betterment of our fellowmen. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have great pleasure in seconding the motion of my hon. friend from Turtleford has 

just presented, but I must say that he did mention something about drinking and he said for him “no 

drinking, period.” Well, every man to his choice. As far as I am concerned, I like a glass of beer, and I 

am going to have one as long as I can get it. I say this, too, to you members, especially my hon. friends 

and Leader of the Opposition: if you want a drink I say take a drink, but take it in moderation like I do; I 

just have the odd one. 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Leader of the Opposition): — I beg leave to move the adjournment of the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:20 o’clock p.m. 


