



















































Hansard: February 14, 1955


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Twelfth Legislature 

3rd Day 

Monday, February 14, 1955 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Motion for Address-in-Reply 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, today in rising to move the Address in Reply to the 

Speech from the Throne, it is not only an honour and a privilege for myself, but it is also an honour for 

the constituency of Wadena. Today being St. Valentine‟s day, I think we will have a very loving time of 

it here this afternoon; at least I hope so. 

 

On this occasion, in moving this Address, I take it not as a personal triumph for myself, but rather as an 

honour on behalf of the constituency of Wadena. It is some time since a member from the Wadena 

constituency has had the privilege to move the Address in this House. In checking back I find in the 

records that, in 1917, Mr. MacMillan, who then sat in this Legislature as a Liberal member, moved the 

Address of that year; it was seconded by Mr. Gamble of Bengough. That is the only occasion in the 50 

years‟ history of this province until today, Mr. Speaker, that a member from Wadena, on behalf of the 

Wadena constituents, has had the privilege of moving or seconding the Address in Reply to the Speech 

from the Throne. 

 

In 1905, Wadena was not then a constituency in this Legislature, there were only 25 seats in the 

province. Wadena became a constituency in 1908. The first member to represent the Wadena 

constituency was Mr. H. Pierce and, incidentally, where I live now is only a mile from where Mr. Pierce 

lived when he was a member of this House. Mr. Pierce was followed in this Legislature by Mr. 

MacMillan. Mr. MacMillan was a very progressive thinking man in his ways. He made a mark for 

himself in this House and later, when he was at Ottawa, he was quite forward and outspoken in his 

thoughts. I am sure, if Mr. MacMillan were sitting in this House today, with the forward view he held 

some 40 years ago, that he would be far ahead of the colleagues he had in that day, and he would be 

today sitting with this group on the side of the House. 

 

Mr. MacMillan was followed in this Legislature by Mr. McKinnon who was elected as a Progressive in 

1921. In 1925, he ran on a Liberal ticket. He told the people of the Wadena constituency he could not 

accomplish much for them as a Progressive, but as a Liberal he could do far more for them; and, Mr. 

Speaker, and he was elected in 1925, but the Liberals have never since had the Wadena constituency. 

 

I would like at this time, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate hon. member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) on 

his elevation to the office as Leader of the Opposition. Since the last time we met in this Chamber, the 

party opposite, the official opposition, has seen fit once again to change the leadership of their party, and 

Mr. McDonald, the member for Moosomin, has been chosen by his colleagues and his supporters 

throughout this province to be their leader in this House. I hope he will be able to continue to occupy 

that 



 

February 14, 1955 

 

 

2 

office for a good many years to come. Mr. McDonald is the fourth Leader of the Opposition the Liberals 

have had in this House in the past 10 years, so I sincerely hope he will enjoy more years of leadership 

than his predecessors have done. If I may make one prediction, Mr. Speaker, I would say that he may 

find himself in much the same position as the little chap who worked at a factory. Each day this little 

chap used to take his lunch with him, and every day when he opened his lunch kit he found he had 

salmon sandwiches and he didn‟t like salmon sandwiches; so one of his pals said to him one day, “If you 

don‟t like salmon, why don‟t you talk to your wife about it?” “You leave my wife out of this” he replied, 

“I make my own lunch.” So, Mr. Speaker, the member from Moosomin as Leader of the Opposition 

from now on, will be able to make his own sandwiches to suit himself. 

 

I am glad it is time to see that the member for Shellbrook (Mr. Larsen) is back in this House and is 

enjoying good health. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, when this House adjourned last spring, the member 

for Shellbrook was then quite sick in a hospital in this city, and all of us, on both sides of the House, 

sincerely hoped and wished him a good recovery. I am glad to see, today, the member back in his usual 

place, in his usual form and fettle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this also is our Golden Jubilee year for Saskatchewan and, as was pointed out in the 

Speech from the Throne, elaborate plans have been made for a celebration of our Golden Jubilee. 

Saskatchewan is rather a huge place; we have a big province here. It is far larger than the average person 

realizes. Many people have lived in this province for many years and have never realized the size of our 

province. When one considers that Saskatchewan is as big as the United Kingdom and Germany, with 

Belgium thrown in for good measure, one realizes that we have quite a good-sized province here. It may 

be a very difficult name for outsiders to pronounce, but I can assure you that it is a very easy province 

for the school pupils to draw a picture of; we have a very compact, neat province. 

 

Most people think of Saskatchewan is just huge prairie — a prairie province. That we are one of the 

three prairie provinces is correct, but only approximately one-third of the province prairie; one-third, 

roughly, is covered by forest, and the other third is the pre-Cambrian Shield. The name „Saskatchewan‟ 

comes from the Indian Cree name meaning „Swifter Flowing‟, deriving from Saskatchewan river which 

is a swift flowing river. Saskatchewan, roughly, is 335 miles wide on the average, and 760 miles long, 

making a quarter-of-a-million square miles in the province, so we have a very nice-sized province. 

 

It hasn‟t been until recent years that the north of this province started to come into its own. It isn‟t very 

long back when you talked to people, and they would think of Prince Albert or Nipawin as being in the 

northern part of a province; but you and I know, Mr. Speaker, that Prince Albert and Nipawin are both in 

the southern half of the province; in fact Lac La Ronge is just about half way north within the province. 

It gives people of the southern part of the province an idea of how far are northern boundary is, when 

Lac La Ronge just about centre way. 

 

This year, also, there is going to be another great occasion for the Golden Jubilee and that will be the 

opening, by His Excellency the Governor General of Canada, of the Natural History Museum, which 

will be opened some time this summer. I do not think the date has been set, as yet, for the opening, but 

His Excellency will be here to open the Museum. Saskatchewan being rich in natural history, I think it is 

most fitting, and I 



 

February 14, 1955 

 

3 

would like to congratulate the Government and the Minister in charge for building that Museum as 

Saskatchewan‟s monument to our Golden Jubilee anniversary. It is far more becoming, in my 

estimation, Mr. Speaker, that we should have a building like that put up for all-time recognition as 

Saskatchewan‟s part in her own Golden Jubilee celebration than to build some monument or statue of 

bronze or clay or stone or any other type of monument. This is a building which can be used not only by 

the people of the province today, but for many, many years to come. With the naturally rich history that 

we have in this province, I am sure that people will find it very interesting. I know I shall, at every 

opportunity, try to persuade my constituents, any time they come to Regina, to take advantage of a trip 

through the Museum, because I am sure it will be worthwhile after it is opened. 

 

I am sure that the work which is going on now out around Mortlach, where they are bringing up relics of 

the remains of a civilized nation that existed here some 3,000 years ago, will be most interesting in years 

to come when that story can be told in our Museum. Another thing that is of interest to this province is 

the table which we have in the Library in this building. We have in our Library the Confederation table 

—a thing that is not known to widely throughout this province. I am sure that when the boys and girls 

attending school read about Confederation they sometimes wonder where that table is, but they never 

think to inquire. That table is right in this building in our Library. That table is now over 100 years old. 

It was used first, in Quebec, by the „Fathers‟ of Confederation, then transferred to Ottawa where the 

Confederation was signed; later it was sent to Battleford which was the seat of the Government of the 

North-West Territories for three years, from 1878 to 1881, and later it was sent to Regina where it is at 

this time. I am sure that any visitors wishing to come to the Building here to see that table, or any groups 

of school children, if they will contact Mr. Archer, our librarian, he would be only too pleased to give 

them all the co-operation possible answer any questions they would like to ask, and show them the many 

interesting things we have in our Library in the province of Saskatchewan. We have in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, one of the best Provincial Libraries to be found in any Legislature in Canada. 

 

Saskatchewan is predominately an agricultural province, but the richness of Saskatchewan is not in 

agriculture alone. Saskatchewan‟s strength is in agriculture and industry. Office workers, school 

teachers, and all types of working people besides those engaged in agriculture, play an equal part in 

making Saskatchewan a better place where each and every one of us may live. Saskatchewan has come a 

long way in the past 50 years, but I am sure, with the continued coordination and effort of working 

together of farmer and labourer, that we will go further in the next 50 years than we have come in the 

past 50 years. 

 

In the last 10 years Saskatchewan has seen considerable development in various types of industry. Ten 

years ago, in this province, we produced no oil whatsoever; today, Mr. Speaker, as was mentioned in the 

Speech from the Throne, we are producing over five million barrels of oil per year. We produced over 

five million barrels of oil in 1954, and it is expected, now that the Fosterton pipeline is completed, that 

in the present year we will produce in the neighbourhood of ten million barrels of oil. That is 

considerable progress over the past few years, progress which this province has long been denied, but is 

now coming into its own. While it is true that we do not yet have the oil production of Alberta, who 

knows what this year holds for us; who knows but that, within a few years we may be producing equally 

as much as Alberta, or perhaps more? We have a larger potential area for oil production than Alberta. 



 

February 14, 1955 

 

 

4 

On the 11th of February, as is shown by this Table, which was tabled in the House the other day by the 

Minister of Natural Resources, on the oil production in the province, we had over 1,100 wells capable of 

producing oil in this province. That is a considerable amount of work which has been done in the past 

few years. It shows that the Minister of Natural Resources has consistently given good leadership and 

guidance to his Department to see that oil exploration has been carried on at the greatest possible pace 

and, at the same time, he has taken all the necessary safeguards to protect the welfare of the people of 

this province. 

 

Also, today, Mr. Speaker, we have one of our major cities being served by natural gas. We had only a 

very few individual centres a few years ago, that were served with gas; just a few places around 

Kamsack. During this past few years, however, our natural gas production has been greatly increased 

until today between the 9,500 to 10,000 customers are enjoying the benefits of natural gas from the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation and this number is being added to each year. When the trans-Canada 

gas pipeline is completed in put through this country, the citizens of Moose Jaw and Regina and other 

centres will also be in a position to enjoy the benefits of natural gas; that includes Swift Current and 

some of the eastern points as well, Mr. Speaker. This is going to make a better living standard. It is true 

that it will be many years before farmers will be able to enjoy the benefits of natural gas, but the more of 

these things that we can bring into the province, even if the farmer is not able to enjoy them, if we can 

get them into the urban centres, being a natural resource of the province, the use of that natural gas will 

help to create more wealth within the province, and it will help to make a better living standard for rural 

and urban people alike. 

 

We have, during the past ten years, done a great deal towards bringing development to this province. I 

would just like briefly to run over some of the developments which has taken place. While I have 

mentioned it many times before in this House, Mr. Speaker, I think these things bear repeating because 

many times they are too often forgotten. 

 

One of the things which has received a lot of criticism, both inside and outside his House, is our sodium 

sulphate plant at Chaplin, and of the sodium sulphate branch of the Crown Corporation in charge of 

minerals. The sodium sulphate at Chaplin lay there for many years; it wasn‟t put there in your time or 

mine, and Mr. Speaker; but has been there for many, many years. It was not developed at all until this 

Government had the vision and courage to endeavour to develop our natural resources to assist the 

people of this province. It is one of the things which, in my opinion, should be developed, because 

Saskatchewan has the only commercial deposits of sodium sulphate in Canada, and having those 

deposits we should see that they are developed. I know I have often read in the papers, when the plant at 

Chaplin has closed down in order to clean it out and fix things up again ready for production, accounts 

reading “sodium sulphate plant closed down”, but before the ink was dry in the paper that plans was 

once again producing. So I think the people of this province realize that those industries are here to stay 

and are helping to give employment to the workers of this province and, in turn, the more industrial 

workers we can encourage to stay in this province, the greater is the market for our agricultural products. 

 

Another development which has taken place in this province, one which I think will be of great 

importance to our economy in the future, is our potash deposit. I can recall sitting in this Legislature 

when Mr. Phelps, who was then that Minister of Natural Resources, made the announcement in this 



 

February 14, 1955 

 

5 

House that potash had been discovered. He described it as one of the great discoveries of our time, and 

at that time he was laughed at and made fun of in the press to some extent, on the terms in which he 

described the discovery of potash. But I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the day will be here in the not-too-

distant future when potash will mean a lot to the economy of this province. We have now a mine at 

Unity which will be in production before too long; there is another one east of Saskatoon which is in the 

process of sinking a shaft. Neither of these two places are producing potash as yet, but they will be in the 

not-to-distant future. Several companies are coming into the province exploring the possibility of potash, 

and I am sure that in a few years to come, we will see that potash is big business. We have, so far, the 

only known deposits of potash and Canada. It may, when thoroughly explored, extended slightly into 

Manitoba in the east, or into Alberta on the west; but Saskatchewan does have a huge bed of potash, and 

I am sure it will give employment for hundreds and maybe thousands of people in the future in this 

province. 

 

Another thing which is helping to give employment to labour of this province is the salt mine at Unity. 

We have a very good salt mine at Unity which is being developed, and I think each and every one of us, 

when we buy packages of salt, if we look at the package we will see that a lot of the salt we are using 

every day on our table comes from Unity, right from within our own province. Those are things I am 

glad to see happening, Mr. Speaker, when we can develop our own products and supply employment 

here for our own people. 

 

We have other activities in the north, such as around the Beaver Lodge area, at Uranium City, where we 

have our uranium mines. Production is starting in some of them; some are working underground and 

others are preparing to go underground to produce uranium. Uranium is a very valuable ore and as far as 

is known so far, we have Canada‟s greatest deposits of uranium. 

 

We have in the North tremendous reserves of base metals also. The only ones that have been developed 

much in the past have been the base metals in Flin Flon which lie on the Saskatchewan side. But, due to 

the Prospectors‟ Assistance plan that is being carried on by the Department of Natural Resources, 

assistance has been given to prospectors by holding prospectors‟ schools and helping them financially 

and other ways to get equipment to go into the north to look for minerals and to be able to help to 

develop the north. Many of these prospectors, having had a chance to go to the schools, recognize the 

different minerals when they come in contact with them. Before, prospectors may have gone into the 

north looking for a given mineral and run across half-a-dozen different kinds of minerals, not being able 

to identify them when they saw them. So, today we are seeing that North come into its own, and I dare 

say that, in the next 25 years in the northern half of this province, the amount of wealth it will be 

producing will be phenomenal compared to what it is producing at the present time. 

 

Our forest management programme in this province is one, I think, each and every one of us should be 

justly proud of. According to all forest experts, not just of this Government, Mr. Speaker, but those who 

should know what they are talking about, if the forest had been cut in this province at the rate it was cut 

during the war years, within a short period of years after the war our forest would have been a thing of 

the past as a commercial operation. But, through the sustained yield and management programmes 

which are being carried on, and by putting the lumber industry on a firm basis, we 



 

February 14, 1955 

 

 

6 

can look forward to lumbering for many, many years to come in the timber belts of this province, 

because forest management is being carried on it every chance. I think every member of this House will 

say that it is good if we can preserve our forests so that generations to come will have the benefit of 

these forests. I, along with other members of this House, would like to ask the people of this province to 

do everything they can to help prevent the deliberate waste and destruction of our forests by fires and 

other hazards which do deplete our forests. The fire hazard is one of the things which has taken more of 

the forests of Canada as a whole than any other factor. Many fires are started by human carelessness and 

not by an act of nature. So, if each of us co-operate fully I feel that we can preserve our forests for future 

generations far more in the future than we have done in the past. 

 

To help the workmen of this province we have plywood factories now producing plywood. They are 

industries that haven‟t been in this province too many years; but at the present time negotiations are 

going on to bring a pulp mill into this province to produce pulpwood and maybe also some types of 

paper. That has not become an established fact yet, but steps are being taken to encourage that type of 

industry to come to the province. 

 

Besides those things, Mr. Speaker, we have a number of private industries which have come to this 

province. We have a garment manufacturing industry at Moose Jaw. In Regina we have electric 

transformers being made. Also, the Ford and Chrysler companies have put huge depots here for repair 

parts for their cars. Those all create work for labour which means a market for agriculture, because any 

time we have everybody working we have more people consuming agricultural products. 

 

In addition to those things telephones have made tremendous gains this past few years. The extension of 

telephones has been phenomenal, and I am sure that Minister of Telephones, before this Session closes, 

will give us all a summary and up-to-date view of what has happened in the Department of Telephone; 

so I will not go into it at this time. 

 

Insurance, too, has done a lot to stabilize the economy of this province. The fire insurance rates which 

we enjoy in this province are the lowest of any on the North American continent. The general insurance 

rates are equal or second to none any place on the North American continent. While it is true that you 

can take your fire insurance on your house with the Government Insurance Office, or any private 

insurance company you wish, whether you get your insurance from the Government Insurance Office or 

not, the Government Insurance office are still making the insurance on your home cheaper because it is 

in operation. The Government Insurance Office has brought down the premiums on every policy which 

has been issued in this province, and I am sure that in the years to come the trail they have blazed in the 

past will only be a small part of what will be done in the future. 

 

I was very pleased, a week or two a go, when the Provincial Treasurer was able to announce to the 

people of this province that, due to a decrease in accidents and better driving habits of the province as a 

whole, the insurance rates were being reduced all the way from 20 to 60 per cent under the Automobile 

Accident Insurance Act. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province will continue in the 

future, as they did this past year, to co-operate further so that next year once again, I hope, the Provincial 

Treasurer will be able to announce another reduction in the Automobile Accident Insurance Act rates. 



 

February 14, 1955 

 

7 

Another thing which has been of great importance to this province has been the Power Corporation. We 

have today, in this province, more than 110,000 customers getting their power from the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation. Those 110,000 customers include over 25,000 farms. Plans are now made for 

another 7,500 farms to be added to that list this coming year, and they are hoping, in 1956, to be able to 

add another 7,500 farms, so that will bring the total number of farms enjoying electric power up to 

around 40,000. The accomplishments of the Power Corporation have been very huge. When you stop to 

consider, Mr. Speaker, that 10 years ago there were less than 500 farms in this province that were served 

by the Saskatchewan Power Commission, or any other individual private power companies — 10 years 

ago they had a number of private power companies, but, altogether, there were less than 500 farms 

receiving power. I think it was 135, or in that neighbourhood, which were served by this Saskatchewan 

Power Commission; but today there are 25,000 farms receiving power from the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, and another 7,500 immediately planned for this year. This has meant a tremendous amount 

of work for the people working for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 

 

I find that we now have over 18,450 miles of distribution lines which serve farmers and so on, and 

another 7,000 miles of highline. When you speak of that in terms of thousands of miles, just what does it 

mean? I would like to give you one or two examples just how many miles of line that really means. If 

we had to take that 18,450 miles of distribution line and string it end to end, we would go across the 

province of Saskatchewan over 51 times from one border to the other. The 7,000 miles of highline 

would extend across this province 21 times. Or, another way I would like to give you an example — it is 

3,000 air miles from Halifax to Vancouver. If you take the highline, started out at Vancouver, you can 

build a highline from Vancouver to Halifax, back to Vancouver and back as far as Regina, and you 

could do that considerably more times with the power line because we have 18,000 miles of distribution 

line to 7,000 miles of high tension line. If you take the two together, Mr. Speaker, the highline and the 

distribution line, and put them end to end, you can build a line clean around this earth at the Equator. 

When you consider, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has built a power line clean 

around at the Equator, it shows that it has been a very huge operation. 

 

In 1954, Mr. Speaker, we saw setback in the agricultural economy of this province. This last year we 

had one of the worst crops we have had in our history for many years. The conditions in the north-east 

were, I think, the worst of any place in the province. Conditions up there were really serious for many of 

the farmers whom I have the privilege to represent, beside the farmers who are to the east and north of 

me. The Government of the province was not unaware of the problem which existed out there. They put 

on work-and-wage projects to help to give those people work and wages to help themselves, because 

they had absolutely no crop. Many of them would never have been able to seed an acre of land. So the 

work and wages was very much appreciated by the people of the northern part of this province; much 

more so when most people realize that, a few years ago, when they had disaster and difficulties with 

their crop, there was no work-and-wage programme for them to help to keep them going. Their only 

way of survival a few years ago was straight relief. They had to go to the municipality, apply for relief 

and the municipality would ask the Government to help them out. But, I am glad to say that the 

Government of the Saskatchewan today has spent many thousands of dollars today in the northern part 

of this province to alleviate the situation. 

 

On October 12th, I believe, a thing which is unique in the history of this province happened at Tisdale. 

Some 12 or 14 municipalities met in Tisdale; four Ministers of the Government were also at that 

meeting, 



 

February 14, 1955 

 

 

8 

along with the various private members who were affected in that area. The member for Tisdale was 

there; the member for Nipawin was there; I was there myself, and the four Ministers, Mr. Brockelbank, 

Mr. McIntosh, Mr. J.T. Douglas and Mr. Nollet. One of the municipal men got up there and he said he 

has served on a council for many, many years in this province, but that was the first time in his 

recollection that any government at any time had ever come out to the field to meet the municipal 

representatives, rather than the municipalities having to come all the way to Regina. I want to assure this 

House, Mr. Speaker, that the people at that meeting greatly appreciated it. 

 

The Department of Agriculture has been giving considerable assistance in the north-east to drainage. 

While they have not solved all the problems, I know the people of the north-east know they are going to 

get continued interest and active support from the Department in this coming year. Also, another thing 

that was greatly appreciated by the people of the north-east — and I would like to take this opportunity 

of thanking those people in the south-west — and that is for the free potatoes which were donated to the 

people of the north-east by people from the Big Beaver-Rockglen area. A carload donated by those 

people went to McKague. Another carload of potatoes was donated around Assiniboia district and 

shipped to Hudson Bay. A third carload was assembled at Shaunavon and shipped to Crooked River; 

and the fourth carload from Rush Lake went to Carragana. Those people up there very much appreciate 

those potatoes because they realized that they had none whatsoever, and they did not have the money to 

buy potatoes; so I can assure the people of the south-west that the people of the north-east appreciate 

your generosity. 

 

During the „thirties when the South was dried out, we were then in a position where we could donate and 

send fresh vegetables from the north to the south. Well, I hope the south will never be dried out again as 

they were in the „thirties; but I know the people of the north, if they are blessed with vegetable gardens, 

will only be too glad to help out the people of the south-west again, if the people of the south find 

themselves in the position of needing them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture in this province, as I have said, has been our stand-by. While we have produced 

five average crops this past three years, we have also at the same time had high crop expenses as well as 

high crop production — in fact, we have had more than that. I went over a table which was prepared by 

the Searle Grain Company and, by taking their table, I don‟t think anyone in this House could say I was 

taking a table which was prepared for my side of the argument, Mr. Speaker. I find, when we take the 

period 1935 to 1939 (of the Dominion Government price controls and so on) take that as 100; when we 

take that price, we find that in two years, 1936-37, and 1937-38 crop years, we did receive over the cost 

of production in those two years. But, taking that five-year period as the basis, I find that ever since 

1925 (you can go back as far as 1925), taking the price of No. 1 grain at Fort William or Port Arthur, 

and deduct from the Fort William price the elevator handling charges, I find that ever since 1925 to the 

present time there have only been two years, according to the Dominion‟s own way of looking at the 

price relationship, in which we have received more than the cost of production. In 1945 and again in 

1946 we did get over the cost of production. I do not have the figures available for the present crop year 

because all the participation payments are not made; but in the 1952-1953 year, for the amount of money 

we are getting now on our wheat, we are only receiving 80 cents on the dollar in comparison to what we 

had in 1935-1939. Our wheat price has fallen that much, because our cost of production is getting to be 

too high. 



 

February 14, 1955 

 

9 

If you take 1945-46 and use that as 100, you will find, Mr. Speaker, that the cost of agricultural 

production has gone up so greatly that we only get today 55 cents where we received $1.00 in 1945. In 

other words, our wheat today should be considerably higher than it was in 1945, if we are going to keep 

pace with the cost of production. 

 

This province produces over 50 per cent of all cereal grains produced in Canada. When you realize those 

things, Mr. Speaker, you will realize why agriculture is so important to the economy of this province. 

When the Federal Government allows the price structure to fall so much below the cost of production, 

we are today only receiving 55 cents on the $1.00, as we did at the end of the war when the price 

controls were removed, that will explain to you why, in the north-east and in other parts of this province, 

as soon as the farmers have one bad crop they find themselves in the plight where they do not have 

enough money to carry on, and municipalities have to invoke the Seed Grain and Supply Act to give 

assistance to those people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention many other things which were mentioned in the Throne Speech, 

today, but time does not permit me to cover them all. But I am sure they will be dealt with fully by other 

speakers before this debate is over. 

 

I would, however, like to refer to be Speech from the Throne where it talks about teacher supply. I am 

glad to note that the teacher supply in this province is improving. I am also glad to note that the Speech 

from the Throne mentioned that an increase in school grants was going to be proposed at this Session. 

From checking the records I find that, in 1944, the total cost of education in this province was a little 

over $14 million. Grants at that time amounted to a little better than 19 per cent of the total cost of 

education. In the last year figures are available for, 1953-54, the amount spent in this province on 

education was over $34 million, and the amount of grants amounted to a little over 26 per cent of that 

$34 million. So, in other words, the grants have gone up percentage wise and otherwise, both, Mr. 

Speaker. And last year — a year ago now — an addition of a million dollars was voted by this 

Legislature for grants for schools, and once again I am pleased to note that further assistance will be 

given to education this year. 

 

It is true that our educational costs have gone up a lot these last few years, but there are many reasons 

for that, Mr. Speaker. When you stop to analyze the cost of farming and other branches of endeavour, 

you will realize that education had to go up if the teachers of this province were going to get a fair break 

along with any other worker, and along with the farmers. Teachers‟ wages, prior to 1944, were pitifully 

low, and many teachers had money coming from school districts which they had not been able to collect. 

Those things are now rectified. The teachers do get their money, and they get a far better salary; and 

today we are not out of line with the salaries paid teachers and other parts of Canada. I do not think 

many parents, who want to see the welfare of their children protected, would suggest for a moment that 

we moved back to the type of pay our teachers were getting a few years ago, so that we would lose our 

teachers to other professions. 

 

Today, I find a number of people who believe their school taxes are too high. They say, “we do not have 

the money to pay them.” But why don‟t they have the money to pay the taxes, Mr. Speaker? I will tell 

you why they don‟t have it. In 1945, we farmers could buy the best self-propelled combine for $3,000. 

Today at the same combine costs $6,000. That combine, Mr. Speaker, has gone up by over $3,000. Now, 

if you have an assessment on your farm of $10,000, the increased costs of that combine means that, in 

order to buy 



 

February 14, 1955 

 

 

10 

a combine now, you must pay an additional 30 mills of tax on your farm assessed at $10,000, in order to 

pay that the increased cost of the combine, and that is over a period of 10 years — 30 mills for 10 years. 

If you take the cost of that combine over one year then you would have to tax your farm 300 mills for 

that year. That is only one piece of equipment. When we take into consideration the tractors, cultivators, 

the seed drills, discers and the rest of the machinery that goes to build up the farm unit, you will realize 

that we are paying in increased costs for farm machinery, enough to pay our school taxes for many years 

to come. I realize that it is perhaps necessary for implements to cost more than they did 10 years ago, but 

I cannot agree that they should be double what they were 10 years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a year ago, in this House, this Legislature voted over 50 per cent of its budget to three 

departments — Health, Education and Social Welfare. I believe that this Legislature was justified a year 

ago in doing that. If those three departments can look after the health, welfare and education of the 

people of this province, if we can give the young people of this province a chance to have good health, 

good education and see that those in need of social welfare and assistance may get that assistance, I 

think we are doing a lot to help young people to be able to go out into the province in later years to make 

their own way in the channels of industry or business or whatever profession they may choose. 

 

Saskatchewan is very rich in its culture. We have people in this province from almost every European 

country, besides from the Asiatic countries. It is very interesting to know, Mr. Speaker, that we were the 

first province in the Dominion of Canada (and there is only one other now besides us) to place on our 

statute books a Bill of Rights. We guarantee to the people of this province, by legislation, freedom of 

right of assembly, freedom to worship as they see fit, and we guarantee that there will be no persecution 

in regard to creed, colour, race or religion, giving the people of this province security. I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that every province in Canada should have a Bill of Rights, and the Dominion of Canada 

should have a Bill of Rights. The Dominion of Canada is a member of the United Nations. The United 

Nations have a Bill of Rights which they would like to see every country adopt as their Bill of Rights 

throughout this whole universe. Canada, as yet, has not seen fit to adopt a Bill of Rights, but until the 

day comes when we can have a Bill of Rights in our own Dominion of Canada, how can we expect other 

countries, who have had less years of experience in democratic government than we have had in this 

country, to adopt a Bill of Rights for their countries? 

 

I believe the time is long past when we should have social justice for everybody, regardless of where 

they live, whether they are on the side of the Atlantic or Pacific, or on the other side. We should live 

together as a brotherhood for all this universe. There is lots of space here for all of us. I believe it is 

possible to produce enough food and shelter and clothing for all of us on this earth, and we should have 

lots of time left for leisure and comfort; but we must have governments, who are in the position to do so, 

pass the necessary legislation to give the full co-operation in order to bring about universal brotherhood, 

and until we get universal brotherhood we are definitely not doing the things we should do. So, Mr. 

Speaker, at this time I will move, seconded by the hon. member for Moose Jaw (Mr. Heming): 

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor as follows: 



 

February 14, 1955 

 

11 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 

 

We, Her Majesty‟s dutiful, and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious speech which 

Your Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 

Mr. D.H.R. Heming (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, in seconding the motion of my honourable 

friend from Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst), I think it is particularly appropriate that a farmer and a labour man 

should do this, as being indicative of the type of government which is in Saskatchewan today. I am sure 

that my constituents in Moose Jaw, especially the railroad men, will be pleased and proud, as I am, at 

my assignment today; because, in Moose Jaw, sir, we have always felt that our economic progress 

Saskatchewan is bound up with co-operation between farmer and labour. 

 

Before I deal with the motion, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity of congratulating the 

new Leader of our Opposition at his elevation to this new position. We have all, on this side of the 

House, recognized his ability in past Sessions, and I am sure that his integrity will permit him to assume 

his onerous duties to his own credit and to the honour of the party he serves. 

 

Living in a Co-operative Commonwealth province within our Dominion, actively practising many forms 

of co-operation, it is disturbing to see people all over this world living in fear of insecurity of life and 

liberty. Increasing armaments, atomic bombs and the threat of another war bear heavily upon the minds 

of all people. Let us hope that the spirit of co-operation shall extend itself and guide our leaders in high 

places into channels of action that will permit all to have security of life, liberty and happiness. 

 

There have been handed down to us from the ages certain axioms, precepts and adages to govern our 

conduct one to another. The paramount admonition is undoubtedly that all that Golden Rule: “Do unto 

others as you would have others do unto you.” But in order to put that rule into effect, into practical 

effect, for the economic welfare of our people, it is necessary that we should know some basic truths in 

our way of life. To those who labour, whether on a farm or in town, the plain words of Abraham 

Lincoln, spoken some 90 years ago, apply very aptly here at this time. Abraham Lincoln said, almost a 

century ago: 

 

“Labour is superior to capital and deserves much the higher consideration. Who and what is labour? 

You are labour who work for a living. You till the soil, you mine the coal, you write books, you spin 

yarns, you invent cunning machines, you sell and serve behind counters and build the dwellings of 

men all the world over.” 



 

February 14, 1955 

 

 

12 

The thought behind these words, Mr. Speaker, is equally applicable today as in those days. But this 

uncommon commoner had a special directive to give to the people of this continent in relation to the 

distribution of wealth when he said: 

 

“It so happened in all ages of the world, that some have laboured and others, without labour, have 

enjoyed a large proportion of the fruits. This is wrong, and should not continue.” 

 

Farmer and labour know that, that in our present-day economy, there is discrimination in the distribution 

of our national income, that some are enjoying a large share of the fruits of labour unwarrantedly. 

Especially is this is realized when we check the purchases of Western Canada these last few years. 

Western Canada has accounted for about one-third of the total commodity sales of Canada, with Ontario 

having 40 per cent and Quebec 25 per cent. Our Western provinces have purchased 60 per cent of the 

Canadian farm equipment manufactured in our country; they are second in the purchase of radio and 

electrical equipment; they buy 20 per cent of the auto products, and 30 per cent of the building materials 

made in Canada. 

 

While farmers of Canada and Saskatchewan have been experiencing diminishing returns for their labour, 

while labour generally has been subject to a gradual increase in unemployment, it is a sad comparison 

insofar as our Canadian economy is concerned when we see that, while farmer and labour are suffering 

economic vicissitudes, there are some large Canadian companies who are making larger and larger 

profits. The first nine months in 1954, in comparison with the similar period in 1953, show an increase 

in profits of 27 major Canadian companies of 5.3 per cent. A similar report emanating from the U.S.A. 

shows 660 similar companies showed only an increase of 2 per cent of profits. One striking example 

within our own Dominion of excessive profit was the steel industry, that material which goes so much, 

and increasingly so, into our durable goods manufacture. Of this industrial group, one company in 1953 

made a profit of $14.2 millions on a ten-million ton ingot production. Eight similar companies in the 

United States of America at the same time made a $6.1 million profit on a 1.7-million ton production. In 

the steel industry of Canada our labour costs rose 94 per cent; profits to operating companies during that 

same time rose 337.8 per cent, one company being favoured, during that same period, with a profit of 

613.5 per cent. 

 

In the farm implement field, since 1945, productivity has increased 150 per cent, while at the same time 

there was only an increase of 12 per cent in employees, whose wages in relation to total costs decreased 

from 42 to 28 per cent. It seems, sir, that Western Canada is being discriminated against by Eastern 

Canada; that some are getting a larger proportion of the fruits of labour and others are getting a 

decreasing share. If we are to give men the means to raise the cultural standards and foster the creative 

aspirations of the human spirit, it is essential that we arrange in some manner to provide for all of fair 

share of our Canadian income with not some getting more than their share to the detriment of others. 

 

It has been written in one of our good books of the past: 



 

February 14, 1955 

 

13 

“Give a man of leisure, uncontaminated by cant, illuminated hypocrisy, and he shall some day find out 

why the grass grows, why birds fly and why man, the animal, cheats his fellow man.” 

 

It has been asserted that the high costs of labour is the cause of increased costs of goods and services. I 

submit, sir, that this is incorrect. Workers wages of today are a little more than workers wages of 50 

years ago. The hourly rate for labour varies but little throughout Canada, averaging about a $1.15 per 

hour for a 40- or 44-hour week. Carpenters in Montreal get $1.80 an hour, in Saskatoon $1.80 an hour. 

Electricians in Montreal get $1.90; in Regina $2.00 per hour. Plumbers in Montreal get $2.00 per hour; 

in Regina $2.00 per hour. The wages of skilled labour, if he works, varies but little throughout Canada. 

With our farmers, however, things are somewhat different. I read a report emanating from Winnipeg a 

few days ago in which a farmer in South Portal sold wheat for $2.27 a bushel; a man in North Portal sold 

wheat for $1.23 a bushel; and a man in Montreal selling the same wheat secured $1.80 a bushel. It is true 

that parity prices prevail on the American side, but it is not unreasonable to suggest that the farmers of 

Saskatchewan and Western Canada should have some type of parity price too, whereby there shall not 

be the difference in purchasing power as is apparent now. If you pay a doctor or lawyer, a professional 

or businessman $2.00 an hour in Montreal and in Winnipeg and in Edmonton and in Calgary, this seems 

to me to be some balance to that. 

 

The Crow‟s Nest Pass rates were put in, as I understand it, to benefit the farmers of the West so that 

benefit should go to them in another way by securing for them and adequate compensation comparable 

to the United States of America. We cannot live, sir, in a country so close to the United States and not 

conform generally to their customs. The economic progress of the West will ever be associated with 

agricultural production. If the farmers of the West continue to receive diminishing income, then it is 

apparent that all those who labour shall also feel the discrimination proportionately. It was Daniel 

Webster who wrote: 

 

“Let us not forget that the cultivation of the earth is the most important labour of man. When tillage 

begins, other arts follow. The farmers, therefore, of the founders of civilization.” 

 

As a union man and as a co-operator, I was indeed glad to read of a recent resolution passed by the 

Farmers‟ Union of Saskatchewan in these words: 

 

“Whereas the Interprovincial Farm Union Council, the Canadian Congress of Labour, the Trades and 

Labour Congress have jointly formed a Canadian Farmer-Labour Council in an effort to gain a closer 

understanding of the problems confronting these two groups, therefore be it resolved that they go on 

record wholeheartedly endorsing the formation of this newly established co-ordinating body and 

recommend further that it be used as a medium for joint presentations to government on problems of 

mutual interest to both farmer and labour.” 

 

I am reminded, sir, of what Abraham Lincoln said in regard to united effort: 



 

February 14, 1955 

 

 

14 

“The strongest bonds of human sympathy outside of family relations should be the uniting of all 

working people of all nations, tongues and kindreds.” 

 

Organized labour in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is prepared to co-operate with the farmer for mutual 

benefit, especially in regard to securing warrantable shares of the national income. Organized labour in 

Saskatchewan is indebted to this Government, as in a predominantly agricultural province it has an 

active labour legislation which is second to none within the Dominion of Canada. Our Minimum Wage 

Act is the best in Canada. Our Hours of Work Act is unequaled in all the provinces. Our Annual 

Holidays Act is outstanding, and appreciated by all those who participate. Our Trade Union Act, a 

model act of its type, is the envy of all organized labour throughout the Americas. Our Compensation 

Act for our men who get injured on the job, is well administered, is the best in Canada, and is well liked. 

The Industrial Standards Act, the Apprenticeship Act, the One Day of Rest in Seven Act, the Equal Pay 

Act, and several other minor ones of that type, together with the four Lien Acts and the nine Safety Acts 

administered by that Department of Labour, indicate the consideration this Government has given to the 

welfare of the working people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Department of Labour have recently published a little grey pamphlet outlining concisely the labour 

legislation over which they have jurisdiction, for which I commend them. I would suggest that any 

workingman of Saskatchewan, who does not fully realize the legislation which has been made for him, 

should write to the Department where, I am sure, he will be able to get a copy of this publication. It has 

been asserted, sir, that since this Government came into power, the organized labourers of Saskatchewan 

have increased 118.5 per cent, while the rest of Canada only increased 25 per cent. This might be true, 

but the astounding fact is that around about 150,000 farmers and a little more than 150,000 urban 

workers, by their vote, deemed it was necessary and warranted. 

 

Labour legislation, however, necessarily involves employment. What does it avail a worker if he has the 

best legislation protecting him if he has no work? In Canada, generally, and in Saskatchewan 

particularly, there is developing a serious unemployment situation that warrants the special 

consideration of all governments. Unemployment insurance does lessen the impact of unemployment, 

but does not take the place of employment with wages. In Vancouver, welfare agencies report that they 

have an almost unbearable burden with close to 45,000 people unemployed. In Montreal a similar 

number, 45,000, are applying as against only 30,000 last year. In Ontario there are 100,000 men 

unemployed today, or more. In Winnipeg over 15,000 men are looking for a job; Calgary has 5,000; 

Edmonton 6,000. In Saskatchewan, the last figures I heard recently, there were 17,000 in Saskatchewan 

seeking employment compared with 11,000 last year and 7,006 in 1952. These figures compare 

adversely with the United States of America, with Great Britain, with Sweden, with Australia and New 

Zealand, and other countries. I would particularly like to point out that in New Zealand for the last 10 

years there has never at any time been more than 100 men looking for employment, and of those 100 

men, most were physically handicapped. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the urge of our manufacturers to manufacture for export; I appreciate the urge 

of agricultural production in order to provide people who are hungry and other markets of the world; and 

I 



 

February 14, 1955 

 

15 

understand the urge, too, to have a large population in Canada. But, since the last war, we have had over 

one million immigrants enter Canada. Saskatchewan has taken her share of this group. Seeing these 

figures on unemployment, does it not seem, sir, that there should be some consideration given as to the 

numbers which are to be admitted here? With our natural birth-rate in Canada of 400,000 births a year, 

our death-rate of 125,000 a year, with an immigrant rate of 150,000 to 200,000 at year, coupled to a 

almost stationary civilian labour force of 5.3 millions of people, it does seem that some consideration 

should be given to see that our native-born are given employment prior to admitting too many 

immigrants in here to take away jobs from them. I am of the opinion, sir, that the unemployment figures 

of the United States of America today are there because, this last year, only one-tenth of one per cent of 

their civilian labour force has been admitted as immigrants to that country, where ours is close to three. 

 

I would like to say a few words on the Jubilee. I came to this country one day before it was made 

Saskatchewan. I worked for 25 cents an hour for 10 hours a day, six days a week. I remember the ox and 

horse, the 12-inch plow, the 6-foot binder. I remember the time when you could buy a meal anywhere in 

Saskatchewan for 25 cents. I remember when coffee was 25 cents a lb.; $3.00 a bag for flour; $4.00 a 

week for room and board, with washing. I remember those days, sir, and I have been glad to see, 

throughout the years, as we have gone from one stage to another, so much progress that we almost forget 

the past. I think we have had our past, and I think where we are standing now shows that we have 

progressed wonderfully. I am convinced that, if we progress in the next 50 years as we have in the past, 

some day we are going to be in an enviable position. 

 

There are two things, however, that strike me as being predominant at this time in Saskatchewan. One is 

the uranium development and the other is the development of co-operation. In our uranium fields, as was 

mentioned by the mover, we have an extraordinary supply of this wonder metal. The Eldorado Mines 

Limited shortly will be the largest single concentrate producer in the western hemisphere. The Gunnar 

Mines Limited is spending $25 million and, this fall, will be producing concentrate also. There are a 

number of companies (I think 50) in one stage or another in the production of this wonder metal. I was 

just wondering, since apparently we are going to be a second Belgian Congo in production of uranium 

shortly, if there could be some way in which the men of the world who have control so that our wonder 

metal could be used mainly for the benefit of mankind rather than for the devastation of civilization. 

 

In Saskatchewan, today, we have a co-operative movement that, proportionately, is the largest in 

Canada. From a membership of 107,000 in 1944 we have, today, a membership in our co-operative 

movement of 600,000 out of a population of 850,000 people, and our business, last year, was close to 

$500 million. 

 

The same applies to the Credit Unions. In 1944, we had 30,000 members in the Credit Union with assets 

of 2.4 million clear, today, we have 70,000 members with over $20 million assets. This response to co-

operation under a co-operative government must indeed be a source of satisfaction to all those who are 

responsible for this extraordinary growth. 



 

February 14, 1955 

 

 

16 

It is apparent that industrial and business development is playing an increasing role in Saskatchewan‟s 

economic life. Our future is indeed bright, and others agree with that. I would like to quote a paragraph 

from Western Business (a publication from Vancouver) which sent a man up here to see what our 

Jubilee year was going to be like. Here is the paragraph I refer to: 

 

“Given a political climate of reasonable and stable government there is no reason why the future of 

Saskatchewan, as it lies below the Saskatchewan Government‟s Airways plane wending its way over 

the vast territory, cannot be like the radio report of weather ahead — C.A.V.U. — ceiling and vision 

unlimited.” 

 

There can be no doubt that, if we continue to have men who dare to dream beyond the lean horizon of 

their days, men who are not too timid to follow the gleam, this province of ours shall come, some day, to 

where we are the land of wonder and amaze. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am glad to support the motion. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:30 o‟clock p.m. 


