



















































Hansard: March 28, 1955


 

 
1 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session - Twelfth Legislature 

33rd Day 

 

Monday, March 28, 1955 

 

The House met at three o’clock p.m. 

On Orders of the Day 

 

RAND FORMULA 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture)  — Mr. Speaker, I am sure members would be interested in 

hearing of the discussion which has just taken place on the Rand formula. 

 

I want to make it clear that we met with the Farmers’ Union delegation and pointed out to them the 

difficulties of preparing legislation since the Session is so close to proroguing. We pointed out, too, our 

legal difficulties that need to be cleared up; and I believe I made it as clear as I could possibly have 

made it, that it would be very difficult to bring down legislation as late as this in the present Session. 

 

RE NEWS STATEMENT 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer)  — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are called, I 

wish to bring to the attention of the Assembly an error made in the press. It appeared in both the ‘Star 

Phoenix’ and the ‘Leader Post’, and I just want to say at the outset that I think it was really a very 

excellent summary of The Vehicles Act — a most difficult Act to try to get a summary prepared for. The 

only reason I mention it is because it might encourage some people to break the law even more than they 

are doing today. The item lists 12 changes, and one of those says  “Permitting passing on the right on 

one-way streets or where lane driving is in force.” Now the first part of that is right, but the amendments 

do not permit passing on the right, even where there are lanes on the streets. What we are doing, this 

year, is to insist that motorists shall signal when going from one lane to another, and then, if they can 

learn to move properly from one lane to another, I hope, next year, that we might be able to introduce 

this legislation to allow them the privilege of passing on the right-hand side; but certainly the way they 

are driving, today, I would not want to take any chances on it. 

 

The Assembly resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on several Bills and, after spending 

considerable time therein, adjourned at 10 o’clock p.m. 

 


