



















































Hansard: February 24, 1955


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Twelfth Legislature 

11th Day 

 

Thursday, February 24, 1955 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed, from Wednesday, February 23, 1955, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion 

of Mr. Dewhurst for the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, having paid the usual complimentary 

respects to the mover and seconder of the Address, and having also complimented the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition, it is not necessary for me to re-state the commendations made, yesterday afternoon, when I 

adjourned the debate. 

 

The Speech from the throne mentions that the 1954 crop was one of the most disappointing experienced 

in the history of Saskatchewan. The one significant feature in regard to the effects of this crop failure 

was the fact that it has come after a series of excellent crops. We had three unprecedented crops in 

Saskatchewan prior to 1954; in fact, in 1952, we produced 435 million bushels of wheat in this province, 

which is equal to a normal crop produced, in an average year, in the Dominion of Canada; and that as a 

result of one crop failure economic conditions should deteriorate so rapidly in this province, is indicative 

of the important place at agriculture holds in the economy of our province, and the great need of 

endeavouring to overcome the many natural hazards that affect our agriculture, but more particularly, to 

stabilize the economic aspects of our basic industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not, as a rule, wish to make reference to remarks or statements made by members of 

this Assembly. I cannot help, though, but make some reference to the statements made by the hon. 

member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson), yesterday. He made reference to, or commented on, the fact 

that a certain Mr. Rawluk was now working for the Federal Government. He expressed the hope, I think, 

that this young man would make a success in life. The hon. member can be assured that we all wish that 

the gentleman in question will make a success in life. However, he then posed the question, saying, 

“How did this young man get into the mess he was in?” He apparently asked the question of the House 

and then proceeded to answer himself. I think he should have directed that question to the young man 

himself, or, in the alternative, to the former Leader of the Opposition in this Legislature, Mr. Tucker, as 

he could tell him better why this young man got into difficulties. He referred to the fact that it was 

mentioned in this House that the young man in question now has a job with the P.F.R.A., and he said 

that mention of it was „sheer dirt-throwing‟. He forgets that this Assembly sat here, I think for two or 

three or four weeks, and listened to a whole lot of dirt emanating from that side of the House. I do not 

think that all people, not even perhaps this young man‟s relatives, will concur in upholding this young 

man, to the extent 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

 

2 

 

he has been, as a model of perfection, in this Legislature. The hon. member closed by saying that this 

matter should be dropped. I said, last year, that is not to be dropped, and I hope that it will be dropped. 

The people of this province have heard enough about this particular episode. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — You fellows brought it up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I wish to make some reference, and again with reluctance, to 

some of the statements made by the hon. member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Dunfield), and to comment on 

the quotations made in an editorial in the „Leader-Post‟ on February 19th, in which he stated that 

employees of the Government in northern Saskatchewan were similar to “little Caesars, bloated with 

power and personal ego”, and that the spirit of compulsion is still the basis of the programme of this 

Government in northern Saskatchewan. And the Liberal press went on to depict the situation in a 

cartoon captioned “C.C.F. trapped”, in which they seemed to indicate that the people of the north were 

caught in the steel jaws of C.C.F. totalitarianism, bureaucracy, and what have you. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — You sure hit it there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — All I have to say to the hon. members opposite is: listen, my friends, and you shall 

hear about some facts that will give you no cheer. In all kindness, Mr. Speaker, I must say to the hon. 

member that it is unfortunate that his capacity to reason and see things in their true light is exceeded by 

his desire to make the most unworthy kind of political capital. This also goes for the Leader-Post, which 

talks so fluently about the duties and responsibilities of the press. 

 

The Department of Agriculture has an agricultural representative in northern Saskatchewan, and, by the 

way, there was never any agricultural assistance and advice given to the natives of the north until this 

administration came into power. This particular gentleman is the most devoted public servant, dedicated 

to the task of helping the native people of the north to improve their living standards; and the work 

already accomplished by this agricultural representative is greatly appreciated by the people of northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to give the House some indication of the success that the ag-rep. in the north has had in the 

formation of 4-H clubs, Mr. Speaker, bringing to the north and new concept in the new ideal for the 

young people of that country. As the House knows, club members are pledged. They pledge their heads 

to clearer thinking, their hearts to greater loyalty, their hands to larger service and their health to better 

living for their home, their club, their community and their country. High ideals, I would say, Mr. 

Speaker. Since we have had the ag-rep. in the north he has organized eleven 4-H Clubs, with 345 

members, nine garden clubs and three potato clubs, located at various places in the north — Beauval, Ile 

a la Crosse, Buffalo Narrows, Snake Lake, Cumberland House and Pelican Portage, Sturgeon Landing, 

Montreal Lake, etc. I should mention, too, that for the first time we were able to take some of the 

outstanding boys and girls from those clubs to Prince Albert, paying their air transportation, to the 

Prince Albert Fair, where they could engage in competition with the boys and girls from southern 

Saskatchewan. 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

3 

 

The projects that are being undertaken of are infinite help to the people of the north, recognizing as we 

do the limitations on food production and the increasing population problem we have in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In addition to the extension work carried on, besides 4-H club activities, pasture improvement projects at 

Buffalo Narrows have been established in the amount of nearly $700 by the Department, and vegetable 

and fruit-growers‟ co-operatives have been established at Ile a la Crosse at an expense of over $3,000 to 

the Department. A livestock project was initiated, last year, at Snake Lake. For the first time, we brought 

into Snake Lake five head of cattle by Cat. train — five heifers and one bull, Mr. Speaker, and you can 

be sure I made certain that it would be a Aberdeen Angus bull, knowing that this particular breed will 

withstand the severe climatic conditions of the north probably better than any other breed. I thought, Mr. 

Speaker, it would be advisable to put in a little „plug‟ for a breed that has not enjoyed too much 

popularity in Saskatchewan. 

 

In behalf of garden improvement and development projects at Portage La Loche, we have paid to these 

people and assisted them in an amount of well over $3,000. All of these activities added together, Mr. 

Speaker, do add up to a different type of approach and the solution to the difficult problems of the native 

people of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

The ag-rep. for the north has sent the club leaders what he terms the „Northern 4-H Club Newsletter‟. 

Many of the club leaders contribute to this newsletter, and the best possible answer to the statements 

made by the hon. member from Meadow Lake is to quote some extracts from the comments made by the 

club leaders in the different parts of northern Saskatchewan. He and the people of this province can then 

determine whether or not government employees in that area are arrogant Caesars, who have no regard 

for human rights and human liberties and human freedom and what have you. I want to say that I know 

of no government employee in northern Saskatchewan who isn‟t devoted to the uplifting and the 

well-being of the natives; and their chief problem in doing so is largely due to the adverse influence of 

the traders and the bootleggers who have held sway in northern Saskatchewan throughout the years. 

They are the ones, who have created the adverse propaganda referred to, and exaggerated by, the hon. 

member from Meadow Lake. 

 

To get back to club activities, Mr. Speaker: it is mentioned in the newsletter that the big activity in the 

majority of the clubs, this winter, is a public-speaking competition. Most of the clubs — Green Lake, 

Beauval, Buffalo Narrows, Snake Lake, Meadow Lake, Montreal Lake and Montreal Lake Indian 

Reserve, Pelican Portage — have entered into this competition. A shield and six medals have been 

kindly donated by the Department of Co-operation for the competition, and this will be an annual affair. 

Does this sound like „strutting Caesars‟, „arrogant Caesars‟, bent on power? 

 

Speaking of some of the comments made by the club leaders, here is a typical one: 

 

“Bill Harrison, Club Leader for the Lakeside Club at Montreal Lake says this: 

 

“Our cozy newly-constructed school, last winter, is beside Highway No. 2. I feel privileged over some 

of the 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

 

4 

 

northern teachers in having access quite readily to the outside world. Twice I have been home to 

Pierceland, and several times in to Prince Albert; therefore, my previous misconception of being so far 

north has radically changed.” 

 

This is indicative of the progress that is being made in the northern part of this province as the result of 

the initiative of this administration to bring roads and schools and health services to that country. I want 

to say here that, as a result of the establishment of the schools and providing teachers in the north, a 

great deal of help has been received and a great deal of co-operation has been given by the Department 

of Education in connection with these 4-H Club activities that would not have been possible had not the 

schools been provided for these people, as well as the teachers. 

 

Another comment runs in this vein: 

 

“We are progressing in our public-speaking contest. It was hard at first, but we have really worked on 

it and now we are almost hoping to win.” 

 

And another comment, Mr. Speaker: (coming from a news editor from the Green Lake club) 

 

“From Meadow Lake to Green Lake we now have a highway! Two years ago a construction crew 

called the Stewarts assumed the task of changing the old wagon trail from our districts into a modern 

road fit for motor vehicles. In the first step towards this achievement that Company sent out 

employees to scout the most suitable routes. They checked their chosen paths by marking them with 

small stakes with a peculiar printing, which all road markers can easily decipher. Then the cleaning up 

again. Five Caterpillars bulldozed those huge trees, cut down steep hills, dug ditches to insure a 

passable road suitable for traffic. During all the summer months 18 men pursued their work until 

freeze-up, leaving the road covered with heavy gumbo; then the job remained dormant for the months 

following. Last fall, to our great contentment, a gravel gang appeared, heavy graders smoothed the 

gravel and now the most hazardous spots have become safe and pleasant. 

 

“We wish to extend our most sincere thanks to all those who rendered this northland what it is today.” 

 

I could quote many more, Mr. Speaker, but I think I have taken sufficient time for quotations to 

convince the people of this province that the statements made by the hon. member from Meadow Lake, 

as usual, are exaggerated, uncalled for, and certainly cannot be constructive criticism as recommended 

by the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to mention and refer to one more thing; another editorial. It is not of any great 

consequence, but it was with a 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

5 

 

considerable bit of humour that I read it. this editorial appeared in the Saskatoon „Star Phoenix‟. We 

naturally expect that the Liberal daily press wishes to build up the new Leader of the Opposition, and we 

cannot blame them for this; but sometimes they go to a ridiculous extreme, and the humour that I 

derived from this particular editorial lay in the fact that it did go to a very ridiculous extreme. The 

editorial writer, it seems, wished to convey the impression that, somehow or other, the Premier had 

come off second best in the Throne Speech debate, when he stated that the second source of 

encouragement in the speech of the Hon. Leader of the Opposition was the performance of the hon. 

Leader in his first real legislative test as Opposition Leader. The editorial goes on: 

 

“As a matter of fact, a comparison of the reports of the two speeches leads us to the conclusion that 

Mr. McDonald had the best of the encounter.” 

 

This is then qualified by saying: 

 

“If they are right, this was a remarkable is achievement . . .” 

 

Indeed, it would be a remarkable achievement. It is the kind of achievement that we all aspire to, and, 

Mr. Speaker, in order that people may get the record straight, I would suggest that they read the 

historical records of the feud between the Scottish clans, and I think they will find that the Douglas 

usually came out on top in any competition with the McDonalds. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Never in their lives! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I am sure that the hon. member for Nipawin would agree with that statement; and 

the hon. Leader of the Opposition, being a very modest Scott, blushes at the suggestion that he should 

aspire to such high honours. 

 

I wish to deal, now, with a few statements contained in this speech of the hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

He said that the Government has not paid the attention it should have to agriculture, our basic industry in 

Saskatchewan. Again, Mr. Speaker, much as I dislike to, I will have to refer to some figures in order to 

give the facts in this particular instance. The estimates for the Department of Agriculture 1944-45, when 

we took over the administration of the government of this province, were $761,000. In 1954-55, our 

agriculture estimates were $5,100,000. Some of that increase can be attributed to increased costs and 

increase salaries; but I am going to give to the House the actual net increases above increase costs that 

have taken place; and they amount to well over $4 million, made up of an increase in assistance to 

agricultural societies in junior clubs of $90,000; of increased assistance to the agricultural 

representatives service of $335,000; increased services to veterinary districts, and in behalf of veterinary 

policies, $70,000; General assistance to the livestock industry, $114,000; improvements in protection to 

field crops, a straight increase of $256,000; and to the Conservation and Development Branch, an 

entirely new branch, of very nearly $2 million. As a matter of fact, to date there has been spent, in the 

Conservation and Development Branch, since 1949, $6,733,000 on behalf of reclamation of land by 

draining and irrigation, and we have provided in this new branch a complete engineering staff plus 

equipment to do the work of physical development. This is a new service that never existed before the 

provincial Department of Agriculture. 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

 

6 

 

To give a further indication of the expanded programmes in the Ag-Rep. Service. In 1944, there were 

only 21 agricultural representatives, and the service did not rate the status of a branch with an 

administrative director. In 1954, the agricultural representative branch comprises a staff of 77 persons, 

including 44 agronomists and 23 clerical staff in country offices alone, with 4 agronomists and 6 clerical 

staff at the central office. In 1944, the 21 agricultural representatives served their districts out of 11 

headquarters, while in 1954, the 37 agricultural representatives worked out of 35 headquarters. In 1944, 

a total of 695 farm meetings were held, while in 1954, a total of 4,600 meetings were held in country 

points, indicating the improved services given to the farmers of this province. 

 

In regard to assistance grants to agricultural societies and junior clubs, it might be of interest to note that 

the grants to the Class A fairs have increased three times over — from $21,000 in 1943-44 to over 

$67,000 in 1953-54. Grants to the Class B fairs similarly by well over 300 per cent, and the grants to the 

Class C fairs have been increased nearly six times over what they were in 1943-44. For junior club 

activities, the grants, as compared to 1943-44, increased from $5,900 to $14,500 in 1953-54; and so I 

could go on down the line in great detail, indicating the tremendous additional services that have been 

given to the agricultural industry of this province 

 

In the Plant Industries Branch, assistance in the matter of tree-planting programmes and roadside 

re-grassing, spraying assistance and weed-control assistance alone since these programmes were 

inaugurated in 1948, we have expanded some $300,000 on behalf of the assistance programmes just 

mentioned. 

 

I don't think that it is necessary for me to go to any further detail to convince the people of this province 

that the Department of Agriculture has undergone a terrific expansion within the past few years. 

 

Some reference has been made in the Throne Speech to the seriousness of the effects of some two or 

three crop failures in north-eastern Saskatchewan because of flood conditions. Reference was made to 

the assistance that is being made available to the people of the north-east part of this province through 

work-and-wages programmes inaugurated at an early date, last summer. It might interest the House to 

know that some $250,000 has been expended in these work-and-wages programmes to date; but, Mr. 

Speaker, never has the lease policy of the Department being justified to a greater extent than it has under 

these circumstances. It might interest the House to know that, at the end of this fiscal year, we will have 

paid out in clearing and breaking accounts to lessees who hold Crown land, some $1,500,000. It might 

interest the House to know that cash payments have been made to lessees of Crown lands for clearing 

and breaking in the amount of $2,000,000 to date, all of which is contributed immensely towards 

assisting Crown lessees in overcoming the adverse conditions experienced over the past three years 

particularly in the north-east part of the province. 

 

I have heard a good deal said in this House and comparisons made with reference to similar settlements 

on the Manitoba side of the border. We have been criticized because we haven‟t sold this land outright 

to prospective settlers. We haven‟t gone into the lease policy because of any perversity of mind or 

because of any particular philosophy. We went into this policy of land settlement because we felt that it 

was the best form of partnership arrangement that could possibly be devised to assist a young man who 

intended to start farming 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

7 

 

on new land toward becoming established, without too much initial financial burden; and our policies 

have been justified, particularly so in view of adverse weather conditions in the north-east part of the 

province. 

 

I have a statement which appeared in the Winnipeg „Free Press‟ of November 5, 1954. Apparently they 

are having their difficulties on the Manitoba side of the border as well. The reason I want to make 

reference to this editorial is to make a comparison between the lot of the Crown land lessee on our side 

of the border insofar as new settlement is concerned, and the lot of the settler on the Manitoba side of 

the border, where he has been subjected to an initial cash payment for the land, plus interest and plus 

payments over at 15-year period of time. And these are veteran settlers. The Winnipeg „Free Press‟ news 

item is entitled: “PUT UP OR CLOSE UP on a veteran project, Legion tells Government.” It states: 

 

“The representations to the Government contained the following recommendations: 

 

“That the province should arrange a consolidation of debt owing by the settlers to the Manitoba 

government, municipalities and others. It would also be necessary to postpone payment on these until 

settlers have enough working capital to keep them going. The Legion committee suggested that 

commercial bank credit supported by the government was the most practical.” 

 

Compare that, Mr. Speaker, with our policy, where we make payments outright for clearing and 

breaking down, and where there are no annual interest liabilities and consequent accumulation of 

interest liabilities, as well. The delegations further recommended: 

 

“That work for settlers who can leave their families and livestock during the winter should be 

provided. Arrangements made previously in this respect have been appreciated.” 

 

It is noteworthy that the administration here at an early date gave assistance as far as work and wages 

was concerned. And then one more thing is mentioned: 

 

“That one authority should be situated near the settlement with the power from the government to act. 

This representative should also be able to co-ordinate work and plans of government departments now 

involved in the project.” 

 

The Canadian Legion circularized some 43 settlers, asking them to report on their experiences. Some of 

the experiences related by the settlers are interesting and I quote some of them. One states: 

 

“I came here in 1946 with $6,300. I have cleared and broken 100 acres myself. I bought equipment, 

put up buildings. Now, through no fault of my own, I am broke. We have no roads fit to travel. The 

drainage problem is still with us.” 

 

Another declared: 

 

“Someone else will have to figure a way to make the project a success. I have tried all I know and I 

consider — 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

 

8 

 

and outside of army life I have farmed all my life. I am unable to properly summer fallow the land I 

have broke. What happens from here I don‟t know.” 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that this proves conclusively that we were right when we adopted a lease policy 

under which the Crown, as the landlord, went into partnership with the lessee towards getting him 

established. I might say, a whole lot of extra administrative and clerical work is involved in order to 

establish this kind of relationship, and I am happy to say to this House that, in this fiscal year, another 

crop failure year, we will be paying out to lessees of Crown lands some $1,500,000. 

 

The Throne Speech makes some reference, as it has for the past couple of years, to the South 

Saskatchewan dam. The Leader of the Opposition referred in his speech to things that should have been 

done years ago. Well, so many things have been done in the past ten years that the Liberal party does not 

even now realize what has already been done. In fact, they are late as usual in even recognizing 

accomplished facts, because they have hastily placed in their 1954 model platform things which are not 

new, as though they were still things to be done; but, as a matter of fact, things that have either already 

been initiated, or are now accomplished facts. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell them of the one thing that the people of Saskatchewan should have had 

years ago. I refer, to the construction of the South Saskatchewan dam. Indeterminable negotiations and 

correspondence have taken place in regard to this project since I became Minister of this Department, 

until it now looks as though this whole matter is tied up and bogged down with a hopeless exchange of 

correspondence and political fancy footwork on the part of the Dominion Government in regard to 

proceeding with the project. They should have told as long ago whether or not they were prepared to 

proceed with this project, in order to avoid this interminable correspondence, negotiations and meetings 

after meetings that have been held over the past years. Why! Mr. Speaker, since we have been talking 

about this project, in the country to the south of us they have built another project, completely at the 

expense of the National Government there. I refer to the Fort Garrison dam. The National Government 

there is so interested in helping certain areas of the United States that it is prepared not only to build a 

dam and irrigation structures complete, but also to put in the electrical generation units, and, in addition 

to this also make loans available, at very low rates of interest, to co-operatives who make distribution of 

the power generated at very low rates. It is unfortunate that the farmers in the states of Montana and 

Dakota have already enjoyed the benefits of cheap rural electrification while we are still being denied. 

This is because of the broad viewpoint that the American Government takes on resource development in 

that country as against the narrow viewpoint taken by the Ottawa administration in Canada. 

 

The hon. members opposite ought to be the last to talk about this administration being backward in 

assisting agriculture or in providing expanded social services. We have a good record in that regard, Mr. 

Speaker, and no one in this province has ever accused us of being backward in these matters. As a 

matter of fact, more often than not, I have heard hon. members opposite get up on their feet (a few years 

ago) and accuse us of going too far with social services: now they want everything. Well I am going to 

tell them a few things, Mr. Speaker, in regard to this dam. It is evident that our government at Ottawa 

has no uniform, clear-cut policy for the development of Canada‟s great potential natural resources. It 

seems that they follow a policy of political expediency in these important matters . . . 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

9 

 

Some Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — . . . as witnessed by going ahead with the St. Lawrence seaway that will reduce 

power rates in a province where power rates are already low, to a much lower level, and which will 

naturally attract more industry to a province where they already have great industries. I heard a man 

from Ontario telling us here, last summer, at a Jubilee celebration of the great industrial possibilities that 

were going to take place in his little town in Ontario because of reduced power rates, after the St. 

Lawrence Seaway is completed. There has been no question there, Mr. Speaker, about subsidization of 

power. Why is it that they raise the question when we ask for a similar project in this province of ours? 

As I stated on one location to the Federal Minister, unfortunately, nature hasn‟t endowed us with power 

sites that can be developed at low cost, similar to the power sites in Manitoba or British Columbia. Any 

development that takes place in this province will be costly; but in the negotiations to date it can clearly 

be seen that the Ottawa government is bound that the people of this province will have to pay high 

power rates forever. 

 

Hon. members opposite ought to be the last to talk about cheaper power rates. As a matter of fact, this 

administration has reduced power rates since we took over, in 1944, on three different occasions, despite 

the fact that we had a very expensive and extensive rural electrification programme in this province. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member would just sit down on his fanny until I am 

through . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You‟d be better if you had stayed on yours, too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that we are on the air with limited time, they insist on 

getting up; if there are any questions he would like to ask when I am making my budget address, he can 

do so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — You are opposed to the St. Lawrence Seaway, eh? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — They keep talking about how they are going to provide cheaper electrification. On 

the other hand, the Ottawa government, in our negotiations to date, indicates clearly that we shall not 

have cheap electrification in the province of Saskatchewan. I am going to tell them why, Mr. Speaker. It 

has been announced in the Throne Speech that we have agreed in principle to an agreement drafted by 

representatives of the Dominion Government. What is implied in this agreement? Here is what is 

implied — and I hope the people of this province understand and know this; I think it is high time that 

the people of this province are told about what has been going on behind the scenes in regard to the 

negotiations on this very important project. This administration has done much for agriculture; we are 

prepared to do much more. As a matter of fact, we have been criticized by the most ardent exponents of 

irrigation in this province for already having committed the province to too much, when we accepted, in 

principle, the agreement that I am going to refer to now. 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

 

10 

 

What does it say? It says that the province is expected to pay $20 million, or more, towards the 

construction of the dam itself; and to assume full responsibility for all the works beyond the dam, 

amounting to another $35 million. Then, of course, we will have to put in the generation equipment and 

the conduits in the dam, and that will cost another $20 million, making a grand total of some $75 million 

that this province will have to provide for, if this project is preceded with. That is the price we are 

paying. This is what is meant, Mr. Speaker, when the Federal government says that power should not be 

subsidized in this province of ours. They are saying, in effect, that we must not go above the generating 

rates that power can be produced from our present steam plants. That is what they are saying; and 

further that we will forever be denied cheap power in Saskatchewan! 

 

What is the alternative if we don‟t go along and accept these unreasonable demands? What is the future 

of this province, Mr. Speaker? It is grim, indeed. There will be no possibility of industrial development 

here. The Government has no alternative but proceed, in behalf of the economic future of this province 

and in behalf of the agricultural industry of this province. This is a big commitment to be faced with. 

But, very nonchalantly, our hon. members opposite and the daily press, suggest that we should be 

reducing taxes, that we should make more and more grants. It is never enough, Mr. Speaker. They forget 

that we may be called upon at any time to take on this financial responsibility too. I think this is a most 

unfair and unjustified amount for this Province to contribute towards the cost of this particular project. It 

seems that if Confederation means anything, it ought to mean that people are unfortunately situated, 

people in the so-called „have-nots‟ provinces, ought to be helped by the Federal treasury, which has a 

wide and broad taxing power, to develop the resources of these respective areas in order that the 

standards of living and the standards of services may be improved in such parts of the Dominion of 

Canada. If it doesn‟t mean that, what then does Confederation stand for? In United States to the south of 

us they have recognized this principle, and I had the opportunity of hearing the President enunciate those 

principles when he was closing the Fort Garrison dam in North Dakota. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, this should be enough. I want to say that we have been accused of blaming Ottawa 

for everything, that we give all the blame to Ottawa. We have never blamed Ottawa for anything that 

isn‟t its actual responsibility. We have assumed responsibility in many cases that are responsibilities of 

the Federal Government. We assisted in hospital grants far before the date the Dominion Government 

came in. We also provided supplementary old-age pensions, but everyone knows that there are limits to 

what a province can do. 

 

We have also reduced the burden of taxation on the land. We returned to municipalities the Public 

Revenue Tax. Further the increased social responsibilities that have been assumed by this administration 

are well recognized by the municipal people of this province, and nothing that the hon. members 

opposite can say is going to convince the municipal people of this province to any other conclusion. 

 

Another thing mentioned in the speech of the hon. Leader of the Opposition was that everything we have 

done in respect to agriculture has increased taxes. Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that they are in 

complete 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

11 

 

contradiction with themselves. In one breath they say we should have more and more services, that the 

Provincial Government ought to assume greater and wider responsibilities; that we even ought to assume 

the responsibility for marketing and pricing agricultural commodities. They know quite well that this is 

clear-cut Dominion Jurisdiction. Then they turn right around, and they start pitying the poor taxpayer, 

hoping to get some ill-gotten and cheap political support, the most irresponsible attitude that I have ever 

seen in opposition, and I include the daily press, too, Mr. Speaker. I looked at an editorial, the other day, 

in regard to the expanded programmes that have been necessary in the city of Regina with expenditures 

that will involve some $6,000,000; and did they picture the taxpayer as a burdened down, depressed 

kind of a creature that couldn‟t waddle because of the burden of taxes on his back? Oh, no! Here was 

Mr. Taxpayer standing up there with his chest out, saying to the fathers of the city of Regina, “Well, it is 

about time.” Well, Mr. Speaker, it was also about time to have added a whole lot of services in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and we have at last got them. We have better educational services in this 

province; we have better municipal roads in this province. Despite what anybody says, our roads are 

better throughout and better road equipment too. But, Mr. Speaker, costs have gone up, and neither 

municipal governments nor provincial government can escape when costs are permitted to rise as they 

have been permitted to rise in the post-war years. 

 

I was talking to my municipal secretary, a few weeks ago, and I asked him how much the municipality 

had invested in road equipment. He told me that they have over $40,000 invested in road equipment. I 

asked the same question when I was reeve of this municipality during the depression years, and at that 

time the secretary replied that the municipality had about five or six hundred dollars tied up in road 

equipment. Yes, a few old Fresnos and some of those old foot burners, walking ploughs, and a few slips; 

and at that time I also said, “If I had only that much equipment on my farm, comparatively speaking, I 

wouldn‟t have enough to farm 10 acres, let alone the amount of acreage that I was farming. 

 

The point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is that, instead of having $600 invested in road equipment, this 

municipality now has $40,000 invested in road equipment. Is anyone going to tell me that this road 

equipment hasn‟t made better roads? Certainly road should be better still; and it is a big problem. 

However, I am suggesting that costs have gone up in municipalities, and this is just one illustration. 

Similarly, costs of gone up as far as the farmer is concerned too. Hon. members ought to recognize that 

the farmer, today, has 20 times as much invested in equipment as he had in the 1920‟s, and 10 times as 

much as he did in the 1930‟s. 

 

Where are we going to get the money to provide the level of services required by people today for a 

mechanized agricultural economy? There is only one place that it can be obtained, Mr. Speaker and that 

is out of the price that the farmer receives for his products. We have been fighting in season and out of 

season in behalf of adequate prices to our farmers. We have asked, I think on two successive occasions, 

in the Throne Speech and in this House, and I have also asked the Federal Minister of Agriculture to call 

a conference at which we could discuss the entire matter of marketing, particularly livestock and 

livestock products. We like the Wheat Board principle. It has given the grain growers a great deal of 

stability. We would like to see our livestock producers and our poultry and dairy producers receive the 

same kind of price stability. 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

 

12 

 

When I say this, Mr. Speaker, I am not speaking entirely in behalf of the farm people of this province; I 

am also speaking for the continuity of the present level of municipal and educational services that we 

now have in rural areas. In my own country we have rural electrification, and everyone is thankful for it; 

and the people know that it is going to cost money. They know, too, that it is much cheaper than the 

wind-charger that Mr. Gardiner talked about. Mr. Gardiner‟s solution, as you will recall, was that all 

farmers should put up wind-chargers. Well, they might work and operate quite cheaply as long as we 

have enough people like Mr. Gardiner around, but since having made that statement, I know that Mr. 

Gardiner also now has rural power, and I am sure that he finds it much cheaper than the wind-charger. It 

does much more work, and certainly lightens the burden of toil for our farm people. 

 

All of this means, Mr. Speaker, that some place along the road governments must recognize that we will 

have to get together on marketing plans that will at least guarantee some economic stability to this 

important agricultural industry of ours. 

 

I could say a good deal more, Mr. Speaker, in regard to the cost price „squeeze‟ that has taken place in 

the past few years, but this administration and this party of which I am pleased to be a member, found its 

origin in the struggles of the farm people of this province. We have, in season and out of season fought 

on behalf of agriculture. Our record in that regard is well known, and stands on its own merits. 

Suggestions from hon. members opposite that we have increased farm production costs, is without 

foundation, when everyone knows that the cost of everything that goes into the farmer‟s operation has 

increased, in some cases, 300 per cent. I think I recall that the hon. Minister of Education (Mr. Lloyd) 

mentioned in this House that if increased costs alone were available to pay taxes, all our school taxes 

would be taken care of, as well as municipal taxes. 

 

I know that my time is now exhausted, Mr. Speaker, much to my great regret. I was just getting up a 

nice little head of steam to a point where I could give hon. members opposite a few facts that wouldn‟t 

be very cheerful to them. I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — In rising in this debate on the Speech from the Throne, Mr. 

Speaker, there are many things that I would like to say. The first, and the most important, is that I have a 

new daughter to report to this Legislature, born February 22nd. I do not expect to make an annual event 

of this, if anyone is wondering about it. 

 

I want to congratulate those who have spoken before me in this debate. Their varying contributions have 

been indicative of their varying abilities. I want to congratulate the hon. Leader of the Opposition on his 

accession to the Liberal throne in this province. It is rather ironic, this congratulating the member of the 

Opposition, because further on in my speech I intend to knock into a cocked hat some of the arguments 

that he put up in the Throne Speech debate. 

 

I want to say a few words, this Jubilee Year, about The Battlefords. I think we can rightly claim that The 

Battlefords and the town of 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

13 

 

Battleford is the most historic site in the province of Saskatchewan. If any others wish to argue that 

point they can see me later. Battleford was the first capital of the North-West Territories. Since then, 

things have deteriorated to some extent in this province, and they moved the capital down to Regina, 

which we regret, but can do very little about it. I want to say that if it had been left there, we could have 

saved the province considerable expense. We have spent a good deal of money landscaping, building a 

man-made lake here, when the natural terrain and scenery around the town of Battleford and the city of 

North Battleford would have lent itself as a very proper setting to the capital of Saskatchewan, and it 

would have been far more central in the long run. 

 

I would say a few more words about the town of Battleford. I want to say that it is a very historic site. 

We don‟t have to read history there; you can reach out and touch it, and there is a good deal to reach out 

and touch. I think, in mentioning this, we must mention the old parliament buildings, which are now our 

Roman Catholic college up on the south bank of the Battle River. Further down, along No. 4 Highway 

coming into the town of Battleford you have the Indian and Natural History Museum. It has been taken 

over since it was renovated by the Provincial Government, and is now run by the Dominion 

Government. We in The Battlefords are very thankful of the foresight of this Government when they 

stepped in and salvaged what was fast becoming a lost history, when they salvaged the old barracks. 

 

History shows and records show that, for years, the people of the Battlefords had been attempting to 

save that particular area. They pleaded with both the national and the provincial government to do 

something about it, but it wasn‟t done until the advent of a C.C.F. government that had the interests of 

history and the people of Saskatchewan at heart. They did something about it, and we are proud of it, 

Mr. Speaker; and the people of The Battlefords, and especially the town of Battleford, are very grateful 

for it. 

 

I would like to say further, in this Jubilee Year, that the city of North Battleford is the fastest-growing 

city in Saskatchewan. It is a very progressive city, a very nice city, and a city that you could come and 

visit, whether on holiday, or if you intended to settle there. We would be pleased to see you, and we 

know that there is a real future in north-western Saskatchewan and in the city of North Battleford. 

 

This is the Jubilee Year also for the City of North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, and we will be celebrating 

that along with our provincial Golden Jubilee. It is also a bit of a jubilee for myself, personally, for our 

family. It is 50 years ago today that my father came to Battleford. He walked (and it took him four days) 

from Saskatoon to where he finally located his homestead 16 miles north and east of the city of North 

Battleford. 

 

We have accomplished a great deal in the city of North Battleford throughout the past few years. This 

year some of our pasture lands were culminated in the building and opening of a new City Hall and new 

Fire Hall. Several community centres, new churches and so on and being built, and we also have a new 

and the most modern shopping centre in north-western Saskatchewan in the new Co-op store that is 

being built there, this year. Tomorrow, down in the east end of The Battlefords constituency, they are 

opening a new wing of the Borden Hospital, which will further increase the hospital facilities of The 

Battlefords constituency. I understand the Minister of Health, Mr. Bentley, 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

 

14 

 

will be there tomorrow night and I hope to be there myself to take part in the celebration. 

 

Through the entire area there, whether it is in the rural parts or the urban centres, they are progressive, 

hard-working people and they are very proud of their place in Saskatchewan‟s history, as will be proven 

by their celebrations in their dedications, next summer, in our Golden Jubilee year. 

 

I would like to say much more about this constituency, this area, but time is limited. Anything I might 

say, I am afraid, would certainly be an anticlimax after the Minister of Agriculture has spoken. 

 

In this Jubilee Year, I believe that we should honour our pioneers. I want to say a few words about them. 

Many people wonder about the people of western Canada, and some of our friends in eastern Canada 

and the older and more conservative section of the country, wonder a bit about why we do things out 

here that seem to be frowned on a bit in eastern Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to suggest to you and to this House, the reason we do things is because we here in 

western Canada dare to be different; we dare to look to further horizons. This is a perfectly natural thing. 

We come from a people who left their homeland years ago, came here and faced the hardships simply 

because they were not satisfied to sit back and do what grandfather had done for generations. We are the 

sons and daughters of people who dared to be different and dared to try something new, and I hope that 

we will never lose that vision, that we will never become conformative to old traditions. It can become a 

very serious thing when you are continually looking back over your shoulder at the past and fail to see 

what the future may hold for you. 

 

Our pioneers came out here, as I said, and suffered a great deal of privation, and I still remember some 

of that. After all, it is about 40 years ago, or little better, that I was born out on the homestead. We did 

not have doctors and facilities within easy distances we have today. My mother had to be satisfied with 

the assistance of a midwife — a very good one too, I must say; and she had to be, too, because I 

weighed 13 pounds when I was born. At this time I would just like to remember the pioneers, and 

especially the mothers of those pioneers, because it is their contribution, Mr. Speaker and members of 

this House, that made a future in this country possible. They, too, dared to try and dared to face the 

battles of nature. 

 

I would like to quote from this poem of Josiah Gilbert Holland, and I would especially like to dedicate 

this to my mother out on the ranch — she is 76 years old, and she is still out there and is still enjoying 

good health — and to my wife into all the other mothers of Saskatchewan, and the pioneer mothers: 

 

“More human, more divine than we 

In truth, half human, half divine 

Is Woman when good stars agree, 

To tamper with their means denying 

The hour of her nativity.” 

 

I would like to say further on this, another poem entitled “The Day‟s Demand.” I think every one of us 

in this House can take cognizance of this, Mr. Speaker: 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

15 

 

“God give us men; a time like this demands strong minds, 

great hearts, true faith and ready hands; 

Men whom the lust of office does not kill; 

Men whom the spoils of office cannot buy; 

Men who possess opinions and a will; 

Men who have honour; men who will not lie; 

Men who can stand before a demagogue and damn his 

treacherous flatteries without winking; 

Good men, some crowned, who live above the fog 

In public duty and in private thinking.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a province here that is not only different in its people; we have the people who are 

different. They came from many lands. You have, right now, people who have not moved too far away 

even from their native language. Up in my constituency and all over the province you will find 

Scandinavian, Germanic, and Ukrainian people who will still greet you in their native tongue; and you 

will have the Scotsman who will say “Hoot mon” and the Irishman who will say, “Sure and begorrah” 

and all these people have been blended together, and they form a people who dare, as I said, to be 

different. That is why we, in the province of Saskatchewan, have progressed further with many of the 

programmes that we have undertaken that other speakers have outlined — and I shall not take up the 

time of this House in going over them again. The debate thus far has clearly outlined the progress that 

has been made in the last 10 years by this Government. I am not discounting that progress has been 

made by other governments in the past; but I do object, Mr. Speaker, to people like the hon. member for 

Meadow Lake (Mr. Dunfield) for instance, and the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) with 

that gutter type of debate which they choose to indulge in. As far as I am concerned, if I had to reply to 

them I would have to get down in the gutter, too, and I don‟t like the gutter. So the best thing I can do is 

to ignore them. 

 

We have problems as has been pointed out in this debate, in the province of Saskatchewan and in my 

constituency. I know what the problems are. I held several meetings, last fall, throughout the farming 

area in my constituency, and that is the area that feels the pinch first. The pinch is felt first by the farmer 

always in this agricultural Community. From there on it is felt by the workingman and the small 

businessman as is indicated by several bankruptcies that did come into effect and were suffered by some 

of the businessmen in north-western Saskatchewan this year. Why? Why? 

 

We have been told that the farmers of western Canada have enjoyed the ten most prosperous years in our 

history, which is relatively true; but what they have failed to say is that, in spite of the fact that they 

were the best years, they are still not good enough, not in a country like this that has the elements to 

battle with, all the gambles that nature can offer. We have got our good solid areas like Rosetown and a 

few others that are consistent with tremendously good crops every year; but the great part of 

Saskatchewan is still on a 15-bushel average and less. Some of them do not enjoy a 15-bushel average. It 

is those people who feel the pinch, and those people are the great multitude of taxpayers in the province 

of Saskatchewan. It is those people who must provide the lifeblood for government finances and 

municipal finances and federal finances — and why haven‟t they got enough? Why do they suffer when 

the first major crop failure, the first major catastrophe comes along? Why haven‟t they got enough? I 

will tell you why they haven‟t got enough. Simply because the fiscal policies of the Federal Government 

have been inadequate and 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

 

16 

 

too little. The Federal Government, in spite of what these people on the other side of the House will try 

to tell us, is responsible for the economy of this country. It is no use for them to stand there and try to 

„balkanize‟ Saskatchewan and make an economic entity of it. The people of Saskatchewan know too 

well what the problems are. 

 

I will tell you what the problems are. They are short of money! I think probably the best way to bring it 

home, especially to the hon. members opposite, the answer to all their criticism so far, would be to quote 

from a speech of a man who is well known in this House. It is the Star Phoenix, January 31, 1955, and 

let me tell you, we appreciate reading the Star Phoenix up around The Battlefords, especially after we 

have been subjected to the Leader-Post for a few days down here. I grant that, especially around election 

time, it becomes very slanted and very biased in favour of the Liberal party; but it least it will print both 

sides of the story — if you search far enough and go on to the back pages. That is more than we can say 

for the Leader-Post on many occasions. To get back to the speech made by Mr. Walter Tucker, M.P. for 

Rosthern, in the House of Commons on January 18th, and he starts out: 

 

“I should like to deal with the problems facing western Canada today. As you know, in 1939, the 

Prairie Farmers‟ Assistance act was passed, under which the farmer contributes one per cent from the 

receipts of the sale of his grain. This is collected by the Federal Government. In the case of crop 

failure, payments are made to the farmer. At the time the Act was passed the farmer received (mark 

this) 57 cents per bushel for his wheat, on an average. The levy of one per cent meant that the Federal 

Government collected about half a cent per bushel. For the last 8 years the Federal Government has 

been collecting, under this one per cent provision, 1.6 cents per bushel on average price prevailing, 

during that time, of $1.63. This is almost three times as much as it had been collecting when the Act 

was passed.” 

 

Well, we all know that; there is nothing too revealing about that: 

 

“The difficulty is that the payments to the farmers remain practically as they were when the Act was 

passed, with a maximum payment being $500 and the minimum being $300. Today $500 will not even 

go half as far as it did when the Act was first passed. This payment was supposed to enable the farmer 

to put in his crop and tide himself over the following year. It was not too generous an allowance to do 

that, back in 1939. Today, when the dollar does not go nearly as far, of course, this payment does not 

do what the Act was originally designed to accomplish. The actual cost the farmer must pay to live 

and carry on his occupation has risen to an extent indicated by the fact that, taking the index for the 

base period of 1935-39 as 100, the figure, today, is 225.” 

 

Get out your paper and pencils, and take that down, in case you haven‟t got this speech: 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

17 

 

“In other words, it takes $225 today to do the work that $100 would have done in 1935-59. Today, 

therefore, $500 will not do as much as $250 would do when the Act was first passed.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is your answer. There is the answer to the people opposite. The hon. Leader of the 

Opposition stood up and told us “the farmer is paying too much taxes”, and he got up and he prattled 

about this very generous P.F.A.A. payment, and he also had the nerve to get up here and prattle about a 

mothers‟ allowance that was so generously given by the Federal Government — pardon me, the family 

allowance. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Be careful! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — You know what I meant. I want to say that the hon. Leader of the Opposition had 

better take another trip back to Ottawa. He had better tell the general headquarters back there that their 

strategy is not too good. They loaded him up with an awful bum load of ammunition when he was down 

there, last time. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan, and the Liberals (I have an awful lot of friends who are Liberals, and I 

appreciate them) expected something better than that, Mr. Speaker. They expected to have leadership, 

and I was pleased to hear the hon. Leader of the Opposition say that he hoped to conduct the debates in 

this House on a high plane, and that he expected to give constructive criticism. If he wants to get a 

following and have some of the Liberals that probably may, or may not, still vote for him, and come out 

of hiding and support him, I think he had better go back to Ottawa and stand up on his hind legs and tell 

the Liberals down there, and the general strategy committee and so on, that the people and the farmers 

and the working men and the business men of western Canada are tired of being pushed around and 

being treated as a poor relation of eastern Canada. He had better go down and tell them that the farmers 

of western Canada are tired of hearing just promises. He can go down and tell them that the people of 

western Canada would like to see not only the P.F.A.A. Act up-dated, but they would like to see 

something done about the promises that go back even further than that, before they are going to renew 

their faith. Let him go down and tell them about the 1919 health insurance promise where all the people 

of Canada, according to the late Rt. Hon. William Lyon MacKenzie King, were going to have a 

complete medical, dental and health care from the cradle to the grave. That was in 1919 — 36 years ago 

— still a good promise; and the Hon. Paul Martin had the nerve to say that the people of Canada were 

pleased with the „dynamic approach‟ taken by the Federal Government on their health matters. 

 

He had better also tell them that the farmers of western Canada are tired of hearing just talk about the 

South Saskatchewan River dam. We are also very tired and also disappointed in hearing our leader, the 

Rt. Hon. St. Laurent, say that he doubts, at this time, after spending $2,000,000 finding out the 

engineering possibilities — after spending $2,000,000 they doubt it if it is in the national interest. They 

doubt if it is in the national interest! I could say that he could also go back and tell them that the farmers 

of western Canada are looking for something that will approach parity prices for agricultural products. 

The excuse is always given — “we are too much of an exporting nation; we cannot do what the United 

States is doing.” Well, they can make a start. We consume 20 per cent of our wheat here in Canada and 

if the farmers of 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

 

18 

 

western Canada had received parity prices, which would have meant about 40 to 50 cents more per 

bushel for 20 per cent of their wheat, they would be in a considerably better financial position today than 

they are. Tell them that, next time you go to Ottawa! 

 

Mr. Speaker, another thing that he can tell them is that the farmers of western Canada are tired of paying 

the bulk of the taxes. Figure out the 10-per cent sales tax alone, and forget all the others, on what we pay 

on the machinery that comes in here. We are tired of that. And we are tired of being told about that 

miserable pittance that is given back in return for all the money that goes from us, and we are tired of 

hearing about the subsidy which the proper name for is the „tax rental‟ — $27,000,000 given back for 

the privilege to pick our pockets of hundreds of millions! Yes, we are tired of hearing that, too! And if 

you want your Liberal friends to come out of hiding and stop hanging their heads in shame, then I think 

you had better go back and make it public. When you do, and if you do, you will get support; you will 

get support from quarters you probably never even dreamed of. He won‟t have to go out, Mr. Speaker, 

when the campaign comes on, and depend entirely on P.F.A.A. and P.F.R.A. for his organization 

support. That is what, unfortunately, those two organizations have largely become. We appreciate the 

P.F.A.A. Act and we appreciate the plan. We feel — and four meetings that I held in my constituency 

bear that out; the resolutions came from the floor and in each case they said they could either be doubled 

or trebled and that, in spite of the fact that they are already paying three times as much, they would be 

willing to pay more in the compulsory deductions on the P.F.A.A. plan. You know, it is a funny thing. 

These people are always talking about compulsory insurance, yet there are more compulsory plans, such 

as the P.F.A.A. Act, which forces you to pay, and quite often won‟t allow you to collect, if they can find 

some loophole; you are forced to pay into this and then, in many cases, you will not be paid simply 

because of some little loophole in the Act, such as a man being away from home or one thing or another, 

and they don‟t pay him. 

 

The Act, Mr. Speaker, does not need to hire scads and scads of men to do political work when they 

should be doing inspection work. The inspection work in itself is not necessary. All the information that 

these inspectors pick up, and spend countless hours and dollars picking up, could be obtained far more 

efficiently and in far less time if it had been done by the municipal secretary on the recommendations of 

the municipal council and through the information that is in the Permit Book given under oath in every 

elevator. There is no reason in the world why they should hire hordes of men when you can look for 

miles in any direction in the country, and you can see a jackrabbit at 300 yards. Why should they further 

impede the progress and create further expense by hiring inspectors? Well, there were very few people 

on the Liberal ticket who weren‟t hired, this year, as P.F.A.A. inspectors. 

 

I am going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that if the hon. Leader of the Opposition says that western farmers 

are tired of that kind of patronage in that kind of administration, and if he cuts adrift from these people, 

he won‟t have those old boys who are out on P.F.A.A. working for him, but I will grant you that he will 

have some young men who are proud to go out and work for nothing, because of something they believe 

in. We, on the side of the House, do not have to depend on anybody except those people who believe 

they have got something to work for. Every time I have taken part in an election (and I have taken part 

in a good many of them), people who cannot 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

19 

 

afford to do so dig down in their pockets, put up money for radio time, drive their cars and work, and the 

work is pretty effective, as the representation on this side of the House so aptly shows. 

 

I don‟t want to dwell too long on these points. I certainly want to say that rubbing salt in a few obvious 

sores, speaking on these little immediate things that people have, will solve nothing. Apparently the 

Leader of the Opposition and his friends have toured around and they have picked up the most obvious 

things that people, who are not too well informed, have complained about; but it doesn‟t take too long to 

find out why. We have been telling them why, and apparently the ex-Leader of the Opposition, once 

removed, has found out something he would never admit while he was here. He has found out that it 

costs $2.25 to do what $1.00 would do about 10, 12 or 15 years ago. 

 

There is the answer, Mr. Speaker regarding our difficulties on the farm front. There is a difficulty 

regarding the troubles on the labour front. The people who are working in every walk of life are 

continually being, and have continually, been, faced with this uncontrolled inflation and they, too, must 

strive to get their wages raised to put bread and milk into the mouths of their families. Simply saying 

that „taxes are high‟ isn‟t going to solve anything. It is not going to satisfy anyone, and what the 

Opposition has said so far is simply this: they have really stretched their imaginations in the most 

freakish manner. They have come to the conclusion now that, in spite of the fact that the Federal 

Government has failed to do and take the necessary steps to meet these natural economic crises that we 

have faced for the last ten years, they have tied the farmer to a stump with controlled prices in wheat and 

one thing and another, and allowed all the rest of the prices to go up and up and up. The farmer was 

sitting right on the tailboard while prices were going up — and where is he now? Sitting right on the 

neck yoke, leading the parade while prices are going down; and it is not going to be very long, as 

businessmen well know, before they are joined by the workers and the farmers. 

 

I was surprised that the member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. Kohaly) contributed further to this particular 

mirage they are trying to create by saying that we here in Saskatchewan are not doing our part to do 

something about unemployment. Wouldn‟t it be surprising, Mr. Speaker, if unemployment was not a 

problem here in Saskatchewan, this year, when farmers have had practically no purchasing power? 

Garages in small towns and cities all over have laid off help because the farmer isn‟t bringing in his 

truck and his car to be overhauled, and all the other work that goes on, when economy is buoyant and 

prosperous. The only reason that we weren‟t in this position before is because of nature‟s goodness in 

providing more than ample crops. We produced three and four times the bushels in the past two years, 

prior to 1954, than we had done in any average year before that; so we actually were growing twice the 

crops at the same expense, and the very small price that we were getting for our product helped to take 

care of the situation. But what happens? And the member for Souris-Estevan ought to know; he doesn‟t 

live too far from the border. Right at North Portal, Mr. Speaker, you can go into the elevator on the 

Canadian side of the border and the initial price paid to the farmer that day is $1.23. Walk across the line 

in the same town to the American side, and it is about $2.24 or $2.25 for the same grade of wheat! 

Likewise, go to the automobile dealer, for instance, and buy a Ford car on the Canadian side of the 

border and you will pay $600 more than you will just a hundred feet or so south of the border from an 

automobile dealer there. Our cost of production is much higher; the price we receive is much lower — it 

is much too low; and 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

 

20 

 

the hon. member for Souris-Estevan said that, somehow or other, it is the fault of the Saskatchewan 

Government that we are in economic difficulties. I think that the member for Souris-Estevan knows 

better and that probably he feels that he should do a little to aid and abet the cause of the Liberal group 

on that side of the House, in the hope that he may continue to get their support down in his constituency. 

 

I have got a lot of Conservative friends and I get their support up in The Battlefords — yes, some of the 

Liberals too, incidentally. I get their support, and I think I am going to continue to get their support, and 

incidentally, what I have just said in reply to the member for Souris-Estevan was suggested to me by 

some Conservatives in that particular constituency. They suggested that I might mention it to him — 

that he might choose better ground to stand and fight on. 

 

So they say they are subsidizing those farmers down south of the line; that is always the argument. They 

are spending millions, yes, billions of dollars in subsidizing those farmers south of the line, in order to 

maintain a stable agricultural economy in that country. Sure they are, and it is money well spent, and I 

am going to tell you just how much it costs the people of the United States. During the 17 years that 

Commodity Credit Corporation has been in operation it has cost, per capita, the people of the United 

States, 35 cents each, per year. I maintain that that is a pretty cheap price to maintain the prosperous 

economy that the farmers and the stockman south of a line enjoy. Walter Reuther, one of the great 

labour leaders in the United States, made the statement that he was all in favour of those millions and 

billions of dollars being paid into the farm subsidies. He said, “It is the only assurance that we, as a 

country and a labour force, have to avoid depression, because if we do not do this, and if we allow the 

farm economy to slip, we will again be heading into another farm depression. So don‟t worry too much 

about subsidies.” 

 

They don‟t seem to be worrying on that side of the House about subsidies that have been paid to the 

monopolies down east. Oh no! These champions and stooges of monopoly on that side of the House are 

fully in accord with that type of thing; but when it comes to giving dollars and putting purchasing power 

into the hands of the farmers, they say, “Oh, no, we can‟t possibly do that; that would put the country 

into debt.” But they are quite happy to pay homage to their masters, the gold industry and all the rest of 

the industries that were subsidized during the war and after the war. 

 

I maintain, Mr. Speaker, it is time they got their eyes off their shoelaces and started looking to the 

broader horizons and try and do something before it is too late to salvage the economy of western 

Canada. We have, as I said earlier in my speech, been the poor relations and have been treated as a poor 

relations of eastern Canada too long. I think it is high time that those of you who have the intestinal 

fortitude on that side of the House got up and said something, and showed that we people here in 

western Canada form a united front, and show the people in charge of the government down there in 

eastern Canada — these people who have taken this vacillating attitude all through the years, an attitude 

which has been completely indecisive; they have been inactive and they have failed. It is high time, Mr. 

Speaker, that these people did take some action, and if they take that kind of action, they will get the 

support they need and that they are trying to buy today with a few cheap, immediate criticisms that don‟t 

hold any water. All they have said 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

21 

 

so far is that the people of eastern Canada and the farmers of western Canada should vote for the 

provincial Liberals, because the Federal Liberals, through their fiscal policy, have brought them to a 

state of bankruptcy. Some pretty freakish logic! But we are used to that from some quarters on that side 

of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have exceeded my time limit; I am sorry that I was crowded. The hon. member for Pelly 

(Mr. Feusi) hoped to get on the air today; I am afraid he didn‟t. I am sure that his contribution would 

have been much better than mine. However, you have been very patient and have put up with this speech 

and I want to say, before I sit down, that I was mighty proud when the people of The Battlefords asked 

me to stand as their candidate for the C.C.F. party. I was prouder still when I took my seat in this House, 

and I have had no reason since that time to be anything but proud to sit here under the leadership of our 

Premier, the Hon. T.C. Douglas. We have made mistakes — sure, we have, Mr. Speaker; but any 

mistakes made have been made in the honest effort of trying to build something better, and, as I said 

before, we have had the courage to try to do something different, instead of falling into that little narrow 

rut that is prescribed by the oracles of wisdom down in eastern Canada. We won‟t we shan‟t, we never 

will again follow those narrow groups, and we shall, I hope, keep our eyes on the broader horizons and 

keep looking to the future, building for the future, and make Saskatchewan continue to grow and be one 

of the gems in the Canadian Crown. 

 

I will support the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Arnold Feusi (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure we have all enjoyed the capable addresses of the 

previous speakers, this afternoon. I feel very much like the little fellow who came late to the auction 

sale; there wasn‟t very much left but the poultry to buy. Possibly I shall have to deal a bit with the 

poultry, this afternoon. 

 

The member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) did mention that his seat had great historical significance. 

I, also, can say that Pelly constituency has historical meaning. If you can visualize, Mr. Speaker, the seat 

of Pelly is bisected by two rivers, the Swan and the Assiniboine, both of them rising in north-central 

Saskatchewan and running roughly parallel to a point where they approach each other within a distance 

of some 10 miles, and then diverging in each entry in a different water system, the one the Winnipegosis 

and the other south and east to Lake Winnipeg. 

 

Where they come together, within the 12 miles or 10 miles, we had in the early history of white 

settlement to trading posts, one Fort Livingstone on the elbow of the Swan, and the other Fort Pelly, on 

the elbow of the Assiniboine. Between the two forts was a natural low waterway, in some parts of the 

year a creek, that in times of heavy flood were known to join. Evidently this was an overland or 

part-time portage between the two posts. I like to mention the two forts because Fort Livingstone was 

one of the early sites of territorial government. Fort Pelly was important as the jumping-off place for an 

overland route from Fort Pelly to Fort Garry. I had the privilege of using part of that old Fort Pelly-Fort 

Garry trail that traversed the northern section of Duck Mountain Provincial Parked within the bounds of 

Saskatchewan. We utilized it as a patrol road. 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

 

22 

 

It was rather grim that Fort Pelly could not have been salvaged some 20 years ago. Approximately 20 

years ago, Fort Pelly was almost intact. Much of the records were strewn around the old fort site. In the 

intervening 20 years, the records were partially destroyed; some of them were salvaged by interested 

settlers in the vicinity. The Norquay Historical Society has reclaimed much of the old literature — and, 

should my friends opposite be mistaken as to the word „historical‟, I mean the word „historical‟, Mr. 

Speaker, and not „hysterical‟. I gather the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) yesterday belonged to 

the hysterical Society. 

 

Also of historical significance is the fact that Kamsack became an organized community back in 1905, 

and Kamsack will be celebrating its 50th anniversary, this year, with the province. It is of great interest, 

and I think unique in the history of the west, that we should have today a mayor, the mayor of Kamsack, 

who officiated 50 years ago as the overseer of Kamsack. I regret very much that he is not present here, 

this afternoon. He is in the city of Regina, and I hoped to pay tribute to him for the long years (some of 

them interrupted) of service to the town and district of Kamsack. 

 

We who are going to pay tribute, this year, to the old timers probably have in Mr. E.J. Johnson, the 

present mayor of Kamsack, an example of an individual whose character and honesty has been woven 

into the web and the woof of a community. It is interesting, that, last year, when Mr. Johnson spoke at 

the opening of the new St. Stephen‟s Roman Catholic Church in Kamsack, he mentioned that he was 

also present when the original church was opened, I believe somewhere around 1912. The original 

church was destroyed by the 1944 cyclone, but Mr. Johnson, in mentioning the fact that he had been 

present at the original opening of the St. Stephen‟s Church, called the attention of the audience to the 

fact that he has survived four bishops in the interval. I know that he did remark to the presiding 

archbishop that evidently the archbishop‟s followers were much harder upon the clergy than the civic 

followers were upon mayors. 

 

We have heard very much about the development of Saskatchewan from this side of the House. We have 

heard derogatory remarks from the other side. Probably due to the fact that we have got visitors from 

other lands here today, and I know that much of their geography does tell them, in the discussion on the 

western part of Canada that it is bald prairie, and I think it was registered in their minds very much 

before they came here that Saskatchewan or western Canada was a barrenness or an emptiness of bald 

prairie. I do know, when I was in the services overseas, that a little English sergeant used introduced me 

to his friends as “Feusi from the bald prairies”, and, of course, he had a very high forehead and he 

invariably rubbed the top part of that forehead to emphasize the fact of how bald the prairies were. If he 

could see today the development that has gone on, Mr. Speaker, the growth in our towns and our cities, 

the telephone and power line extensions all over the prairies, our new highways, hospitals, churches and 

schools, I believe he would change his mind and change his introduction of myself to his friends. 

 

One of the interesting developments is the expansion of the telephone service on the prairies. As a 

matter of interest, would like to state that the town of Kamsack will probably be the 21st town or city in 

this province to obtain a dial telephone exchange. We are very happy, Mr. Speaker. 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

23 

 

Much has been said by the previous speakers on problems that we in Saskatchewan have. I come from a 

section of Saskatchewan that has had untold hardships within the past few years. I shall dwell more upon 

the constituency problems and probably strike and note of pessimism. I intend to probably bring in a few 

points to this Assembly, this afternoon, that affects a small man of Saskatchewan, the small farmer. It is 

strange, after the many good crops we have had during the past years, that one failure should put many 

on their backs. 

 

I come from an area known as the Garden of Saskatchewan; a very productive area, one of the best in 

the province. Two of the latter years‟ failures, due to flood and rust, have put them into such 

circumstances that many of them are in dire difficulty today. We know of implements being picked up; 

we know of implement dealers and small-store proprietors having to close up this winter, and it is rather 

strange that one year should set us back that much. 

 

I would like to mention the fact that, in one of the visits up to the grimmest part of the north-east in 

Kelsey constituency, last year and the year before, I was in an area where you can see the water-mark on 

the farm houses, where the flood had left a token or mark for the community to see for the rest of the 

year. My territory was not quite as grim. We have a very well-drained area, not as level of land as 

probably further north. But we have a problem in portions of Pelly constituency, portions of Canora 

constituency, and, I believe, the fringe of the north or the park belt wherein many of our farmers are 

behind the „eight ball‟ for the simple reason that they have small holdings — quarter-sections and 

probably at the best a half-section. Figures, not only provincial but federal, show that the small farmer 

has his back against the wall. 

 

Today, we find that our quarter-section farmers not only have no spare capital to tide them over, but they 

have no grain on hand to tide them over to another crop year. I believe that probably economic 

circumstances are going to force them to alter their ways. I note, in going across the province, that we 

find areas where one farmer has left through economic circumstances, another one has absorbed his 

holdings. It is very evident north of Long Lake, the central part of the province, where every second 

farm home is vacant. We probably aren‟t faced with that in the north-west, or across the northern part of 

the province yet. 

 

To solve some of these problems we have undertaken a programme of help, and I would like to thank 

this Government for the immediate help given, this fall. True, it was insufficient, but it was help, Mr. 

Speaker. I refer to the work-and-wages programme that was given by the Government in the north-east; 

also, the Department of Natural Resources for opening up north timber lots and stock-piling in order to 

bring money into the hands of our small farmers in the north. 

 

In my territory we have undertaken, through the Department of Agriculture, a re-settlement programme. 

It is a very small one, but it is an assist. During the „thirties a group of more or less in derelict farmers, 

people who did not have the cash, moved into a territory that was very hard to provide with roads and 

schools, very much cut off with water courses, and of very, very marginal value. I believe they got some 

of the land for $150 to $200. Well, 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

 

24 

 

in those years in the „thirties, they were able to get by for the simple reason that they did have free 

pasture and wood and did some trapping. They got by during the „thirties, when everyone else had 

corresponding hardships. But, during the latter years they have failed to gain as the neighbours across in 

more arable country have. We have had youngsters in those families who are of school age today, who 

need attention, and since they are seven and eight miles in school, we have undertaken a re-settlement 

programme. 

 

I might say here, Mr. Speaker, that we have had problems and we are going to have problems dealing 

with re-settlement. In the area to which these folks are going to be moved, our Department of 

Agriculture has attempted to have a clearing made of land to give those folks a start. For two years now 

they have barely made a beginning. Water levels, although this country is well drained, the excessive 

rainfall, every second day a rainfall during much of the summer months, has delayed the programme. 

 

Because of the economic circumstances across the north and in general throughout Saskatchewan, as the 

previous speaker mentioned, we have an unemployment problem, particularly in the north-west, 

north-east and north-central parts of the province, the park belt. There must be tens of thousands of 

young farmers, sons of farmers and daughters of farmers who are marking time today with their feet 

under their parents‟ tables. It is a matter of regret that, across the floor, they should call for more 

provincial help and not point a finger to the Federal Government from which much of this assistance 

should come. 

 

I recall, last fall, when the Rt. Hon. Louis St. Laurent, speaking to the Reform Club in Montreal, 

mentioned that unemployment was a federal responsibility, and that any government unable to cope with 

unemployment had no right to exist as a government. Mr. Speaker, they should be calling attention to 

the problems as they are, and leave the blame to the Federal Government and not alone to the Provincial 

Government. 

 

Our daily press in Saskatchewan, predominately Liberal, has been doing very little a bringing to the 

notice of the general public some of the problems that we have across the north part of the settled 

portion of Saskatchewan. In fact, the latter half-year, they have been devoting much of their time (and I 

am referring to the press) to building up a Liberal leader in the province, and I cannot help but say that 

they have been busy stuffing leadership straws into a little effigy from Moosomin. Mr. Speaker, true he 

is a promising young man; but if you follow his radio programmes, as some of us have, we agree that he 

is a „promising‟ young man; he has promised almost everything, except the front porch and the Mace. 

Much of this promising has been to such a degree that it is a tremendous irresponsibility, and I believe 

that the thoughts that go abroad in Saskatchewan must be that they feel that this new leader does not 

ever hope to form a government here in Saskatchewan, because he would be unable to live up to the 

many promises he has made. 

 

This irresponsibility reminds me of a little story. The story is of an elderly doctor who used to delight in 

tormenting some of the young nurses. It happened at this time that he came on duty in the morning, and 

one of these pretty young nurses had just ducked out of the baby ward where she had spent a trying time 

during the night. The doctor, of course, with  a satanic grin on his face said, “Well, my dear, how do you 

like the babies, this morning?” She stamped her foot and said, “Babies! Doctor, a baby is nothing else 

but a 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

25 

 

long length of alimentary canal with a loud voice at one end and no responsibility at the other.” Mr. 

Speaker, I can‟t help but feel that this does cover our Liberal party here in Saskatchewan — a very loud 

voice and no responsibility. 

 

I cannot help but recall, also, Mr. Speaker, my friend from Saltcoats constituency, who went the length 

and breadth of this province holding leadership meetings and, of course, he held out a prize to the 

contestants and a prize to the public of Saskatchewan that he had a „dark horse‟ that was going to run in 

the contest. So, down our way, after thinking things over, a lot of people couldn‟t help but think that this 

dark horse must be Mr. Rawluk. 

 

The Liberals may attempt to pose as the farmers‟ friend. All through the debate they have attempted to 

bring up the fact that they are the firm supporters and exponents of all that the farmer desires. I would 

like to bring to the attention of this House one small item — and I said I was speaking on the smaller 

farmer and our smaller people in Saskatchewan, this afternoon. 

 

We recall the many times that the Hon. J.G. Gardiner exhorted the people or the farmers of 

Saskatchewan to go into more livestock, into hogs, into cattle, and into poultry. Many of the brighter 

farmers (and we have a lot of them down my way) often do the opposite, and they seem to make out 

better than by listening to his advice. But I recall here, a year ago, many of the small farmers went into 

turkey blocks and, Mr. Speaker, it is quite a problem in the wet season to raise turkeys. We found the 

farm housewives devoting much time to raising probably 100, 150, or 200 turkeys. In 1953 they made 

out pretty well; an average tom brought 35 cents a pound and probably some yielded $8.50 straight a 

bird. Last year, in 1954, the Federal Government allowed subsidized American turkeys to the tune of 1 

1/2 million pounds, to enter Canada and ruined the market to such an extent that the same turkey that 

formerly brought 35 cents a pound to these small producers, brought 25 cents a pound. Coupled with the 

losses they would have, the overall losses through increment weather, it made the poultry proposition 

one that put them „in the red‟. 

 

I know very many of them were discouraged. Take, for instance, a small farm family that probably have 

100 turkeys. The loss from 35 to 25 cents meant around $3.00 to $3.50 per bird. For 100 birds that 

meant a loss of around $300 to $350. That, Mr. Speaker, would have paid many of the taxes that burden 

our small farmers today. 

 

I would like to mention a point that was brought out again recently by the Secretary of the Manitoba 

Farmers‟ Union. He was speaking of the $200 million that was set aside in 1945 for a floor-price 

programme for the farmers of Canada. Very little of it had been used, and he brought to light again a fact 

of which we are well aware, of the egg prices. A guarantee was given on egg price. There is a floor price 

of 38 cents, not to the producer but to the packer. And a further 5 cents for storage. The picture across 

the province, or across Western Canada, the past couple of years, has been that very few of our small 

farmers have ever realized the 38 or 43 cents a dozen. Much of the time they were getting 15 and 16 to 

20 cents a dozen. 

 

I can‟t help but draw a comparison. During these years mentioned, our gold producers were subsidized, 

but our small farmers were not subsidized. None of our farmers were subsidized to any amount. 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

 

26 

 

I cannot help but bring to this House a parody of one of Longfellow‟s poems. It is a parody, Mr. 

Speaker, and it probably carries to your mind some of the feeling, the frustration, that goes on in the 

minds of some of our people in the province of Saskatchewan. This is a parody of one of Longfellow‟s 

better poems: 

 

“Lives of poor men oft remind us 

Honest toil don‟t stand a chance 

The more we work we leave behind us 

Bigger patches on our pants.” 

 

Premier Douglas: — Poor Longfellow! 

 

Mr. Feusi: — My apologies to Longfellow, yes. It seems, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is 

in his seat now. He did speak on the Trans-Canada Highway as it affected his constituency. He belittled 

Trans-Canada just for the fact that he has some puddles along the roadside, regardless of the type of 

weather that we have had during the last couple of years. There must be some peculiar thinking in the 

constituency of Moosomin. I know that my people in Pelly constituency would be very proud and happy 

to have a trans-Canada, and we have had worse flood conditions than he has had. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That‟s a matter of opinion. 

 

Mr. Feusi: — I would like to point out to this House just what flooding we have had in Pelly 

constituency in the north-east, Mr. Speaker. I have here a chart that has been built from figures given by 

the Northern Affairs Branch of the Federal Government, and it covers the flooding of various rivers — 

the Assiniboine River in Saskatchewan, the English River in Ontario (the highest rivers in Canada), and 

it does mention the peaks of various other rivers across Canada. You will note, Mr. Speaker, that this is 

first — the percentage of normal stream flow; you will notice that this dark line here represents the 

Assiniboine River. You will notice that, in August of 1953, it reached a peak of approximately 800 per 

cent above normal flow. You will note again that in August of 1954, it reached a point of 930 per cent 

above normal. You will note here that, during the months of June, July, August and September, 1953, 

the Assiniboine River had no other river to compare with it in flood level. Again in June, July, August 

and September in 1954, the Assiniboine exceeded the flood level percentages of any other river in 

Canada. The only one river to compare with it was the Saugeen River just out of Toronto, where 

„Hurricane Hazel‟ boosted that river up for a matter of a few days to flood proportions equivalent to the 

one we have had in the constituency of Pelly. 

 

I mentioned that our constituency is well drained by river, and possibly I should say here that, as we 

clear more and more land, we are going to have greater and greater flood problems. We are going to 

compare more and more with the mid-central United States because, as we denude our watersheds of 

covering foliage of the forests, by turning more land into agriculture, we hasten the spring run-off. These 

watercourses in many years gone by had handled the run-off over a period of many weeks. Due to the 

overhang of the trees, the shadow of the tree prevents the snow from melting rapidly, and it thus melts 

away in a matter of weeks. The watercourses could take the water in. Nowadays, of course, the 

watercourses must take the water in a few days; hence we are having greater and greater flood problems. 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

27 

 

I would just like to recall to the memory of this House some of the problems that I have very fresh in 

mind of what I went through last summer, along with various other officials, the Ag. Rep. and some of 

the town officials, in regard to the flood in and around the town of Kamsack. We were isolated for 

possibly a week, and we had a rural area that was isolated between a week and two weeks. I remember, 

the federal man being out and taking the flood levels of the Assiniboine. I recall him standing on the 

bridge, and we have a very sound and substantial bridge west of town, built by this Government. There 

was much criticism at the time because the flood levels reach the base of the bridge. It came up about a 

foot or two feet on the main structure; it never did reach the floor of the bridge. Anyone standing on the 

bridge could feel the impact of any traffic touching the bridge. As soon as a car or a vehicle hit the 

bridge you could feel the impact of the movement or the weight of the vehicle on the bridge, and there 

were more comments at the time by people who, I think, must have something wrong with them 

mentally. They could not help but, sort of in a joyous mood, criticized the construction of the bridge; 

that this Government did not know what it had been doing when they build that bridge, and they sort of 

wished or they expressed the sentiment, that they would like to see the bridge go down. 

 

There are people in the province today, who take a satanical delight in belittling some of the problems 

that government has had and the problems that some of the people in the province have, and try to make 

political propaganda out of it. I know they did it with the Landing bridge across the Saskatchewan, a 

matter of a year or two ago. I would like to point out to these people who were criticizing the bridge 

west of Kamsack, that that bridge would withstand many times the flood that we had. The fact is that, in 

a concrete bridge, you have expansion joints; and because of expansion joints you can feel vehicle 

weights coming onto the bridge and leaving the bridge. So much for thoughtless citizens. I mention this 

fact because I believe very much of the irresponsible display across on the other side of the House has 

been to probably capture a lot of thoughtless votes in the next election. 

 

I recall going out at various times during the night and during the day to check levels with some of our 

town officials, and to watch the flooding. We have a settled area south of Kamsack that is in the territory 

known as „the flats‟, and there was danger of probably loss of life. I know I had a committee in to see 

me, after I had just come back from visiting the west bridge, asking me to go down to the south bridge. 

The water then was pouring from the Assiniboine River, across Highway No. 8, approximately a 

half-mile in length and probably a foot in depth. Some of the small homeowners that resided on the flats 

had their yards within probably two feet of water levels; their yards were little oases or islands, and they 

were very much worried. They had their stock in their yards. They didn‟t know what was going to 

happen. They knew that the flood crest had not reached there yet, and somebody put the idea into their 

heads that we should use a bulldozer and cut Highway No 8. Now, we pondered it very much, and the 

delegation was very disagreeable. 

 

The R.C.M.P. at that time had a car with a radio in it, and we spoke to the highway engineer who, at the 

time, was present at a serious breach in Highway No. 10 west of Yorkton. He was devoting much of his 

time there, because it meant saving a portion of our blacktop. Fortunately there was a mounted police 

patrol car there as well, and we were able to reach the highway engineer and ask for permission, if 

necessary, to cut No. 8 Highway. Of course, he pointed out to us the fact that he would give us 

permission, but we were to 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

 

28 

 

weigh every factor before we did. 

 

We saw the fact that, if the river did rise very much more, the extent of flooding would carry on over 

probably another quarter of a mile of highway and probably the highway would carry a great deal of the 

water, and we could not see that the water levels could rise that much that it would endanger these 

homes. Hence, of course, we held out. In fact, in order to soften the ire of my friends, I did take them to 

my home and I sort of stalled for a time. I was very fortunate in having a jug of wine on hand, Mr. 

Speaker, and it helped. But I evaded the issue until the next morning, and then they were down my neck 

again. Some of the language used was very strong and probably I was very fortunate in having the bulk 

that I have, because otherwise I might have fared badly. But, we were wise in not cutting the highway, 

because there was very little damage done to the highway or the homes. 

 

Some years before, evidently, Highway No. 5 west of town, was cut in order to allow excess flooding to 

go through the breach in the highway. But the damage done to a highway, to the bed, especially with 

continuous rainfall, does prevent repair work, because what you have or breach in the road, to make the 

repair is a terrific task. The highway, though it acted to a certain extent as a dam, also was passable for 

much of the flood period when there was a foot of water going across it. 

 

I would like to point out another problem, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned a rural area that was flooded and 

isolated for a matter of a week to two weeks. These people had a real problem. The Farmers‟ Union 

district, the Union Lodge of Lillyvale, composes half a municipal division between the White Sand and 

Assiniboine Rivers. At the height of the flooding, or very near the height of the flooding, the T.B. van 

was located in Kamsack. I know that this settlement attempted to get out to the T.B. clinic. There were 

three bridges, one across the White Sand and two across the Assiniboine, that never before in their 

history had been flooded as they were at that time. The people were able to arrive at the approaches of 

the bridges and, mind you, only one of them was passable that they felt they could safely navigate; but 

they couldn‟t do so with their cars. One of the farmers had followed with a very high-wheeled tractor, 

and the citizens ganged up into their cars and turned off the switch so as not to dampen the motor, and 

the tractor pulled him across one by one. 

 

There was very great danger there, because these were pile bridges. They arrived at Kamsack and went 

to the clinic, which took some hour or two of time, during which a cloudburst set in. Then they had to 

make their way back home the same way. Probably their homes were a matter of only 10 miles from 

Kamsack; but the long roundabout way to get across is one bridge that was still open to them, must have 

made around 50 miles, and I understand they made it back the next morning around 4 o‟clock. 

 

We were very much worried that there probably would be loss of life. The next day they were on the 

„phone and wished to arrange with me a time to walk the river banks to find another bridge site. Though 

they have three bridges, they wanted to find another bridge site. We did walk the river; but through 

walking the river were able to cool them down to a certain extent. 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

29 

 

The year previously they also had flood conditions, but not quite as bad; but at that time they were 

satisfied and agreed that, if the Minister of Highways would assist with the flood bridge on the flats 

adjacent to one of the Assiniboine Bridges, that would care for their needs. Of course, it took some very 

long-headed talking to some of these individuals who are very much excited, and we convinced them 

that they would have to abide by what had already been built. I would like to mention here that the 

bridge that the Minister of Highways had put in, the flood bridge on the flats, you couldn‟t see it at all 

when the floods were at their peak. The gulls, I believe, used the top railing, and even then got their tails 

wet in the water. 

 

After the waters subsided, the people went together (and it is a very fine community, an aggressive 

community) and attempted to get some assistance from three sources. The bridge was within the 

confines of a Indian Reserve, which is more or less, Federal territory. The half-mile flats that had to be 

built up were within the confines of the Indian Reserve and federal territory. The previous year we had 

put in a pile bridge across the flats with the assistance of the Department of Highways and two 

municipalities, the one municipality in which half the division resided in the other municipality across 

which the people had to go to get to the highway and in which the Reserve was situated. It is rather 

interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, how these people work together and of course, promise of assistance 

was obtained from each of the municipalities; a promise of assistance was obtained from the Minister of 

Highway; and the promise of assistance was obtained from the Department of Indian Affairs through 

their agents. Towards fall, the rain ceased and they were able to get work done. We were fortunate in 

getting a good contractor, and all the earth had to be moved, Mr. Speaker, every foot of the way across 

the bridges, from both sides; one side was the Assiniboine bridge and the other side was the flats bridge. 

It all had to be carried by B.G. and a very good job was done. I think the half-mile flats were raised 

some two to three feet. 

 

Then came the time for payment, and the Department of Highways came through with their grant; the 

municipalities had their money on hand; but the Department of Indian Affairs stalled. They had an 

excuse. First, they thought it was not wise for them to come through because the Farmers Union Lodge 

had approached the federal member who happened to be a C.C.F. member and, of course, he had good 

friendly relations with the Department of Indian Affairs, and he approached them and asked for 

assistance because this was right in the centre of an Indian Reserve and it was a project that they utilized 

or used as well. The Lodge put the Indian Agent on the spot and he hedged for a bit, and then said he 

was going to attempt to get some help from a Federal Indian Social Welfare fund. Time dragged, and 

they went after him again, and he came through with a story that he could not get any assistance there. 

The final story was that he put the onus on the Indians — that they would not agree to it. But a strange 

thing, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Indian Affairs built a new school along that road since, and yet 

they subscribed nothing towards the venture. 

 

I would just like to point out here that when our Liberal friends across the way promise grants, promise 

reconstruction of bridges, that it is all so much hot air. We have proven right in Pelly constituency where 

we had a Liberal organization — a Liberal government, a C.C.F. government, yes, and municipal 

government mixed in together, that it was the municipal government and the provincial government that 

paid the shot. 

  



 

February 24, 1955 

 

30 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — Hear, hear! It‟s an old story. 

 

Mr. Feusi: — I am happy that that job was completed. The citizens are very happy, and they know 

down in that area what the score is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have probably carried forth for some time. I would just like to mention an item of interest 

that is prominent in the constituency at the present time. 

 

The officials of P.F.R.A. recently had a meeting in the town of Kamsack and expounded a theory on the 

control of the flooding of the Swan and the Assiniboine rivers and that was most interesting. We believe 

that the programme has merits, and if you can think back with me and recall the bend in the Assiniboine 

River where the Assiniboine and Swan approach each other to probably within 10 miles, that there was 

low land between the two of them at the elbow. I believe in the early history of western Canada we have 

information obtained from Indian source, probably, that the Swan or the Assiniboine, when under flood 

conditions, one has overflowed through this low level land into the other. I think the programme or the 

plan put forth by the P.F.R.A. people that they are working on at the present time, is that they are going 

to build two dams: one dam up in the head waters of the Swan, just about a mile from the edge of 

settlement. In the valley of the upper Swan, a lake would be formed and the spring flood waters of the 

Swan would be held back within the confines of that lake. A similar dam or a smaller dam would be put 

in the Assiniboine at the elbow and force the upper flooding of the Assiniboine to go across into the 

Swan, and therefore, divide the flooding of the Assiniboine into two river channels. Once the crest of the 

flooding was passed, they could then slowly open the dam up — that is, they could open the Assiniboine 

dam and let the water take its natural route, then open the Swan dam and throughout the summer have a 

control flow of water coming off the upper watersheds of the Swan. 

 

We believe very strongly that the project has merits, and we hope that they go forward with it. I do hope, 

Mr. Speaker, that they don‟t make a political football, a political issue of it again such as they did with 

the South Saskatchewan dam. The South Saskatchewan has even more merit for the province of 

Saskatchewan and for western Canada than this little project has; but I just want to outline to the House 

of what is being proposed because I know that (well, I was almost ready to bet my hat) that this is more 

or less a political hoax. But the more I look into it, it has such merits and need, that I hope the officials 

go through with it, and more power to them if they do. 

 

Last, but not least, Mr. Speaker, before I mention that I shall support the Throne Speech, I would like to 

mention within the length of my voice (which is not very far here, this afternoon, since I have got „mike‟ 

junior here) that I would like to commend the Throne Speech to every citizen of Saskatchewan for the 

breadth of coverage that it has. I believe that we must probably sympathize with the Opposition in this, 

that they have been away from governments for such a length of time that they have not got an idea or 

the foggiest notion of the magnitude of government in Saskatchewan today. With that, Mr. Speaker, I 

shall support the motion. 

 

Mr. R.H. Wooff: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the Debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6 o‟clock p. m. 


