



















































Hansard: March 23, 1955


 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session - 12th Legislature 

30th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 23, 1955 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

On Orders of the Day. 

 

CORRECTION OF PRESS ITEMS 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are called, I wish 

to draw your attention to a news report in the „Leader-Post‟ this morning. It says here that I said the 

Federal Government had done nothing to find new trapping grounds for the Indians — I was referring to 

the Indians in the Primrose Lake area that had been displaced, some 2,000 of them, who had joined the 

ranks of the unemployed; and that it was the Provincial Government that had solved the matter. 

 

I said no such thing. What I have said is what I quoted from the previous report in the same press. Here 

is what I said: 

 

“Mr. Pickersgill said the Indians moved from the Cold Lake range depended upon sale of the furs for a 

living; it was up to his Department to find new trapping grounds, and new areas are scarce. He had 

discussed the question of compensation with Defence Minister Campney, but no solution had been 

found.” 

 

I want to point out that no solution had been found by the Federal Government, and I had not said that 

this Government found a solution. 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the House to a report 

of the debate on the Livestock Commission resolution, yesterday afternoon. It is reported as if the House 

had endorsed the Livestock Marketing Board. I think that statement should be corrected, because the 

resolution was entirely debated to the effect that we recommended that Livestock Commissioners be 

appointed; it had nothing to do with a Livestock Marketing Board. 

 

CAMPBELL BROTHERS RECEIVED 

 

Mr. Walter Erb (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, before we proceed to the next order of business, it is my 

privilege to inform you that six distinguished residents of Saskatchewan, who have brought great honour 

to this Province, and who have been invited here by Your Honour on behalf 



 
March 23, 1955 

 

 

2 

of this Assembly, await your summons to attend upon Your Honour. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly that the Hon. Member have leave to bid the 

distinguished guests of the Assembly to enter the Chamber? 

 

(Agreed) 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by the Hon. Leader of 

the Opposition (Mr. McDonald): 

 

“That proceedings be now suspended in order that the Assembly may greet and do honour to its 

distinguished guests.” 

 

(Agreed) 

 

Mr. Erb (Standing at the Bar): — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to present to you, and through you 

to the Assembly, Messrs. Lloyd, Glen, Don and Garnet Campbell, brothers, of Avonlea, Saskatchewan, 

winners of the Macdonald‟s Brier Tankard, emblematic of the Curling Championship of Canada and, 

indeed, of the World, and their proud parents, Mr. and Mrs. „Sandy‟ Campbell. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Let the Bar of the House be raised that our honoured guests may enter and take the 

seats provided for them. 

 

I will now call on the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. McDonald, to say a few words on behalf of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, Honoured Guests, Members of the 

Assembly, it is a great honour for me to have the privilege of saying a few words here, this afternoon, 

and I am sure I am speaking for all the people of Saskatchewan when I say that we appreciate so very 

much the excellent work done by the Saskatchewan Curling Association and the Jubilee Committee in 

making the Macdonald Brier the largest and most enthusiastic ever held in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

I also want to extend my equal thanks and appreciation to our Honoured Guests, this afternoon, — the 

Campbell brothers and their families, from Avonlea, — on their achievement in bringing the Macdonald 

Brier Tankard to Saskatchewan. I am sure that we have never attended a sporting event where there was 

more enthusiasm on the part of the large crowds, or more support for our local team. We, in 

Saskatchewan, are very proud of our team and want to congratulate you on the great contribution you 

have made to the good sportsmanship of Saskatchewan, and also the great honour you have brought us 

in winning the Macdonald Brier in this, our Jubilee year. 

 

As we all know, this is the first occasion that Saskatchewan has ever won this great sporting event. What 

could have been more appropriate than to have accomplished this in our Jubilee year? 

 

Our many thanks to you, the Campbells from Avonlea. 



 
March 23, 1955 

3 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, Distinguished Guests, fellow members and ladies and 

gentlemen; I want to concur most heartily in the good wishes that have been extended by Mr. 

McDonald, the Leader of the Opposition. I am particularly glad, at this time, to see the good relations 

that have now been established between the McDonalds and the Campbells, because students of Scottish 

history will remember that, something over 200 years ago, one dark night, the Campbells went to 

Glencoe and massacred all the McDonalds. Apparently they missed one or two! And for many years, the 

Campbells and the McDonalds were not on speaking terms. I am sure you were delighted, today, to hear 

a McDonald now praising the Campbells, and that the good relationship of the past has now been re-

established between the two clans. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is indeed a historic and unique occasion. It is historic because this is the first time in 

the history of the Macdonald Brier Bonspiel that Saskatchewan has brought the Tankard back to this 

Province. It is also historic because this is the first time, I think, in the history of this Province that the 

Legislature has brought a group of citizens on to the floor of the Legislative Assembly to publicly thank 

them and to publicly honour them for their contribution to the Province. It is unique in that I think this is 

probably the first time in the history of the Macdonald Brier contest that it has been won by four 

brothers, four brothers from one community, four brothers all of whom were born in this Province. 

 

As the Leader of the Opposition has said, it is particularly fitting that this victory should have been won 

in the very year in which Saskatchewan is celebrating its Golden Jubilee. I think that the tremendous 

crowds that were present at the Bonspiel, the marked enthusiasm which they showed, the strong support 

which they gave the Saskatchewan rink, all are indicative of the fact that our people, in their Golden 

Jubilee year, were proud of the province and were hoping very much that our rink would bring home the 

Tankard. You have done that, and by doing that you have not only brought honour to the Province, but 

you have stimulated the pride which our people have in their own Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You have done something much more. You have given a demonstration to the young people of this 

Province of good sportsmanship and clean living and fine upstanding manhood. We are exceedingly 

proud to do you honour, today. We hope that the record which you have established will set a goal for 

other young athletes in our Province. 

 

May I say, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is not going to be content with just the Macdonald Brier. We 

are going to go out after the junior hockey championship; we are going to go out, if we can, after the 

Dominion Drama Cup, and we are going to go out after the Grey Cup, emblematic of the football 

championship of Canada. We are going out to make this a good year. If the other groups who will be 

representing Saskatchewan during 1955 do as well as you have done in your field of athletics, then this 

will indeed be a very happy year. Whether we win or whether we lose in these other contests, nobody 

can take away from us the fact that you have brought the Macdonald Brier Tankard to Saskatchewan, 

and, most important of all, you have set a standard of good sportsmanship which, if it is followed by our 



 
March 23, 1955 

 

 

4 

other Saskatchewan athletes, will bring credit and renown to this Province. 

 

It is, therefore, my privilege to make a formal presentation on behalf of the people of this province, 

through their elected representatives. All the people of this province, I am sure, would like to have some 

presentation made to you, that will tell you and your children, throughout the years, of this historic and 

unique event. We wanted something that you would be able to keep, something that the people in your 

community and the people in your own family, for many years to come, will be able to point to and say 

that „that was presented to a member of our family by the people of Saskatchewan, through the 

Legislative Assembly, in 1955, when we brought home the Macdonald Brier Tankard.‟ 

 

Mr. Garnet Campbell: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, on behalf of our rink I would like to thank you for 

the opportunity of being present here, today, and I would also like to thank all the people of 

Saskatchewan for giving us these very lovely gifts. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would like to ask the father of these boys to say a few words. I think he is worthy of 

a lot of congratulation. I remarked to him that I have raised five boys, but I couldn‟t keep them together, 

working as a team, as his boys have done. 

 

Mr. ‘Sandy’ Campbell: — Mr. Speaker, our Premier, and members of the Legislature, I thank you, Mr. 

Speaker, for giving me the privilege of saying a few words. After listening to the two previous speakers 

and hearing all those nice and flattering words about our boys, I just hope they will be better for it, and 

that their hats will still fit them. 

 

My wife received a letter from a friend of hers, a few days ago, and in this letter this woman said that 

when she heard the boys speak over the radio, she thought they were plain „home boys‟. I like those 

words, Mr. Speaker. I think it is one reason that they have reached the top in curling, because they are 

just plain „home boys‟. 

 

You have heard that old saying „that all things come to those who wait‟. When the boys went away for a 

week or so curling and their wives stayed home to keep the fires burning, and they would come back 

perhaps with some luggage, or a wrist watch or a shot gun, it wasn‟t much for the wives to get enthused 

over; but after seeing the lovely gifts that have been presented to our boys, this afternoon, I think it is 

quite appropriate, and I am sure that their wives will be delighted. I think perhaps, this time, the wives 

have got the best of the deal. 

 

On behalf of the Campbells I would like to express our appreciation for those lovely gifts, also for an 

educational, entertaining and very pleasant afternoon. 

 

Getting back to curling for a moment, it is almost incredible to think that this Cup has been in 

competition for the last twenty-six years and has never been brought to Saskatchewan before. However, 

Mr. Speaker, I hope now that we have it here we are going to keep it here, and when the boys lay down 

their brooms in curling, I hope some other young fellows will take them up and keep this Cup in 

Saskatchewan 



 
March 23, 1955 

5 

 

for a long, long time. 

 

The business of the Assembly was resumed. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 4.25 o‟clock p.m. 

 


