



















































Hansard: February 18, 1955


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Twelfth Legislature 

7th Day 

Friday, February 18, 1955 

 

The House met at three o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

RE PRESS STATEMENT 

 

Mr. R. Kohaly (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to raise a point of personal privilege. 

 

The Leader-Post of Friday, February 18, has a 7-column headline stating, “Bentley charges Kohaly with 

inaccuracy in Jobless Issue.” Now, I want to take personal exception to that headline. It is not correct, 

and it ought to be corrected by the parties involved. I do not want to protract the particular problem 

between the Minister and me. I am not discussing that. I am discussing this, and I think that it should be 

cleared up. 

 

My figures were not inaccurate as far as the Leader-Post is concerned and as proof, the weekly Labour 

Report, taken from the Legislative Library, of the Department of Labour of this province shows the 

figures. I quoted 21,000 as of February 4th; they quote as of February 3rd, 20,989. I may have been 

inaccurate to the extent of 11 people of 21,000 people approximately. However, the next figure, a 

February 10th shows 21,190 and so, when I took a date in between, I was not inaccurate and I feel that 

that 7-column heading that indicates inaccuracy on my part is not fair and is not correct, and that I 

should take this point of personal privilege and have it cleared up. I think that is the only point that 

prompts that heading. 

 

Now there are differences of opinion between myself and the Minister of some of these figures, but I 

don’t think it refers to that. I do not want to protract the discussion any further unless somebody else 

wants to. But I do insist that that is an unfair heading, that my figures are correct, and that they are in the 

reports of the Saskatchewan Government Department of Labour, and that the report is on file in the 

Legislative Library. 

 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed, from Thursday, February 17th, 1955, the adjourned debate of Mr. Dewhurst for the 

Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Hon. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, when we adjourned last night I was 

just exchanging a few pleasantries with the members of the Opposition and pointing out the failure of 

the Leader of the Liberal party of the day and the party itself, since its last convention, to proffer a 

programme with regard to health and other things that might be intelligible to the people. I had also dealt 

with some other matters that have been dealt with here, this afternoon. 

 

In my opening remarks with regard to the programme of the Liberal party, I have stated that I would 

examine each one of those statements that are the planks of their party, so far as health is concerned, in 

their platform. 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

2 

I pointed out that what they have offered to the people is a health platform that is nothing more or less 

than a shady attempt, and a pretty transparent attempt, to copy a programme of solid achievement by the 

C.C.F. Government, and then to claim it as their own. 

 

For the benefit of the members, Mr. Speaker, I would like again to quote their first statement of 

principles, and then I will deal with their planks one at a time. This is what they say; this is their purpose 

in regard to health: 

 

“The Saskatchewan Liberal party having by its legislation pioneered local health insurance schemes 

for our rural economy, which provided hospital and medical and surgical services outstanding for their 

high standard and moderate costs, services which rapidly extended within the province to serve a large 

proportion of the people, and having as its objective the extension of such services until they serve the 

whole population, and having also established invaluable diagnostic, preventive and treatment services 

for tuberculosis and cancer control, will upon its return to power, continue and augment health 

services within the province to provide:” 

 

And then the six planks follow. Superficially, I suppose a person could say that that statement appears to 

offer precisely the programme that the present Government is carrying out. But, the statement is 

inaccurate as to facts, it is misleading as to intent, and it is notable for what it fails to say. 

 

It is true that they did, shortly before the retirement from office in 1944, place on the statute books some 

enabling legislation on cancer control. It is well to remember, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberal Party was in 

power from 1905 to 1929 — 24 years in this province. They had all that time to introduce something on 

cancer. Cancer is not something new. It took a Tory Minister of Health, a co-operative government with 

a Tory Minister of Health, to introduce the first cancer programme of any kind in this province — my 

esteemed friend Dr. Munroe, who is a friend of all of us. Then, when that government went out, our 

Liberal friends had another 10 years of office; jury in six of those years (the latter 6) 2 of them were 

over extended time, one of them I believe could be called an illegally extended year of time. Then in the 

last year they produced this legislation. So I say it is misleading and it is inaccurate and its intent is 

wrong. They did not make one step towards the implementation of that legislation. So a person can only 

conclude that that Legislation was intended as a pre-election campaign promise. 

 

The Liberal statement of what they did prior to 1944, their great accomplishments, avoids mention of 

care for the pensioners, for persons on social aid, for persons who are mentally ill. The reason was that 

nothing was done for that kind of people by the Liberal government as long as it was in office. And, 

coming under the category of health insurance, which should by any measuring stick of all be regarded, 

are those categories such as medical, hospital, surgical, nursing, mental and other health care for 

pensioners and other persons receiving social aid, and their dependants. There are about 35,000 of these 

people in this province and for the first time, in 1945, these people began to be treated not as charity 

patients, but as persons who had a right to the services, and were encouraged to seek the best medical 

care 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

3 

and other health care in order that their lives would be prolonged and made happy and productive. 

 

The Liberal party did and said nothing about the crushing burden of mental illness falling upon the 

relatives or estates of those among the mentally ill who were judged independent. It took a C.C.F. 

Government, Mr. Speaker, which, in 1945, made treatment in our mental hospitals available regardless 

of ability to pay. Our friends across the way made no such contribution to that particular section of our 

population which certainly needed it, as time has proven. 

 

I would like now to take their planks one at a time and deal with them. Their first plank was: 

 

“Continuation of the present hospital services plan.” What could be more inane than a remark like that? 

With all their faults, with all the stupidities that we might charge against the Liberal party in this 

province, no one can accuse them of deliberately cutting their own throats, and any government or party 

seeking power who would say anything different from that would be deliberately cutting its own throat. 

They never did it when they were in power; but because a government has done it since they got out of 

power, now they would like to say, “Me, too; we’ll do it”, and so they say that. I am going to deal with 

that a little bit later. That is their first plank. The second plank: 

 

“Financial assistance for the construction and equipment of approved hospitals to provide essential 

services as close to the people as possible.” 

 

I said the previous one was an inanity. I don’t know what word to use to describe this one. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Assininity. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Assininity? I don’t know if that is parliamentary, so I won’t undertake to use it; 

but if some people have it in their minds, I won’t try to remove it, because I would probably find 

occasion to agree with that description. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — People will read the platform regardless. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Yes, and laugh. My hon. friend, Mr. Speaker, said “people will read the platform 

regardless of what I say”. I say, yes, they will read it and laugh, except those that haven’t got any sense 

of humour, and they will likely tear it up and throw it away. 

 

A statement or a promise to provide “financial assistance for construction of hospitals as close to the 

people as possible,” is just as meaningless as a statement could possibly be. Making quality care 

available to everyone is precisely what the present programme is doing. I don’t know what our friends 

over there do better than make promises. They have a lot of faults. They probably have many things 

wrong with them, but one thing they are unexcelled in, and that is in making promises. If there is 

anything in their attitude or their actions which equals their ability to make promises, it is their failure to 

keep them after they have made them. 

 

Mr. McDonald: —We’ve a long way to go to catch up to you, boy! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — There is a lot of mumbling going on over there, Mr. Speaker, 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

4 

but then it does not mean very much. They should join our friends from Swift Current and wear beards; 

the mumbling would sound more musical. 

 

Construction grants to assist in the building of small rural hospitals was pioneered by the C.C.F. 

Government in 1946, not, prior to that, by anyone else, but in 1946. I want my friends to remember that, 

and the record is there to prove it. The need for such assistance was urgent at the time, and I will tell you 

why it was urgent in a moment or two. The programme was introduced in recognition of the fact that 

there will always be a place in a rural economy like Saskatchewan for the small hospitals. So, obviously, 

what they said was meaningless. 

 

I wonder if our friends cannot forget, or do they expect us to forget, the deplorable hospital system that 

we had in Saskatchewan prior to coming into power of the C.C.F. and which we inherited from the 

Liberal regime in 1944. There were a few small hospitals at the time. All of Saskatchewan hospital beds 

numbered less than 4 per thousand — not much more than half of what we have at the present time. I 

don’t know what they are trying to tell people. They had all the opportunity in the past to do these things 

and did not do them. Now they come along and say they are going to do them. 

 

Most of the small hospitals that did exist were renovated houses; they were fire traps; they had no proper 

sanitation facilities, and they lacked the facilities for good hospital and medical care, and these people, I 

suppose, are saying now that they will build more of them to get them as close to the people as possible. 

The Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan was introduced in 1947. There was no Liberal Government in 

power; nor had it ever been introduced before, Mr. Speaker. The reason it was introduced was because 

we needed this high-quality care for everybody in the province, and this Government proceeded to do it. 

 

The rapid development of good roads in this province during the last few years and the increase in motor 

car registrations has assured ready access, through most of the year, to the bigger and better-equipped 

and better-staffed hospitals in the province. Consequently, the emphasis has been on construction since 

1947 and before that while this Government was in power and up until the present time, is to provide for 

hospitals close to the people, the smaller hospitals. Now I want to this remembered. At every stage of 

the programme, year in and year out, month in and month out, people who represent or come from the 

municipal associations, from the hospital associations, from the health profession and other groups, were 

consulted, and their advice is being acted on. We have imposed no plan on the people. We have simply 

guided the construction programme for the provision of the smaller hospitals, close to the people, closer 

than our friends are likely to get unless they don’t know what they are doing; and we have done it along 

the lines that were recommended by the people I mentioned whose advice we seek. 

 

As a result of that there has emerged in Saskatchewan a pattern of hospital construction that does ensure 

the very thing that our friends across the way are promising — quality facilities in care within the reach 

of all, or will be very shortly. At the same time, we have assured an end of wasteful and extravagant 

overbuilding and overlapping of these facilities. Most people in Saskatchewan are within 25 miles of 

first-class hospital facilities. If the Liberal party were similarly interested in providing the best in 

hospital construction, in hospital care and in ideal hospital locations at reasonable cost, they would have 

spelled out their programme in detail. Almost every small community would like to have a hospital. For 

one thing it brings business, 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

5 

and boards of trade are interested. But what the statement of the Liberal party in their platform really 

implies is that they, that Liberals, would assist in building many small hospitals, whether they were 

needed or not, as long as they brought votes to the Liberal party. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — How wrong can you get. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — How crazy can you get. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Now their third plank. I expect they really hope to stand on this platform. 

Personally, I think it is a pretty shaky one, but I suppose it is the best they could devise. Their third 

plank: 

 

“Relief of present overcrowding of hospitals by provisions of special institutions for the care of the 

chronically ill.” 

 

The Liberal party in offering a programme to relieve overcrowding of hospitals by provision of special 

institutions for the care of the chronically ill should know that the first task is not to relieve 

overcrowding, but to assure that the chronically ill receive the kind of care which makes them 

comfortable and assures real opportunity for return to normal and happy lives. I would like our friends 

across the way to mark that. Many of the chronically-ill conditions can best be treated in general 

hospitals where specialized medical care is readily available. The important first objective of the present 

Government has been to make it possible for the chronically ill to receive good hospital care when they 

needed it, even though it times it might mean they would occupy a bed when they were not actually 

acutely ill. 

 

Several hundred beds have been provided for chronically-ill people in the province, and already more 

are under construction. This problem, Mr. Speaker, is being solved while the Liberals are talking about it 

and making, as I say, these meaningless promises. 

 

And their fourth one has a lot of words to it — not that they mean very much; but I suppose they 

sounded good to them when they wrote them down. The fourth one is: 

 

“A steady extension in co-operation with the municipalities, the Federal Government and existing 

health agencies, or contributory health insurance with the ultimate objective of providing a province-

wide scheme of medical, surgical, nursing, dental, pharmaceutical and optometrical services.” 

 

What do they mean by “co-operation with the municipalities?” Nothing was done prior to 1944 in 

assisting the municipalities to pool their resources to the instrument of the organized health region. The 

present Government has made possible the establishment of eight of these regions. It pays two-thirds of 

the cost to operate and provides many additional consultative and technical services so that health 

services of a high quality can be offered. Government policy makes it possible for these democratically-

controlled regions to set up complete medical care programmes, totally or in part, whenever the region 

itself feels that they care to do so, and the Government makes substantial grants to assist them to do it. 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

6 

What I am wondering, Mr. Speaker, is: does the Liberal statement mean that the Liberals would prefer to 

work with individual municipalities and let the health regions starve through inattentiveness and inaction 

and neglect? Nothing in the statement suggests that these people who make this promise, or Liberal 

friends, know anything about how to help municipalities to help themselves. I think this statement is 

purposely vague on what they mean by a “steady extension in co-operation with municipalities and 

Federal Government and existing health agencies, or contributory health insurance.” I don’t really 

believe they know for sure what health insurance, health services, really involve. I may deal with that 

aspect of it a little later this afternoon. 

 

What the Liberal party stand is on who should control health insurance is something that they have not 

stated yet. I assume they propose to follow up the proposals advocated by the voluntary health agencies. 

Such proposals call for programmes handled by the voluntary agencies, with the government only 

coming into the picture to pay the premiums for the indigent people who are unable to pay their own. 

The Liberal statement fails to show understanding that comprehensive health insurance involves many 

professions and skills. This is something they had better learn if, in the course of the next decade or so, 

they hope to come over and occupy these seats on your right, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal statement fails to 

show understanding that comprehensive health insurance requires many, many things beyond what they 

have stated here. Unless the Liberals state to the contrary, I must assume that they have in mind a 

multiplicity of little programmes operated by a multiplicity of little agencies all over the country. 

 

Contrary to that, I want our friends to understand the programme and the policy of this Government, 

which is a policy committed to the developing of a unified and co-ordinated health service, which is the 

only way by which health service of high quality can be made available to all the people so that it is 

worth something to them. 

 

We now come to the fifth plank in the platform. I do not know whether this is just a bunch of slats, or 

whether they are really supposed to be planks; and so I get a bit confused and trying to work out what is 

in their minds by the words they put down. Here is their fifth plank, however — we will dignify it by the 

name of any ‘plank’ because that is the general usage throughout the years in political platforms. I 

quote: 

 

“Administration of health insurance by a central commission with adequate representation of those 

providing the services, those receiving the services and the government, such representation to be 

appointed only with the approval of the groups concerned.” 

 

That statement calls for the administration of health services by a central commission, and they mention 

who will compose the central commission. I would like to remind the members opposite, and everybody 

in the House and everyone who might hear, that even the Prime Minister of this country, Prime Minister 

St. Laurent, in recent utterances on health insurance has emphasized that control of health service must 

rest with the agency responsible for collecting funds, which means, of course, the government. The 

principle of ministerial responsibility which means that the Minister is answerable to the representatives 

of the people in the Legislature is found in all the health programmes initiated by the present 

Government of Saskatchewan. Spokesmen for health professions and other groups that I have mentioned 

before — municipal 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

7 

associations, labour, farm groups, hospital groups and so on — do advise the Government, through the 

Health Services Planning Commission, on which there are members drawn from these various agencies I 

have mentioned. We attach a tremendous amount of weight to the advice that they give us; but, because 

it is the taxpayers’ money which is being spent, the Government considers it only proper that all health 

programmes should be controlled by the responsible Minister concerned, in this case, the Minister of 

Public Health. Unless the Liberal party is prepared to say to the contrary, it must be assumed that they 

mean by “central commission” a body not answerable to the Legislature for their actions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think they should make that position clear. Is it their intention, or is it not their intention, 

to hand over the operation of all the health services, which they say they are going to maintain and 

continue to expand and augment, to an independent commission (independent of whom?) Completely 

outside the control of the Legislature, outside the control of the Government that they hope some day to 

have sitting over here, and to allow a commission of that kind to spend public money without, in any 

way, being responsible for how that money is collected from the public? I think they should state their 

intentions and state them in no uncertain terms, and remember — the new Leader of the Opposition 

should remember — the statement I just mentioned was made by the Prime Minister of this country who 

is, I assume, in Liberal ranks, somewhat senior to our young friend across the way, who has recently 

assumed the position of Leader of the Liberal party in Saskatchewan. I will mention that again. Prime 

Minister St. Laurent has said, and he has emphasized very strongly, that control of health service must 

rest with the agency responsible for the collection of public funds. I would like our friends to keep that 

in mind. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — They never thought of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Now they have another plank — the sixth and last one on the list, according to 

the information I have, emanating from their convention, and their statement of what they are pleased to 

call principles with regard to health. The sixth one is: 

 

“Maximum utilization by the province of health grants provided for the province by the Federal 

Government.” 

 

That again is like the other one I have quoted: it is meaningless; there is no substance to it. I don’t think 

they knew what they were talking about when they wrote it down, except that it sounded good and they 

hoped, by that statement, to intimate to and convince anyone who reads the statement that this 

Government does not make the maximum use of the Federal grants. Well, I would like to disabuse their 

minds. We not only make maximum use of them, but we would like to have some more. If it were not 

for the restrictions on them we would use them to the last nickel, and we use them to nearly that now. 

 

I want to remind our friends that these grants are, at the present time, already being utilized as fully as 

possible. Nothing they could do would utilize them any more fully. Some are ear-marked for long-term 

construction projects to which the province is committed, and these will be used up as the construction 

projects proceed. We do not start a project and get the money from the Federal Government as soon as 

we say we are going to start. We get it in stages; and as the project is completed in the stages, we get the 

money. Until we get the money our friends across the way would like to suggest to the 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

8 

public and maybe convince themselves, that we are not utilizing the grants. Once we have committed 

ourselves to a construction programme, we make our application to the Federal Government for its 

construction grant that is promised according to their policy, and they either agree or disagree with our 

project. If they agree, they say we will get the grant — therefore we get it; but we do not spend it until 

we get it. So we are utilizing the construction grants, and will utilize them when our construction 

programmes are completed, to the full. They cannot use any more than that unless something happens, 

which I will refer to in a few moments. 

 

Now other grants are being used to train qualified workers and engage qualified workers. There is a 

shortage of trained people all across Canada. We are getting them as fast as they are available, but this 

shortage exists and nothing the Liberal party can promise or say will alter that shortage, nor speed up the 

time when the shortage will not be in existence. So that statement, again, of their sixth plank doesn’t 

mean very much. 

 

I want to remind our friends across the way that there are certain regulations and restrictions on our 

ability to get Federal grants. It is all very well for our friends to get up and say “the Federal Government 

makes so much money available for certain things in the provinces and Saskatchewan isn’t using it”. 

Some of these grants are not being used because the thing that the Federal Government says they can 

only be used for is being done already here, or has been provided for in Saskatchewan. The Federal 

Government says, “if you have already provided for them, you do not get any more help.” So a province 

like Saskatchewan, which has done a great deal and has pioneered in health services in this country, 

finds itself in the position of being unable to utilize these grants because they had done the things that 

the grants were supposed to be used for, years before the grants came into existence. 

 

Some of the grants are only available for new or expanded programmes, and we cannot use all those. No 

province can use all those, particularly a province like Ontario, who had no desire to extend their health 

services and, therefore, did not take advantage of the grants; or a province like Saskatchewan, which as I 

said a moment ago, had done the very job that the grant money was supposed to be used for, so it is not 

available to us and we cannot use that at all. It may be possible that our friends across the way think by 

having a Liberal government here they can have some inside track with the Federal Liberal Government, 

and get preferred treatment in the matter of grants. If that is the case, then I can only say that it is about 

as cheap a kind of political activity for anyone to anticipate or hope to have happen. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You are setting up a straw man now, boy! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Well, there is no other way for them to do it except by getting special favours. If 

they get the same restrictions on the grants if they were here (which they won’t be, of course, which is 

fortunate for the people of Saskatchewan); but if they were here, they would either have to get special 

treatment or they would have to get along under the regulations set by the Federal Government. 

 

There are some fields where we use far more than the Federal Government grants. In the field of cancer 

services our expenditures exceed by many hundreds of thousands of dollars the amount the Federal 

Government matches for us, and the same might be said for some of the other grants also. And we do 

not get any grant assistance from the Liberal government at Ottawa for our hospital services plan, even 

though this was promised several years ago. So 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

9 

when they talk about utilizing the grants to the full, they are building up a straw man when they say that 

by attempting to convince the public that we are not taking full advantage of any financial assistance 

which the Federal Government makes available. We take advantage of every nickel that, just as fast as 

we possibly can, because we need the services in this province. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I do not want anyone to get the impression that we regard these health grants 

from the Federal Government as generous. They are far, far short of the amounts of money and 

assistance that the Federal Government promised to make available to the provinces when they held 

their Dominion-Provincial conferences of 1945 in 1946. Read your ‘Green Books’ — even the 

gentleman across the way, who is smiling a bit sarcastically, can read. I have seen and heard him read, 

so I know he can read I would suggest that he read the Green Books and see what is there. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — He can’t they see the book for the green. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Through the last Liberal convention, and through their new leader, the Liberal 

party is promising many things. Among other things, if I have listened and heard correctly, both since 

the Legislature opened and two radio talks before that and so on, they have promised larger school 

grants, larger municipal road grants, higher allowances to old-age pensioners, mothers’ allowance cases, 

blind pensioners and reduced taxation, at a time when Federal Liberal foreign policies are reducing farm 

income from which the bulk of the provincial revenues come. These are the kinds of promises they are 

making. I said a while ago that there is one field they have never been excelled in, any place in the world 

that I have ever read any history on, and that is in their ability to make promises, and again I follow that 

up with the same qualification — that their ability to make promises is only equalled, or possibly even 

excelled, by their failure to keep any of the promises after they are made. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You’ll eat those words. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I remember sitting in this House at a time when I think it was conceded from this 

side there was some gray matter among the members over there, for I remember after one of their 

members was removed to another position our Premier made the statement that he didn’t think the 

Liberal party was stupid enough to blow its own brains out . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — We considered the source from which it came. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Yes, that’s right, and it came from an excellent and authoritative source. There is 

no one better able to recognize brains than the leader of the party on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . a poor example today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I remember when some of these people, since I have been in this House, making 

speeches here, stated that the C.C.F. Government provides too many social services. It is well 

remembered — even some of our friends over there will have memories long enough to remember that. 

Then they come out with a statement of what they call ‘principles’, and their other promises of what we 

are going to do! Now they cannot have it both ways. They cannot provide more social services and say 

this government has too many social services, because when they say they are going to provide more 

social services, they must mean more than this Government provides, and then 

t 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

10 

they are guilty, in the past, and I expect they are thinking yet even if they are afraid to actually say so; 

they have been guilty in the past of saying we provide too many social services . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — When? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, I can only assume it is the Liberal intention to reduce the amount of 

money which makes these services possible, because, remember, they said our taxes are too high and 

tacitly promised to reduce them. Now we should be told by the new leader and his colleagues how they 

propose to reduce these social services, how they propose to do any of the things they talk about. For 

instance, do they plan to reduce the cost of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan? Is that their 

intention? I would like them to tell us about that. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You tell us! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I’ll hear a lot of words, but I do not expect I will hear much sense. Mr. Speaker, 

there are three main costs in the operation of hospital. Those costs are payrolls, food and drugs. Do our 

friends across the way propose to reduce these salaries and wages of the hospital workers? If they do, I 

am sure the people who work in the hospitals will be extremely interested in hearing a statement of that 

kind. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Another straw man. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — They talk about reducing costs, and that is one way they would probably think of 

doing it; that is the way they did it in the old days, Mr. Speaker. There has been no change of heart that I 

can see; only a change of words — that is all. If they are going to reduce costs, I suppose that means 

they will join with the Liberals at Ottawa and other people in this country who would like to see the 

value of farm products lowered. I am sure the farmers of the province would like to know if it is their 

intention to assist in lowering food costs at the farmers’ expense so they can lower hospital costs so as to 

lower taxes and do all the other things they say they are going to do. 

 

Now, in drugs: have our friends across the way received an undertaking from the Liberal Government of 

Canada that price controls will be reinstated in the field of drugs? If so, the people of Saskatchewan are 

entitled to be told. Naturally they will wonder, if that is going to be done, why it was not done several 

years ago, if it can be done now. Those are the three fields that represent the higher costs in operating 

hospitals, and if those people over there are going to reduce those costs, then I think we have a right to 

know where they intend to start. 

 

Or has the Liberal party of Saskatchewan received a promise from the Prime Minister that he will confer 

with the new leader of the Liberal party in Saskatchewan in a hotel room somewhere here in Regina and 

make a deal whereby the Federal treasury will pay a larger share of the health services to a Liberal 

government in Saskatchewan than it has been prepared to pay while a C.C.F. Government was in office? 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, in view of what has happened recently in the Federal field, there is no reason why 

we should not properly ask for a joint statement from the leader of the Liberal party in Canada and the 

leader of the Liberal party in Saskatchewan, as to whether they intend to confer on matters of this kind 

and make backroom deals in hotel rooms such has been done in other parts of Canada. 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

11 

I have read their six planks and have dealt with them. They made no mention of the things I propose to 

mention now — they said they would augment these fields, and that means add to them and extend 

them. They haven’t done anything in the field of rheumatic fever control. This Government has 

instituted, in one area of the province, a programme of rheumatic fever control, through co-operation of 

the Medical Society there, the Health Region officials, the public generally and the persons afflicted 

whereby 50 persons are presently receiving assistance. The purpose of that programme is to provide 

these people, at public expense (not very great expense, but some) with certain additional assistance 

during their younger years until they become adults, so that the rheumatic fever they have been afflicted 

with when they were younger will not result in serious heart ailments at a later date when they become 

adults. This was never done by our Liberal friends, nor, as far as I know, was it ever thought of; nor is 

there any remark in their programme on health work in their ‘New Look’ that they produced last 

November. 

 

We have had dental disease in this province as long as there have been teeth, longer than the Leader of 

the Opposition has lived, as long as the two older members over here in the Liberal party have lived, as 

long as I have been here, and that is getting along; we three can be called senior citizens now. Did they 

do anything about it? We have done so, Mr. Speaker. We have been training and engaging young 

women who are trained dental hygienists to go out into the country and visit the children and to show 

them and teach them how to care for teeth and to apply topical fluorides for their teeth. I say here, we 

will continue, as a Health department, until we are convinced we are wrong, to advocate that wherever 

communal water supply can be fluoridated, that such shall be done. 

 

Teacher psychologist is another field that we have entered into, and we find, in health regions in school 

units among those people who are interested in the welfare of children and in behaviour problems that 

teachers and parents are confronted with, that some assistance be given in that field by trained personnel. 

We have undertaken that and are doing it at the present time. 

 

Public health nursing is something they did know a little bit about; but if you were to look over the 

activities of public health nursing under any previous Liberal government in this country and compare 

with what goes on at the present time, you would hardly see any similarity between the two 

programmes. 

 

We heard a lot about the northern administration district — I am sorry the hon. member for Meadow 

Lake (Mr. Dunfield) is not in his seat. The northern administration district is now getting, for the first 

time, complete health services in the way of a medical health officer, who is assigned to that region, a 

sanitary officer, and just as fast as we have personnel and funds to do it we will extend our programme 

to further assist the people he talked about. And I want to say in this connection: one of his remarks, if I 

heard correctly, yesterday, was that the incidence of T.B. and V.D. is greater since this Government 

came in. I do not believe there are any statistics to prove a statement of that kind, but I will tell my 

friends over there, and through them, him (because he is not in the seat) that we have a far better case-

finding machinery today. The result is we are finding these people and offering them help that was never 

offered to them before. 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

12 

I would like to also mention something about our poliomyelitis programme. I am very happy to be able 

to report, of course, that 1954 was not as serious a year as 1952-53. Nevertheless, we have quite a 

backlog of victims of residual paralysis from poliomyelitis which we are caring for in our restoration 

centres which I will mention in the moment. I think the House will be interested in knowing that this 

Government does foresee what is likely to take place, does make provision for any preventive service 

that seems to have any value whatsoever, and because of that, we have made provision for the purchase 

of sufficient of the Salk type vaccine to be able to vaccinate all the five-and-six-year olds is because they 

are in the age group which poliomyelitis is most likely to attack. This is not going to be compulsory — 

don’t let anyone get any wrong idea; but we will have sufficient available to vaccinate all the five-and 

six-year olds, if the parents of those children wish it to be done. 

 

I would also like to mention our physical restoration centres. I am mentioning these, Mr. Speaker, for a 

definite reason. I have read the Liberal health programme and their platform plank by plank, and in that 

there was nothing to indicate that they have any idea that the things I am speaking of now are a 

necessary part of any complete and co-ordinated health programme for the good of all the people. Our 

physical restoration centres, both at Regina and Saskatoon, are as full as we can get them with patients 

who are being treated there by the highest quality personnel, and we have been fortunate, in the last few 

months, of being able to recruit more and more qualified people, such as physiotherapist and 

occupational therapist and the whole field of therapy people who are required to rehabilitate these polio 

victims and to keep their academic standing and their speech and the physical activities at as high a 

standard as possible so that some day, through other agencies, they will be able to go out into the world 

and be self-supporting, which would not have happened had these restoration centres not been available 

for their use. I would like to remind the House that here, in Regina, when the new nursing home is built, 

we are going to have 50 beds allocated to us for the use of bed-ridden persons who are attending our 

centre. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to just say this. The Federal Government has been asked many times, 

since 1945, to share with the provinces the cost of a comprehensive health insurance programme. Their 

participation was requested in a resolution before the Saskatchewan Legislature here, last year. 

Repeatedly, the Federal Government has stated that it has no intention of introducing a national health 

insurance programme at this time. Now, I want to know what the Liberals in this province are trying to 

do. I said yesterday and I say again, there is no time when a Liberal member in this Legislature, or a 

Liberal member of Parliament from Saskatchewan in the House of Commons, has stood up and given 

his unqualified (or even qualified) support to a national health insurance programme. It is truly did not 

oppose the resolution here, last year; but I remember no speeches or no commitments in favor by any 

member on your left, Mr. Speaker. I think they are implying, in their statements on health insurance, that 

Ottawa will likely co-operate with the Liberal government here more than it will with a C.C.F. one. If 

that is the case, then I can only say that they are playing politics with the health of the people, and there 

aren’t words strong enough that you would permit, Mr. Speaker, for me to use to describe an action of 

that kind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Saskatchewan’s Golden Jubilee commemorating 50 years of progress. The progressive 

spirit of the majority of Saskatchewan’s people resulted in the election of a C.C.F. Government in 1944. 

That is eleven years ago. Those eleven years have seen more done in the field of health and 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

13 

welfare than in all the years of Liberal rule. The C.C.F. will continue to do the very things they are doing 

and expand them. 

 

I will support the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mrs. J.E. Cooper (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, I would first like to congratulate the mover and the 

seconder of the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. We have in these two men very able 

representatives of the groups which originated the C.C.F. party — the farmer and the labour groups. The 

mover, the hon. member from Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst) speaks for agriculture, and there are few people 

in this province who have a better understanding of the problems of rural Saskatchewan, or who have 

laboured more diligently and more efficiently for the farming people of this province, than the member 

from Wadena. The seconder, the hon. member for Moose Jaw (Mr. Heming), is a man who for many 

years has fought for a better standard of living for the labouring people of this province. Both of these 

men have made, not only a valuable contribution to this debate, but they have also made an able 

contribution to the government of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the hon. member from Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) on his new and very 

important position as the leader of the Liberal party in the province and as the Leader of the Opposition 

in the House. I cannot say I envy him his task, but I do admire the courage he had assuming such a task. 

I understand that the hon. Leader and his family have taken up residence in our fair city of Regina, and I 

would like to say a special word of welcome not only to the hon. Leader, but to Mrs. McDonald and the 

McDonald family, to the city of Regina. I hope you will enjoy living here; I think you will find it a very 

friendly city. After living here most of my life I can honestly say that I know of no place I would rather 

live, and I hope you and your good family will shortly feel the same. 

 

I was very much interested in listening to the speech of the Leader of the Opposition here, the other day; 

but I was wishing, when he was talking, that I had taken my mathematics a little more seriously when I 

went to school, because I would like to have been able to add up what the implementation of all the 

promises he made, on behalf of the Liberal party, would have meant in dollars and cents to this 

province; but I could not count that high, Mr. Speaker. I did decide, before he was through, that he was 

even worse at mathematics than I am, because I felt quite sure that had he taken a pencil and paper and 

add up all the money that he spent in this Legislature, last Thursday, he would never have had the 

courage to make the promises that he did. One thing I am sure of, Mr. Speaker, is that the hon. Leader 

never expects to be the Provincial Treasurer of this province. 

 

I have also, like the previous speaker, been following with interest some of the speeches of the hon. 

Leader since he became the provincial leader, and some of them were mentioned by the previous 

speaker; but it was not only what he said, but the way it was said, that startled me a little bit. 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

14 

One in particular I would like to refer to. When I first saw it I thought my eyes were deceiving me, but I 

when I looked again there was no doubt this is what it said, and it is headed: 

 

“Hospitalization product of Liberal thinking” . . . 

 

and it goes on (and I am quoting from the report in the ‘Leader-Post’): 

 

“For the Liberal party to abolish hospitalization would be like a parent killing his own child.” 

 

Now what do you think of a statement like that? Claiming hospitalization as a Liberal baby! Mr. 

Speaker, when I recalled how, when this plan was first introduced, the members of the Liberal party 

ridiculed the plan — they threw cold water on it; they said there weren’t enough doctors, there weren’t 

enough beds, there weren’t enough hospitals and we would ruin the province; Blue Cross is just as good. 

I even heard prominent Liberals say that when this plan came into operation they were going to the 

hospital for a good long rest — as if they needed a rest, Mr. Speaker! When I read that statement I found 

it almost incredible and the only explanation I could get for such a statement was the same one that the 

hon. Premier gave — that, as the Leader of the Opposition is a relative newcomer to the ranks of the 

Liberal party, I think he has been listening to the Liberal propaganda and he has just fallen for it, and 

that is really never safe to do. I cannot blame the Liberal party for wanting to adopt this C.C.F. ‘baby’, 

but I can assure them that the Minister of Social Welfare is very particular in this matter of adoption, and 

this is one they will never have a chance at. 

 

Later on, in the same speech, Mr. Speaker, he goes on to speak about health insurance, and again I am 

going to quote. Here is what he says: 

 

“Health insurance should be approached in easy stages. It is better to proceed in easy stages, making 

gradual and solid advances, and to consolidate our gains so that the services established are on a sound 

and durable basis.” 

 

That certainly sounds like a Liberal statement, Mr. Speaker, and the emphasis is definitely on the word 

‘gradual’. It is 34 years now (isn’t it?) since they promised us health insurance. How long does it take to 

establish a sound and durable basis? If the matter of providing hospitalization in this province had been 

left to the Liberal party, I am afraid they would still be looking for that ‘sound and durable basis’ and we 

would have had no hospitalization plan. If you want to know what the Liberals really think of 

hospitalization, take a look at the province of Manitoba where there is a Liberal government in power. 

You won’t find any hospital services plan there. 

 

I also notice, though, that there is one C.C.F. baby that the Liberal party is prepared to kill off, and that 

is our automobile insurance plan. Now I think, Mr. Speaker, that that was one of the most unwise 

statements that the Liberals ever made, because I am quite sure that our compulsory automobile 

insurance plan is one of the most popular measures that this Government has ever introduced. I am not 

worrying too much, because I have too much faith in the good sense of the people of this province to 

believe that they will allow the Liberal party either to get rid of our automobile insurance plan, or take 

any risk on just what would happen to our hospitalization plan. 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

15 

Now, Mr. Speaker, turning to the Speech from the Throne. No one could listen to that Speech, nor to the 

inspiring address of our Premier, the other day, without feeling a great faith in the future of this 

province. When I was listening to the tremendous development that is taking place in this province in 

the field of natural resources, and the development of oil and gas and uranium, and the expansion of 

power in this province, and rural electrification and the telephone system and so on, I was thinking of all 

these things in terms of just what they will mean to young people growing up in his province today. It 

isn’t so long ago that our students from universities, when they graduated, had to leave his province and 

seek other fields to find a career; and we lost them. We lost them to eastern Canada, or we lost them to 

the United States or some other part of the world. This no longer needs to be the case, because we need, 

in this province, engineers and geologists, architects and technicians of all kinds. Now in this province 

we have a medical college and we can train our own doctors right here, and there are endless 

opportunities in store for young people who have the training and the faith in this province to make their 

future career here. To me, this is one of the most heartening aspects of the developments that are taking 

place in the province right now. 

 

I am also glad to say that, along with these tremendous developments, we can say that we are providing 

the best health care programme on this continent. We are maintaining a very high level of social services 

and, as forecast in the Speech from the Throne this year, there is to be further assistance to our old-age 

pensioners; mothers’ allowances are to be raised, there is to be more money for people who take foster 

children into their care; we are entering into an agreement with the Federal Government to provide 

assistance to the physically incapacitated; there is a steadily rising level of assistance to education; we 

are giving to the people of this province the cheapest car insurance that can be found anywhere. And, 

because we do have a very efficiently run administration, we have been able to do all these things 

without excessively taxing the people or without jeopardizing our borrowing power. We can borrow 

money on the market today at a rate that is comparable to any other province in this Dominion. I feel, 

Mr. Speaker, that is a record of which we can be justly proud. 

 

There are a great many aspects of the Government programme I would like to deal with, but I am going 

to confine myself primarily, today, to the subject of education, because it is one of the programmes of 

government in which I am particularly interested. The Leader of the Opposition had a good deal to say 

about education, and I also want to say a good deal about education today. 

 

I want to start out by saying that I am very proud of the progress that is being made in this province in 

the field of education, and I would like to commend the hon. Minister and the members of his 

Department for the very able leadership they are giving in everything pertaining to education. It is the 

aim of this C.C.F. Government to provide, as much as is humanly possible, equality of opportunity for 

every child in this province. To be able to do this in a province such as ours, with sparsely settled areas, 

presents a great many difficulties; but we have been moving steadily towards that goal, and we have 

been doing this in many ways. In the first place, in the matter of building and equipment. 

 

There has been a very energetic and a very extensive school building and repair programme going on 

over this province in the past number 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

16 

of years. I find that, in the period from 1945 to 1951, there were 825 new schools built, 623 of which 

were built in units and 192 in non-units, and, of course, there have been a great many more schools built 

since that time, but I only have the figures up to 1951. The Government has materially assisted in this 

programme; indeed, they have assisted it to the tune of $8 1/2 million. I think there is being a very 

efficient job done in the building of these new schools. 

 

A great many of them have benefited from our rural electrification programme and we find many of our 

schools and many of our teacherages now have the benefit of electric lights. Great care is being taken in 

the schools in seeing that there is good lighting, which is a protection to the children’s eyes, and that is 

very important. There is a better ventilating system; there is more modern heating equipment — many of 

the schools are oil heated. The little red schoolhouse may be all right for a song, but I taught in one of 

them, Mr. Speaker, and I still have very vivid memories of some bitterly cold days when I arrived at 

school and the school was just freezing cold and, after got warmed up little bit, the children near the 

stove were just roasted; if you got ten feet away you started to shiver and the poor children who sat at 

the front of the room had to have hot bricks at their feet to keep themselves warm. When I see some of 

the lovely new modern schools I am quite sure, Mr. Speaker, that I was born 40 years too soon. 

 

We are making good progress in overcoming our teacher shortage also. The fact that we brought 135 

teachers from the British Isles, last year, has helped some, and I am glad to be able to report that the 

number of study supervisors has been cut from 524, last year, to 260 this year. The Estevan School Unit 

reports that, for the first time in many years, their whole slate of teachers are qualified teachers. Not only 

this, but the general certification of the teachers is much higher this year. 

 

In the Estevan Unit we have some other very interesting figures. Certainly costs have risen — they are 

doubled; but I also found this — and the figures I am quoting are from their own report, the report that 

they published, and I did check them with the Department, and they are quite correct. They show that, in 

1946, the equalization grant was $3,326; in 1954, it was $32,849 — that is 10 times greater. Also, in the 

same period of time, the operational grants went from $37,215 to $46,711. There has been an increase in 

the enrolment of this Unit of 10 per cent — 3 per cent in the public school; but to me the most striking 

thing about the whole report was that the number of students in grade XII has increased, in this period, 

by 214 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Cooper: — This is very indicative of what is happening all over this province. You may remember 

that the hon. Minister of Education (Hon. Mr. Lloyd) last year cited Foam Lake, where six years ago 

there were 40 high school students; in 1953, there were 240 high school students, or six times the 

number, and they expect 300 students in high school this year. Many of these children have been 

brought into the high schools by buses, or they live in the dormitories provided by the Unit. I feel it is 

very true that the fact that we have been able to make it easier and less expensive for rural children and 

small town children to get a high school education is certainly a milestone in the business of providing 

equality of opportunity in education. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there has been considerable criticism recently — I have read several editorials in the 

‘Leader-Post’, and there has been 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

17 

some criticism in school districts and in some of the school units about rising costs in education. 

Universal education in a rapidly changing and a modern and scientific world such as we live in is a very 

expensive business, and I think we are just going to have to face the fact that it is going to continue to be 

expensive and it is going to become even more expensive than it is today, because the kind of training, 

that is, the kind of skills that we demand to meet modern-day needs are very different from the kind of 

skills that were demanded by our fathers and our forefathers, and they do call for a higher level of 

education, for more variety in training and for more years of school; and, of course, all of this results in 

higher cost. Critics of rising costs in education, I believe, fail to realize that we are living in a new age. 

Modern machinery on every hand is replacing simple manual labour, and the lot of the unskilled and the 

uneducated person is becoming increasingly difficult; it is seasonal, it is transient, and they are the first 

group in the economy to become unemployed. 

 

A good example of the changing needs in education is that of farming. Farming at one time was 

considered rather a simple art. It called for a lot of hard physical labour and for long hours of work, but 

not necessarily a very great deal of education. Today, however, farming has become a very scientific 

business, and to farm successfully a man needs to be something of an economist. He has to understand 

markets; he has to know a lot about soil and horticultural; he has to have a great body of scientific 

information, and he has to keep constantly in touch with new methods. Also, in order to handle the kind 

of complicated machinery we find on farms today, he has to be something of a mechanic as well. 

 

What is true in farming is true all along the line. In the world of business complicated business machines 

are rapidly taking the place of physical labour. I attended the opening of the Ford plant in Regina 

recently, and I saw one machine and it took the place of the labour of nine people, but naturally the 

person who runs that machine must be a trained person. In the building industry all sorts of new 

techniques are being introduced, and they call for a new kind of training. We are living more or less in 

the day of the expert. We find it in professional life — the family doctor is being replaced by the 

specialists; and the friendly neighbour of pioneer days who used to come and help when people were ill 

is replaced by the trained nurse. Our social workers must be trained persons, and we see the trend even 

in the armed forces. There was a time when wars were fought with spears and swords, but now we talk 

in terms of planes and tanks and radar and guided missiles and atom bombs. Warfare and defence, today, 

it is a technical job and it calls for trained men and trained women. So, when we talk of cost in education 

we should be realistic, and the demands of a new day should be kept in mind. 

 

Aside from this new emphasis in education the need for more education, for more years of school, what 

are some of the other factors involved in the rise in educational costs? Well, of course, education, like 

everything else, has been hit by inflation, and I do not need to tell any of you what the effects of 

inflation have been. You only need to look at your family budget. I know that the price I paid for a 

pound of coffee 10 years ago was about 39 cents; today I pay $1.29. Compare what you pay for a pair of 

shoes today to what you paid 10 years ago, or any article of clothing, or rent, or to buy a house. The hon. 

member from Wadena made some comparisons of the cost of farm machinery, and, of course, things 

that schools buy a naturally could not escape this inflation either. The cost of a ton of coal 10 years ago 

was $9.50; the same ton of coal today is $18.50. Building materials have tripled; all the 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

18 

supplies that the schools use have increased; labour has increased. Compare the cost of a caretaker of a 

school today, or a bus driver, to what it was 10 years ago; and, of course, it would be ridiculous to 

expect that education could possibly do anything but follow the pattern of the rest of the economy 

follows in a period of inflation. 

 

In many ways, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was particularly vulnerable because during the depression, in 

the 1930’s, there wasn’t any money to replace schools and school equipment, and many of them did 

need replacing and most of them needed a great deal of repair. Large numbers of the schools were in 

poor condition, and even after money was available, it was a while before materials were available, so 

that a great deal of this building — in fact almost all of the building — had to be done in a time of 

sharply rising costs. Besides this, in many cases there were debentures still to be paid on the old school; 

in fact the Units took over a very heavy load of debt when they were organized. For a time some of these 

mounting expenses were paid out of tax arrears, and so they weren’t so quickly noted; but, of course, 

that source is dried up now. 

 

In many of the Units and in many of the School Boards a good deal of the replacing and the repairing 

has been done on it ‘pay as you go’ method, and the costs have been taken from operating revenue. In 

1949, capital expenditure of $2.6 million was taken from operating revenue; and in 1952, I find that 77.6 

per cent of capital expenditure in the units and 62.6 per cent in the non-units of the capital expenditure 

was taken from current revenue. I am not criticizing this pay-as-you-go method. In the long run it 

certainly will reduce costs through a great saving in interest; but it is one of the factors which has caused 

rising costs. 

 

Another thing that I think is often overlooked is that, at about time the Units were organized, there was a 

re-assessment in this province. I have a memorandum here from the Trustees’ Association and I want to 

quote from it. It states this: 

 

“That the assessment in rural municipalities — the 1952 assessment and rural municipalities — was 

one-third less than the 1930 assessment, and when the assessment was reduced by a one-third it was 

necessary to increase the mill rate by one-half to produce the same levy.” 

 

For example, if before the re-assessment the mill rate was 12, it would immediately jump to 18 mills, 

and unless you tie mill rates to assessments it can be very deceptive. In other words, a re-assessment 

meant a substantial rise in mill race without one extra dollar going into the pot for education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course transportation costs is another thing. The trend to larger farms and the moving of 

people into towns and cities have meant that more children have had to be conveyed; I notice Estevan 

alone reported 591 to be conveyed. 

 

Certainly, also teachers’ salaries have been a major factor in rising costs. The teachers’ salaries, of 

course, had to follow the pattern of other salaries and other wages in this Dominion, and I was quite 

interested in looking up labour costs to find that the teachers’ salaries have risen by just about the same 

percentage as the cost of farm labour. Of course teachers also 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

19 

need to live in a period of inflation. I noticed a report in the School Trustee magazine which states that, 

since 1945, teachers’ salaries in this province have risen 104 per cent, but the national average rise in 

teachers’ salaries was 108 per cent, so, if those figures are correct, we are still 4 per cent below the 

national average rise in this province. What, then, Mr. Speaker, has been the effect of these better salary 

schedules, because I think this is really the important thing? I believe the thing we should be concerned 

about, more than just merely cutting costs, is to see that we do get the very best value for every dollar 

we spend on education, and certainly the value we get for every dollar we spend on education depends 

almost entirely on the kind of teachers we can retain and that we can recruit in this province. If we are 

going to be able to persuade some of our most able young people to enter the teaching profession (and 

certainly we do need the most able young people there), it stands to reason that we have to provide 

salary schedules comparable to those of other provinces. Looking at the effect, we now have in this 

province a salary schedule that is reasonably comparable to that of other provinces. We have better 

schools. We have better teacher tenure laws, and we have a vastly improved teacher superannuation 

scheme — and I do mean vastly improved, because, in 1944, $573 was the average pension while, last 

year, it was $1,447. 

 

We are beginning to see the effects of these things. The number of students entering our teachers’ 

training colleges is increasing; it has increased by 94, this year, in the teachers’ colleges and 182 at the 

College of Education. There are 303 more students enrolled as teachers-in-training than there were two 

years ago. We are also able to see the effect of all these things in the fact that we are stopping the exodus 

of teachers to other provinces. This year we had the smallest exodus we have had for a great number of 

years, and also I was pleased to note that there are 92 teachers who have come from other provinces to 

teach in Saskatchewan. 

 

While education costs have increased in this province, we are not alone, and I was very interested in 

looking at figures from the province of Alberta. I find that there are very few districts in Alberta where 

the mill rate is below 30 mills. There are 44 districts, by the way, where the mill rate is from 35 to 39 

mills; 20 where the mill rate is from 40 to 50 mills, and there are four with mill rates over 50, and one 

with the mill rate of 60. In Saskatchewan, they range from 17 to 35 mills, and we have only eight where 

the mill rate is over 30 mills. The taxes for school purposes in Alberta are substantially higher than in 

Saskatchewan. I also find that our Government pays a slightly higher percentage of the total operational 

costs for education than the Alberta government pays. We pay 29.95 per cent and Alberta pays 29.51 per 

cent, while Manitoba pays a great deal less — 23 percent of the total operational costs. 

 

In the light of all of these things, how has the C.C.F. Government been assisting schools in meeting the 

changing needs and in financing education? 

 

Well, for one thing, there has been an almost complete revision of curriculum to bring it into line with 

modern-day needs, and there has been excellent community participation and revising this curriculum. 

Then, as far as finance goes, grants have a good deal more than tripled since 1944: $3,166,544, in 1944; 

over $10 million last year, and they are to be increased again this year. The system of equalization grants 

has brought a great deal more equality of opportunity throughout this province, and we find that the 

Government pays 63 per cent of the costs in districts like Meadow Lake and Hudson Bay. We have built 

28 new schools in the northern area. Not only do we build them but we operate them, and we have 

brought educational opportunities to children who never had a chance before. 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

20 

Then, through loans and scholarships, we have been assisting students to go on with higher education. 

Since 1950, $793,162 has been loaned to students, and 2,870 students have been assisted. The picture at 

the University is good. Grants have risen there from $550,000 in 1945 to something in excess of 

$1,500,000. Besides this, we have built buildings this year. We have spent $4 million on buildings, and 

the total expense on University buildings, since 1944, is over $15 million. I think that is something to be 

proud of. Grants to schools for building and equipment, last year alone, were $1 1/2 million, and I told 

you the total in 10 years was $8 1/2 million. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, financial assistance to education in 

this province has been rising steadily and rapidly since this Government took office. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the greatest forward step that has been taken in this province and education 

with the organization of the Larger Unit. There are so many advantages in these units. For one thing, 

there is better library service, and that is tremendously important in providing a good education. The 

units, generally speaking, are better equipped. They offer better audio visual education; they have 

helping teachers; they have hot lunches for the children; they arrange field days and musical festivals; 

things like this that only the city children had advantage of before. They do a good job in equalizing 

costs within the units, and most important, they provide much better opportunities for high school 

education. Also, it is a well-known fact that teachers prefer teaching in units. There are great many 

advantages there, and that is why they prefer it. It has been easier to keep the units staffed with qualified 

teachers and also, because of the units, it has been possible to get a more fair and more uniform salary 

schedule. Certainly, without the unit system, the teacher situation in this province would be much more 

grave than it is today. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the parents and the children of this province have 

a great deal to thank this Government for the fact that we did organize Larger Units. 

 

Coming back, in conclusion, to what I said about the cost of education, whether or not the cost of 

education is too high or too low is a matter of where we place our values. Do we want to go back to the 

horse-and-buggy days, or do we want to move on with the modern age? People are always willing to pay 

for the things they really want. We can still buy a horse and buggy for around $150; but most people do 

buy a motor car for $2,000 to $3,000. Compare the cost of a tub and washboard with that of a modern 

electric washer, or broom with a vacuum cleaner, or a plow with a tractor or a combine; and yet we are 

willing to pay that difference because of the value we think we receive. We can spend in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, and we did spend, last year, approximately $9 million for tobacco, $4 million for cosmetics 

and $50 million on liquor. We are willing to pay for blacktop highways, for rural electrification, and we 

expect to pay for these things. Education is no different, and yet it always seems to me that, even in a 

period of slight recession, the very first play some people turn to cut the cost is teachers’ salaries and 

costs of education, despite the fact that the very life of democracy depends on a well-informed and a 

well-educated public. 

 

As long as the C.C.F. government is in power in this province, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to move as 

rapidly as possible to a greater measure of equality and of opportunity for education for every child in 

this province, toward greater stability and a more adequate standard of living for our teaching 

profession, and toward a more efficient administration of our schools. And, of course, the proper answer 

to this whole question of the adequate financing of education, particularly in the province like 

Saskatchewan 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

21 

where we have scattered communities; the proper answer, of course, is Federal aid to education on an 

equalization basis. The need for more Federal aid has been recognized by every major educational body 

in this country, and it is time that the Federal Government assumed their responsibility in this matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker I support the motion. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural and of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, it is not 

very often that members of the Legislature are honoured by being able to follow, in the debate, our 

honourable and charming member from Regina, but it undoubtedly has its disadvantages, too, because 

what I have to say will undoubtedly seem rough and dull. However, one of the things, I suppose we men 

have to put up with, is that kind of disadvantage. 

 

The member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. Kohaly), who is not in his seat at the moment, made a statement, 

yesterday, in which I was rather interested, when he referred to the weakness of the Opposition. I do not 

know — maybe he is right. Then he mentioned help that the Opposition needed. For his benefit I would 

like to tell him something about life in the Opposition when we had a Liberal government in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You had to live with it to know it! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — We didn’t get any extra help for the Leader of the Opposition, which 

position I occupied for some years, nor did we have an office and a secretary all the year round. I was 

expected either to let my secretary go at the end of the Session or make provision for her salary. Of 

course, I will admit to we had a comparatively soft job in the Opposition in those days, and that our hon. 

friends opposite, at this time, have a rather difficult job. We faced a government that had certainly 

grown old and senile and was in the habit of doing nothing and not doing it very well. But my hon. 

friends opposite face a different situation at this time. 

 

Yesterday, the hon. member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Dunfield) shovelled off quite a load of 

misrepresentation and abuse on some of our employees, and today he is not in his seat. 

 

Premier Douglas: — “He who fights and runs away . . .” 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I regret that I will not be able to withhold any of the remarks that I intended 

to make, because of his absence. I would say that if there had being anything, during this Session, to 

prove that the statements of the member for Souris-Estevan that the Opposition was weak, it is a correct 

statement, it was the speech made by the hon. member for Meadow Lake, yesterday. People do not make 

speeches like that, full of so much that was far from the truth, and full of abuse of people outside the 

House, unless they have a very weak case indeed. 

 

The member for Meadow Lake made a speech, last year, on February 23rd, in this House and his speech 

at that time was chiefly about Green Lake, and the people of Green Lake. You know, Mr. Speaker, not 

all the people of Green Lake agreed with him. There was a letter came in, signed by 52 people of Green 

Lake, and I am sure that members of the House would like to have an opportunity to look at it, so I will 

lay a copy of it on the Table. 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

22 

I want to give a few ‘quotes’ from that letter. The first one is this: 

 

“We, the undersigned citizens of Green Lake Métis settlement, strongly protest the speech that was 

delivered by Mr. H.C. Dunfield in the Legislative Assembly, Regina, on February 23, 1954.” 

 

The second quotation: 

 

“Now, Mr. Dunfield should be fair in his criticism. We admit there has been bootlegging in Green 

Lake, but not nearly as much as he claims it to be; most of the bootlegging comes from Meadow Lake 

and elsewhere. 

 

“We notice Mr. Dunfield mentions the word propaganda in his speech very frequently. We presume he 

hasn’t got much love for a propagandist; in this case he wouldn’t have much love for himself.” 

 

The third quotation: 

 

“Today there is work available for all, summer and winter. Wages are from $5 to $22 per day. Yes, 

Mr. Dunfield can’t always pull wool over our eyes. We may be ignorant but at least we know what is 

good and what is bad.” 

 

And the last quotation I want to read from the letter is the ending, and it reads as follows: 

 

“Now the above is contrary to what Mr. Dunfield said. Anyone interested in this venture can come to 

Green Lake and see for himself. Remember, when you come, you will be travelling over a C.C.F. 

highway — no Liberal mud holes to overcome. We realize that fur and wild game will be a thing of 

the past in the near future. As a result we will be compelled to adopt the ways of the white man to till 

the land for living. We know Green Lake’s project is a costly venture, but we can assure you it will not 

be a waste of money. Time will tell.” 

 

The hon. member for Meadow Lake made a similar speech again this year, and, from a political point of 

view, Mr. Speaker, I hope he makes lots of them — at Green Lake, at Buffalo Narrows, Ile à la Crosse 

and other places. The hon. member ended by saying that the Government had established in northern 

Saskatchewan the first totalitarian state in Canada. How ridiculous it is! Conclusive proof to the contrary 

is the very fact that he is able to pour forth his calumny without let or hindrance here at this time. The 

first thing that disappears, in a totalitarian state, is the right of free speech. The member professes to be 

concerned with the northern native people . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — He is speaking in the southern area, here. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — He didn’t except between north and south. 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

23 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: —Mr. Speaker, a teacher once wrote on a boy’s report card: 

 

“Johnny’s arithmetic is a disgrace to both of us, but I try, and he doesn’t.” 

 

None of us can be proud, Mr. Speaker, of the way our Indian and Métis people have been treated, nor of 

the conditions under which they live; but we in the C.C.F. Government have tried, and are continuing to 

try. These people have been ruthlessly exploited in the past by many white people, including the hon. 

member’s friends, Clark and Bedard — possibly, also, by the hon. member himself. In thus speech he 

made, last year, there was this outstanding statement: 

 

“Those people could live under conditions in which a white man could never live.” 

 

The idea of a man with racial prejudice and the idea of exploitation! Later in the speech he said: 

 

“I had many of them working for me.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — They must live under pretty rotten conditions! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — He ought to go to South Africa. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I remember, last year, the Opposition making fun of us for employing an 

anthropologist. I can almost see the humour in the faces of the two senior members over there, when that 

question was brought up. They seemed to enjoy it. Now the anthropologist is quoted! I am not going to 

deal with those quotations given by the hon. member for Meadow Lake at this time, but a little later in 

my speech. 

 

Why did we employ this man, an anthropologist? We employed him because we knew we had a 

problem, and a difficult problem. The results of antiquated and inhuman exploitation and of segregation 

were all there. Those were the things that built up fear and suspicion. We knew, too, as many of the 

native people in the north realize, today, that they had no choice if they were going to continue to exist 

but to make some change in their mode of living. We have been working at that problem. We know that 

we have made mistakes, and we know that we will make mistakes to; but we are trying, and have tried in 

the past, and we are succeeding. The Liberal government never tried. I was here in this Legislature, and I 

never heard of any programme, with the exception of the very start of the Green Lake settlement, and 

the conditions in that settlement were pretty horrible the first time I saw it. 

 

The hon. member stated that tremendous amounts were squandered in the north. We have used 

tremendous amounts of money to build schools all over the north — ‘squandered’ according to the hon. 

member, I guess. We built hospitals at Buffalo Narrows, Sandy Bay, Stony Rapids, Cumberland House, 

Uranium City — I guess according to the Liberal party, that is ‘squandered’ money; and of the operation 

of these schools and hospitals. We built roads in the north. The hon. member did not even mention the 

road built in his own constituency, 40 miles on the Beauval Road; nor the Air Ambulance service, which 

runs into many thousands of dollars every year in the north; the doctors and nurses employed in the 

north, and this Green Lake project as well. 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

24 

Mr. Speaker, I am afraid that my hon. friend and his friends on whose behalf he was speaking here, 

yesterday, would be much more happy if the native people in the north were left alone for them to 

exploit; if they didn’t have any education. They don’t want them to have a chance to market their 

products in any other way except those through those particular individuals. He mentioned the north 

being an unorganized territory. He mentioned that the Liberal government only had one man in an area 

where there are now 10 employees. That is quite possible, with teachers, nurses, a doctor, conservation 

officer . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — He said doing the same work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You could easily count up to 10 in any area where they had one; but they 

were not giving service. Even the officer that was there did not do very much either. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — He was a liberal. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — It was unorganized territory at that time; it still is unorganized now. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — He picked the right figure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Never, before we took office, did they ever have any ratepayer committees 

in those areas. We established that to give to those people a chance to have a committee, to discuss their 

local affairs with the administrator, and to take part in it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — That’s totalitarianism! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Right here on this question of totalitarianism, I would like to quote from an 

article that appeared on the editorial page of the Saskatoon ‘Star Phoenix’ last August, the 25th of 

August. It was a reprint from the Montreal Daily ‘Le Devoir’ and it says: 

 

“The C.C.F. party is the only Democratic one we have had in Canada. Liberals and Conservatives 

belong to political parties born of capitalism and totalitarianism. Those old parties have followers but 

few adherents. They would indeed be ill at ease if they were compelled to disclose the source of their 

election funds.” 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I wonder if they would say that today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The Liberals would be very ill at ease, Mr. Speaker, if they were forced to 

disclose where their election funds come from. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — So would you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Not at all. Mr. Speaker, it is always the way with the Liberals. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You get yours from the labour unions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — They cannot possibly imagine any other political party having any different 

kind of ethics from what they have had; they have been willing to sell out to ‘big business’, and that is 

where 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

25 

they got their money. They cannot imagine a political party built on any other basis. 

 

The Department of Natural Resources’ personnel was mentioned, yesterday. The hon. member I think 

referred to them as ‘arrogant dictators’, ‘little Caesars’, and so forth. He said they were feared. Well, as 

a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, Indian and Métis people in the north fear and distrust the white man 

generally and you cannot blame them. That is one of the circumstances that makes the problem a very 

difficult one to solve. They have had cause for that suspicion and fear in the past; but I want to tell you 

that our conservation officers or not C.C.F. organizers. They are not hired for that purpose. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Ah, phooey! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Will the hon. Leader of the Opposition please contain himself . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It’s impossible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . until he hears the story. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I’ve heard enough. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You can hear, but you don’t understand. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I can understand the hon. Leader of the Opposition 

wanting to leave the Conservative party; but I could never figure out why he should want to get into the 

Liberal party. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Likely the same thing could be said about yourself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — We recruit our conservation officers from among the young men of the 

province of Saskatchewan, and they are selected for their ability, their integrity, their reputation in their 

own communities. I admit that the majority of them will be C.C.F., just as the majority of the people in 

the province of Saskatchewan are. You couldn’t expect anything else. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — There aren’t many of them left now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — These young men are young men who want to do that kind of work . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — There aren’t many left in the north. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . and we hire them first on a temporary basis. They go to our 

conservation officers’ school, where they have not only training in the classroom, but also training in the 

field. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Socialism . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — My hon. friend says ‘Socialism’. Probably, in his opinion, anybody who has 

schools is a Socialist. Sometimes when I listen to him, I think that might be right. 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

26 

These young men go to conservation officers’ school and then they become conservation officers, 

employees in a probationary class. I think we have as fine a group of employees in the Department of 

Natural Resources as you can find anywhere. I know them very well. I see them in the field; I see them 

at our conferences, but I agree that you might think my opinion is somewhat biased. 

 

Last Spring, and during Forest Conservation Week, we had for special speaker in the celebrations across 

the North in Forest Conservation Week, Mrs. K. Russenholt from Winnipeg — she speaks on C.B.C. 

She was certainly not a C.C.F.’er when she came here; I don’t know — she may be now. I saw her in 

Regina and then she went on north, and I saw her again near the end of the week. She had put in a week 

with many of our conservation officers and people in the Department and the public generally. When 

she met me the second time, she said: “Mr. Brockelbank, I never saw anything like this. I have been a lot 

of places, but never did I see anything like this that I see here. Everyone who works for you is dedicated 

to his job.” I considered that to be the greatest compliment that could be paid to my employees, and I 

think they deserved it. 

 

These men are feared by those who want to get away with something, and I hope it will always be like 

that. More and more they are becoming both respected and liked and appreciated in their communities. 

 

I would like now to come to this question about washing fish. 

 

First, at no time did our officer instruct or compel fishermen to wash their fish or even suggest that they 

do it. He did insist that the fish were clean, and that can be done and properly done. On June 15, 1954, 

our officer did find a number of fishermen dressing fish, then dipping them in water and packing them in 

ice, which was his first knowledge that fish were being dipped in the lake, — the lake water in June 

would be at a temperature of 55, to 60 degrees. Over a hundred boxes of Clark’s fish remained on 

Dominion Dock on Doré Lake from June 16th to June 19th — fresh fish. You can imagine what it would 

be like. Mr. Clark has never followed the practice of making any investment in equipment in plants, but 

his policy has been to go in, without equipment, very often where somebody else put equipment, buy 

some fish when things were favourable and get out. This time it didn’t work, and it didn’t work because 

the weather was bad. He was on an isolated lake, without any proper facilities for keeping the fish 

because he would not invest the capital in the necessary facilities. The Department of Natural Resources 

cannot recoup a man for his losses under those circumstances. 

 

Now, in regard to the prosecution of Mr. Bedard which took place on June 18th, 1955, there were about 

30 boxes of unmarked fish and those were in only fair to bad condition, hardly fit for human 

consumption. On June 15th fish were inspected on the dock, some of them were boxed, and the boxes 

were not marked. Bedard was warned not to leave before the boxes were marked, and that was in our 

correspondence long before this House got into Session. Bedard said he couldn’t leave on account of the 

roads. The conservation officer went back to check the fish out on the 17th of June. He found that 

Bedard had left early, about 5 a.m. Obviously, the conservation officer wondered what was taking place 

because it was understood he was going to come back and check out the load of fish. When he came 

back they were gone. So he followed, and he overtook Bedard about 23 miles south of Doré Lake 

headquarters, with a truckload of fish, no bill of lading, boxes not marked; fish were very soft. 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

27 

He followed the truck through and laid the charge at Meadow Lake under Section 30 of The Fisheries 

Act, and on July 18th the trial was held. Bedard pleaded guilty, was fined $5.00 and costs of $2.00, and 

the fish were confiscated, which actually was not much of a loss because they were pretty well spoiled 

already. 

 

The hon. member for Meadow Lake, according to my information, asked our conservation officer for 

information in regard to this case. He was told that he could hear all at the trial. Our conservation officer 

did not consider it proper to discuss the evidence before the trial. I am informed, too, and I have 

absolutely no reason to doubt it, that Bedard told a conservation officer that he would “get him”. It was 

after this trial that the whole question of washing fish was cooked up, and it was also after this that the 

petition came in asking for the removal of this conservation officer. And that is simple, because Clark 

and Bedard do not want any conservation officer in that part of the country whom they cannot push 

around. Apparently, with the assistance of the hon. member for Meadow Lake, they want to get rid of 

them. 

 

Now for one minute, let us have a look at this petition which was tabled in the House, yesterday. All 

members of the House will have an opportunity to look at, and I want you to notice his signatures. I feel 

absolutely sure that those are not the signatures of the people of Doré Lake. These are signatures of 

people who are accustomed to the handling of a pen or pencil; they are not the signatures of fishermen. 

They may be their names. I know, too, that they did not compose or put together the heading on this 

petition. I think that is all that need be said about that. In spite of the trouble with the fishing industry, 

commercial fishing is generally expanding in northern Saskatchewan, and steps are being taken right 

along to get better quality products. I am happy to announce that the Federal Government is putting into 

effect the fish inspection regulations which will apply all across Canada. 

 

Our fish resources are important also for the sportsman, and year by year the number of anglers 

increases. In 1943 we had 7,700; by 1948, we had 21,000 licensed anglers; in 1953 we had 68,000, and 

in the current year we estimate 70,000 licensed anglers. So fish resources, not only from the point of 

view of commercial fishermen, but also from the point of view of those of us who like to go fishing, is 

well worth taking care of. 

 

There is one serious threat concerning many of our angling waters, particularly in the south of the 

province, and that is the invasion of carp. Carp is not a native of North America, but was imported to 

this continent from Europe or Asia. It is a fish that destroys the habitat for other fish by keeping the 

water murky and all ‘riled-up’. . . 

 

Mr. J.T. Douglas: — Must be Liberal fish. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . and there is danger of that fish getting in the Saskatchewan River 

system — it is now in the Qu’Appelle system. The Saskatchewan Fish and Game league has 

recommended that the use of minnows for bait prohibited throughout the southern part of the province, 

because that is one of the ways carp gets spread. Fishermen using minnows for bait, when they come to 

the end of the day, are not too particular where they dump out their bait pail, and so carp are carried to 

another lake. Our biologists recommend the same thing. The experience they have had in the United 

States indicates that the only possible hope of holding carp in control (it is unlikely that we will ever get 

rid of it) is fairly strict regulation. Something can be done by putting in screens to prevent the carp from 

migrating further in 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

28 

some of our smaller streams. You could not do that in the Saskatchewan River; but we are considering 

taking the necessary steps to control, to stop if possible, to slow down, the spread of carp. 

 

Continuing in the field of the sportsman, hunting and Saskatchewan has constantly grown more popular 

for many years. In 1943, there were 3,000 big game licences; in 1954, about 38,000. And in bird hunting 

there were 8,000 licensed hunters in 1943; 60,000 in 1954. 

 

Then we come to another resource, our fur. This, to a few thousand people of the province is pretty 

important. First of all, I would like to deal with the muskrat. You know, our hon. friends opposite 

always make fun of the idea of planning. I always thought you could not do very much unless you 

planned your work. We planned the conservation programme. That conservation programme has really 

worked in regard to muskrat. For five years, 1940 to 1944, the average take was 190,000; for the next 

five years it went up to 430,000; and for the last five years, the average annual take a muskrat was 

589,000 per year. This year our guess is that, from last Fall to this Spring when the trapping is finished, 

there will be close to one million muskrat pelts taken in this province, which, as far as I know, will be a 

record for all time. Conservation programmes do bring results. 

 

I attended the Trappers’ Convention again, this winter, in January, and I might point out that a Trappers’ 

Convention such as we have had each year for six years now does not look very much like a totalitarian 

state. At that convention a resolution in favor of open marketing of muskrats was carried. But when the 

delegates at that convention were discussing that resolution, every one of them was careful to say, “We 

want to keep the conservation programme”; that is unanimous. Every one of them was careful to say, 

“We want to keep the Fur Marketing Service.” That too is unanimous. 

 

I regret, Mr. Speaker, that the northern trapper has not accepted this marketing programme. Their 

standard of living is not too high and I am absolutely sure that, if all their furs went direct to the 

Saskatchewan Fur Marketing Service, they would be in one year half a million dollars to a million 

dollars better off. You see, Saskatchewan Government Trading operates some stores in the north, and 

though no dealer can legally buy muskrat or beaver, they do by the other fur, mink and weasel and 

squirrel and so on. So, in these stores our storekeepers first of all recommend that the trapper ship his 

furs into the Fur Marketing Service. If he says, “No, I want to sell them”, then our storekeepers will buy 

them. We were buying furs right under the nose of the Hudson’s Bay Company, meeting their prices, 

meeting private dealers’ prices, and yet, when we bought those furs, shipped them down to the Fur 

Marketing Services, we made a very substantial profit on them, and the other fellows were buying at a 

lower price yet, especially where there was no Saskatchewan Government Trading Store. So, we cannot 

help, I am sure, but feel real sorry that the people of the north, the trappers of the north, cannot accept a 

marketing programme such as we have accepted in our wheat marketing in the south. Last Fall was, of 

course, a very favourable season for the dealer. 

 

No change in the system of marketing fur, muskrat and beaver can be made before the Fall of 1955. 

When they passed this resolution, the first thing I did was to refer it to the Game Advisory Committee. 

That Game Advisory Committee consists of my deputy minister (Mr. Churchman) as chairman; the 

Game Commissioner is on the Committee, and also a representative of the Indian Affairs Branch — his 

name has escaped me for just a moment. I asked them to look into the problems that would arise, what 

effect this would have 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

29 

on the conservation programme. and then we will have to refer to it to the Hon. Mr. Pickersgill at 

Ottawa, because this compulsory marketing is by a joint agreement between the province and the 

Dominion. 

 

I might point out, this time, that we did not start the principle of compulsory marketing of fur. Before we 

started this programme there was compulsory marketing of fur for the Summerberry marshes in 

Manitoba, the Sipanok lease (which is an Indian Affairs lease) east of Carrot River — the Indian Affairs 

people took them, and they were sold on a sale in Winnipeg until we established our sale here. The same 

programme is carried out in parts of Ontario and Quebec as well. 

 

This question is going to need some pretty careful consideration, because we do not want to lose the 

conservation programme which has meant so much better harvest for the trapper. I am sorry that both 

northern members, the member for Athabaska (Mr. Ripley) and the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. 

Dunfield), are not in their seats, because I would like to ask them where they stand on this question, 

whether they have been trying to persuade the trappers in their constituencies to stay with the Fur 

Marketing system of marketing, similar to our Wheat Board marketing, or whether they have been 

trying to persuade them to be against that. I have never heard them declare themselves, but it would 

certainly be interesting to know just what they have been doing, because going out of the compulsory 

marketing of beaver and muskrat is just the same as it would be to put the Canadian Wheat Board on a 

voluntary basis. I cannot imagine any of my bold political friends on the other side of the floor 

advocating that here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Some argument! 

 

Premier Douglas: — They did it in 1935. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — There’s no comparison. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, 1935 is 20 years ago, and they have made probably one year’s 

progress since then. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — There is no comparison in the two services. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I wish the Leader of the Opposition, if he believes in the orderly marketing 

system as we have in wheat, would have a heart-to-heart talk with his two supporters from Athabaska 

and Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — There is no comparison and you know it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Now, I would like to deal for a few moments with the question of public 

works in northern Saskatchewan and, first of all, the roads in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

We have had a policy in regard to the mining roads in Saskatchewan for some time. It used to be that we 

would go for a three-way split of the cost of an approved mining road, over and beyond the first mile 

and a half. The first mile and a half we considered to be a normal length of road, and normal expense for 

the mine itself to undertake. If they were that close to a road, they were pretty lucky. This three-way 

split would be one-third the 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

30 

 

company, one-third the Federal Government and one-third the Provincial Government, and at one time 

the Federal Government did announce a policy in regard to mining roads. 

 

We got aid from the Federal Government on two roads only. One was the road from Stony Rapids to 

Black Lake, 14 miles long; not a very expensive road, because it went over mostly sandy plain, with 

very little rock work and not much muskeg work either. The other road was the one from Black Bay 

through Uranium City to Beaverlodge. in this case the companies at Beaverlodge made a contribution. 

The smaller as companies put up small amounts, Eldorado was the large contributor, of course, and the 

Federal Government put up an amount as well as the province. But the Federal Government did not 

accept a full one-third of this road, because before it was finished, they left the picture in the province 

and Eldorado had to go 50-50 then on the finishing of it. 

 

I would like to point out to you, that, in this particular case, Eldorado Mining and Refining Company is 

a Crown Corporation owned by the Federal Government and, consequently, the Federal Government 

just had to have a road from Black Bay to Eldorado. And so, I submit, Mr. Speaker, that in this case it 

was the province helping the Federal Government, rather than the Federal Government helping the 

province. 

 

I am a little suspicious, and I have grown more suspicious since. It seems that the Federal Government, 

since the construction of that Eldorado Road, has lost interest in mining roads and Saskatchewan, 

because we have had a number of applications made for assistance and every one was turned down by 

the Federal Government. We didn’t like that, so we changed our policy. We said that our policy will not 

be tied to the Federal grants, will not depend on the Federal Government having to come in. If there is 

an approved mining road, we will go for one-third of the cost insofar as our budget will allow, and the 

rest will be between the company and the Federal Government. 

 

I wish that my hon. friends opposite, if they had any influence, would try to talk to the Federal 

Government into making these contributions to mining roads, because the Federal Government gets a lot 

more out of mining in the Provincial Government does. We get the royalty, but they get the income tax, 

and, in regard to the Saskatchewan mining income, the Federal Government’s income tax amounts to 

probably three or four times the royalty that we collect. So I think that it is only fair to say, “You should 

be interested in getting more mines and as a result getting more income tax.” 

 

There are other development roads in the north which I might comment on. One is the main central road 

north to Lac la Ronge, which is a Department of Highways’ Road and which everybody, I think, is 

familiar with. A new one that is now under construction is the one from Kinoosao, commonly known as 

Co-op Point, to Lynn Lake in Manitoba. That is a distance of 65 miles. Co-op Point is on Reindeer Lake, 

which is the second largest lake in the province. Wollaston Lake is not far away from Reindeer Lake. 

The fish from Wollaston and Reindeer will have an outlet to railhead at Lynn Lake. All this 65 miles of 

road, all of it is in Manitoba except about a mile and a half. Nevertheless, the Department of Natural 

Resources is constructing the road (It is just going to be a narrow truck road), with a promised grant 

from Manitoba. I wish it had been larger, but it was the best we could get. 

 

I might mention that this road from Co-op Point to Lynn Lake will be of definite benefit to Manitoba. 

They will sell all the gasoline and 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

31 

collect all the gasoline tax that is used on that road. It will be a road for the people of Lynn Lake to get 

out to two or three beautiful lakes. It will be a road that makes more accessible another stretch of the 

pre-Cambrian area in Manitoba. Granted it is also a value to us because it will put the Reindeer Lake and 

Wollaston Lake fish a cent or a cent-and-a-half a pound closer to the market, which will mean a better 

return for the fisherman. 

 

Another road I would like to comment on is the one from Green Lake north to Beauval, and, in my mind 

at least, and I hope in many people’s minds, it will be projected on by Ile a la Crosse to Buffalo 

Narrows. That is over a hundred miles as the crow flies. This year we graded 40 miles between the 

Waterhen River and Beauval. I do not know how fast we will be able to go on to completion, but that is 

a road that will serve several communities. It will enable them to get out their fish more cheaply and 

make it of greater value. It will make possible, I believe, the development of quite a blueberry industry, 

as that country is wonderful for wild blueberries; but you have to have a way to get them out over 

reasonably good roads and without too much cost. 

 

It will do something else, too. It will let the tourists into the west and of the Churchill River valley, to 

the Buffalo Lakes, Lake Ile a la Crosse, and for boating, for fishing, for scenery, a wonderful part of the 

province of Saskatchewan. That is certainly cannot be expected to come in a day, but, as far as I am 

concerned, and I am sure as far as the Government is concerned, we will keep working at it every 

opportunity we get; but we are not going to promise it to win the next election. 

 

Another road is the forest access road which extends north from Hudson Bay in my own constituency. It 

is now built 40 miles. It was a joint effort between the Department of Natural Resources and the 

Saskatchewan Timber Board that has built that road. I might mention the Nipawin-Carrot River-

Cumberland House winter trail which we got pushed through a month or two ago. It is approximately 

115 miles from Nipawin to Cumberland House over that winter trail. I drove it early this year. It took 

about six hours to make the 115 miles over the new road. It is just a winter trail. It is on a location that is 

very good and does not go over any lakes or large muskegs, but certainly it will be quite a job to make it 

more than winter trail. 

 

Our old perennial, is, of course, the Nipawin-Flin Flon highway and I was so delighted that my hon. 

friend from Arborfield, who represents the constituency of the Nipawin (Mr. MacNutt) sent around, or I 

presume he sent around, a little paper about what he had been saying about the Nipawin-Flin Flon 

highway. He said: 

 

“Let us keep on fighting for the completion of No. 35 Highway and for the building of a highway from 

Carrot River to The Pas.” 

 

Well, now, there is nothing like asking for plenty, anyway, and when you add to that all the other 

highways in the province that need reconstruction, all the market roads that he is going to ask for when 

he gets up on its feet here, it is going to be quite an order. But one of the bright things on this piece of 

paper is that the hon. member has spoken a very what do you call it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — A mouthful. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The Minister of Agriculture says ‘a mouthful’; probably that is the best — I 

cannot think of a better word. 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

32 

He says: “This government will not last forever.” We don’t expect to! We don’t expect to last forever, 

and so it is a very good thing to see the hon. member recognize that. But, unless my hon. friend gets 

some — 

 

Mr. MacNutt: — I’m going to ask — 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I am sorry to inform the hon. Minister, but I am guilty of sending those slips of 

paper around. It is in the ‘Daily Reminder’ issued in Flin Flon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — And here I was giving my hon. friend credit — I hope you got credit over 

there for sending it around. And then he says: 

 

“And the next government, led by ‘Hammy’ McDonald, will certainly build the roads for us.” 

 

Boy, if they build roads like they did in the good old days when they were here before, it will take a long 

time! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Those roads are still here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — A long, long time. I think it is time that we took a sensible kind of look at 

this Nipawin-Flin Flon highway proposition. I know the hon. member for Nipawin, Mr. MacNutt, from 

Arborfield, whenever he gets a chance, thinks it is good politics up at Nipawin, and so he keeps talking 

about it, and he says let’s fight for it. Well, that road was started in good faith at a time when there was 

no road to Flin Flon at all. Then, all of a sudden Manitoba awakened, got a Federal grant, Federal 

assistance, and built No. 10 Highway into Flin Flon. People do not have to be told what happened there. 

People know what happened there. It was for purely political considerations that the Federal grant was 

switched to Manitoba, because they figured they could not afford to have a C.C.F. Government in 

Saskatchewan getting help like that. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Crying again! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Poor Federal Government! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Now, there is no doubt about it that the second road to Flin Flon would be 

desirable. It would be nice, but it would cost a lot of money. I do not think that there are very many 

members in the House who would say that the second road should have priority over for example, the 

Beauval-Buffalo Narrows road, in an area where they have not got any road at all at the present time. It 

has often been stated that, if the Federal Government had a change of heart and would kick through with 

a 50-50 proposition on the Nipawin-Flin Flon highway, we would go ahead with it, and I would agree to 

it. 

 

Mr. MacNutt: — What would you do without the Federal Government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — But I think that is a very remote hope. I think there is a better chance of 

getting the South Saskatchewan River dam than there is of getting them to go 50-50 on that highway. 

But, if my hon. friend from Nipawin can go down to Ottawa and persuade his friends there to go 50-50 

on that highway, then he really 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

33 

will be doing something for the Nipawin-Flin Flon highway. However, I really don’t expect him to do it, 

because I do not believe he thinks that he could get that assistance. Anyway, if it was built, he would not 

any longer be able to use it to kick around as a political football, and he is having lots of fun at that. 

 

Let us now take a look at alternatives, possible connections for example with No. 10 Highway in 

Manitoba. I realize that it would be desirable for Saskatchewan to have a better connection to Flin Flon 

than we have at the present time. First, there is the Cumberland House trail I mentioned. That, too, I am 

afraid is remote, because of its length and because it is all raw country and has not been worked at all. 

But I do think that in the Hudson Bay area there are possibilities: first, north and east of Hudson Bay. 

Presently, that forest access road, built on an excellent location, a gravel ridge, extends 40 miles. It is 6 

or 8 miles north-west of Otosquen. From the end of the present road it is about 35 miles as the crow flies 

to No. 10 Highway at Westray in Manitoba. That would mean about 45 miles of road to get there, of 

course, and about 20 of that would be in Manitoba. Westray is 20 miles from The Pas. This would mean 

this route from Hudson Bay to The Pas would be about 105 miles, but there are 45 miles of untouched 

road on that route. 

 

Another possibility is from Hudson Bay east. No. 3 Highway is being constructed to Hudson Bay from 

the west. I hope it continues east; I am sure it will. From Hudson Bay to the Manitoba border is about 35 

miles of road, and then from the Manitoba border to No. 10 Highway, at a point north of Mafeking, is 

another 35 miles in Manitoba. This would be a much longer route from Hudson Bay to The Pas — about 

170 miles, compared with 105 for the other route. One of the big questions, of course, would be whether 

or not Manitoba would be willing to do their part of the construction. 

 

I am not talking about those things because they are going to be realized tomorrow; I am talking about 

them because I believe in planning. We should be thinking ahead about these things, and I am certainly 

going to keep these things in mind and push some of them forward just as fast as I get a chance. 

 

Other public works in the north — first of all, air-fields. The Department of Natural Resources has built 

air-fields at Lac La Ronge, at Ile a la Crosse, at Buffalo Narrows, at La Loche, at Pine House Lake, at 

Stony Rapids, Cumberland House, and Hudson Bay. At Big River there is an old air-field that was built 

in the Dominion days before 1930. Meadow Lake built an air-field with assistance from the province. 

Beaverlodge air-strip at Eldorado mine was built by the Federal Government. That is the only one in 

northern Saskatchewan that has been built by the Federal Government. At Gunnar, one was built by 

Gunnar mines, and there is a small in emergency strip at Cree Lake which was built by a private party. 

That is a very small strip. Now, we are hopeful of getting some Federal assistance for the extension and 

improvement of Lac la Ronge air-field. These air-fields have been a great service. It is true that lakes are 

dotted all over the north where you can land on pontoons in the summertime and on the ice in the winter 

on skis; but wherever you have the air-fields, it means you can have all-year-round flying, and you don’t 

have a lay-off at the freeze-up and at the break-up period. 

 

One word about the air weapons range which was taken over by the Department of National Defence in 

north-western Saskatchewan. This block of land north of Cold Lake was leased to the Department of 

National Defence. The first action in this connection was in 1952. I just want to say that I am sorry they 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

34 

have not yet made a settlement with the fishermen who fished on Primrose Lake. These fishermen are 

organized and standing out for a fair settlement. We have been working with them and they have not yet 

got a settlement and I was going to ask the hon. member for Meadow Lake if he were here to see what 

he could do about getting a settlement. 

 

A word or two about Saskatchewan Government Airways itself. When Saskatchewan Government 

Airways was organized, a good many years ago, the then manager of the Saskatchewan Government 

Airways, Mr. Glass, was in Ottawa. One of our other people was with him. They saw the Rt. Hon. Mr. 

Howe, and at that time Mr. Glass urged that no other companies be permitted to obtain a charter in the 

north, as he considered there was not room for two companies to carry on under competitive conditions 

in an area which could support only one operator. Mr. Howe agreed, welcomed the advent of 

Saskatchewan Government Airways, and thought it was in the best interests of the northland that it be 

served by one company only. He believed that air transport in most areas of Canada must of necessity be 

monopolistic in nature, and agreed to support the continuance of S.G.A. I can believe that is right. Mr. 

Howe has been responsible for Trans-Canada Airlines, and certainly he has had the co-operation of the 

Air-Transport Board in preserving an area in which T.C.A. enjoyed a monopoly and in which they have 

been giving a most excellent service. 

 

Now, we find that the former Manager of Saskatchewan Government Airways, a member of Athabaska 

Airways (a new company) will make an application for a charter licence to operate out of Prince Albert 

and Lac la Ronge and then, Mr. Floyd Glass Jr., quoted in the ‘Star Phoenix’ of January 6th, saying: 

 

“It was time that people realized that the monopolistic government enterprises were not healthy for the 

development of the province.” 

 

Well, he had better tell that to C.D. Howe in regard to the T.C.A. The Athabaska Airways put up a very 

poor case; there is no question of more service being needed; and yet they were granted the licence by 

the Air Transport Board. That is going to make it more difficult for “Airways” because operating in that 

area, Airways serves the lean scheduled flights and the other parties will be sitting there to pick off the 

cream on some of the charter flights. I certainly object to that kind of procedure. 

 

I would like to mention a word or two about the crash at Buffalo Narrows, when we were also sorry that 

such a disaster came. We have no report yet from the Department of Transport. A thorough investigation 

was made — or as far as I know it was a thorough investigation; and our people were out there, too, and 

help with the investigation as well as the Department of Transport people. 

 

One thing I want to mention in particular was that there was a leakage of the names of the victims at the 

time of the accident. The mother of one of the victims, the mother of the lady that was killed in the 

accident, heard on the radio her daughter’s name and she collapsed and had to go to the hospital. Now, I 

don’t know how those names got out. We withheld them, but somehow the Canadian Press got a hold of 

it, and I think it would have been very decent of them if they had withheld those names and checked to 

make sure that the next-of-kin were notified before they were released. It seems to me, sometimes, that 

the press forgets some decency and some ethics in its haste to be first with the news. 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

35 

Another point is that the ‘Leader-Post’, even before the funeral of a pilot, dug up the story of the strike 

of 1951, on the excuse that they have a duty to the public. If ever there was a flimsy excuse that was it. 

If they wanted to make sure that that was not overlooked, all they had to do was notify the Department 

of Transport and not advertise it in the daily papers for the widow and child of the pilot to see. As a 

matter of fact, that pilot was cleared by an Arbitration Board which was composed of three old-time 

bush fliers and his licence was never cancelled by the Department of Transport. The D.O.T. would not 

have anything to do with it, and since that time he had three years of perfect record of flying. It seems to 

me that this digging up the Leader-Post did served no useful purpose, but was just a bit of ‘yellow 

journalism’, with a little bit of hope of political advantage. 

 

Before I close tonight, I intend, Mr. Speaker — and this is not a threat (I do not mean it that way), I 

intend to adjourn the debate. I know I have talked a long time now, but you will all be rested over the 

weekend and can maybe take some more. But before I do adjourn the debate tonight, I would like to say 

a few words about my own constituency. 

 

I have had the honour to represent this area since 1938. This is the 19th Session of the Legislature I have 

attended, and two of my colleagues are here — you, Mr. Speaker, and the member for Kelvington (Mr. 

Howe). A couple of our friends across the floor are senior in point of sessions they have attended. The 

member for Humboldt (Mr. Burton) had some broken service. He had a tour at Ottawa, so we beat him 

out on that. I do want to say that my constituency is one which could be appreciated, I am sure, by any 

member in this Legislature. They have had extremely tough going there for the last five years between 

frost, crop snowed under, and too much rain. I want to pay a tribute to the fortitude and resourcefulness 

of those people. It is very commendable indeed. I want to express my appreciation to the Government, 

on behalf of the people of my constituency, for the programme of assistance that has been conducted. I 

have been there and watched it pretty closely, and I know just how much that programme is appreciated. 

There was summer-fallow assistance, and there was work and wages. 

 

When I was out at a meeting in my constituency and I was talking about this work-and-wages 

programme, some smart fellow said, “That’s just like the ‘thirties.” I said, “Yes, all except for about 80 

cents an hour. There is about that much difference.” 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Is that all today? The cost of living is about four times as much. That’s terrible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — 80 cents an hour? We have had a considerable amount of work with the 

resources there. We have been very thankful that it is one of the best timber areas. We have been able to 

expand our programme to help to get some potatoes. The people know they are going to be able to get 

seed, and with the drainage work that is being carried on, all these things have given to the people a real 

hope. Some people try to make out that the trouble arose in that area not because of excessive rainfall, 

but because of a failure of the Government in some way. That certainly is not true. 

 

At Hudson Bay the rainfall for April to August, 1954, was 70 per cent over normal. That was following 

two or three quite wet years. The temperature was, for that same period, three degrees below normal, 

which meant that there was less evaporation, less drying. Here is a very interesting fact. 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

 

36 

The Assiniboine River at Sturgis is metered by the Federal Government and, in 1954, in the summer 

season, the Assiniboine River at Sturgis was 712 per cent of the normal flow. It was excessive rainfall 

and it wasn’t something that was not done that with the greatest cause of the trouble. As a matter of fact, 

it was not the new settler who went in since there was a C.C.F. Government who suffered the worst; 

those settlers who went in previous to that time, really suffered worst of all. Not even drainage surveys 

had been done when we took over. The Minister of Agriculture and his Department have done a great 

job in doing those surveys and getting work done. Again it has been a case where we have had to repair 

the failures and shortcomings of the previous government; but it is being done and that part of the 

country is going to come through and be one of the best in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a good point at which I thing I can sit down and adjourn the debate. If the rest 

of you aren’t tired, I am anyway. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. Minister a question. Could you tell me who Mr. 

Alex Bishop is — the person who signed this letter that you tabled today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, I cannot tell you. I don’t know him personally. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The Minister made some reference to the one that was tabled yesterday, that he 

didn’t think it had been written by the people who signed it; but I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, at least 

the people’s names that appear on the letter that was tabled yesterday are in their own handwriting. This 

letter that was tabled today — we don’t know who the person is who signed it. It is a copy of an original 

letter, and the names are not written at all; they are printed on here and I note in the letter starts off as 

though this Mr. Bishop had been writing the letter himself. He said, “we, the undersigned” and then he 

goes on . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, is the hon. member asking a question or making another 

speech in this debate? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I am asking for clarification. Then as he proceeds in the letter, as he gets down 

further, he says “they”, referring to the Métis as “they”. Well now I do not think the Métis wrote this 

letter, and I don’t think they ever signed it, and I would like to have the original copy of the letter tabled 

in the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Isn’t that the  copy that the member from Meadow Lake tabled? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, I tabled this. 

 

Premier Douglas: — We usually table a copy. Here is the original, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is the property of the House. 

 

Premier Douglas: — This is the property of the House and individual signatures are here, some in ink, 

some in pencil; but it is quite apparent that they are genuine signatures. If the hon. member says he does 

not believe these people signed this, this proves that he doesn’t know what he is talking about. But that 

is not unusual. 



 

February 18, 1955 

 

37 

Mr. McDonald: — I might say that this also proves that neither you or the Minister of Natural 

Resources know what you are talking about, because these are original signatures as they are shown on 

this letter that we tabled yesterday. 

 

Premier Douglas: — We were talking about this document. My hon. friend does not know which 

document he is talking about. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I am not confused at all, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! Let us get this thing straight. Is the hon. member disputing the 

authenticity of the document that the Minister of Natural Resource has tabled? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I am asking for the original to be tabled, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the original is here, and it is being tabled. The Minister has put it on 

the table. I am just pointing out that when my hon. friend said that the document was not signed by the 

people who were alleged to have signed it, the signatures here prove that he doesn’t know what he is 

talking about. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier obviously doesn’t know what he is talking about, because 

he didn’t listen to what I said. I said this does not prove that the people whose names appear on here 

ever signed the document, and I would like to see the original document tabled, which he has tabled, and 

that is fine. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You are just entitled to a copy; you are not entitled to the original. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is this the original copy that is now in the possession of the Clerk? You can examine it 

with the copy and see if it is exact. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That is just what I asked for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — We want to see the original, that is all. First it was just a copy that was tabled by the 

Minister of Natural Resources. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, all the member is entitled to is a copy. The original must be kept in 

the possession of the Clerk. You should know that by this time. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I beg your pardon? 

 

Premier Douglas: — The hon. member ought to know that all he is entitled to is a copy, the original is 

left in the possession of the Clerk, and that is where it is. All he is entitled to is a copy, and that is what 

he has and he should know that it is a copy of the original. 

 

(Debate Adjourned) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:00 o’clock p.m. 


