



















































Hansard: February 11, 1955


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Twelfth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, February 11, 1955 

 

The Assembly met at three o‟clock p.m. 

Before the Orders of the Day: 

 

CRUDE OIL PRODUCTION 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural Resources): — I would like to make an announcement 

of news I have received which I think denotes an important milestone in the progress of our province. I 

received a telegram, yesterday, from Socony-Vacuum Oil Company in Swift Current, and this is how the 

telegram reads: 

 

“At about 3:00 p.m. on Friday, February 11th the Socony-Vacuum Woodley Southern group will 

produce their one-millionth barrel of crude oil in western Saskatchewan.” 

 

The major portion of this production has come from Fosterton, Success and Cantuar fields, northwest of 

Swift Current. The new pipeline is now full of oil from those fields. A certain amount is being used for 

local consumption at Moose Jaw and Regina, and in the course of the year that oil will be going on to 

other markets. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

MOTIONS OF CONDOLENCE 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, it has grown customary to take a few minutes out each 

year, at the beginning of the Session, to pay tribute to former members of the Legislature, who have 

passed away since the last time we met. It seems to me particularly appropriate during this Golden 

Jubilee year, when we are emphasizing the part which the pioneers had in laying the foundation of this 

province, that we should be pausing at this time to pay tribute to men who helped to lay the basis for a 

democratic government in Saskatchewan. 

 

Since the last Session, two of the original members of the Assembly, who contested the first provincial 

election ever held in Saskatchewan and sat in the First Legislature, have passed away. The ranks of the 

„Originals‟ are thinning out. Only Chief Justice J.T. Brown, Senator J.A. Calder, and perhaps two others 

long way from the province, information concerning whom we have been unable to trace, survive of the 

25 members comprising that first Assembly which laid the foundations of self-government in this 

province. In this, our Golden Jubilee Year, we feel a special debt to members of that first Provincial 

House. In honouring the memory of those two veterans whose names 



 

February 11, 1955 

 

 

2 

appear in the motion, we are honouring the memories of them, and paying tribute to the great work done 

by those first legislators who so successfully brought us the statue and through its infant years. 

 

Thomas Henry Garry was 92 years of age when he died, at Yorkton, October 11, 1954. Born at Kippen, 

Ontario, January 22, 1862, he was educated in a rural school. He came west to Saskatchewan with his 

father and brother in 1883, and walked the last eighty miles from Whitewood to become one of the 

earliest settlers in the Yorkton district. 

 

Mr. Garry worked on the Insinger ranch for seven years and later, with two partners, bought the Insinger 

holdings. For 16 years he was a trustee of Look Out School, which he helped to organize, and was one 

of the first councillors of Orkney municipality, remaining on the council for 16 years. He was an 

original director of the Beaver Rural Telephone Company, serving eight years as president, and retaining 

his connection until recently. Mr. Garry retired from the farm in 1947, since when he had resided in 

Yorkton. He is survived by his widow, two sisters and a brother. 

 

Mr. Garry, as I‟ve said, was first elected to this Assembly on December 13, 1905, representing his home 

constituency of Yorkton as a Liberal. He was returned to serve in each of the Second, Third, Fourth, 

Fifth and Sixth Legislatures, and thus retained his membership from 1905 until the dissolution of 1929, a 

period of more than 23 years; surely a clear mark of the esteem in which he was held by his neighbours 

and constituents. 

 

Highly respected by all members of the Assemblies in which he sat, Mr. Garry was honoured with the 

chairmanship of several Standing Committees during his period of service. For several sessions he was 

Deputy Speaker of the Assembly, and frequently occupied that Chair in the absence of Mr. Speaker. The 

province is the richer for having had such men as he in those early formative years — the poorer and 

now he and so many of his colleagues have slipped away. 

 

The second pioneer of Legislature and Province named in the motion is James Franklin Bole, better 

known to associates and friends as „Frank‟ Bole. Mr. Bole died June 26, 1954, at the age of 85 years. He 

had been a Regina resident since 1883; and he, too, served in that first Legislature which met on March 

29, 1906. 

 

Born at Watford, Ontario, April 25, 1869, he was educated there and at Sarnia. At age 14, the family 

moved west to Regina to join the father, who, by the way, was chairman of the first exhibition held in 

Regina — in 1884. 

 

Young Frank‟s first employment was as a newsboy with “The Leader”, which had just been established 

by Nicholas Flood Davin. He was the paper‟ s first newsboy, and one of his first jobs was to put the first 

edition of The Leader through the press, then load it on the sleigh to make his rounds. The experience 

gained, prompted him to organize the first mail pick-up and delivery in the Regina settlement. 

 

After spending some 14 years on the family farm near capitol Foxleigh, Mr. Bole returned to Regina in 

1898 and organized the Regina Trading Company, the first department store in the city. In 1909 he 

became president, and operated the company until 1920, when he sold the business. In 1912, he was 

president of the Dominion Fair. he was also president of the Saskatchewan Mortgage Corporation from 

its inception. 



 

February 11, 1955 

 

3 

In addition to his business activities, Mr. Bole interested himself in public affairs, and was elected to the 

town council soon after his return to Regina. He was a member of the first city council in 1903, the year 

Regina was incorporated as a city. Mr. Bole joined the Regina Exhibition Board in 1907, retaining his 

membership for 46 years. 

 

When Saskatchewan was created in the province, Mr. Bole entered provincial politics and was elected as 

a Liberal to represent Regina City in the 1905 election. Re-elected in 1908 and again in 1912, he 

resigned his seat in 1915, his successor in Regina being the Hon. W.M. Martin, the second premier of 

the province, now Chief Justice of Saskatchewan Court of Appeals. On leaving the Legislature, Mr. 

Bole took charge of the Saskatchewan liquor system which replaced the prohibition policy of Premier 

Walter Scott. In 1937, he was appointed housekeeper of the Legislative Building, a position he retained 

until his retirement in 1945. Latterly he had been employed by the Prairie Farm Assistance branch of the 

Federal Department of Agriculture. As a member of this Assembly, Mr. Bole piloted many of the early 

Private Bills through the House. 

 

Predeceased by Mrs. Bole, who died in 1927, Mr. Bole is survived by two sons: Albert, now President 

of Saskatchewan Command of the Canadian Legion, and Arthur, an employee of the Department of 

Social Welfare. 

 

Another former member, though of later advent to this Assembly, to whom we pay posthumous tribute 

today is Abel James Hindle, formerly of Assiniboia, who died on July 16, 1954, at his home in Regina. 

 

Mr. Hindle, 84 at the time of his death, was born at Barrie, Ontario, and educated at Owen Sound. In 

1909 he came west to the Assiniboia District and farmed in Stonehenge municipality. His first public 

office was reeve of Stonehenge. 

 

He entered provincial politics as Liberal in 1917, being successful in Willow Bunch constituency in the 

elections of that year. He retained his seat until 1925. Re-elected in the general election of that year, 

however, he resigned shortly afterwards, vacating the seat in favor of the Hon. James A. Cross, then 

Attorney General. Later, Mr. Hindle was employed in the Child Welfare department of the Provincial 

Government until 1938, when he returned to farming. Retiring to Assiniboia 12 years ago, two years 

before his death he came to reside in Regina. Quiet, unassuming, yet sincere and zealous in his work, as 

so many of our pioneers were, Mr. Hindle was a very highly respected member and public servant. 

 

He is survived by his widow, three sons and five daughters. There are 24 grandchildren and six great-

grandchildren. 

 

Another of that quiet, unassuming fraternity was Bertram B. Clement, who died in hospital at Rochester, 

Minnesota, and was interred in Saskatoon on November 15, 1954. Born at Chesley, Ontario, in 1882, he 

was thus 72 at the time of his death. 

 

The Clement family moved west to North Dakota in 1887, but returned to Canada for years later to 

make their home near Winnipeg. 



 

February 11, 1955 

 

 

4 

Mr. Clement, after coming to Saskatchewan, operated a lumber and hardware business in Yorkton and 

Lanigan for some years. 

 

Elected to the Assembly in 1934 as a Liberal, he represented the constituency of Watrous throughout the 

term of the 8th Legislature. Retiring from political life in 1938, he re-entered private business. During 

the war, he became owner and manager of the Dominion Lime and Coal Company in this City, and had 

resided in Regina for the past 15 years. 

 

Active in Masonic circles, Mr. Clement was a member of King Hiram Lodge, Chapter Royal Arch 

Masons and the Wa-Wa Shrine Temple, Regina. He was also a life member of the Regina Kiwanis Club. 

 

Mr. Clement is survived by his widow, two daughters, a brother and four sisters. 

 

As a member of the Assembly, Mr. Clement seldom participated in the debates, except to report 

periodically on conditions in, and the needs of, the constituency he represented. He took active part in 

the Committee work of the House, however, and he won and held the respect of all his fellow members. 

 

1955 was but 22 days old when death removed another pioneer resident of the province and a veteran of 

long service in municipal, provincial and Federal fields. John Albert Gregory, mayor of North Battleford 

for 13 terms beginning in 1907, died in hospital in the city he had served so long and in many capacities, 

on January 22, 1955, at age 80. 

 

Born in Exeter, Ontario, he recently received his early education in that town and that collegiate 

institutes and got a rich and London. He studied law after coming to Western Canada. Mr. Gregory 

arrived in North Battleford, then the end of steel, with the first construction train of the then Canadian 

Northern Railway pushing westward to Edmonton. He lived to see a life-time ambition fulfilled in the 

opening, last August, of North Battleford‟s new City Hall. 

 

First elected to this Assembly in the general election of 1934, Mr. Gregory represented The Battlefords 

in the 7th Legislature as a Liberal. Re-elected in 1938, he resigned in 1940 to enter the Federal field, 

being successful in the Dominion election of that year. An orator in the classical tradition, Mr. Gregory 

served the Assembly as Deputy Speaker and Chairman of Public Accounts Committee, comporting 

himself with the unfailing dignity in both positions. He served in the House of Commons for one term. 

 

His civil life was marked by devotion to several public causes. For a number of years he was president 

of the Saskatchewan Musical Association. He was director of the Historic Sites and Monuments Board, 

saw service as president of Saskatchewan Historical Society, and as honorary colonel off the prince 

Albert and Battleford Volunteers. He was also for a time president of North Battleford Board of Trade 

and of Saskatchewan Co-operative Creameries. 

 

Mr. Gregory leaves to mourn his loss, three sons, two brothers and three sisters. 



 

February 11, 1955 

 

5 

Yet another former member — a popular and colourful figure in this House in his day, and reputed to 

have been the fastest talker ever to sit in the Assembly, passed from us, suddenly, in his hometown of 

Swift Current on January 31, just 11 days ago. I refer to William Wensley Smith, who was a Minister 

without Portfolio in the Co-operative Government of Dr. J.T.M. Anderson, and who also had a fine 

record of service of his city as mayor and alderman. Mr. Smith was 68 at the time of his death, and had 

resided in Swift Current since 1912. 

 

Born at Woolwich, England, in 1886, Mr. Smith migrated to Canada at age 17, arriving in Qu‟Appelle in 

1903. There he obtained employment at a department store. Later, he learned the insurance business in 

Regina, went to Swift Current as representative of Confederation Life Insurance Company, and later 

still, the partnership of Smith and Wallace was formed. 

 

In Mr. Smith was active in community affairs throughout his long residence in Swift Current. He served 

four years as alderman and two terms as mayor. As a Conservative, he contested the provincial election 

of 1929 and, being successful, represented Swift Current constituency throughout the term of the 

Anderson Government as Minister without portfolio. As a member, Mr. Smith‟s rapid-fire utterance won 

him the title of “Machine-gun Smith” amongst reporters in the Press Gallery. 

 

A charter member of Swift Current Rotary Club, Mr. Smith was a member of the Royal Arch Masons 

and the Wa-Wa Shrine Temple. He is survived by his widow, one daughter, three sons and two brothers. 

 

While their names are not included in the motion, I think I would be remiss were I not, on this location, 

to make reference to the passing of two others who, though never members of this Assembly, had very 

close relations with it over a long period of years, and who, in other capacities, served this province and 

served it well. 

 

First I would refer to the death at St. Thomas, Ontario, on August 6, 1954, of Hon. Mr. Justice Henry 

William Newlands, who was Lieutenant-Governor of Saskatchewan for two successive terms from 1921 

to 1931. He was 92 years of age at the time of his death. In Territorial days, he was puisne judge of the 

Supreme Court of the North-West Territories from 1904 to 1907, later going to the Supreme Court of 

Saskatchewan, later still to the Court of Appeals. From 1906 to 1920 he was a member of a Royal 

Commission on revision and consolidation of Saskatchewan‟s statutes and ordinances. 

 

A native of Dartmouth, N.S., Mr. Newlands came west to Winnipeg to enter the law firm of Macdonald, 

Tupper, McArthur and Dexter, coming to Regina in 1897 as inspector of land titles. 

 

The other to whom I should refer is Col. Alfred G. Styles, D.S.O., who died at age 63 in Shaughnessy 

Heights military hospital, Vancouver, on September 17, 1954. 



 

February 11, 1955 

 

 

6 

Col. Styles served as aide-de-camp to successive Lieutenant-Governors of Saskatchewan at 28 

consecutive openings of this Legislature, performing the duties for the last time on February 10, 1949. 

First appointed aide-de-camp in 1921, the Lieutenant-Governors he served were: Hon. H.W. Newlands, 

Hon. H.E. Munro, Hon. A.P. McNab, Hon. Thomas Miller, Hon. R.J.M. Parker, and Hon. J.M. Uhrich, 

all of whom predeceased him. 

 

Col. Styles had a fine military record prior to and in the first World War during which he won the 

D.S.O., was twice mentioned in despatches, and rose to the rank of brigade major. During the second 

World War he commanded the Saskatchewan Security Corps, an organization with a membership of 

10,000. A crack shot, Col. Styles was on Canada‟s Bisley team in 1923, 1925 and 1932. As an athlete 

and rugby player, he helped Regina Roughriders wins three Western titles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think there is any need for me to elaborate or pay any further tribute to these men 

who played such an important part in the public life of this province; except that I am reminded of a 

little phrase which appears in the Book of Hebrews. It is: “These all died in faith, not having received 

the promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, . . . that 

they without us should not be made perfect.” 

 

It seems to me that is a fitting tribute for these men and for all the many pioneers who have passed away 

in recent times. They had a faith in this province and in its future possibilities. Many of them did not live 

to see those possibilities realized; but they believe in them, they worked for them, and they lived for 

them. To us has been given the privilege to carry on where they have left off, that we might make our 

contribution in our day and generation as they made their contribution in theirs. You will remember in 

our school books, when we were youngsters, there used to be a verse by Longfellow. It said: 

 

“Lives of great men all remind us 

We can make our lives sublime, 

And departing, leave behind us, 

Footprints in the sands of time.” 

 

I think it is a good thing that at the beginning of each Session we stop for a moment to pay tribute to the 

men and women who, through the years, have helped to make Saskatchewan what it is today, and to 

draw from their efforts and their contribution the inspiration necessary to go on and do our part in our 

day. 

 

I was privileged to know a few of them, however none of them in the Legislature. I met Mr. Smith from 

Swift Current on a number of occasions and I, of course, knew Mr. Gregory when he was in the House 

of Commons. I know of the work done by the other men who have been mentioned; and, of course, I 

worked with Col. Styles, who is not mentioned in the Motion but to whom I have paid tribute, who 

helped us not only as aide-de-camp to His Honour The Lieutenant-Governor, but who was helpful in 

many ways in arranging public functions during the time that he was here. 

 

I hope that members who knew these men or are familiar with their work won‟t hesitate, in the 

discussion on this motion, to pay their tributes to them. 



 

February 11, 1955 

 

7 

I would, therefore, like to move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 

McDonald: 

 

“Resolved, That this Assembly records its sincere regrets at the passing, since last Session, of six 

former Members of this House, two of them Members of the First Legislature all the Province of 

Saskatchewan, all of them pioneer residents who made great contributions to the development of their 

communities and Province: 

 

Thomas Henry Garry represented the Constituency of Yorkton in the First, Second, Third, Fourth, 

Fifth and Sixth Legislatures, a service extending from 1905 until 1929; 

 

James Franklin Bole represented Regina City in the First, Second and Third Legislatures, from 1905 

until 1915; 

 

Abel James Hindle represented Willow Bunch Constituency in the Fourth and Fifth Legislatures, from 

1917 to 1925; 

 

Bertram Gilroy Clement represented the Constituency of Watrous for the term of the Eighth 

Legislature; 

 

John Albert Gregory represented The Battlefords in the Eighth and Ninth Legislatures, from 1934 to 

1940; 

 

William Wensley Smith, Minister without Portfolio in the Government of 1929-34, representing Swift 

Current Constituency in the Seventh Legislature. 

 

In paying tribute to the memory of these former Members, the Assembly acknowledges with gratitude 

and appreciation their sterling services to their communities and to the Province to which they came in 

early youth and helped, through long and useful lives, to create and develop. 

 

This Assembly extends its deepest sympathies to surviving members of the bereaved families.” 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to associate 

myself with what the Premier has already said in respect of those people we are honouring here, this 

afternoon. 

 

I think that while we are in our Golden Jubilee year, when we are fifty years of age, and the fact that we 

have probably a longer list to honour here today than we previously had, indicates that we in 

Saskatchewan are only now coming of age. Many of our pioneer citizens, when they came to our 

province, naturally were very young people, and it is only now that so many of them are passing on. I 

think that we in Saskatchewan owe them 



 

February 11, 1955 

 

 

8 

a great debt. Had it not been for the pioneer spirit and the strong belief that these people had, probably 

the province of Saskatchewan, or Western Canada, would never have attained the position that it now 

holds, not only in Canada but throughout the world. 

 

Unfortunately there are only two of the gentleman mentioned, this afternoon, whom I happened to have 

known personally. One of them was James Franklin Bole, a man who was certainly physically very 

strong, and I think mentally very strong and of strong convictions. He certainly had a great faith in the 

province of Saskatchewan, in the City of Regina and in Western Canada, and he has left a mark that 

undoubtedly will remain with us for many years. He is also set an example that I believe many of us 

today would be wise in following. 

 

I believe that some of the other members on both sides of the House will have acquaintances with some 

of the deceased to whom we are referring here, this afternoon. I, too, hope that they will say a few words 

about these different gentlemen, because I realize that a person as young as myself, not knowing them 

personally, would know nothing about their many golden qualifications. I think it is only right and 

proper that we should at this time, put on the record the many good things that they have done for the 

province of Saskatchewan during their term of office as members of the Legislature, or during their life 

and their work for the different communities they happened to represent. 

 

Mr. A.P. Swallow (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to pay my respects to the former member 

for Yorkton. I had known Mr. Garry ever since I was a very small boy, as he was a very close neighbour 

and friend of my father back in 1902, in the homestead days. Mr. Garry was always a very good 

neighbour, a very sincere friend, and he served his province and the constituency of Yorkton for 24 

years very faithfully. It does seem too bad that if Mr. Garry had only lived a few more months he would 

have celebrated the anniversary of the first time he sat in this House. We regret that very much. 

 

Mr. Garry was always truly a Christian gentleman and was respected by all. I wish to add my sympathy 

to that expressed in this House for Mr. S. Garry. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity of sitting in this House with 

two of the former members that Premier has mentioned. Mr. Clement was one of them, being a member 

for the Constituency of Watrous from 1934 to 1938. He was of a quiet and retiring disposition but was 

very friendly. He was a good worker, and never made much of a show of any kind, but was a good man 

in Committee. He was a good man when discussion took place on important matters; he had good sound 

judgment and expressed himself very forcibly and very clearly. I know that all the members of that time 

regretted very much that he did not come back in the 1938 election. I‟m sorry to hear that he has passed 

away; I had not heard anything about him and had not seen him for many years, but I remember very 

well his efficient way of carrying on his work in this House and his friendliness to everyone. 



 

February 11, 1955 

 

9 

Mr. Gregory, on the other hand, was sitting in this House for six years while I was here. He came in 

1934 and was the type of individual who stands out and is taken notice of by everyone. He was a very 

well-built man, with very nice appearance, dignified, clear in his statements and his speech. When it 

came to debate on the floor of the House I don‟t think I ever heard anyone, in the short period of my 

public career, who put forward his argument and handled his subject to better advantage than Mr. 

Gregory could. He had wide experience in municipal work and in co-operative work. There is probably 

where I came in closer contact with him than any other member of this House because he was, as the 

Premier has said, president of the Co-operative Creameries for many years, and I had close discussion 

with him (I believe it was after the war) when the Co-operative Creameries were turned back to the 

producers. He and I then had a little conference in regard to the methods and the objects and aims we 

had in mind. While we didn‟t agree, after we had talked the matter over for a time we came to agreement 

on certain things, and I think we did what was required to be done at that time. As a consequence the 

Co-operative Creameries belong to the producers today. 

 

Mr. Gregory was also a member of the Federal House. I think he resigned his seat in this House to go 

into Federal politics, and he served there for one term. I spent some time with him on the train going to 

Saskatoon from Regina during the sessions, and we had an opportunity of discussing some Federal 

matters and he gave me an altogether different impression of a Federal M.P. as compared to the duties of 

a member of a provincial Legislature. I think there are very few men in Saskatchewan who can leave a 

more constructive record behind than Mr. Gregory can. 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few words to what has already been 

said, and what, I think, the Premier has enunciated very clearly. I happen to have sat with three of the 

men who have been mentioned. I was not in the Legislature when Mr. Garry was a member, but I knew 

Mr. Garry as a citizen, as a typical old-timer. If you want a record of a pioneer you can get it from the 

history of „Tom‟ Garry. He was of a very friendly disposition. He knew the hard times, coming here in 

the early pioneer days, and had been fairly well settled when the second rush came in at the turn of the 

century, and Tom Garry‟s name was all over that Yorkton area as being one man to whom every 

newcomer could go and find a helping hand when they were in need. That is one thing that Tom Garry 

has left behind, and that is the spirit of a kindly pioneer old-timer. He started out, as has been stated, 

with two bare hands; walked 80 miles, as the Premier has said, to get his homestead. I did not know 

much about him at that time because that was before I was born, so you can see there is quite a 

difference between our ages, in spite of the fact that I look pretty old now. He has left behind him a 

mark that could well be emulated by those who follow him. He has left some relatives whom I have 

spoken to and who have learned much from the way that Tom Garry carried out his activities through 

life. While he was in this House he was honoured by everyone as far as I know, and I am sure that the 

memory of Tom Garry will long be remembered in the Yorkton area. 

 

The other gentleman I sat with in this House was Mr. Clement. He came into this House in 1934 and sat 

until 1938 — that was when I was kicked out. He was a character that I would say is common to us all, 

except that he was not quite a vocal as some of us were; but when he was in caucus, or when he was in 

committee he exemplified his qualifications as a sound and solid administrator, and I think his past 

activities in business will demonstrate that. 



 

February 11, 1955 

 

 

10 

Another gentleman that I sat with was Mr. Smith. I cannot say much about Mr. Smith except that he was 

honoured and respected by everybody in this House. He was a jovial fellow, if I remember correctly; but 

I imagine that what you know about him since will exemplify what he was in this House. 

 

The fourth gentleman that I sat with was Mr. Gregory. I do not know that anyone can describe Mr. 

Gregory‟s ability better than has already been said by my seatmate here, Mr. Danielson. I do not think 

there was ever a man sat in this Legislature who was more particular about the authenticity of what he 

said, not only in material but in words, than was Mr. Gregory. He was a very forceful speaker, and he 

was rather critical of us fellows who did not do things as they should be done, in a parliamentary way. 

Of course I think we have someone in this House, who calls us to order, who is equally capable in that 

respect; but it would probably be a great deal better if we emulated a perfectionist such as Mr. Gregory 

was in that day. I am sure he will long be remembered in his area, and in and around Battleford, where 

he has done so much for people. 

 

I knew Mr. Bole casually as one of the fine old pioneers, with a kind disposition and friendly approach 

to everyone he met. As far as his reputation and record is concerned that has already been discussed 

here. 

 

The other gentleman I did not know very well. I happened to be at a dinner function when the 

Lieutenant.-Governor, Mr. Newland, was holding forth here in Government House on the west side of 

this city, and I can assure you that he entertained us very generously and made us feel right at home. 

 

I conclude by endorsing all that has been said by the former speakers with respect to these gentlemen. 

 

Mr. Harry Gibbs (Swift Current): — I would like to join in paying respects to former members who 

have passed away. I knew Mr. Smith personally. As the Premier has pointed out, he was a Minister 

without portfolio in the Anderson government for the constituency of Swift Current. We always called 

Mr. Smith „Bill‟. I might say that when he died, a few weeks ago, it was quite a shock, both to Swift 

Current and to the province. He was very, very well known and respected. He was a lively chap — one 

who, if you were in his company, you felt was the life of the company. He was a great fellow for social 

work, for community spirit, and I think he was in practically everything that went on in Swift Current 

for the past number of years. 

 

As you know he was one of the oldest real estate and insurance man in the West — that is oldest by his 

trade or profession; and no matter where Bill went he took with him that air of friendliness, and it was a 

great shock to me when I heard of his passing. 

 

Bill was always a good, clean fighter. I never saw him in action in the House here, but I know he had 

plenty of action and plenty of fun when he was outside. I wish his boys who are carrying on his 

business, now, every success they can possibly have. I believe they all saw service in the last war and 

fought for their country; so in the passing of Bill Smith 



 

February 11, 1955 

 

11 

I would like to pay my respects, and also to the others who have passed on. It is too bad they had to go 

this Golden Jubilee year, because they would have been a great source of strength in planning activities 

for our celebration. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, I believe that I would be remiss, today, if I did not 

rise and pay tribute not only to all of the members mentioned, but to Mr. J.A. Gregory in particular, who 

was a member for The Battlefords both in the provincial and federal House. He also served, as has been 

stated here previously, as mayor of the city of North Battleford for some time. He was not our first 

mayor, but he was our second, and he was re-elected thirteen times as mayor of the city of North 

Battleford. He served the city, the province and in the Federal House, and he certainly was recognized as 

a good servant in those particular positions that he held. 

 

I think the tributes that have been paid to Mr. Gregory from across the floor by those who knew him 

were certainly well advised; they knew him and heard him as I did, and he certainly earned the 

reputation that he had in the House at Ottawa as the „silver-toned orator of the west‟. It is very seldom 

that a man is able to live so long and hold as many diversified positions as Mr. Gregory held in his 

community — pioneer, mayor, provincial and federal legislator. He raised three sons in that community 

— two of them are no longer in North Battleford, they are at Vancouver — and each of them is making 

his contribution as a citizen. Allan, his youngest son, distinguished himself in the army and rose to the 

rank of Colonel in the last great war. 

 

It is unfortunate that Mr. Gregory did not live, as he hoped, to see the Golden Jubilee celebrated. I had 

the honour of sharing a platform with him at the opening of our new City Hall in North Battleford, last 

year. Mr. Gregory was not a well man, but he did attend and was able to take part in the ceremony. I 

think that all of us are sorry to record the passing of these pioneers, and I think it‟s fitting that we pay 

tribute to them here in this Legislature at this time. 

 

Mr. Robert Kohaly (Souris-Estevan): — As one of the younger members I hesitate to speak on this 

matter. I feel that I have no particular knowledge of any of these men; but I do want to record for myself 

and others our appreciation and remembrance of one member who is being spoken of very highly today 

by the Premier and others who followed him. From time to time, as a young person, we notice that we 

seem to be more occupied with what we ourselves have to do, without looking back to see that we are 

very fortunate to have a very firm foundation on which to build the project our ideas, and we look at 

them and feel that they are our own children and that we have all of the credit coming. The young 

people, I hope, in the province this year, will look at our problems from a different angle and remember 

that we have an inheritance here; something that we ourselves have not built, but which others built 

before us and, fortunately, left to us to do as we could with it and to make it a little better and pass it 

along. 

 

These men whom we have spoken about today were apparently such people. Mr. W.W. Smith, who was 

of course a Minister of the Crown in Dr. Anderson‟s Government, will possibly be remembered by the 

communities of 



 

February 11, 1955 

 

 

12 

Saskatchewan in years even after those of us who are young today have gone. I had to look through the 

Journals and the reports to find out about this pioneer‟s work in this House, and I was quite surprised, as 

a young person who has heard about the various principles that have been evolved and are presently in 

force in the province of Saskatchewan, to find that Mr. Smith was actively associated, and in many 

instances it was the prime mover, in some things which have today become primary and which cross and 

recross all political lines, regardless from where they emanated in the first place. I am sure that the 

farmers of this province will remember Mr. Smith as being the chairman of the Select Standing 

Committee on Debt Adjustment legislation, and brought this down in this House to ease the situation 

which had occurred in the province and was becoming extremely dangerous. 

 

I am sure that those people who from day to day work in shop and factory, will remember Mr. Smith and 

his interest and concern for their welfare and safety, for he was the man who was actively behind the 

proclamation on the Workmen‟s Compensation Act of Saskatchewan. I am sure that those people will 

remember Mr. Smith and his work in this Legislature. I know, as a young person, I was very surprised to 

see that he had been the one who had been actively behind those two measures. 

 

Of course, all the people, who, from time to time in the past have been and will be in the future, afflicted 

with cancer, will remember that he was very actively engaged personally, and most interested, and 

establishing the first cancer clinic in the Dominion of Canada. I am sure that they will remember Mr. 

Smith as well. 

 

The people of our province, young and old, should, especially now remember that Mr. Smith was one of 

those who was very actively involved in an effort to return the natural resources to our province, and 

around Swift Current today Mr. Smith would find, if he were able, that the natural resources that were 

returned are providing new revenues, and new works, new welfare, for the people of this province, and 

that part of this was the work that he carried on very quietly in the House. 

 

Finally, I am sure that we should remember, as I found in going through the Journals and reports and 

newspaper accounts, that Mr. Smith was one of the representatives of the Province of Saskatchewan 

who attended the conference in Ottawa to ratify the Statute of Westminster. This statute, of course, 

stemmed from the Balfour Declaration of 1926 and read in part: 

 

“That the Dominions and Great Britain were autonomous communities within the British Empire, 

equal in status, in no way subordinate one to the other in any respect of their domestic and external 

affairs, though united by common allegiance to the Crown and freely associated as members of the 

British Commonwealth of Nations.” 

 

I took that from the “Balfour Declaration”, as I understand from speaking to those who knew Mr. Smith 

and his family, that that represented that man‟s attitude towards this province. I am sure that it was on 

that basis that this province has become the great province that we are so proud of as young people and 

as older people. 



 

February 11, 1955 

 

13 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — I would just like to add a word to the tributes which 

have been paid to Mr. Frank Bole, a former member of this House. The Premier has given us an 

excellent résumé of Mr. Bole‟s life in the city of Regina, and there is no need for me to repeat what he 

has said. 

 

I do recall, though, that he came here in 1883, never lived any place else, started in working as a young 

man, got into business, into politics and so forth, and his name has been well known in this province for 

many years. The last time I saw Mr. Bole was in the Labour Temple. It was on the occasion of the 

Golden Anniversary of Mr. Cox, the manager of that institution. At that time we had quite a friendly 

talk. He told me a good deal about his life in the early days, and I found him a very interesting man. It is 

most unfortunate, I think, Mr. Speaker, that all of these gentlemen should have passed away in the last 

12 months, and not be with us on the occasion of the 50th Anniversary. 

 

I never met the late Mr. Smith, although I have talked with him on the telephone and recall that he 

telephoned the office in which I worked some twenty years ago, while he was in the Legislature. His call 

was in connection with hay. It was during relief times, and he was greatly interested in getting hay for 

the farmers in his constituency and thought we might know something of it. Someone has said he was 

quite a talker, and I do recall I had quite a time getting off the telephone on that occasion. 

 

Mr. Gregory was a very fine gentleman whom I met on one occasion in Ottawa, and I know he was well 

thought of in the part of the province in which he lived. The member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) 

has just paid him a very glowing tribute. 

 

But I feel I would be very remiss if I did not mention Mr. Bole, a resident of my constituency for some 

60 or 70 years. He was a very fine gentleman and one of our best and own pioneers. 

 

Mr. Wm. S. Thair (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to pay tribute, along with the others, to 

one member whom I knew fairly well as a young man coming to Regina, the late Mr. Frank Bole. 

 

Mr. Bole was a good friend to my parents in the early days here, and many of my relatives who farm 

north of Regina, have known him particularly, not so much as a member of parliament, but as the head, 

or President, of the large department store, the Regina Trading Company. I would like to join with the 

Premier and all the others here in paying tribute to Mr. Bole, and the other former members who have 

passed away the past year. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I came to the province in 1904 and I have met, on one occasion or another, all these 

gentlemen who have been included in this expression of regret. Quite a few of us in the Assembly sat 

with two or three of them, and I am sure we can rise for a moment and sincere reverence on their 

passing. 

 

(The Resolution was then unanimously agreed to) 



 

February 11, 1955 

 

 

14 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), seconded by Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): 

 

“Ordered, that the Resolution of regret and condolence just passed, together with transcripts of the oral 

tributes in memory of the deceased former Members, be communicated to the bereaved families, on 

behalf of this Assembly, by Mr. Speaker.” 

 

(Carried unanimously) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 4:10 o‟clock p.m. 

 


