



















































Hansard: February 10, 1955


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Twelfth Legislature 

1st Day 

 

Thursday, February 10, 1955. 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, dated this 

Seventh day of January, 1955, for the meeting all of the Third Session while the Twelfth Legislative 

Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan, and the Assembly having met: 

 

Mr. Speaker informed the Assembly that he had received a communication from the Private Secretary to 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor stating that His Honour would open the Session at three o’clock 

p.m. today, Thursday, the tenth day of February, 1955. 

 

3 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber and, having taken his seat upon the Throne, 

was pleased to open the Session with the following Speech: 

 

MR. SPEAKER, MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: 

 

IT AFFORDS ME great pleasure to welcome you to the Third Session of the Twelfth Legislature of the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

On the first day of January I had the honour of officially inaugurating the fiftieth anniversary of the 

formation of the Province of Saskatchewan. At the opening of this Session I wish to draw to your 

attention the historical significance of this location and to pay homage to the pioneers of this land whose 

toil and vision we honour. I extend my thanks and sincere appreciation to all the people who worked to 

prepare for the celebration of our fiftieth birthday. I urge all the people of the Province to co-operate 

with their local Jubilee Committees in the celebrations which they will be sponsoring to commemorate 

1955 as our Jubilee Year. I pray that these celebrations will not only honour the past but herald a great 

future for our people. I also wish to take this opportunity of inviting former Saskatchewan residents as 

well as people in Canada and other lands to join with us in celebrating our Golden Jubilee. 

 

Saskatchewan will be honoured in this Jubilee Year by the visit of His Excellency the Governor 

General, who will officially open the new Provincial Museum of Natural History. This Museum is not 

only a tribute to the courage, toil and vision of the pioneers but is also a reminder of our solemn 

obligation to safeguard our natural resources for our children, the citizens of tomorrow. 

 

Saskatchewan 1954 crop was one of the most disappointing ever experienced. Continuous wet weather, 

the most widespread rust infestation in history, and frost reduced a very promising crop to the lowest 

level since 1943. The effects of crop failure combined with the relatively low farm prices has caused a 

drastic decline in farm income. 



 

February 10, 1955 

 

 

2 

Extensive spring flood conditions and the continuation of the wet weather experienced over the past 

years in north-eastern Saskatchewan created an emergency situation for many farm families. My 

ministers have kept in constant touch with conditions arising out of all the crop failure and have taken 

prompt and effective measures to cope with the situation. Early action was taken to supplement farm 

income by providing various types of work and wages programmes for useful community projects 

including repairs to roads and bridges. Assistance was also made available to farmers for financing farm 

operations. Supplementary estimates covering the cost of these programs will be submitted for your 

approval. 

 

Because of reduced agricultural income my ministers deemed it advisable to accelerate the programs of 

paying farmers for clearing and breaking done on Crown Land in certain areas of Saskatchewan. To date 

farmers leasing Crown land have received cash payments of over one and one-third million dollars and 

have retained crop rental shares valued at a similar amount. Provision will be made for a continuation of 

this policy in the coming year. 

 

Assistance is being provided in locating and storing seed supplies and for the movement of seed grain 

and carload lots to points of need. Provisions of The Municipalities Seed Grain and Supply Act for 

purchase of supplies in behalf of farmers requiring seed have been implemented. 

 

My Government is disappointed that the Government of Canada has not seen fit to call a conference, as 

requested by this Legislature, to devise effective long-term marketing schemes for livestock and 

livestock products similar to the principles of the marketing of grain by the Canadian Wheat Board. The 

widespread desire for some action to be taken is shown by the fact that the plan has been submitted to 

the Saskatchewan Marketing Board by farming organizations for the establishment of a provincial 

livestock producers marketing board. 

 

You will be asked to amend The Provincial Lands Act to facilitate the Government’s policy of allowing 

veteran lessees to purchase Crown land after ten years of tenure. Amendments to The Conservation and 

Development Act and The Water Rights Act will also be presented. 

 

My Ministers have continued to discuss with the Government of Canada the question of the construction 

of the South Saskatchewan River Dam. A draft agreement presented by the federal Minister of 

Agriculture on the apportionment of the costs of the dam as between the Governments of Canada and of 

Saskatchewan has been tentatively accepted in principle by my Government. My Ministers will continue 

to press upon the Government of Canada the need for recognizing that the construction of this dam is in 

the national interest. 

 

The comprehensive investigations conducted by the Royal Commissions on Agriculture and Rural Life 

have been concluded and it is anticipated that several volumes of their report will be tabled during the 

course of this session. 

 

The unemployment problem has grown to serious proportions throughout Canada. In 1954 the number 

of persons registered as seeking employment was the highest on record since the end of the war. My 

Government 



 

February 10, 1955 

 

3 

will continue to press for at Federal-Provincial conference for the purpose of implementing the 1945 

proposals and to ask the Federal Government to join with the provinces and municipalities in concerted 

public investment programmes to alleviate unemployment. 

 

The increased number of apprentices enrolled for training and the number of persons taking advantage 

of examinations offered in the trades during 1954 is indicative of the value of the Apprenticeship 

Training Programme. 

 

The Government will introduce legislation for the amendment of The Workmen’s Compensation 

(Accident Fund) Act to provide increased benefits to widows and children of workmen killed in the 

course of their employment. 

 

The production of crude oil in the province continues to expand in significant proportions. At the present 

time more than eleven hundred wells are capable of producing oil. During 1955 over five million barrels 

of oil were produced. This represents an average daily production of fourteen thousand barrels as 

compared to two thousand one hundred barrels in 1949. The production of natural gas from one hundred 

and twenty wells during 1954 increased by one-third over 1953. 

 

Last year the second highest record of mineral claims staked was experienced when seven thousand two 

hundred and ninety claims were recorded. Claims in good standing continue above the twenty thousand 

level. Mining leases in good standing increased from six hundred and thirty-three to seven hundred and 

sixteen. 

 

No less than seventy companies have been active in uranium development in the Beaverlodge area 

during the year. Three are now producing uranium ore. Five are preparing to produce in the near future 

and eight others are either underground or are preparing to sink shafts. 

 

Excellent interest is being shown in the province’s potash resources. The Western Potash Company is 

continuing to sink its shaft at Unity. East of Saskatoon the Potash Company of America is presently 

drilling holes for freezing the shaft site and will begin its sinking operation this summer. 

 

The Saskatchewan Minerals Corporation has expanded its facilities in the sodium sulphate field. This 

expansion will not only result in further utilization of our sodium sulphate resources but will create 

employment opportunities which will benefit all the community. 

 

Extensions to the natural gas system to serve as additional communities were completed in 1954. To 

guarantee gas supplies a transmission pipeline was extended to the Coleville Field. 

 

Developments in this scheme to transmit gas from Western Canadian fields to Canadian and American 

markets have been followed closely. Engineering plans for the transmission and distribution of gas in 

major Saskatchewan centres along the proposed route of the Trans-Canada Pipeline have been prepared. 



 

February 10, 1955 

 

 

4 

The fact that six thousand five hundred additional farms were served with power last year indicates the 

popularity of the Farm Electrification programme. This programme greatly exceeds any other farm 

electrification programme ever attempted in Canada in any one year. The Power Corporation has as its 

objective the bringing of power to additional towns and villages and to seven thousand five hundred 

farms during the coming construction season. 

 

The Government has continued its policy of attaining maximum benefits from our forests, while 

ensuring their productivity in perpetuity. The Forest Inventory programme, now completed on almost 

thirty thousand square miles in the mixed wood forest belt, will be extended farther north. 

 

Summer commercial fishing on the northern lakes yielded more than five million pounds of fish for 

North American markets. Legislation dealing with the construction of fish processing plants will be 

submitted for your approval. Sport fishing in Saskatchewan continues to provide recreation for our 

people and attracts ever-increasing numbers of anglers to our province. It is of interest to note that 

angling licence revenues are now over ten times what they were ten years ago. 

 

Road construction in Northern Saskatchewan progressed favourably last year. This programme makes 

more accessible our forest and mineral resources. 

 

You will be asked to consider amendments to The Pollution of Streams Act and the Northern 

Administration Act. 

 

Despite adverse weather conditions the major portion of a record highway construction programme was 

satisfactorily completed. This year you will be asked to approve estimates providing for the third phase 

of a five-year highway construction programme. 

 

Good progress has been made in mapping the proposed grid system of main market roads which will be 

supplementary to the provincial highway system. It is anticipated that a grid plan will be completed in 

time to be studied with the report of the Royal Commission on Agriculture and Rural Life. In the 

meantime the Government will propose additional assistance to rural municipalities for market roads 

pending a full study of this report. 

 

It is a matter of great satisfaction that the work of the Select Special Committee on Highway Safety and 

the amendments to The Vehicles Act enacted last year assisted in greatly reducing the number of 

accidents on our highways. As a direct result the Government was pleased to announce large reductions 

in the cost of automobile insurance provided by The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. You will 

again be asked to set up the Highway Safety Committee to give further attention to highway safety 

matters. Amendments to The Vehicles Act will be submitted for your consideration. 

 

The largest construction programme in the history of the Saskatchewan Government Telephones 

Corporation was completed during 1954. More than seven thousand telephones were added to the 

system, bringing the total number of telephones in service to more than one hundred and fourteen 

thousand. New telephone exchange buildings in the city of Regina, Saskatoon and Moose Jaw will be 

placed in service during this year. 



 

February 10, 1955 

 

5 

The twentieth completely automatic telephone exchange was brought into service this year. A new, large 

construction programme designed to further reduce the waiting list of those desiring telephone service 

will be undertaken during this year. 

 

The Student Aid Fund continues to assist Saskatchewan students to attain higher education. Both the 

number of students assisted and the total amount disbursed during 1954 are higher than at any time since 

the fund was established in 1949. 

 

A favourable vote by the ratepayers has established another Larger School Unit on a permanent basis. 

This brings the number of units so organized to a total of forty-seven. 

 

The teacher supply system continues to improve. The number of studies supervisors employed has 

shown a sharp drop, and enrolment in teacher training institutions has shown a satisfactory increase. The 

Government in co-operation with trustees and teachers sponsored the bringing to Saskatchewan schools 

of one hundred thirty-five well-qualified teachers from Great Britain and Eire. 

 

Amendments to The School Grants Act will be introduced to provide increased grants for education. 

 

I am pleased to advise you that the University Hospital is now caring for patients and that it will be 

officially opened during the course of this Jubilee year. 

 

It is gratifying to know that the Saskatchewan Training School at Moose Jaw will be occupied this year. 

In addition to the transfer of those in the present training school, a number of patients from the 

Saskatchewan Hospital at Weyburn will be transferred to this new institution. 

 

A building to provide modern facilities for the care of tuberculosis patients is now under construction at 

the Saskatchewan Hospital at Weyburn. The completion all the nurses’ residence at this hospital will 

improve facilities for the nursing staff and will release space for other purposes. 

 

A consolidation of programmes in existing Health Regions has gone forward. It is proposed to continue 

the establishment of additional Health Regions as rapidly as staff requirements and local community 

conditions permit. 

 

Saskatchewan was fortunate in 1954 that poliomyelitis occurred at a much lower rate than in the two 

previous years. Restorative services for persons paralyzed by this and other crippling diseases are being 

provided and excellent results are being achieved. Existing centres are working at full capacity and 

provision will be made for the centre in the city of Regina to be expanded. This year it is proposed to 

begin a trial of recently developed Salk type poliomyelitis vaccine. 

 

In order to prevent the recurrence of the pollution of the North Saskatchewan River my Ministers 

deemed advisable to call a conference of the Governments of Canada and the three Prairie Provinces 

with a view to establishing a mutually satisfactory method of controlling water pollution. It is hoped that 

the Joint Pollution Control Board, as recommended by this Conference, will be established and it will 

become in effect of public instrument for the protection of vital water resources. 



 

February 10, 1955 

 

 

6 

As part of the programme to provide security for our senior citizens my Government is pleased to report 

that excellent progress has been made in providing housing accommodation for aged persons during the 

past year. In fourteen municipalities or groups of municipalities housing units for aged married couples 

and hospitals for single aged people have been completed or are in the process of construction. Capital 

and annual maintenance grants will be made available to these institutions. You will be asked to make 

provision for the continuation of the policy of assisting additional housing areas which are in the 

planning stage. 

 

During the past year the Saskatchewan Nursing Home at Melfort was opened. Care is being provided for 

one hundred and fifty aged persons in this home. Construction of a three-hundred bed Saskatchewan 

Nursing Home in the city of Regina has commenced and is progressing at a satisfactory rate. 

 

During the course of this Session the Government intends to place before you proposals to give 

additional assistance to pensioners under The Old Age Security Act. 

 

The Government will propose an increase for the recipients of Mothers’ Allowances. An increase in the 

per diem payments to foster homes which are undertaking the humanitarian service of carrying for foster 

children will also be submitted for your consideration. 

 

A programme for the payment of an allowance to totally disabled persons has been in effect since the 

first of the year. 

 

The people of the province are to be commended for the fact that tax collections have been maintained at 

a high average during the past year notwithstanding serious crop losses. Preliminary estimates show that 

the average tax collection is over eighty-five per cent of the taxes levied in the municipalities of the 

province. 

 

The co-operative movement throughout the province has experienced steady progress. One thousand one 

hundred and eight co-operative associations with two thousand three hundred thirty-nine places of 

business and a combined membership of over six hundred thousand had a net turnover of business and 

services of four hundred and seventy million dollars. 

 

Legislation will be introduced to improve operating procedures of credit unions, to clarify their 

borrowing powers and to regulate the conditions under which they make certain types of loans. 

 

Among other measures, you will be asked to consider amendments to The Larger School Units Act, The 

Municipalities Seed Green and Supply Act, The Power Corporation Superannuation Act and The 

Telephone Department Superannuation Act. 

 

The Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together with the estimates for the year beginning April 1st, 

1955 will be submitted. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the session with full confidence that you will favourably discharge 

your duties and responsibilities. May Divine Providence continue to bless our Province and guide the 

Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

Hi Honour the Lieutenant-Governor then retired from the Chamber. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 3:30 o’clock p.m. 


