



















































Hansard: March 25, 1955


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session - Twelfth Legislature 

32nd Day 

 

Friday, March 25, 1955 

 

The House met at three o’clock p.m. 

On Orders of the Day: 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 77 — An Act to amend The School Act 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, this Bill has a number of small 

amendments, with one or two changes in principle, in legislation presently existing. In the case of an 

organization of a new school district, or in the event of a vote for a debenture by-law in a rural or a 

village district, the vote is not taken by ballot, but is taken rather by people entering their names for or 

against in a poll book. This is a procedure which has been in existence since the School Act was first 

written, I suppose, Mr. Speaker. There has been some dissatisfaction with regard to it and we are now 

proposing that in these two instances the vote shall be by ballot, rather than by the entering of names in a 

poll book. 

 

Another change which may be of interest at this time has to do with the matter of fees for the Trustee 

Association. Up until now the actual schedule of fees has appeared in the Act. This is rather 

cumbersome, in that whenever the Trustees wish to change their schedule of membership fees, there has 

to be a change in legislation and we have felt that that could be done otherwise and the Act makes it 

possible for them to set their own fees, subject only to our approval, but not requiring a change in the 

legislation itself. 

 

The others, I think, can be discussed in committee. I would move Second Reading. 

 

Second Reading was carried and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 78 — An Act to amend The School Grants Act. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill to amend The School Grants 

Act and it contains further changes in School Grants. I will just mention, as with regard to the secondary 

education Act, the change which results in an increase of $100 a year to schools under the secondary 

education Act. 

 

The School Grants Act changes propose to increase the grant with regard to other schools, also by the 

extent of 50 cents a day, or $100 a year. 



 

March 25, 1955 

 

2 

It provides, also, Mr. Speaker for the changing of the equalization grant to those districts which are not 

organized as school units, or which are not included within cities or towns operating 50 or more 

classrooms. I had reference to this change in the budget debate; it is simply that we take the difference 

between the assessment per classroom and in rural and village districts, $130,000. We multiply that 

difference at present by 13 mills and the Bill proposes to change that by increasing it to multiplying it by 

14 mills. The same formula is followed with regard to town districts, except that there the difference is 

between the average assessment per classroom and $125,000, multiplied by, at the present time, 13 

mills, and to be changed to 14 mills. 

 

I would move Second Reading. 

 

Second Reading was carried and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 o’clock p.m. 


