



















































Hansard: March 24, 1955


 
 

1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session - Twelfth Legislature 

31st Day 

 

Thursday, March 24, 1955 

 

The House met at 3 o‘clock p.m. 

On Orders of the Day: 

 

CORRECTION OF PRESS REPORT RE LIVESTOCK MARKETING 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are called, I would 

like to mention a certain press report which I have taken objection to: ―Legislature Unanimous on 

Livestock Board‖. I don‘t know what the other members have received, but I have been in contact with 

people, this morning, from various places in the province, where this headline has definitely left the 

impression that this Assembly passed a motion unanimously supporting a Livestock Marketing Board. I 

pointed out at the time this resolution was being discussed that I was afraid that the members who were 

talking on it would leave that impression in the House; and I want here, speaking for myself, to say I 

don‘t want that impression to get abroad. On November 4, 1954, in the ―Maple Creek News‖ in the 

constituency of Maple Creek, is a report of our convention, ―Liberals Opposed to Compulsory Livestock 

Marketing Board‖: 

 

―Liberals of the Maple Creek constituency meeting here, last Thursday, went on record as being 

opposed to any form of compulsory livestock marketing board.‖ 

 

If at any time I had any reservations as to compulsory livestock marketing, I have none today. I wish to 

go on record as definitely opposing bringing compulsory livestock marketing boards into this province 

and I will stand or fall on that commitment. 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I would 

like to repeat the protest that I made on the Orders of the Day, yesterday. I was hoping that that protest 

would be announced in as prominent a way as the announcement that this House was unanimously in 

favour of a livestock marketing board, because in reality there was nothing said in that resolution about a 

livestock marketing board, and the impression that is given to the province is absolutely erroneous. It 

was endorsing a board of livestock commissioners. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member is just reiterating what he said yesterday. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The matter is a question of privilege affecting the privilege of the House, which 

every member has a right to raise, and I simply rise for the purpose of saying that the resolution which 

was passed had to do with the establishment of a national board of livestock commissioners, which was 

passed unanimously, and members have already drawn attention to the fact that there was an error in the 

heading which appeared in the ‗Leader-Post‘. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

2 

I think it should be pointed out, first of all, that as most who are familiar with newspapers and their 

methods of operation are aware, the man who writes an article does not write the heading. What a 

reporter or correspondent does is to write an article. There is one man on the newspaper whose job it is 

to do nothing else but write headlines. He looks at the first few paragraphs of an article, gathers the 

sense of the article and then writes the heading for it. Men in the Press Gallery who are writing the 

articles are not responsible for the headings and sometimes, if you will read an article carefully, you will 

find the article and the heading are quite divergent in the views they express. 

 

While I am on my feet, Mr. Speaker, and the House will permit me, I would like to take this opportunity 

— I have been wanting to do it for some time — to say that I think this House ought to express its 

gratitude to the members of the Press Gallery for the excellent work they have done in reporting this 

Session of the Legislature. I don‘t know any session when the Legislature has been as well reported as it 

has been this year. Members of both sides of the House have had good publicity, and I think very fair 

summaries of their speeches in the House have been given in the public press. While I do not agree 

sometimes with the editorial policies of some of the daily newspapers in this province, I think the reports 

of the proceedings of the Legislature have been fair and have been extensive, and I think the members of 

this House ought to express their thanks to the Press Gallery for the excellent coverage which this 

session of the Legislature has been given. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think that those who are responsible should correct the mistake. 

 

BOX CAR ALLOCATION 

 

Moved by Mr. Wooff, seconded by Mr. Swallow: 

 

―That this Assembly urge the Federal Government to implement a box-car distribution that insures the 

farmer the right to deliver grain to the elevator of his choice.‖ 

 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, the motion before the House, I think, is brief and to the 

point. The problem of allocation of box-cars is an old one. It is as old, I think, as the western grain trade. 

It goes back beyond the history of Saskatchewan as a province, back to those colorful days of early 

railroading and the coming into being of the grain elevators. These elevators have become synonymous 

with prairie urban life. They stand like sentinels over every hamlet, village and town on our western 

plains. They are practically emblematic of western agriculture. I think that they have been both blessed 

and cursed throughout the years by those who have patronized them. Undoubtedly they have been both a 

blessing and a curse to many people. 

 

Prior to the turn of the century and the coming into being of the Manitoba Grain Act, there were rumours 

of the odd time when box-cars were even auctioned off to the highest bidder. As early as 1887, which 

was one of Manitoba‘s bumper wheat crops, a distribution of box cars became a real problem. As the 

settlers poured into western Canada and the prairies were turned into waving wheat fields, it was not 

long before all the existing 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

3 

facilities for moving wheat became choked, and the farmers were in a quandary. The stress of flowing 

gold became an impossible stream to cope with. This was the period when the railroad companies hit 

upon the scheme for building grain elevators at every loading point and, in order to encourage capital 

into the elevator construction field, they made certain concessions to these elevator companies. No 

farmer would be allowed to load grain into a car from any point at which an elevator operated. 

 

History, of course, repeated itself, and these elevator companies which enjoyed this special privilege, 

little by little came to the point where they abused it by undergrading and false weights and cuts in 

prices, etc. etc. In any event, such were the complaints of the farmers of that day, and it was out of this 

situation that, at the turn of the century, a Royal Commission was set up to investigate the complaints 

and to make certain definite recommendations. I think like most Royal Commissions, they did a 

splendid job. They made recommendations out of which came the Manitoba Grain Act in 1900 or 

thereabouts. Among further recommendations by this Royal Commission was the right of farmers to 

load grain into cars and ship it without going through the local elevators. Quite naturally, of course, the 

elevators who had enjoyed these privileges, resented any intrusion by legislators laying down laws and 

regulations. Late in 1902 or the winter of 1902-03, the Territorial Grain Growers finally sued the C.P.R. 

company because they would not abide by the new regulations covering the loading of grain over 

platforms, and it was through this struggle, which was won by the farmers, that the car order book was 

given birth. 

 

The primary use of this car order book was to provide the farmers with an alternative to being driven 

into the clutches of unscrupulous elevator companies. I would like to emphasize the fact that it was not 

to cover difficulties such as we face today (that is, the allocation of cars according to the farmer‘s choice 

of elevators, that the car order book came into being. It was merely to give the farmer the choice of 

loading grain over the platform and shipping it without going through the elevators. 

 

Firstly, following the debates in the Federal House in recent years on what I believe is to many of us a 

very important issue, one becomes aware of the fact that there is either a lot of woolly thinking, or a lot 

of wishful thinking or downright evasion of facts and the desire to see that justice is dispensed on this 

particular problem. I would like to repeat again that the car order book was never intended to allocate 

cars as between elevators according to choice of the farmers. 

 

Secondly, those speaking on amendment to the Act do not ask and do not want the section covering the 

car order book to be rescinded or to be taken out of the Act. Nor is there any reason that I can see, for 

doing so. However, I consider that, for meeting the situation today, it is a rather clumsy and inefficient 

method of allocating cars so that farmers may deliver grain to the elevator of their choice. If I placed my 

name upon the car order book and had sufficient grain of my own of that particular grade to fill the car, 

the difficulty is not very great, the inconvenience is small. If, however, I have to spend time trying to 

organize some of my neighbours to help me fill the car, either because I have insufficient grain of the 

right grade, or because my quota at that particular time is too low, then we 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

4 

realize that to use the car order book method is both clumsy and I think stupid. Trying to apply a section 

of an Act to a situation for which it was never intended by those who drew it up always confuses an 

issue and this is no exception. 

 

I think we all agree that a comptroller was necessary and he has done considerable to improve the 

general situation. However, there are still many points in the province that have not had sufficient cars to 

move even the 1952 and 1953 crops. It seems as though cars are allocated to certain sections or divisions 

of a railway system, rather than to given points or to specific companies. 

 

There is a constant ‗passing of the buck‘ (to use a slang term) between the railway company and the 

Wheat Board. If you contact the railway, they say it is the Wheat Board that carries the responsibility, 

and if you contact the Wheat Board, they claim that it is the railroad company‘s fault. But the Wheat 

Board and the National railway, at least, Mr. Speaker, are both creatures of the Federal Government, 

who should, I believe, and finally must, take the responsibility of satisfactorily settling this problem. I 

don‘t think there is any other group of people producing on the same scale as members of the Wheat 

Pool who are forced by circumstances and lack of legislation to bypass their own handling facilities with 

their own product and use channels which not only do not make them savings, but actually constitute an 

expense to them. 

 

There are shipping points in the province that serve very good illustrations of the situation as it exists at 

the present time. I am only going to use one, that of Sintaluta. Sintaluta is a point of four elevators and, 

over a 17-year period, the Sintaluta district has delivered over 50 per cent to the Wheat Pool, and at the 

moment Sintaluta gets only 25 per cent of the cars that go to that point. Now, I think, over a period of 

time, by the use of the car order book, which, as I said a moment ago, I consider both clumsy and at 

times stupid in its application to this situation, they have been able to raise that 25 per cent quota to 

some extent. If Sintaluta were an isolated case in the province it would not be too bad, but it is rather the 

rule than the exception. Wheat Pool officials have estimated that there has been a loss of three quarters 

of a million dollars in patronage dividends and credits to Wheat Pool members because these members 

of this particular organization, who have built their own facilities, are not allowed to make full use of 

them. 

 

I have just briefly raised some of the problems, and probably we will ask what are any suggestions in the 

overcoming of this particular difficulty. There have been suggestions made from time to time. Some of 

them — and this one I feel has real merit, and before I sit down I shall cover it just briefly. This 

suggestion requests that a new section be put into the Act in question, allowing farmers to indicate in 

their permit book the acreage they wish to deliver to a certain elevator company or companies. Where no 

preference is indicated in the permit book, that acreage would be divided by the number of elevators at 

that particular point. The total percentage delivered to a Pool Elevator at a given point would be the 

acreage indicated in the permit book plus one-quarter of the acreage not indicated by 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

5 

the farmer in his permit book. There would be no compulsion in this section of the Act whatever. Only 

farmers wishing to choose their elevator need indicate their preference. 

 

I feel that this suggestion has a possibility of solving this aggravating question of members of an 

organization that have spent years in building up these facilities, who because of the lack of legislation, 

quite apart from congestion, are in many cases unable to make use of the very facilities that they over 

the years have spent so much time and effort in building up so that they have some control over 

marketing and movement of the grain that they produce year by year. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I wish to move, seconded by Mr. Swallow, the resolution standing in my name. 

 

Mr. A.P. Swallow (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, the member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) has done a very 

good job in dealing with this resolution. I am sure he has given many reasons why all the members in 

the House should support this resolution. I feel that if every farmer in the province had a vote on this 

resolution, a very large majority would favour it. I am sure all the farmer members of the House have 

experienced the difficulties that farmers have in delivering their grain to the elevators of their choice. 

 

I remember the Leader of the Opposition mentioned, the other day, that he was forced to take grain to 

another elevator rather than the one he usually deals with, and that, I think, is the experience of most of 

the farmers. 

 

Last summer when the quota opened, I sold 600 bushels of very good No. 2 wheat for No. 3. The case 

was that I was either forced to take it to another company where I could have got No. 2, or pass up my 

own elevator, and I did not feel that, because of a very unfair distribution of box-cars, I should have to 

take it to a company that I had not dealt with before, and I therefore took it to my own elevator. The 

penalty was the difference between No. 2, and No. 3 wheat. 

 

A few years back, when there weren‘t the problems we have today, there seemed to be a lot of room in 

the elevators; we can remember the towns where there were 4 or 5 elevators. Among the line companies 

there were some agents who received a very good handling and filled their elevators up. There were 

other agents who only received a very small amount, hardly sufficient to keep their elevators open. The 

agent possibly gave better services, opened his elevator earlier in the morning – I don‘t know about 

grades; but, in general, the public had more confidence in him. But, today, under the way the box-cars 

are distributed, every agent is assured that his elevator will be filled, and the true principles of free 

enterprise, fair competition and better service are absolutely removed today because of the distribution 

of box-cars. 

 

I wonder what we would think of a system if our wholesalers who supply our retailers with goods, 

adopted the same methods. Supposing there were two hardware stores in a small town, Mr. Speaker. 

Suppose the member of Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) operated one and I operated the other; he operated 

a better store than I did. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

6 

Mr. McCarthy: — Naturally. 

 

Mr. Swallow: — He was more popular, and maybe it was his Irish smile — I don‘t know what it was; 

but, anyhow, suppose when he ordered, say, 10 kegs of nails, or 10 lock sets, the wholesaler delivered 

the same amount to me. He kept his store cleaner, his stock better, and possibly he could get more credit 

than I could. The result would be that he would have to advise his customers that he had sold his quota, 

that they must come to my store, although I did not give the service. Now, Mr. Speaker, sounds silly; but 

it is not any more silly than the system we have through the unfair distribution of box-cars. 

 

As I said before, I think every farmer has experienced what it is to pass up the elevator to which he has 

gone for many years. He gets his grain fanned there and gets all these services, but he is forced to take 

his grain to other companies that he does not wish to. 

 

There seems to be a misunderstanding as to who is responsible for this. It seems a Pool committee 

within the province decided to do something about it, and they wired the Board of Railway 

Commissioners, and they received a reply back that the Wheat Board instructions require (this is not the 

exact wording, but very close) that empties be supplied equally when they have grain to ship to the 

elevators. That was the reply received from the Railway commissioners, and they immediately received 

another reply from the Grain Commission: ―The board have no control over the distribution of box-cars, 

but will advise railways and hope that action will be taken‖. It seems to be hard to tell whose 

responsibility it is. It is passed from one to the other. 

 

This resolution is not asking anything that is not fair. It is not even suggesting what amendment should 

be made to the Grain Act, and it is not suggesting the solution. But the feeling is that the authorities in 

Ottawa have advisers who are capable of solving it, if they wish to. Many other problems have been 

solved in the past: distribution of goods in time of war is much more difficult; and other times when they 

want to. But it seems that there is nothing done, and they do not wish to do anything about it. So, Mr. 

Speaker, it gives me pleasure to second this motion. 

 

Mr. Wm. S. Thair (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words on the resolution. 

Members of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool are much concerned over the problem of box-car allocation 

as outlined in this resolution. 

 

After some years of comparative quiet, the wheat growers of western Canada particularly, have become 

remarkably active in urging the Federal Government to face up honestly to the unfair distribution of 

box-cars for grain deliveries in western Canada. I might quote from a short article in the ‗Western 

Producer‘ of December 9th, ―Car allocations‖: 

 

―When the Rt. Hon. C.D. Howe addressed the annual meeting of the delegates of the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool one, and only one, matter evoked strong criticism. The criticism was unanimous and sharp. 

It was aroused by 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

7 

the unfair method of car allocation, the basis that is presently used for the distribution of box-cars to 

country elevators, and it added this has been a bone of contention and the cause of much protest and 

deep dissatisfaction among the western farmers for some time.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the great elevator congestion in the country, particularly of Pool elevators, as 

well as at the terminals, and the restricted delivery, the quotas for grain, the proper operation of the car 

order book was inoperative and incapable of handling the situation of a fair distribution of box-cars 

under the car order book, and, slowly but surely this is cutting the yearly handling of the Saskatchewan 

Wheat pool, year by year. At the present time the railway company allocates cars to the elevators at 

shipping points on the basis of one elevator, one car. According to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, this 

means that the farmers are not able, of course, to deliver their grain to the elevator of their choice, and 

actually forces the farmers to deliver to another elevator or keep their grain at home. 

 

The ‗Western Producer‘ has quoted some figures to show that an elevator which normally handles some 

75 per cent of the grain at any shipping point in Saskatchewan, gets the same number of cars as one that 

handles some 25 per cent of the grain, and thus they are cutting down yearly on the handlings of the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. Probably the same occurs in the other provinces as well. I would like to 

quote from a report of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in 1954 wherein it states: 

 

―The deliveries of grain to Saskatchewan Pool Elevators from the 1953-54 crop year are just over some 

44 per cent of the total amount of grain delivered, or a reduction from the previous year of some .66 of 

one per cent. For 1949 and 1950 the Pool elevators handled over 51 per cent of the total Saskatchewan 

deliveries and since that date all handlings of grain by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool have decreased 

steadily to the low point of 44 per cent, or a little over, of the handlings of last year.‖ 

 

I believe that, unless some immediate strong action is taken, it is only a matter of a few years until the 

handlings of the Saskatchewan Pool Elevators will drop to below the 40 per cent of the actual handling 

of grains, and may get down to 30 or 35 per cent if this continues. This is due to the manipulation of the 

box-car allocation, which has been put into effect and is controlled by or under the Canada Wheat Board 

Act. 

 

I do not intend to outline the operations of the car order book since 1950; but, I would like to indicate 

what has been done by the Pool organizations of the three western provinces and why they have 

considered the plans which have enabled the farmers to deliver grain and to ship from the elevator of 

their choice. I would like to quote again from the annual report of the 1954 meeting of the delegates of 

the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and I quote in this regard: 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

8 

―It was finally agreed to ask for an amendment to the Canada Grain Act and the Wheat Board Act to 

provide that growers could indicate by ballot the choice of elevator to which they preferred to deliver 

grain at their regular shipping point, and that cars should be distributed by the railway company with 

the preference so indicated.‖ 

 

I understand from the Wheat Pool that this plan was submitted as an amendment to the Canada Grain 

Act and was discussed with the Minister of Trade and Commerce and the Inter-provincial Pool 

Committee in February, 1954. The Minister of Trade and Commerce advised the Committee that the 

Government was not prepared to accept the Pool‘s proposal at this time. At a later date, the same Inter-

provincial Committee of the Pool recommended that a car cycle be installed, and that the crop year 

1945-1946 to 1949-50 should be used as a basis for this purpose, as representing that period when they 

had free grain movement and the growers had been able to select the elevator to which they wished to 

make delivery. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, they met the Transport controller, the Canadian Wheat Board and the Minister of 

Trade and Commerce during the month of July, 1954, and again the Minister of Trade and Commerce 

advised the Committee that he regretted that it would not be possible (these are his own words) ―to bring 

the proposed car cycle into operation at this time.‖ 

 

In the meantime, the Minister of Trade and Commerce, according to the report of the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool, November, 1954, had accepted the invitation from the Board of Directors of the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool to attend and address this meeting on the grain situation and, as a result of 

this meeting, the Minister of Trade and Commerce (Mr. C.D. Howe) reported as follows: 

 

―As a result of this meeting the Minister of Trade and Commerce, the Hon. C.D. Howe, . . . 

 

I made a mistake here it should be the Saskatchewan Pool delegates — 

 

―the Saskatchewan Pool delegates, last November, had a frank and full discussion of this matter 

regarding the allocation of box-cars and a good many delegates said exactly what they thought about 

the whole matter, and since that time the inter-provincial Pool Committee, made up from the three 

prairie provinces had continued negotiations with the Hon. C.D. Howe,‖ 

 

I believe they have reported back very recently to the Committee that the allocation of box-cars is not by 

any means a dead issue and that the door is not closed to further negotiations. So it is the feeling of some 

of the Pool directors that at least they have made some little progress in the past year. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I report that there is very general support among the farm organizations in 

western Canada for this resolution, which includes the Farmers‘ Union of the three western provinces, 

the Canadian Federation of Agriculture the Association of Rural Municipalities, the three 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

9 

western Wheat Pools and other organizations. I might also say that the Saskatchewan Liberal party in 

their convention at Saskatoon, last fall, urged a change in the Canada Grain Act (I am quoting from the 

‗Leader-Post‘): 

 

―To the effect that a change in Canada Grain Act be made to provide for the placing of box-cars at 

country elevators in accordance with the farmers‘ preference, so that they can deliver grain to the 

elevator of their choice and also, if necessary, retain for the individual growers their right to order box-

cars under the car order book section.‖ 

 

I am sure the members on both sides of the House will heartily support this resolution. In closing, Mr. 

Speaker, I say that I am glad to support this motion. 

 

Mr. W.H. Wahl (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words on this 

motion, because there is a very important principle involved and one that I have often heard the 

Opposition express concern over and that is freedom, only they use a different term; they say 

‗compulsion‘, and accuse this Government of it on many occasions. 

 

I was very glad to hear the member who moved the resolution mention Sintaluta as an example, because 

very close to Sintaluta is the No. 1 homestead of the province, and I always consider this part of the 

country, which is in the Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley constituency, where much of the progress that is 

mentioned in this 50 years came from. 

 

Again it is very interesting because the farmer thought that over 50 years ago he had this right to deliver 

grain to the elevator of his choice, or load it over the platform, and I think he was surprised, the old 

farmer, when he found that this was not true in the last few years, that he did not have freedom to choose 

where he wanted to deliver his grain. I have a little article here which illustrates this and it says: 

 

―It is only in the movement of grain that the railways presume to interfere with the normal channels of 

trade. A railway does not tell a manufacturer or wholesaler that he may not have any more box-cars or 

additional supplies, and it does not tell a big department store that it cannot have another carload of 

goods because the small merchant across town is not also ready to receive another carload, and that is a 

very important point.‖ 

 

It seems to me that this resolution is tied up some way with the Opposition in this House, and I cannot 

help but feel that it is because of the point I mentioned — freedom and compulsion. If you go back to 

1944, the people of this province, I believe, voted to destroy the government of that time because of its 

corrupt practices. I don‘t think they were so concerned . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. The hon. member must withdraw that. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

10 

Mr. Wahl: — I have to withdraw? I withdraw. Nevertheless, I don‘t think they were so concerned about 

electing a socialistic government. In 1948, they were very concerned about strengthening the 

Opposition, and I think in 1952 again they were alarmed that they had strengthened the Opposition, and 

they turned around and elected this Government then and these 42 members partly because they didn‘t 

want the old Liberal Government, and partly because they commenced to like the programme which 

they connected with this C.C.F. government. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I thought he was going to say because of the box-cars. 

 

Mr. Wahl: — But, after all that time and all those years, after listening to the radio broadcasts, the 

Opposition always kept harping on freedom and they did not like what they termed compulsion, which 

they attributed to this Government. But, nevertheless, this box-car allocation is not something that has 

cropped up in the last year; it is not new. They never expressed any concern about it. They thought it 

was perfectly all right for one elevator when it was usual for them to get 51 or 52 per cent of the grain, 

to lose 12 per cent of the deliveries because they could not get box-cars to get the grain out of their 

elevators. They never expressed concern about that. 

 

I am told — in fact, here is proof of it; here is a letter from the Grain Commissioners to the Manitoba 

Pool, and this is January 10, 1955. They say there is nothing in the Canada Grain Act which instructs or 

authorizes the railway company to allocate cars between elevators on a car-for-car basis, when 

distribution is not made through the car order book. So, evidently the Board of Grain Commissioners 

can say where these cars can be allocated, and a very interesting point comes up here again. We have 

one of our opposition members who has a member of his family on the Board of Grain Commissioners 

and I was thinking that maybe the Liberals would correct this injustice because of him. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Is that the way the C.C.F. work? Is that the way the C.C.F. does things? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — The right person in the right spot. 

 

Mr. Wahl: — Nevertheless, this interesting example of freedom is at stake and it could very well, as the 

member from Lumsden (Mr. Thair) said, destroy the elevator that the farmer built, and that is the Pool 

elevator, because they could well get their bins low enough with this tremendous elevator system that 

they have, that they could not afford to carry on. 

 

There is another very interesting reason, too. They probably think that the line elevators like this 

compulsion, but I am told, on good authority, by line elevator agents that they do not like this state of 

affairs either, because they say that the people who ordinarily haul to them — their elevators are full and 

they cannot take their grain. So, . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — All in one happy family. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Getting balled up badly. 

 

Mr. Wahl: — So, I am going to support this resolution, and I am expecting the opposition will, too, 

because I think they have turned down this 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

11 

gross example of taking the freedom of the right of the farmer to deliver his grain to the elevator of his 

choice, away from him. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River); — Mr. Speaker, a resolution of this kind crops up every year. I hope 

it will crop up for a long time, because then we will have a good crop and lots of wheat in the elevators, 

because that is the reason for this problem. 

 

After we have listened to three speakers on the other side, and I think they are all practical farmers (well, 

I wouldn‘t accuse the last member of being farmer, but I think the other two are), and they have not 

advanced any practical solution. The member who introduced the resolution very correctly said that the 

Canada car order book was no solution for this distribution of cars. I don‘t think it was ever intended to 

be a solution, because in those days the problem was not very great, if it was any problem; it was only 

increased by abnormal conditions. 

 

First of all, we had this problem in the early days of the war when every port in the world that received 

grain shipments from Canada was closed, except the port of Great Britain. All the other ports were 

closed to commerce and ships and, as a consequence the wheat piled up in our elevators, and not only in 

our elevators in Saskatchewan, but on the ground. They built temporary storages to hold some (I think it 

was) 5 million bushels, just temporary storage. Then for a short time after the war there wasn‘t any 

problem, because immediately in the old lands there was a demand to get grain in there quickly, and the 

temporary congestion of our elevators was a problem of the past. 

 

But, it recurred again, largely because farmers had three crops in two years. I say we had five good crops 

in 6 years, Mr. Speaker, and then we gradually built up until we are in the position we are now. Just now 

there is no immediate prospect of a solution. I hope there won‘t be any solution, because that means 

there will be another bad crop, and we don‘t want that under any circumstances, or a largely increased 

export demand. 

 

I don‘t think anyone can accuse me of drumming-up business for the line companies or anybody else. I 

was a Wheat Pool delegate for several years, and I am a Wheat Pool member today, and all the wheat 

that I ever produced on the farm goes to the Pool until the last year or year and a half, and here is the 

situation. Take my own town of Davidson. I had a talk with several Pool men, and they do not have any 

solution for it. If they have, I have never seen it in print. What will you do, Mr. Speaker, when you have 

about 8 elevators in a town; you have 63 per cent of all the farmers in that town signed up as Pool 

members; the Pool has about 32 or 35 per cent of the storage space in that town. What will you do when 

you have all the elevators, except the Pool elevators, empty while the Pool elevators are full? What 

would you do? Well, they draw up into the other elevators, and there are just as many pool elevator 

members in the private elevators in my town as there are Pool members with their grain in the Pool 

elevators. Now they are all full; every one of them is full to the door. Some of my wheat is in another 

elevator, not because I want it there, but because that is the only place I could deliver it. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

12 

Now, when the cars come in, they give two cars or so to each elevator; sometimes one might get three 

and sometimes they come in 40 cars — like last Spring, 40 cars in two days. Then, of course, there‘s 

more cars to each elevator; but ordinarily they come along about one or two cars to each elevator. If they 

shoved all those cars to the Pool elevator to empty the Pool elevator, I certainly would protest and so 

would dozens of other farmers, because we happen to have been forced through circumstances to put our 

wheat in the line elevator. Now, what are you going to do for a solution of that kind of situation? 

 

There is no solution. If the Government actually passed a law that will compel the Pool farmer to deliver 

his wheat to the Pool elevator, then he will sit with his wheat on the farm until enough cars are put into 

the Pool elevator to empty it. That‘s the only solution of it; I don‘t think there is any other solution. They 

tried the car order book up in my town and in other towns as well. There was pretty near a riot there one 

day. They started the car order book and it confused the whole situation, and the farmers themselves 

demanded that the car order book be taken away. I think it is back now again, but it isn‘t doing any good 

because, as I said, every elevator is full and there are no more cars except what dribbles in now and then. 

 

Now, if you have plenty of space, you don‘t need any legislation for a situation of this kind. If you get 

cars enough in there to remove enough wheat out of the elevators and there is open space (not empty by 

any means, but a certain amount of space, where they have a 2,000 or 3,000 bushel space in each 

elevator), you don‘t need anything, because immediately they are going to draw in more wheat. But, 

again, there is this problem. If there is 34 or 35 per cent space in the Pool elevator in the town it will be 

filled very rapidly because there are about 63 per cent signed up as Wheat Pool supporters in that town. 

Well, when that is filled up without the cars coming in fast enough to keep open space in the elevator, 

you have the same condition again, and every elevator is filled up. But you are not going to stop the 

farmer, because he signed a Pool contract to deliver to the Pool, from hauling 6,000 or 8,000 bushels of 

wheat to the line elevator company to get money to get his fuel to go out and seed, and get oil for his 

family and to keep them warm or anything like that, because he needs that money. Where is he going to 

get the money to finance unless he can get that wheat in? And the only place he can get that wheat in is 

in the elevator where there is room, and that is not always in the Pool elevator. And that is a solution, but 

I don‘t know any legal solution. 

 

One of the members over there suggested or mentioned something about that when a farmer gets his 

permit he should designate to what elevator he wants to deliver his wheat. I think that is a bad practice, 

because, you know, we have heard the story from the C.C.F. about what these elevator companies are 

trying to do to the farmers: they tried to cheat them on the grade and on the weight and everything else. 

If I happened to be in the position where I had to indicate that I was going to haul my wheat to the 

National elevator and that was the place where I had to take my wheat, then I might get stung, according 

to what we hear from over there. I don‘t think that myself, but no doubt it happened in the early days. 

When I came here in 1904 or 1905, the first crop we ever hauled out, we found out that there was only 

one elevator, and we were practically all forced to sell to that elevator. We never got the grade that we 

were entitled to. I remember one 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

13 

morning we went there and he was weighing a small load; he didn‘t have over 50 or 55 bushels on, and I 

was standing right back of him looking on, and he said, ―Mr. Adams, wasn‘t there another 20 pounds on 

this?‖ ―Oh, yes, I almost forgot.‖ But that was a common practice. We eliminated all that sort of thing 

because we went into business ourselves and rectified these things. 

 

I am not afraid of the Pool elevator going out of business. I am sure when the time comes and it will be 

soon enough, when larger export demand opens our elevators, you will see that wheat that formerly went 

to the Pool elevators will go there. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Nature will take care of that. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I think I speak for all the farmers in that respect. What are the present conditions? I 

haven‘t found a person yet — and I talked to the elevator man up there; we sat down and talked it over 

one day; he wasn‘t very busy and we discussed this matter for about an hour and a half and he didn‘t see 

any solution to it, and I never found any one who really has a solution to that problem; and I said, ―All 

right, You don‘t need any regulations.‖ If there is no room and everybody is sitting back on the farm 

holding wheat and every elevator is filled to the door, the man who has to put his wheat in the private 

elevator or the line company elevator is entitled to just as much consideration and as many cars as the 

Pool man who has his wheat in the Pool elevator, and unless you do happen to find a solution to that, 

you haven‘t done anything. 

 

I am going to support this resolution. I‘m going to support it because it draws attention to a problem, but 

it suggests no solution. It is all very well for my friend over there to laugh. It is not a laughing matter for 

people who sit out in the country in snow and frost and rain and mud, with probably their granaries half 

full or full of grain from 1953, and they haven‘t been able to get it all in to probably even pay their 

taxes. I know people in my district who are just in that position, and in the Spring now when they need 

more money, we hope this wheat pool payment will finally come through on the 1953 crop, and there 

are some small payments on grain that are dribbling through; but after all, what they need is to get a few 

cars in so they can get some wheat in, and get at least $500 or $600 so they can go ahead and finance 

their Spring operations. So it is no laughing matter, and I say to you that the problem is there, and if 

there are any of these wise men who sit there and condemn everybody else, let us hear what they have to 

say. Let them give us the solution to it, and then let us discuss the practical thing. 

 

I am going to support the resolution, and I think that some of my friends on this side of the House will, 

too, just because it is a thing that we never oppose. Who put the car order book into effect? It certainly 

wasn‘t any C.C.F. government. It was put there at the request of the farmers of western Canada — never 

mind who the government was; I don‘t know what the government was in that day, but it doesn‘t make 

one bit of difference. When you commence to deal with the problem of farming on a political basis, then 

you are treading on very, very dangerous ground and there has never been one solution that has been 

found to our problem but by federal legislation, and practically every problem that we have had has been 

remedied, or tried to be remedied, by legislation that has been passed by 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

14 

federal action, and there is nothing done on a political basis. It has been done because it was of great 

public concern, and so it is today. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I agree with the hon. 

member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) that this is no laughing matter, but I can assure him that we 

were not laughing at the problem which exists in the country. The laughing matter was the hon. member 

for Arm River who has been all around the world on this question, now arguing against it, saying it can‘t 

be done without compulsion and saying it won‘t work anyway unless there is a crop failure and a 

shortage of grain . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That‘s ridiculous. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . and then he ends up by saying that he is going to support the motion. 

Mr. Speaker, he came awfully near to talking himself out of it. It is a good job he stopped when he did 

or he would have convinced himself that it was no good and he would have opposed the motion. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — If you had been awake when he was speaking, you would have known what he said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I remember when on Pool elevator in the town where there were four 

elevators would normally handle half of the wheat that went to market in that town. That has happened 

on many occasions in the past, and that was just as true, in those times, in years of big crops when there 

would be considerable periods when the elevators were plugged, as it was in years of small crops. Just as 

true one time as the other. My hon. friend from Arm River does not need to try to convince us, or the 

farmers in the province of Saskatchewan, that to remedy the situation which exists at the present time 

and to give to the farmer the choice of delivering his grain where he wants to, cannot be done without 

compulsion. It can be done. I don‘t think it is necessary to go into details. The authorities who are 

responsible for this know how it should be done; they have done it before. They have maintained 

conditions that allowed us to market the grain at the elevator of our choice. 

 

The hon. member admitted in a town where the Pool elevator is full of grain, the other elevators all get 

full of grain, and in that town half the farmers want to market through the Pool. He never thought 

apparently of having the wheat go through that Pool elevator at a faster speed than through the rest, and 

it could go through that elevator at a faster speed, provided they get the box-cars to load it out. And that 

is exactly what I said, and that is what the resolution is talking about, but he says it cannot be done. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, No, Mr. Speaker. I never said anything of the sort. I pointed that out when cars 

come in and the elevator has space, then the problem is solved. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member went into pretty good details. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he went into enough details to get himself completely 

muddled up on this. There is no doubt about that. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

15 

Mr. Danielson: — Oh, no. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — He told us this could not be done without compulsion. That is what he said. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Or a crop failure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Or a crop failure. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I said the only way you could get the Pool 

member‘s wheat into the Pool elevators when they are all filled up would be by compulsion, that they 

should have the order to deliver it, but not if there are box cars . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I think that is about what he said — there had to be 

compulsion if it was going to work. He got up and he used that word just now and he definitely said you 

would have to compel the Pool members to deliver their wheat to the Pool elevators. Then he mentioned 

the suggestion made by the hon. member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff). I don‘t know if it would work or 

not, but the farmer could designate on their permit book where he desires — not to put in the permit 

book a binding agreement; he did not say that — but his desires as to delivery. Naturally, the loyal Pool 

members, like the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson), might put down ‗Pool Elevator‘ and 

then, on the basis of the choice of the farmers at that shipping point, the box-cars could be allocated to 

those elevators for that year, and that would certainly be better than it is now and well worth trying. 

 

I hope this resolution can get the unanimous support of this House, because I think that the Liberal 

government at Ottawa needs some prodding about this thing . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — And a lot of other things. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — They are apparently more interested in giving advantages to the line 

elevator companies than to our own farmer-owned Pool elevators and, therefore, I am very interested in 

seeing this resolution pass this House unanimously. 

 

Mr. E.H. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a few minutes to correct some 

statements of my hon. friend from Arm River (Mr. Danielson). Of course, his statement that crop failure 

is the only thing that would solve the problem is the usual argument that the Liberal ‗old guard‘ uses: 

when we have good crops, it will solve all our problems and when we have poor crops it is going to 

solve it again. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege again. I didn‘t say any such thing. I said if you 

get a crop failure or a heavy export demand, you will empty the elevators. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

16 

Mr. E.H. Walker: — A crop failure is what I said, Mr. Speaker. The part I want to point out to the hon. 

member, if he is not aware of the annual report of the Saskatchewan Pool Elevators, where they point 

out that, throughout most of the province, the country elevators were badly congested and unable to 

receive all the grain offered. Thus, the percentage of receipts remained below 45 per cent total 

marketings. In the early part of the season receipts were below 40 per cent, and they have gradually 

come up. There is no question that, if the Pool members indicated their intentions that they wished to 

deliver their wheat to the Pool and cars were placed there accordingly, the wheat handled by the Pool 

elevators would be substantially increased. 

 

I also want to mention the statement made by the hon. member that nobody has offered any plan to solve 

this problem. Of course, as usual the hon. member is a year or two behind — but, that is not bad; he is 

only two years behind the times . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Let‘s have it. 

 

Mr. E.H. Walker: — By 1953 the Pool Committee of the three prairie provinces approached the Board 

of Grain Commissioners and urged that certain changes be made and they offered a plan, with 

amendments to the car order book in such a manner that the farmer could deliver his grain to the 

elevator of his choice. The Board of Grain Commissioners, after getting advice from the Federal 

Government at Ottawa, were told that they did not have the authority to do it, and, of course, the Federal 

Government was then approached, and they refused to act on the plan offered by the Pool in 1953. So, at 

the end of that year, the Wheat Pool organizations went back to the Federal Government with another 

plan, something similar to that mentioned by the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Brockelbank) under 

which the grower would have an opportunity to indicate his choice of delivery point. Once again, the 

Federal Government, through the Hon. C.D. Howe, turned down the plan which the Pool offered. The 

Committee again met with the transport comptroller some time after the month of July last year, and 

they are again working on some sort of a plan to give the grower an opportunity to deliver his wheat to 

the elevator of his choice. In this case and at this time they are apparently discussing a plan in 

connection with what they call a ―proposed car cycle,‖ in which they base the car distribution on the 

wheat deliveries of some periods when there was no congestion and when the grower could deliver to 

the elevator of his choice. Once again, I would suggest that, if they use a method such as that, it is going 

to mean that the grower will not have an opportunity to deliver wheat to the elevator of his choice, 

because it would be based on 10 or 15 years previously. 

 

I think those are the only points I need to mention. I might mention that this was taken from the annual 

report of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, if my friends care to look it up. Of course, I am going to 

support the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. 

Danielson) stated that the only practical solution to the problem would be either a crop 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

17 

failure or a very active demand for wheat in the export market. He overlooked one very practical 

solution to the whole problem and that would be advance payments on farm-stored grain, and that is the 

only manner under which we will get orderly marketing that will permit a farmer to market his grain 

casually, rather than everyone rushing in when the quota is opened. 

 

That is the solution, and I would suggest to the hon. member for Arm River, too, that a crop failure is 

not going to provide a solution to the problem because this is the day of trucking. Everyone wants to 

deliver, and of necessity must deliver their grain as speedily as possible, and you will have the same 

congestion even though you have a normal crop, as you do when you have the kind of crops that we 

have had in the last few years. The only solution to that problem would be advance payment for farm-

stored grain, as far as I can see. 

 

The matter of basing the allocation of box cars on the amount of delivery indicated to each elevator 

should not be difficult, if there are box-cars available. It is just a matter, as the hon. Minister of Natural 

Resources (Mr. Brockelbank) said, of speeding up the movement through that particular elevator. I 

know there would be some embarrassment to farmers if all tried to get their grain through one elevator 

very speedily, but this would be taken care of, if we had a system of advanced payments on farm-stored 

grain, which I believe is coming. 

 

This problem is with us because of the rapid manner in which farmers can take their grain to market. We 

had orderly marketing before, for the simple reason that we had to walk behind a sleigh for 10 or 12 or 

15 miles to deliver our grain to the elevator; now the grain goes in very speedily by truck. So this 

problem is going to stay with us, and the only final solution will be a system of advance payments on 

farm-stored grain. Adoption of this scheme will automatically bring about orderly marketing. 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to add a few words to this discussion. 

I was most amused listening to the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) talking about the solution 

being to grow less wheat. I thought if ever a solution was a very weak one, that was it. He pointed out 

that in his town of Davidson, 63 per cent of the farmers are Pool members. Why then don‘t they, by the 

same proportion, issue the box cars to those elevators? Why not send 63 per cent of the cars which come 

into that town to the Pool, if 63 per cent of the farmers would like to deliver to the Pool? 

 

To say the only solution is compulsion by law — to compel the farmers to deliver to the Pool — that 

that is the only way we can do it, well, we have compulsion now, Mr. Speaker. We have compulsion to 

deliver to the elevator companies to which we don‘t want to deliver. We are compelled, through the 

distribution of box-cars of the present day, to deliver to the line elevator companies. That compulsion is 

done, and if it isn‘t done by the Commission or the government at Ottawa, it is done with their blessing 

and their amen, because they are doing nothing to prevent it. 

 

He mentioned that with all the brains and the wise men on this side of the House, maybe we would come 

up with a solution. Well, I am 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

18 

certain, after listening to the speech of the hon. member for Arm River, that there are no brains on that 

side of the House if he is representative of all the members over there in his contribution to this debate. 

 

A year ago, in the federal House at Ottawa, a private member‘s Bill was introduced to amend the 

Canada Grain Act whereby a farmer could sign up with the elevators on a voluntary basis, as to which 

elevator he wanted to deliver his grain. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — He can do that now. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — That member‘s resolution was killed by the Liberals who are at Ottawa. And they 

said it was the wish of the Pool that they didn‘t want to have such a Bill. Well, I don‘t know whether the 

Pool indicated their wishes to them or not, but I do know that the Wheat Pool, last year, at their annual 

convention went on record as passing a resolution in favour of a fair distribution of box-cars whereby 

the farmer designate to what elevator they wanted to deliver their grain, the box-cars to be so allocated 

that the farmers could deliver their grain. As for the town of Davidson, at which, the hon. member 

mentioned, all the elevators were filled, then out of this you would have thought if they gave the Wheat 

Pool 63 per cent of the cars and the others 37 per cent, each farmer could go to the elevator of his 

choice. At the end of the year, when the crop year was out, it would leave all farmers in the same 

position. 

 

I know of numerous cases where the Pool elevators in a given town were filled to capacity at the start of 

the crop year, but the line elevators had a chance to get theirs out . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Where was that? What town was that? 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — I have seen it in my own town of Archerwill. If you check the records you will find it 

for yourself. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The Pool didn‘t get theirs out, and the others did? 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — Yes, the Pool didn‘t have the cars. In the town of Archerwill for many years there 

were two elevators, the Pool and the Grain Growers. The Pool had about 60 per cent of the business and 

the Grain Growers 40 per cent. The Searle Elevator Company built an elevator in there, but they got 

little or nothing. They were getting a very small percentage of the delivery of wheat until the box-car 

situation forced it on them, and now they get a third of it and each gets about a third now, where the 

Pool used to get about 60 per cent of it. You can check and find this information. The Wheat Pool will 

supply it for you. 

 

I have before me, Mr. Speaker, a copy of the two Bills which were moved at Ottawa. One was moved 

last year and one again this year. It was moved last Session, but in November of 1953, Bill No. 3 was an 

Act to amend the Canada Grain Act. I don‘t want to go into details, but the explanatory note that goes 

with it says: 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

19 

―The purpose of this Act is to provide in the new section of the car order book a rule for the fair 

allocation of box-cars among the elevator companies at a marketing point where the car order book as 

said to be constituted is not in effect. By allocating their seeded acreage among the elevator companies 

at a marketing point, producers themselves can determine the distribution of box-cars at that point.‖ 

 

That Bill, Mr. Speaker, last year in the House of Commons, was killed by the Liberal majority, after Mr. 

Howe got up and made a few statements on it. There is a similar Bill before the House of Commons 

today, with identically the same explanatory note on the back of it. But, I am sure that if our friends at 

Ottawa, the Liberal Government, are sincere in trying to do for the farmers what the farmers of the west 

would like to see done, then I am sure, that if the wording of this Bill as such does not meet exactly the 

necessary changes in the Canada Grain Act, knowing what the idea and the wishes of farmers are, surely 

they could offer helpful amendments. With their majority, they could have amended the Bill to make it 

do what it should have done. If their attitude is that this Bill wouldn‘t do for the farmers of the West 

what it was purported to do, to give a fair distribution of box-cars if that is the case, then, with their 

majority, they could have amended the Bill so it would. But, what do they do? Rather than half a slice 

they take away the whole loaf. 

 

They have been very famous all through the times for doing that to the farmers and the farmers‘ friends, 

and the speech we have heard here, this afternoon, from the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) is a 

pretty typical one. He said the only thing we would be doing here would be treating farmers on a 

political basis. But I would like to know how he gets that. Because we are asking for a fair deal for the 

Wheat Pool, does he mean to say that the Wheat Pool would be put on a political basis? I am sure that 

none of the elevator companies have officially opposed any politics, and the Wheat Pool is no different 

from other elevator companies; but I am sure that the Wheat Pool has been more discriminated against 

than any of the other elevator companies in the allocation of box-cars today. So, when he said the 

farmers would be set on a political basis where they are not now, I think the reverse would be true. 

 

In 1928, where I worked in the western part of this province, there was no allocation of box-cars. The 

Pool elevator which was at a little siding called Whitepool (I believe it was Whitepool) yes, Astum was 

on the C.P. and Whitepool was on the C.N., right alongside of each other. The Astum line elevator on 

the C.P. never opened its doors year after year because the farmers were Wheat Pool members; never 

took in a bushel for a number of years. The record will bear that out. But this Wheat Pool elevator at 

Whitepool took in more grain each Fall, including this other one at Astum, than seven surrounding 

elevators thereabouts, because the people wanted to haul to the Pool and people were satisfied with that 

Pool elevator. But, today, under the present situation, all that fellow could take in would be one-seventh 

of the grain. The elevator which used to be closed down year after year at Astum, will now be operating 

equally as great as the Pool. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

20 

Those conditions, I submit, are not fair; they are not just. The farmers of this province are tired of 

tolerating that sort of a set-up. I think it is time that we passed pretty strong resolutions in the House, far 

stronger than this one, condemning the action of the Federal Government in delaying the necessary 

reforms for the wheat grower. We have suffered in a good many ways. Why suffer a way that we don‘t 

need to? I shall support this motion. 

 

Hon. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say a word on this 

resolution, because I think there are a few things that need to be said; I won‘t take long to say them. 

When members on this side of the House, or anywhere in the country, state that there has been 

discrimination against the Pool and more than just the allocation of box-cars, they are stating the truth, 

and the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) if he wishes to be fair about, should know that is a fact; 

also, the other older members. I don‘t blame the younger ones, those who were not too keenly interested 

some years ago, of the younger ones who were away serving the country. 

 

I want to remind my friends opposite that there has not been one single occasion in the history of the 

development of the Wheat Pool when there was a controversy between the Pool and the grain trade, the 

private grain trade, when the grain trade was not given some preference in treatment, and a good many 

of those years, definite lip support, public support by speakers for the Liberal party, including the Rt. 

Hon. Mr. Gardiner, Minister of Agriculture. I will give one or two illustrations. I will take you back to 

the year 1943, when I know every Liberal member in this House probably now has succumbed to the 

pressure of Liberal talk; but the Liberal government that year took it on itself to fix the price of wheat 

and to abolish trading in futures on the Winnipeg Grain Exchange. Maybe members over there honestly 

believe this. I would like to disabuse their minds by telling them the truth of what happened at that time. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — We all know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I don‘t know if my hon. friend does. If he does he can get up and correct me if I 

give a wrong illustration. The only reason the government at Ottawa finally acceded to the request of the 

farmers and the farm organizations by abolishing the futures trading in wheat, was not to agree with the 

farm organizations; it was not for any sympathy with the farmers; it was simply because the open market 

had got into such conditions during those war years, that it was impossible to deliver grain sold on the 

street against a future contract in any reasonable length of time. Wheat that was held by the private 

traders for the October or December delivery, could not be delivered in October or December, because 

of the war demands on box-cars. That is the only reason why the government at Ottawa at that time 

abolished trading on the open market. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Is that their stated reason? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Their stated reason? No, because ever since Mr. Gardiner switched his position 

and ceased to support the Winnipeg Grain Exchange he has made it appear that he has always been a 

champion of the Wheat Pool, and don‘t let anyone here try to kid anyone else — certainly not me; I 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

21 

was in it all the time. Mr. Gardiner spent many years apologizing and speaking as a champion of the 

open-market system and the futures market as against the Wheat Pool and the Wheat Pool system. I have 

said this in the House of Commons to Mr. Gardiner, and I will say it again when the occasion arises. 

Now, to another illustration . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask just one question? When you started speaking, you 

mentioned a year — I didn‘t get that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — The year 1943; in September of 1943, when the trading in wheat futures was 

abolished on the Winnipeg Grain Exchange, and the price was fixed at $1.25 a bushel. 

 

Now, another illustration. During the years when there was a free movement of grain, the Wheat Pool 

and Pool elevators in this province enjoyed a delivery of approximately 50 to 51 per cent; occasionally 

down to 49 or up to 53, but around 50 per cent mark, which, of course, meant that about one-third of the 

elevators which were farmer-owned, the Pool elevators, were getting half the grain, about two-thirds of 

the elevators of those days, owned by private interests, were dividing the other 50 per cent among them, 

and it didn‘t suit them. Now, when I say 50 per cent, I don‘t mean that every point delivered 50 per cent 

to the Pool. They varied. In some places they were as low as 25 or 30 per cent. In other places they were 

as high as 90 and 92 per cent in double elevator or more points. In single elevator points, of course, they 

had 100 per cent, naturally. 

 

The line elevators have always been anxious to have something happen which would provide them 

through some other mechanism than the farmers; choice, with the right to get what they think is their fair 

share of grain, equal to the Pool. The Pool people have never agreed. The Pool people have always 

stated that when they went to the trouble of building an organization, of putting their money in to the 

capital facilities, the physical facilities for handling their grain, they had a right to deliver all their grain 

to those facilities if they wanted to. The choice should be theirs. 

 

Now, then, we come again to the war years, when again congestion was the order of the day, and it was 

necessary to store a lot of grain at the local points. Rather than build new elevators, a system was 

devised that was not a bad system. It was a good system for a temporary situation, namely to allocate the 

supplies of lumber for the building of temporary bins. Now, up to that point everything was fine. There 

was nothing unreasonable; it was a sensible thing for the government to do, to allocate building supplies 

for that purpose; but when it came to the actual allocation, they favoured continuously the line elevators 

right in some of the points represented by my hon. friend from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron), in the point 

of Prelate, to be exact. If you want some illustrations, I can give you more, or how, when line elevator 

companies were given allocations of timber to build these temporary bins, the allocation was withheld 

from Pool elevators. 

 

I give these illustrations, Mr. Speaker, to show that every time there was a possibility of the Liberal 

government at Ottawa giving an advantage by legislation, or order-in-council, or through any of its 

agencies giving an advantage to the private owners of physical facilities or trading, that advantage was 

given. It is in existence yet today, when they will not abolish the private trading in other than wheat, oats 

and barley; flax and rye are still 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

22 

trading on the open market. So, I say right up to this point of the allocation of box-cars, they have 

continually favoured from Ottawa any stem which will guarantee that the privately-owned elevators will 

get an equal portion of grain with the Pool, which is distinctly unfair. 

 

I would like my friend from Arm River to get this point clear, that when government action results in 

such that is compulsion. That is compelling people to use a facility they do not want to use, for which 

their only choice is this — sell no grain and, therefore, have no money in their pockets, or sell it where 

space is available. 

 

Our friends across the way, I believe — I was not in when this was mentioned, but it was mentioned by 

several speakers, so I assume it was alluded to here this afternoon — suggested that members on this 

side of the House are so wise that they can devise ways and means of doing something. I am not going 

to offer any solution, Mr. Speaker, but I am going to say this. We have had now in this province, and in 

the western provinces, big farm organizations who have devoted the last 30 years to the movement, the 

handling of their members‘ grain, the Wheat Pool, and I am convinced that they can at any time at all 

hand to Mr. Gardiner, Mr. Howe, to the Wheat Board, the Board of Grain Commissioners, Mr. Milner, 

or anybody, or the whole collection, a simple and an easy and a workable system whereby every farmer 

can deliver his grain to whichever elevator he likes. I am like my friend from Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst). 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Very interesting. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I think that the member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) has been very mild in the 

resolution he has offered. I am quite sure that no member of this House would dare to vote against it. I 

would hope that all members would vote wholeheartedly for it, and if the member for Wadena had 

offered the resolution in more vigorous terms, I would have been equally willing to support a resolution 

of that kind. 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I sat through the debate and heard the member 

from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) pointing out that, in his opinion, this would not necessarily be a 

solution to the problem, but it would draw to the attention of those in authority, that there is a problem. 

He said he was not well enough versed to know if this was the solution; that he had spoken to line 

elevator agents, and they were not sure it was a solution, and that he had spoken to Wheat Pool men and 

high officials of the Wheat Board, and they were not just too sure that this was the solution. I don‘t think 

that any of us can go out and say for certain that this will solve everything, that the minute they allocate 

box cars in this manner the solution is found. 

 

That is what the member for Arm River was attempting to point out, and we are not so sure that it is a 

solution; but we are for any resolution which will bring the problems we are facing to the proper 

authorities and ask them to get their heads together and try to formulate some solution. Whether or not 

this is the only solution and the best solution, I am not in a position to state. I don‘t think anyone in the 

House is so firm in their commitment that this is the only solution to the problem. It may be; and if it is, 

we are all for it. It will bring to bear our opinion that we are facing this 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

23 

critical situation and some solution must be found and for that reason we are all going to support it. 

 

I don‘t think there is a member here who will not support it. It is definitely a problem, and I can say to 

the Minister of Health (Mr. Bentley) that even last Fall, when we had congestion and could not get box-

cars, I suggested to some points with Pool elevators that they arrange to put the wheat on the ground. 

They contacted the officials and they got permission to do so. I can give you points in the same area that 

you mentioned where they put 60,000 to 70,000 bushels of grain on the ground. Then, immediately that 

was done, they brought pressure to bear to get the box-cars to move the grain that was on the ground, 

and they said that, ‗due to the fact that that grain is on the ground you get first priority for all cars that 

come into that point‘ and they did; and the line elevators sat there with nothing until this 60,000 bushels 

had moved off the ground. Then they reverted back to the same system of a car here and a car to this one 

and a car to that one. The Wheat Pool did not lose those 20 or 30 box-cars which were necessary to 

move that wheat off the ground. They did not go back and say to the Pool Elevators ‗we are not going to 

allot you any further cars until such time as the line elevators catch up.‘ They allocated a special 

shipment of cars to take care of that wheat on the ground; and I can think of several points that did 

likewise under those conditions, and received every co-operation in receiving cars. 

 

We agree it is a problem, and if this is the solution, we are certainly going to support it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The mover of the motion is about to exercise his right to close the debate. Any 

member who wishes to speak, should do so now. 

 

Mr. R.H. Wooff: — Mr. Speaker, I will just take a few moments. I might suggest to the hon. member 

for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) that the motion does not make any suggestion as to an answer or a way 

out. It suggests that the Federal Government implement some policy whereby farmers may deliver their 

grain to an elevator of their choice. 

 

I would probably be the first to agree with my hon. friend that it might not be a complete answer. I 

consider taking a stand such as that is talking all around the real issue. The hon. member for Arm River 

(Mr. Danielson) talked all around the real problem. He talked about carryovers and congestion, and we 

admit quite frankly that it is there; but that is not the point we are discussing. The point we want an 

answer to, the solution we are seeking is, under the stress of carryovers and congestion, that Pool 

members may deliver the percentage of their quotas to the elevator of their choice. 

 

The member for Arm River said that Nature could give the only answer . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — No. Let‘s be fair about this. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I said it would be a solution by crop failure or a 

great demand for export. How many times have I got to drive that back to you. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

24 

Mr. Wooff: — Well, I am sorry if I took him up wrongly; but I think he said that Nature had the only 

answer, but we didn‘t want it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No that‘s what I tried to tell you . . . 

 

Mr. Wooff: — That Nature had the only answer and we don‘t want it, and then he foresees a position in 

which we are always going to be in this jam (to use a slang term). Now, Nature was the only answer to 

the problem 50 years ago. It is admitted, quite frankly, that the only years at the turn of the century that 

there was not a congestion in the handling and shipping facilities were the crop-failure years. He had the 

farmers 50 years ago taken the position that this won‘t work, and there is nothing we can do about it, we 

would still be in the position we were in 50 years ago. But, they did do something. They said, ―We want 

certain legislation‖ — and that is what we are asking for. And they did compel the railway companies 

and the elevator companies to allow farmers to load grain over the platform and by-pass their facilities if 

they wished to. We are asking that the Pool member be allowed to by-pass the line elevator and use the 

facilities which he has helped to build up over a period of years. 

 

In closing, I want to say this. I am not suggesting that what I put forth this afternoon is a complete 

answer, but I will say that essentially it is what the Pool is asking for today. They believe the something 

like that is practical. The permit book is becoming an established thing and it is going to be permanent, 

and so long as there are quotas I think it will be; but to take up the position that this won‘t work or we 

cannot do anything about it, is merely wishful thinking and by-passing any solution that may be 

presented. 

 

The question being put on the motion (Mr. Wooff), it was agreed to unanimously. 

 

RE PRAIRIE FARM ASSISTANCE ACT 

 

Moved by Mr. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale), seconded by Mr. Feusi: 

 

―That this Assembly respectfully recommends that the Federal Government introduce the necessary 

amendments to the Prairie Farm Assistance Act to provide that assistance to grain growers be given on 

a more equitable basis, and specifically providing that: 

 

―(1) the benefits under the Act be increased; 

 

―(2) where spring flooding has prevented seeding of wheat, the intended wheat acreage be taken into 

account along with the actual acreage seeded to wheat in estimating the average wheat yield; 

 

―(3) the size of the area on which average yields are determined for payments be reduced.‖ 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, the Prairie Farm Assistance Act has proved to be 

one of the most acceptable 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

25 

Acts passed by the Federal Government in the interests of the farmers of western Canada. Passed 

primarily as a relief measure, it has become, in the minds of our farmers, synonymous with crop 

insurance. Farmers have accepted it as such, and have willingly paid their one per cent levy, even in the 

northern part of the province where awards under the Act have been few and far between. This year, 

awards were made to many farmers, who, in the past, never thought to benefit from P.F.A.A. Because of 

this widespread experience there has come a demand that the Act be amended so that the many 

inequalities that have become apparent will be remedied. 

 

Members will recall the efforts of the Federal Government of the ‗thirties to assist the hard-hit farmers 

of those days. In 1931, the Bennett government bonused the wheat producer by adding 5 cents a bushel 

to the price the farmer received for his wheat. The total cost to the Government of this bonus was $13 

million. Besides this, in that year, relief to the extent of $10 million was paid to those farmers who had 

no crops. The Bennett government, too, made provisions for the Wheat Board before they were 

defeated, in 1935. The Liberals who were returned to office that year operated the wheat pool with the 

initial price of 87½ cents, and as a result of the price of wheat being below that figure, farmers received 

bonuses to the extent of $6,182,000, in the crop year 1935-36. 

 

In 1936, and again in 1937, the Liberals decided the Wheat Board would not accept delivery of grain 

unless the price of wheat fell below 90 cents a bushel, No. 1 Northern, f.o.b. Fort William. As the price 

for those two years averaged above this figure, the Wheat Board did not function as a buying agency 

during 1936 or 1937. 

 

In 1938, the Wheat Board price was set at 80 cents, and the average price was in the neighbourhood of 

60 cents, so bonuses to farmers were paid by the Federal Government to the extent of $48 million, on 

account of Wheat Board overpayments. In the same year, relief was paid amounting to $12 million. This 

was a grand total, for bonuses and relief in that one year, of $60 million. 

 

Because of the large amount involved and because farmers with good crops were receiving the 

maximum benefits, the Federal Government sought another way of assisting the farmers of western 

Canada in their time of need. As a result, the Prairie Farm Assistance Act was passed, in 1939. This Act 

made provisions to pay those farmers who suffered crop failures, the payments to be made on a 

cultivated acreage basis. An important provision embodied in the Act was that the farmers themselves 

should pay part of the cost of the assistance provided, by contributing one per cent of all grains sold by 

them, with the exception of flax. This principle of contributions by those benefiting from the Act was 

later written into the Unemployment Insurance Act of 1941. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not go into details of the Act, except in connection with the recommendations made 

in the motion I am moving. The first recommendation — ―that the benefits under the Act be increased‖ 

— should meet with the unanimous approval of the members of this Legislature. It is generally known 

that payments under P.F.A.A. to farmers suffering crop failure vary from a minimum of $200 to a 

maximum of $500, depending upon the degree of crop failure and the amount of land which the 

individual had under cultivation. A farmer, to qualify for the maximum, must have at least 400 acres 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

26 

under cultivation. It is also generally known that benefits payable have not been changed since 1939, 

when the Act was passed, and I think that we would generally agree that those benefits were not too 

high, even in 1939. 

 

Today, due to the inroads of inflation, there has been a tremendous change in the value of P.F.A.A. 

awards. Farmers‘ cost of production and costs of living have risen from 99.4 in 1939, to 225 in 1954. 

This, Mr. Speaker, is according to the Dominion Bureau of Statistics figures, based on the period 1935-

39 equalling 100. This means it costs the farmer now $225, whereas in 1939 his cost for identical 

services and goods was just below $100. In terms of P.F.A.A. payments, the minimum payment of $200, 

compared to 1939 costs, has a value of only $88.88. The maximum payment of $500 will only do what 

$222.22 would do in 1939. It has been estimated that the average P.F.A.A. payment, this year, will be 

$250. In terms of 1939 value, this represents only $111.11. Surely, Mr. Speaker, the time is long past 

when benefits paid under P.F.A.A. should be increased. 

 

Those who argue against increased benefits quote the amounts the farmers pay into the Prairie Farm 

Assistance fund on account of the one per cent levy, and contrast it with the total amounts paid to 

farmers as assistance in time of need. It is true that farmers have, since the inception of the Act, received 

in benefits much more than they have paid into the fund. Since 1939, up to and including the crop year 

of 1953-4, farmers have paid into the fund a total of $83,217,000, and have received, in awards, under 

the Act, the sum of $146,312,000. Over this 15-year period there has been subsidization for the farmers 

of western Canada by the Federal Government to the extent of $63,095,000. 

 

This is not so great an amount of money when one considers that the continuing efficiency of the 

farming industry is so essential to the welfare of our country as a whole; $63 million in benefits to the 

farming industry of western Canada, spread over 15 years, is not so large a sum when we compare it 

with the $60 million in relief and wheat Board bonuses in the one crop year, 1938-39. Nor does it appear 

huge when we compare it to the $248 million contributed by the Federal Government to the 

Unemployment Insurance Act fund, since 1942. It certainly does not appear great alongside the $207 

million paid, since 1942, for freight assistance on western feed grain for the benefit of livestock 

producers in eastern Canada and in British Columbia. And surely, the sum sinks in size when we realize 

that the amount paid to the gold mining industry, during the six-year period from 1948 to 1953, under 

the Gold Mining Assistance Act, was $65,500,000. 

 

Nor is the figure so alarming when we compare the first five years during which awards were made 

under P.F.A.A., with the experience of the last five years. During the first five years in which awards 

were made, farmers received a total of $45,601,000; while the one per cent levy for the same years 

totalled $16,561,000. For this period of low grain prices, awards were almost three times the amount of 

the levies paid in. For the last five years, 1949-53 inclusive, the one per cent levy realized $43,559,000, 

while awards paid out were $41,440,000. In that five-year period, farmers of western Canada paid into 

the fund $2 million more than was paid out to them. These figures do not include this crop year, when it 

is estimated that $25 million will be paid; but it doesn‘t include 1949 awards, when $22,050,000 was 

paid out — the highest amount paid in benefits in any one year up to 1954. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

27 

You will note, Mr. Speaker, that the awards paid under the Act were just about the same for the two 

periods — $45 million for the first five years in which payments were made; and $41 million for the last 

five years. The amounts paid into the fund, on the other hand, by the farmers increased from $16 million 

to $43 million. This increase is due to two things: first, increased production, and second, improved 

prices for our grain. 

 

I would draw your attention, Mr. Speaker, to the difference between the awards paid to farmers and the 

total amount of the one per cent levy for the 15-year period. The difference between $146 million and 

$83 million is $63 million of a difference — that much more was paid to farmers that they contributed 

over the 15-year period. This works out at a yearly average of $4,200,000 paid by the Dominion 

Government to farmers who have suffered crop failures. This, sir, is not a large subsidy when we 

compare it with the $18 million yearly average paid as freight assistance for the benefit of the farmers of 

eastern Canada and of British Columbia, or the $11 million yearly average paid to the gold mining 

industry. 

 

If the government at Ottawa had contributed to P.F.A.A. on the same basis as it has contributed to the 

gold mining industry the farmers of western Canada would not have had to contribute a single cent 

towards the cost of P.F.A.A. for the whole 15-year period. In fact there would have been money left 

over, as 11 times 15 is $165 million, and awards paid out under P.F.A.A. were only $146 million. 

Furthermore, if Ottawa‘s contribution to P.F.A.A. had been at the same rate as for freight assistance for 

the benefit of livestock producers in the east and the west, there would have been 18 times 15, or $270 

million for P.F.A.A. With that sum, benefits could have been very nearly doubled without any 

contribution by the western farmers. Surely there can be no justification of assistance under P.F.A.A. in 

1954-55 on a scale drawn up to conform to 1939 conditions. 

 

The second recommendation of this motion derives from a resolution passed at Tisdale, last summer, at 

the meeting of Provincial Cabinet Ministers and municipal officials. At that time there was a widespread 

fear in north-eastern Saskatchewan that the area would not qualify for P.F.A.A. payments under the 

present regulations, although spring flooding had caused considerable crop failure. As a result, the 

municipal officials proposed and passed unanimously a resolution requesting that where spring flooding 

had prevented seeding of wheat, the intended wheat acreage be used in determining average yields for 

the purposes of the Act. 

 

Due to the spring flooding conditions in that area, to which reference has been made many times during 

this Session, the large acreage intended for wheat remained unseeded. On the other hand, neighbouring 

fields, which had not been flooded, were showing good stands of wheat which promised high yields. 

According to P.F.A.A. regulations the actual yield of seeded acreage determined the eligibility of the 

area. 

 

Let us suppose, Mr. Speaker, that the farmers in an area which had been flooded, were able to seed only 

20 per cent of the acreage that they had intended to sow. If this seeded acreage had averaged 25 bushels, 

the area 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

28 

would not qualify for P.F.A.A. Yet the farmers had been able to sow only 20 per cent, or one-fifth, of 

their wheat crop. Taking into consideration the whole acreage intended to be seeded, the average yield 

would be not 25 bushels, but one-fifth of that or only 5 bushels, which would qualify the area for 

P.F.A.A. payments. 

 

Figures on the basis of a farmer‘s intended wheat acreage where spring flooding has occurred is only 

fair. It would present no difficulties to P.F.A.A. officials. Farmers could declare in advance the acreage 

which they intended to sow with various grains, and these figures would be used in establishing the 

average yields. Of course, if other grains had been sown on the land intended for wheat, and had been 

harvested, that would be taken into account; but in north-eastern Saskatchewan, in 1954, many fields 

intended for wheat were first flooded and then, due to the excessive rainfall throughout the summer, 

never became dry enough to permit seeding of any grain. I understand, from conversations with other 

members of this House, that this condition was not confined to north-eastern Saskatchewan, but was 

common to the whole eastern part of the province. 

 

P.F.A.A. was designed primarily to assist farmers who had suffered crop loss as a result of drought. At 

the present time it has been extended to take into account loss from almost every cause, except spring 

flooding. We feel it should be extended to cover this situation as well. 

 

The third recommendation in the motion deals with the size of the area on which average yields are 

determined for the purposes of awarding benefits. There have been numerous amendments to the Act 

since 1939. Most of them had to do with changing the size of the area which could qualify for awards. 

Originally, the Act made the township the basis for determining crop failure. The township is still the 

basis; but amendments to the Act declare, in one part, that one-half the township where yield 

qualifications are met, is eligible for an award as though it were a complete township. Another part says 

one-sixth of a township is eligible for award as though it were a complete township. 

 

This reducing of the size of the area that can qualify for benefits is a step in the right direction. The 

smaller we can get the qualifying area, the less likelihood there is of discrimination under the Act. Yet 

no single section of land should qualify for awards when the farms for miles around have good yields. It 

is only proper that crop failure should be general before awards to farmers are paid. 

 

The smallest area under P.F.A.A. which can qualify as a complete unit, separated from other areas, is a 

half township or 18 sections, and this area must be a rectangular block of sections. Yet crop failure does 

not occur in a square or a rectangular pattern. Every farmer here knows of areas where rains have cut 

across townships with the result that crops receiving the benefits of the moisture would be good, while a 

mile away, on either side, crops would be suffering; and flooding, too, does not occur in a uniform 

rectangular pattern. 

 

The smallest area that can qualify and then only when it is bordering an eligible township is six 

adjoining sections. It seems to me that 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

29 

this should be modified. Crop failure does not respect township boundary lines. It is certainly 

discriminatory that a farmer living alongside the boundary of an eligible township, whose crop may be 

less than that of his neighbour across the road, should be refused assistance unless the crop failure 

outside the eligible township comprises an area of at least six adjoining sections. Why could not that 

eligible area be extended by single sections to the end of the crop failure area, whether that takes in one, 

18 or any number of sections? 

 

I must repeat what I said at the beginning, namely, that the principle behind P.F.A.A. has been accepted 

by farmers of western Canada. The Rt. Hon. J.G. Gardiner, replying to criticism of some features of the 

Bill when he was introducing it in the House of Commons, asked that the Bill have a period of trial, 

following which changes could be made as directed by experience. Some changes have been made, but 

these have not gone far enough. Farmers would welcome further changes removing the discriminatory 

features of the Act as regards size and shape of areas qualifying for awards under the Act, and certainly 

would appreciate a more realistic approach on the part of Ottawa to the problem of farm financing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would move this resolution, seconded by the hon. member for Pelly (Mr. Feusi). 

 

Mr. Arnold Feusi (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, in speaking briefly to the motion as presented by the 

member for Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. Willis) I have in mind a situation back in the Pelly Constituency that 

made me rather happy to second the resolution. We have had a situation of flooding, during the last two 

years, over an area that was much too small to come under the Act. The area was very irregular. The 

area is probably some of the best farming land that the province has, because the bottom lands of the 

valley are probably three to four feet in thickness or depth of black soil, and the yields throughout the 

years have been 50 to 60 bushels to the acre. But for two years now we have had crop failure over the 

river-bottom areas of the Assiniboine. I could give you an example here, Mr. Speaker, of the year 1953, 

when there were 3,350 acres completely flooded out, and another 500 that were not sown. In 1954, there 

were 4,666 acres flooded out and 1,700 not sown. These records come from the Department of 

Agriculture through the agricultural committee of several municipalities in the area. This gives the 

House an idea of the need of having the qualifying area brought down to a much smaller size. 

 

Another problem that presents itself is that we know the farmers are more and more considering the Act 

as a type of insurance. It is a step in that direction, but more than a few of our farmers have received a 

jolt, this past fall. The farmers will never have a sincere insurance scheme in P.F.A.A. as long as the 

Liberal party uses the scheme for a political organization. 

 

Some Govt. Members; — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Fuesi: — We have had . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Just stay on the track. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

30 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Feusi: — Mr. Speaker, the fact is that the farmers will not come first under such a situation. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You just can‘t keep away from it, can you? 

 

Mr. Feusi: — I would like to give you an example down in our area where two businessmen were 

assessors. Now, surely, if this is a farm insurance scheme and, goodness knows, there were plenty of 

farmers who were qualified as assessors and had the need of a little bit of assistance, but they were 

unable to get in under the Act, or under the set-up, and do a chore for the farmers. I just point this out 

because this past fall, we have had this spectacle through our country, and it is evident in our papers, 

where the Federal Minister of Agriculture moved officials of P.F.A.A. like checkers in and out again; in 

fact, so much so that you cannot very well pin an official down from day to day. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — They don‘t even know! 

 

Mr. Feusi: — It reminds me of part of a little story, of years gone by: ―In again, out again, home again, 

Finnegan‖. In fact, it has got now to the stage where I think the member for Rosthern (Mr. Carr) happens 

to be ‗Finnegan‘. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Have you got another one like that? 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — It fell pretty dead over there. 

 

Mr. Feusi: — I would like to point out that it is not fair to the officials, and it is not fair to the people 

who expect benefits from this Act, the people who have contributed for many years. They like to see it 

run strictly on a business basis, and not on a political patronage basis. 

 

Mr. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Pork barrel! 

 

Mr. Feusi: — There is another point I would like to bring out, Mr. Speaker. The member for Melfort 

pointed out the benefits that the gold producers and others have received from the Federal Government 

over a similar period of time that the P.F.A.A. Act has been in existence, and I cannot help but call to 

mind the flurry with which the Federal Government, this past winter, brought about the increase in 

benefits to citizens who came under the Unemployment Insurance Act. Herein was an example where 

they could have extended similar benefits to our farming population who were just as stricken. There are 

many of our young folks on the farms today who are not on the unemployment records; they are 

marking time in the homes of their parents. The parents are stricken through crop failure, and I believe 

that an extension of these payments similar to what was done under the Unemployment Act would have 

been enjoyed or appreciated very much. 

 

Up in the north-eastern part of the province, I have checked recently, and I have found areas that we 

figured were very hard hit, quarter-section areas, that, this year, they have not qualified, the yield was 

just 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

31 

a little in excess of 8 bushels, township after township. Certainly there should have been some leeway 

given in a situation such as this. I know these folks are very hard hit, and, in closing, I would just state 

that the scheme as proposed many years ago has had to be modified, and it will have to be modified 

again; but we would like to see it done along strictly business lines that will bring to our people the 

needed benefits. They have contributed to this scheme loyally and without any comment or reneging on 

their responsibilities. Not once have we heard it from the north. They have contributed through all the 

years during which the benefits were given out to the south and south-west and, this year, they did look 

forward to assistance very much, and we regret that the assistance could not have been extended on a 

larger pattern than was done. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, might I ask the speaker a question? Am I to understand that this is the 

first year you have had a bonus in your constituency? 

 

Mr. Feusi: — Yes, to my knowledge, it is. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Well, I would just like to say this. I was interested in your remarks, particularly with 

respect to the farmer on the quarter-section, that the blocks were too large, that the blocks should be 

small, that the rectangles should be cut out, and that you had been contributing for years. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You are now speaking to the motion. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — . . . to the upkeep of the people of the southwest. I would like to put on the record that 

when the P.F.A.A. was first brought into force, the south-west received a bonus for 11 years out of the 

first 12 years. Eleven out of 12 years, and it was the farmers of the south-west who have pioneered in all 

the changes that have been made in the P.F.A. Act up to date. We did not face a situation such as 

mentioned in the resolution, where spring flooding has prevented the seeding of wheat. We have never 

had that condition, and I can see that the Act had not foreseen such conditions; but you mentioned that 

the boundary lines were drawn in the wrong places, the boundary lines should be extended. 

 

I would point out that you did not show where a crop failure begins and where it ends. There would have 

to be a boundary line somewhere and crop failure areas just don‘t give ‗Farmer Jones‘ 30 bushels and 

the next man five. It goes from five gradually up to eight to 10 to 12, and the difficulty there is where to 

draw the boundary line between a crop failure area and where you are coming out of the crop failure 

area. The experience up west has proved that to put it on a quarter-section basis would be impossible for 

operation, or even on the basis of a section. It would have to be on the basis of a block, but not 

necessarily on the basis of a rectangular block. 

 

I thought it would be well just to point out some of these things — that 11 out of 12 years, we had 

bonuses; many of these changes were made, and it came to be quite the accepted thing there. We did not 

hear such 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

32 

suggestions as have been mentioned here, and that is why I asked if this year is the first when you have 

had a bonus, because those things had been talked about up there and finally the conclusion was reached 

that some of them were most impractical, and for that reason there is no longer pressure for those 

changes being made. But the increase in the benefits — yes; and number (2), where you have been 

prevented from seeding any wheat as a result of flooding, then I think by all means it should be amended 

so that you could base your judgment of the yield of wheat on what you may have seeded if it had not 

been for the flooded conditions. There is no question that the size of the area in which the average yield 

is determined for payments should be reduced, but I just wanted to point out to the member the 

impossibility of attempting, first, to classify P.F.A.A. payments as crop insurance — it was not meant to 

be that; and secondly, the impractibility of attempting to put it on a quarter-section basis. 

 

Mr. Feusi: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a correction here. There was no implication from this 

side of the House that it be put on a quarter-section basis. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, I have a few words to say regarding these proposed 

changes in the P.F.A.A. scheme. I do not entirely agree with some of the statements that have been 

made. While I agree with them generally, I think that, at the outset, when the P.F.A.A. was first 

introduced it was one of the most acceptable schemes for western farmers that the Federal Government 

had ever introduced, and I think the scheme in itself, at that time, was acceptable in its original form. 

You bring in a plan, and obviously, from time to time it requires changes, but I do not believe that 

western farmers ever anticipated that this plan would fall into the category it is now in. 

 

I concur in some of the statements made by the hon. member for Pelly (Mr. Feusi) and his objections 

could have been more critical; and likewise those of the mover, the member for Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. 

C.G. Willis), but for the fact that they are not from an area where P.F.A.A. has been paid out for a 

number of years. We in the Battlefords have not been as unfortunate as the people in the area around 

Maple Creek, but I would say that up in the north-west, farmers have received, on an average, since the 

inception of P.F.A.A. crop failure bonus, very close to one year out of three or four. 

 

In looking over the roster of these P.F.A.A. Inspectors, some of them are objecting to these people being 

used for political purposes. I am objecting to them being there at all. They are not necessary. The whole 

thing is ridiculous. They took months and months last fall. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Order is right. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — May I suggest to the hon. member that he is transgressing pretty much from the 

resolution. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I am speaking to the resolution, Mr. Speaker. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

33 

Mr. Cameron: — That is not in the resolution at all. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — All right, I will move an amendment, then, to the resolution, Mr. Speaker, and speak to 

that. Is that permissible? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Move it, and we‘ll all debate it. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Yes, certainly, I will move it. I will move an amendment to this motion: 

 

―That the Federal Government utilize existing agencies, namely, the information available through the 

permit book in the elevators and the municipal secretaries and their elected council . . . ― 

 

Some Govt. Member: — They would do that, all right. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Oh yes, they would do it — as little as they possibly can. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Load it all onto the secretary. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Put it onto the secretary, yes, the secretary in every municipality could handle this. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Let us get your amendment. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Keep those people quiet on the other side of the House, and I will finish my 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, you have to move your amendment now. If you are moving an amendment, we 

want it. It must be written. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I will move the adjournment of this debate, then, Mr. Speaker, and I will prepare an 

amendment. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly resumed, March 3rd, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Brown 

(Bengough): 

 

―That this Assembly, recognizing that the decline in net farm income resulting from the failure to 

establish a national agricultural policy based on parity and orderly marketing, has adversely affected 

our whole Canadian economy, calls upon the Federal Government to convene a Federal-Provincial 

Agricultural Conference to draft a comprehensive agricultural policy, for submission to Parliament at 

the earliest possible date, and that will provide farmers of Canada with their fair share of the net 

national income; the said Conference to have particular reference to: 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

34 

(a) the establishing of national marketing boards for livestock, dairy and poultry products as a means 

of ensuring price stability and orderly marketing; 

 

(b) the effecting of long-term contracts for agricultural products as a further means of price 

stabilization; and 

 

(c) the establishment of price supports to the producer, which shall be related to parity based on an 

acceptable formula. 

 

―And further, That this Assembly recommends that the Government of Saskatchewan take all 

necessary steps, upon consummation of the policy herein referred to, to assure its proper and 

immediate implementation in this Province.‖ 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I am rather disappointed that the hon. member who just 

sat down was not given time enough to write out his amendment, because we might have had a little 

livelier debate than you are going to get from me. 

 

I might say that not long ago I had prepared a rather voluminous speech on this resolution, and I was a 

little disappointed that circumstances turned out so that I was not able to deliver it. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Get somebody to read it for you now. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Now that we have got kind of humoured down to more reasonable terms, I am not 

going to dwell on this resolution for any length of time. I think it is quite important to some extent, 

although I think that the resolution is very poorly worded. The resolution, in the first place, refers only 

to agriculture. 

 

I am not going to argue that these things may not come about, but I am gong to argue that a Federal-

Provincial Agricultural conference is not going to bring them about, because the cause of the net 

earnings of the farmer is certainly not the fault of the policies of the Federal Government. I think it can 

fairly be established that the high earnings of the farmers have come about as a result of the policies of 

the Federal Government. I do not think anyone can argue and say that our wheat prices are not the 

highest in the world, today, except maybe for the United States. I do not think anyone can say that our 

dairy products are lower than any other place in the world, except maybe the United States. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — What about the cost of production? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — And I do not know where you would sell our wheat for any more then we are getting 

for it, today, and that is partly as a result of the agricultural policy of the Federal Government. But I can 

argue, truthfully, that the actual cost of production can be attributed to this Government here in 

Saskatchewan to a large extent, as a result of their policies. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

35 

And also I can say that this C.C.F. party is not entirely void of the responsibility for the increased price 

of agricultural implements and other goods that the farmer has to buy in order to produce his wheat. If 

my hon. friends want me to go into detail on those things, I think I can prove every point of this. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — Let‘s hear you do it. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Not only has this Government been responsible for the farmers not getting all the price 

that they might have got for their products, but they have also been responsible for increases in taxes and 

levies of all kinds that have gone into the cost of production. Many of those arguments already have 

been delivered in this House, and I do not know whether I should take up the time to repeat them. But 

when this C.C.F. Government here is shedding crocodile tears for the farmers, then I would say that they 

should check up on some of their own actions with respect to what they have done to increase the costs 

and reduce the revenue that the farmer has received since they came into power. 

 

I venture to say that it did not help the farmer any when we had the railway strike in 1950, right in the 

midst of harvest; and when the Federal Government called in the Unions and the Railways and 

demanded that they settle it; and after they had settled it, they wanted to order them to go to work 

immediately, and brought a resolution into the House of Commons, and what did the C.C.F. 

representatives in Ottawa do at that time? Every one of them voted against them going back to work, 

except one member in the House of Commons — every one of them. 

 

Premier Douglas: — They were already back to work. 

 

Mr. Lopston: — They still wanted to stay out. 

 

Premier Douglas: — They were back at work before Parliament even met. 

 

Mr. Lopston: — They certainly were not. The resolution is right in Hansard. And I see that there was 

only one C.C.F. member in the House that did not vote against ordering the men back on the road. 

 

Then I might say that it certainly did not help the selling of our 1950 frozen crop when the Minister of 

Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) got up in a convention in Saskatoon, and said that the 80 cents initial 

payment on that wheat was all that they were going to get. Now, surely, Mr. Speaker, a Minister holding 

that responsible position should have known better than to make that statement, even if he thought it was 

right! It certainly was not going to help the sale of that frozen wheat to the United States or any other 

place, when the Minister of Agriculture of the province that produced most of that wheat, said that that 

was all it was worth, in other words. Well, then, I would say that the rehearsing of the Premier, himself, 

on that ‗give-away‘ policy, has certainly not helped bring revenue to the farmers. 

 

Another one they had here was a very interesting one and an important one, and that was the ‗have-

regard‘ clause of years ago, when the 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

36 

hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs (Hon. Mr. McIntosh), out of the blue, when the conference was 

pending for an increased price under the ‗have-regard‘ clause, got up in this House and told the world 

that the British people had already paid about $280 million more for this wheat than they needed to have 

done. Well, now, surely, any reasonable man will realize that there wasn‘t much chance of getting any 

further payment after that statement had been made. 

 

I would like to say something about this last barrage that came forward here, the other day. We were 

talking about subsidies — subsidizing our dairy products. We all know that butter has been subsidized. 

There was a floor set at a price which, I think it is fair to say, is about as high as it is any place in the 

world, today — at 58 cents. That price is accumulating a stock which means that something has to be 

done to get rid of it, as all subsidized goods generally do accumulate. Then, when the Federal 

Government decided that they would ask the institutions throughout Canada to use butter in their 

institution, gaols and hospitals, in preference to margarine, I think it is fair to say that every province in 

Canada accepted that offer of buying butter at two-thirds of the cost to the Federal Government in 

preference to margarine. 

 

Premier Douglas: — May I ask my hon. friend a question? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — . . . Margarine, except Saskatchewan. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Will he tell me which provinces have accepted it, and on what authority he is 

making his statement? 

 

Mr. Lopston: — Well, I haven‘t heard of any one refusing to use it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Have you heard of any who have accepted it? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Yes. 

 

Premier Douglas: — How many? Which ones? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, Ontario is one. Manitoba, I understand, is another. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Can I find any authority for those statements? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, there are press reports. Can you say that anyone has refused to use it? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Has the hon. member got the press reports? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Can you say that anyone has refused to accept it? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I am not making the speech. The hon. gentleman 

has . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — You are now. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Just a moment, I am up on a point of order. The hon. gentleman has just made a 

statement in which he said that every province except Saskatchewan has accepted the offer. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

37 

Mr. Loptson: — As far as I know, they have. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Has the hon. gentleman any public statements by any Provincial Government to 

substantiate that remark? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, say who hasn‘t. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You are making the statement, not me. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Sure, I made the statement, and so far as I know, they have. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! In any event, the hon. member is accepting the responsibility for his statement. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — In any case, we have the statement of the hon. Minister of Health (Hon. Mr. Bentley) 

who said that margarine is as good as butter and there was no reason why they should pay any more for 

it. Well, that is what this Government has done. Instead of helping agriculture, I say they have done a lot 

of harm in respect to the amount that they might have received for their products. 

 

I might also say that they are also indirectly responsible for the high cost of implements. I am not going 

to blame this Government for that, but I am going to blame it on to the C.C.F. party and their affiliated 

Labour Union leaders, particularly C.C.L. They are continuously advocating higher wages, in spite of 

the fact that the price of farm products is going down. Mr. Speaker, you may ask why should they be 

doing that. Well, there is a reason for the C.C.F. party wanting labour to get more wages than the 

manufacturers can afford to pay. There is a reason why they want agriculture to make less profits then 

they are entitled to make, because, if you look back into their history and into their platform, and check 

up on the statements of their leaders, they claim that a C.C.F. party cannot function or get any place 

unless there is a depression. I think that is true. And in order to obtain that end there are two things 

necessary . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — If I wanted a depression, I would vote Liberal! That would be the surest way to 

get one. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — First of all, you have to depress the earnings of agriculture. Next, you have to raise the 

price of manufactured goods in order that they will pile up on the shelves and become unsaleable; and 

when you cannot sell your products then, of course, there is mass unemployment, and when there is 

mass unemployment there is no more sale for agricultural products. 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, this conference is not a solution for our troubles, today. I suggest that every fair-

minded person in Canada realizes that our prosperity depends entirely on our ability to sell our surplus 

on the world market. I think we will all agree on that is the important part as far as we are concerned. In 

order to sell our products on the world markets we have to be within the price range to compete with 

other competitors for that world trade; and in order to compete, naturally, we have to have a price range 

which is equitable to the producer as well as to the man who is going to buy it. The result is that every 

man and woman, no matter what political leanings 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

38 

they have, is interested in that very fact, in order to establish a price level whereby we can dispose of 

these commodities and keep up our standard of living. 

 

Then the question is, how are we going to do it? I would say, not through a political conference, that is 

not going to get you any place. The Premier of this province and the Minister of Agriculture going to 

Ottawa to raise ‗hell‘ for high prices for our agricultural products — it has to be on a parity with the 

high-priced manufactured goods, which have already priced themselves out of the world market. 

 

I suggest that we should forget all about that, and use a little common sense, and get all these factors and 

factions together, get labour together, who, in some instances I think, are getting more than their share; 

get agriculture in with them, which I think probably is not getting its share; get the manufacturers in to 

the conference; and get the governments in to the conference, because one says that the labour is too 

high, others say the taxes are too high, some say that agricultural products are too high and that is raising 

the cost of living. Well, let us get together and see who is wrong and who is right and I think, if that is 

done, it should be done in a non-political manner, and done from the standpoint of the best interests of 

the nation and in order to try to devise a way whereby we can preserve our standing in the world market, 

as we have had it in the last ten years since the last war. I understand that we have gone up as high as 

being the third largest exporting nation in the world, and surely, Mr. Speaker, let us lay down the 

gauntlets as far as politics are concerned, and partyism is concerned, and do some independent thinking 

and devise some scheme whereby we can preserve our position in the world market and make a little for 

ourselves in order to preserve the standard of living that we have been enjoying. 

 

To that end, Mr. Speaker, I am going to move an amendment to the motion, seconded by Mr. Danielson 

(Arm River) — the dead end kid: 

 

That all the words after ―from‖ in the second line be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

―the high cost of production, calls upon the Federal Government to set up an independent committee or 

commission to investigate the cause of this high cost of production with a view to establishing the true 

facts as to the relationship of price of commodities entering the production of food and manufactured 

goods and services and to make such recommendations as it sees fit to bring out price structure to a 

competitive basis and to maintain full employment.‖ 

 

If you wish, I will repeat the resolution as it will be after it is amended. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I think most people, Mr. Speaker, can follow that. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I won‘t take up time by reading it, then. Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to submit that if my 

hon. friends really are honest 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

39 

about what they are asking and trying to promote, they certainly cannot vote against this amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The debate is now on the amendment. 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, what I have to say will just take about three minutes. I 

do not know whether the amendment is in order, in view of the fact that it really is a substitute motion, 

and since it does not deal with the basic question of the resolution, which has to do with marketing. But 

leaving that out, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out three things which I think are wrong with the 

amendment. 

 

The first is that it strikes out all of the heart of the motion, thereby completely failing to deal with the 

fundamental things which agriculture requires, namely, the establishment of national marketing boards, 

and long-term contracts for export trade and the agricultural prices support Act. All of that is struck out. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — That could come from the recommendations. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It is all struck out by this amendment. In other words, to vote for the amendment 

is to vote against the things listed hereunder — (1), (2), (3). 

 

Secondly, this amendment asks for an investigation of the high cost of production by gentlemen whose 

party took off price controls and are, therefore, today responsible for the high cost of production. They 

do not need a Royal Commission to tell them why they have a high cost of production. They have a high 

cost of production because the party to which they belong took off price controls and left the people of 

Canada to the ravenous wolves — big profit and big business! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Great Britain took of price controls. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Great Britain kept on price controls for quite a long time and continued to 

implement anti-inflationary policies which our government has never implemented. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask my hon. friend a question. Is there any free nation in 

the world today, that has price control? 

 

Premier Douglas: — There are nations in the world, today, who are implementing anti-inflationary 

policies which our government has never done. We did not ask that price controls be kept on as a 

permanent measure. My hon. friend thinks he knows something about that. He has demonstrated that he 

knows nothing about it. I will try to give him a very elementary lesson in economics such as you would 

give to a Grade 1 child. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — Where would you get it? 

 

Premier Douglas: — What you had at the end of the war was people with a tremendous reservoir of 

purchasing power and an inadequate 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

40 

amount of goods. To take off price controls at that time was bound to result in a terrific inflation, 

because there was more money than there were goods. What we asked for was that price controls be 

kept on until our manufacturing facilities had been turned over from wartime production to peacetime 

production, and that, when there were goods to match the money, then the price controls could gradually 

be removed — when there was a balance between the two. That is what was done in Britain. They were 

removed when there was a balance. We didn‘t do it in this country. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — . . . should have given you the whole lot. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — The third thing, Mr. Speaker — my hon. friend is trying to make up for the speech 

he didn‘t make a few minutes ago. I say that is the second thing that is wrong. There is no need to 

investigate why there is a high cost of production. The high cost of production was brought about 

because the Federal Government refused to implement anti-inflationary policies. 

 

The third thing is a typical resolution of the Liberal party who believe that the only way that you can 

deal with the problems of the farmer is to reduce the standard of living of the worker. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, if that were right . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What a silly argument! 

 

Premier Douglas: — ―If the worker didn‘t get such high wages, the farmer would be better off.‖ That is 

what he said. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He never said that. High wages . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — If my friend will just keep quiet — you can make all the speeches you like 

afterwards. If you can‘t make any better speeches than you made, this afternoon, you would be better to 

go back home. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Oh, yeah! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member for Arm River can have an opportunity to speak on both the 

amendment and the motion. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He may speak, but he won‘t say anything. Anybody knows that before he gets 

started. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — We‘re not hearing anything, now. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal party has always worked on the thesis that if you 

have low enough wages you will have agricultural prosperity. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

41 

Mr. Cameron: — That‘s not true. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The whole proof of this country is to the contrary. If low wages would have made 

prosperity, this should have been a rich country in the 1930‘s. The fact of the matter is that the farmer 

could not sell, even in the domestic market, because the worker did not have the purchasing power. And 

the gentleman opposite tells us that if you took down the wages for the railwaymen, if you took down 

the wages for the farm implement manufacturer, if you took down the wages of the people in industry, 

the farmer would be well off. The farmer would be worse off! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — He never said that. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The hon. gentleman said it, and there is no use of my friends over there trying to 

patch it up. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member made his speech and it should be on the records, and as far 

as I can remember, he did make that statement. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, my hon. friend over there is making a speech for 

me that I never said. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Premier is just replying to what the hon. member for Saltcoats said. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I never said it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It is not necessary for anyone else to deny something which the hon. member, himself, 

is not getting up on a point of privilege to deny. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — He just denied it. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, he said that I had suggested that labour should have lower wages and in 

that way it would make . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the records will bear it out exactly. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I said just the opposite. I said if there are unemployed . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I just need to finish this sentence, I do not want to carry on the 

debate. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — If you are going to be too long-winded you had better wait until after supper to make 

your speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — I would have been finished in three minutes if the hon. member hadn‘t interrupted 

every two or three minutes. He has made 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

42 

such a poor hatch of it already that he has to try and patch it up. 

 

The implication of this gentleman‘s remarks, Mr. Speaker, is that the high cost of production is caused 

by high wages. He said nothing about high profits. The fact remains that the only way farmers are going 

to have decent income is for the people who buy their goods in the cities to have decent wages, and that 

is contrary to the whole Liberal policy. As far as I am concerned, I do not think we need to debate this 

amendment at all. I am prepared right now to vote against it. First of all, because it is a negation of an 

agricultural policy which the Liberal party does not believe in, and does not want to vote on; Secondly, 

because it asks for an investigation into high production costs, when we know why we have high 

production costs, because we have a Liberal Government in Ottawa, controlled by big business; and 

further because these gentlemen opposite think the way to reduce production costs is to have low wages 

for the workers, and that puts the Liberal party exactly where it belongs, and as far as I am concerned, I 

am prepared to vote this amendment down right now. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I am not going to put the question. It being six o‘clock, the House will recess until 

7.30. 

 

7.30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, when the Premier was speaking, 

just before we called it six o‘clock, he made some statements in regard to what he thought the hon. 

member for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) had said, and he referred to what the hon. member for Saltcoats had 

said as a ‗silly argument‘. I would like to say that his interpretation was certainly silly; that the argument 

was sound. If he had been listening to what my hon. friend from Saltcoats said, then he might have made 

a lot better effort than he did, a few moments before we called it six o‘clock. His reference to labour and 

reference to high profits by some of the larger companies in Canada were not at all in comparison to 

what the hon. member for Saltcoats had said. 

 

The hon. member for Saltcoats also mentioned the fact that it was possible that there were corporations 

and companies in this country who probably were making a large profit, and the amendment to the 

motion recommends that we ask the Federal Government to set up a commission to investigate this 

particular problem. What is the difference between that and the suggestion of this Government and the 

plans of this Government in setting up a Royal Commission to investigate the problems with regard to 

agriculture and rural life in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — Not a thing. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Here we have a picture of a government in the province of Saskatchewan who are 

not prepared to deal with the obvious troubles that we find in this province in regard to agriculture and 

rural life, but they set up a Commission to investigate them — in other words, something to hide behind. 

Then, on the other hand, when we ask that a Commission should be set up by the Federal Government to 

investigate certain things in our economy, the Provincial Government of Saskatchewan claim to have all 

the answers. In my opinion, they haven‘t the answers to the problems here in Saskatchewan, so I think it 

would go without saying that they certainly haven‘t the answers to the problems for the entire Dominion 

of Canada. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

43 

The Premier also referred to the fact that the amendment had cut out the ‗heart‘ of the motion itself. I 

can agree with that, but after all, if this Government, as I have pointed out, are not prepared to deal with 

the problems in rural Saskatchewan — they say they haven‘t got the answers, and they would like the 

information from a Royal Commission, and I think they were justified in setting up that Commission — 

then I think they should be prepared to support the amendment to the motion that we have suggested, 

namely, that the Federal Government set up a Commission to investigate this very thing across Canada. I 

have no doubt that probably part of the main part of the motion could be contained in a report and 

recommendations from a Commission which we are suggesting might be set up. 

 

I had no intentions of speaking to the motion or the amendment, but I am going to say that I am certainly 

going to support the amendment because I do believe that it is the proper approach to the problems we 

are facing. However, I cannot support the motion as it exists because of the attitude of this Government 

with regard to our own little problem here in Saskatchewan. Perhaps I shouldn‘t say ‗little problem‘, 

because it is a tremendous problem, and I want to commend this Government for the actions they have 

taken, and I think that we are only asking that the Federal Government of Canada take similar action 

with regard to the problems mentioned in the motion. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will support the amendment and if the amendment is turned down, which I 

hope it will not be, because just as the member for Saltcoats has said, we are asking people of every 

political faith and from every walk of life — labourers, farmers, management and everybody else, to get 

together and try and find a solution to this problem, and I do not think there is any reason why anyone in 

this Chamber, no matter of what political faith he may be, could not whole-heartedly support the 

suggestion as contained in the proposed amendment to the motion. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural & Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, there are one or 

two remarks I would like to make in regard to the amendment. One cannot help but be amused at the 

difficulty some of the members on the other side of the House have in looking after the careless remarks 

made by the member for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson), and I think that when we get the transcript of the 

records we will find, then, that the hon. member did not refer to profits, but he referred to high wages of 

labour. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — That‘s what he meant, too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I do not want to dwell on that point, but my hon. friend, the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. McDonald), has introduced in the debate the Royal Commission on Agriculture and 

Rural Life in the province of Saskatchewan, and he is suggesting that this amendment would be asking 

for the same thing in the Federal field. Mr. Speaker, this amendment concentrates on one point only — 

the cost of production . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — No it doesn‘t. Read it. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

44 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . and leaves out other points which have certainly been recognized for a 

long time as being very important to agriculture. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Read the amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — There is certainly no comparison between this amendment and the request 

in it, and the setting up of a Royal Commission on Agriculture and Rural Life in Saskatchewan with the 

widest terms of reference. My hon. friend talked about the obvious solutions. Some of his friends were 

here in this House for a great many years, but they didn‘t take any steps to put into effect any ‗obvious‘ 

solutions. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You haven‘t suggested any here, either. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . and I would suggest . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Not one. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . that this amendment springs from a hope in the hearts of the hon. 

members opposite that they might escape from having to make a decision directly on the main motion. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Call the vote and you‘ll see. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Now I realize well what uncontrolled inflation has done to the cost of 

production. I think I realize it as well as anyone. I am not prepared to support the amendment because I 

think that question itself is taken care of in the resolution by its reference to parity. You cannot consider 

parity without taking into consideration the costs of production as well as the price you get for your 

products. 

 

I will have to oppose the amendment. 

 

The question being put on the amendment (Mr. Loptson), it was negatived by 24 votes against 8. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The debate is now on the main motion. 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer members to the last part of 

the motion: 

 

―And further, That this Assembly recommends that the Government of Saskatchewan take all 

necessary steps, upon consummation of the policy herein referred to, to assure its proper and 

immediate implementation in this Province.‖ 

 

If the policy so set out in this motion is carried forth in Ottawa, you will have national marketing boards 

for livestock, poultry and all products; you 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

45 

will have all long-term contracts for everything that is to be sold; you will have the establishment of 

price support for everything that the farmer produces, which shall be related to parity based on 

acceptable formula. 

 

Some Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Then I would ask you this: what is there left for the province of Saskatchewan to do? 

That is tagged on at the end. Instead of taking any bold initiative in the province of Saskatchewan, you 

expect us to pass a resolution like this, and then to tag yourselves on by saying — ―If and when Ottawa 

does all of this, we will, in the province of Saskatchewan, take the necessary steps to agree to it.‖ I never 

saw anyone hedging on an issue such as is done right here. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Do nothing! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Instead of standing up and facing the issue, you pass a resolution asking Ottawa to do 

all these things, to exempt us from having to do them, and then to say ―if and when this is done, we, in 

Saskatchewan, will tag along with it.‖ And you expect us to vote for that! 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I am interested in the contribution of the member for Maple 

Creek (Mr. Cameron). It is pretty obvious that the hon. member for Maple Creek, while he is seated 

here, his heart is in Ottawa. He is very concerned lest the government at Ottawa might be obligated to 

live up to its constitutional obligations. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I want something done in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — As he was reading the motion I could not help asking myself, ―who else can 

establish a national marketing board for livestock and dairy products and poultry products; who else can 

establish them?‖ 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — Such a wise owl! 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — I suggest that a national marketing board cannot be established by anyone 

else except the national government. My hon. friend from Maple Creek may wish that Ottawa would not 

be compelled to live up to its obligations; but the obligation is there, squarely upon their shoulders, and 

they can wiggle and squirm as they like and they cannot escape it. 

 

Then he says, ―here you are asking Ottawa to effect long-term contracts for agricultural products‖, and 

he suggests that that is letting Saskatchewan off pretty lightly. I would like to ask him who else can 

effect long-term contracts for agricultural products? Who else can establish price supports to the 

producer, related to parity? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is high time that hon. members opposite realize that they are members of the Legislature 

of Saskatchewan, not apologists for the Liberal party at Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — what is the purpose . . . 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

46 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — We were led to believe, last fall, that this Party had had a rebirth. We have 

been led to believe that this Party was through defending the unpopular policies of the Liberal party at 

Ottawa. Why, the minions of my hon. friend, the Leader of the Opposition, said ―the Liberal party will 

never get anywhere in Saskatchewan as long as the C.C.F. can continue to hang around our necks the 

terrible record of the Government at Ottawa.‖ They said that all over this province, and it was on the 

strength of that very campaign that my hon. friend got to the seat where he now sits, and, Mr. Speaker 

. . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — It would take a lot of nerve to vote against that, don‘t you think? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — . . . I suggest that if that was their policy out on the hustings of Saskatchewan 

in the fall of 1954, it should be their policy now in this Legislature. Let them cut themselves loose. Let 

them deny the great Minister of Agriculture at Ottawa. Let them say that they are in favour of these 

things because the people of Saskatchewan, yes, the people of Canada, need them and are prepared to 

support them. Let us say as members of the Legislature that we are prepared to support these things 

because the producers of Canada are asking for them. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — We‘ll probably . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Let us say that we are prepared to support them, even though members of a 

Provincial Legislature, and let us not be trying all the time to protect the people at Ottawa who are doing 

nothing for the producers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — I couldn‘t let a glorious opportunity like this pass without 

looking at my friend over there. You know, he is a great actor, or else he is terribly ignorant — one of 

the two. 

 

This motion ―calls upon the Federal Government to convene a Federal-Provincial agricultural 

conference to draft comprehensive agricultural policies for submission to Parliament at the earliest 

possible date, that will provide farmers of Canada with their fair share of the net national income; the 

said Conference to have particular reference to:‖ — and here is what they are asking, and there is 

nobody who spoke, this afternoon, who said a word about this thing: 

 

―(a) the establishing of national marketing boards for livestock dairy and poultry products as a means 

of ensuring price stability and orderly marketing;‖ 

 

I could not possibly vote for that, and I will tell you some of my reasons for it. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

47 

(b) the effecting of long-term contracts for agricultural products as a further means of price 

stabilization;‖ 

 

Well, we had some experience with long-term contracts and they haven‘t all been too happy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They cost us a lot of money. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, they cost us a lot of money, and at the low price we did get the Minister of 

municipalities told us that they over-paid us $282 million. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — They only think in millions. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That was at the time that Mr. Gardiner and Mr. Wesson were on the boat going to 

Great Britain to try to get some settlement over there, and when they got there they were faced with the 

speech of the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Hon. Mr. McIntosh) in this House in which he said that 

they had overpaid the Canadian farmer in the amount of $282 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — Don‘t shoot, Hermie! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Wasn‘t that doing something for the farmer, Mr. Speaker? What a great service he 

rendered to the farmers of Saskatchewan and western Canada at that time! That was a smart trick, wasn‘t 

it? 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — You‘re arguing . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Gardiner and Mr. Wesson went over there and offered that the Government of 

Canada would convert the balance of $65 million which was still outstanding on the loan that Canada 

had made to Great Britain, that they would turn that over as final payment on the contract, but they were 

met with the same thing. We just cancelled the rest of that loan. That was the reception that Mr. Wesson 

and Mr. Gardiner got from this glorious Labour Government in Great Britain, the friends of these people 

sitting in this House, today. They have sat here for 10 years and done nothing. 

 

Now, this other thing, the establishing of price supports to the producer which shall be related to parity 

based on an acceptable formula. Even the great leader of the Farmers‘ Union, Mr. Phelps — and I will 

admit Phelps has a lot of brains; he has flashes of brilliance that isn‘t shown in this House by any of you; 

he has brains; but even he has admitted that no one has ever found a suitable formula to base price 

supports on. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — Then what is ‗Jimmy‘ Gardiner talking about? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He might be dreaming, but I‘m not. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

48 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! Might I remind the members that only five people have spoken on this 

motion. If the member who is on his feet is saying something you think you should reply to, you will 

have the opportunity to do so, and I would ask you not to keep on this cross-fire across the floor of the 

House. That applies to both sides of the House, because we cannot conduct the business of this 

Legislature if that is allowed to continue, and I am not going to allow it to continue. The member will 

continue. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I will do my best to keep those fellows in order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now then, what is the situation in regard to this matter? Everybody in this House, if he knows anything, 

knows that the Dominion Government has no power to legislate a marketing board for livestock in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Phooey! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That right belongs to the provinces, and that is a Dominion legislation provision, and 

everybody in this House should know that. When the provinces act and put up their Boards, then the 

Dominion Government has legislation which will facilitate inter-provincial traffic in all these 

commodities and finally give them the power to go out into the export markets of the world. That is the 

position, and I am going to read you something here. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — They know it, too. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, they don‘t know it, because I don‘t think they know anything. Don‘t accuse 

them of knowing anything. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here is a news report from the Alberta Legislature, and it is dated March 15, 1955: 

 

―Legislation to enable establishment of commodity producer marketing boards was introduced, 

Monday, in the Alberta Legislature and given first reading. 

 

―Approval of 51 per cent of persons engaged in the production of a certain commodity within a defined 

area would be necessary to set up a board under terms of the Bill. 

 

―Once a board was set up, 10 per cent of producers in the board could petition for the board to be 

dissolved or the Government could order a plebiscite. A 51-per cent vote of the producers would be 

necessary to scrap the plan. 

 

―The Government will hold a plebiscite when a plan for the control and regulating of marketing is 

submitted. 

 

―Agriculture Minister Halmrast said the Bill was submitted to the House before it was discussed with 

the Alberta Federation of Agriculture and the Farmers‘ Union of Alberta, two groups which requested 

enabling legislation. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

49 

―Stock growers‘ organizations in southern Alberta have opposed marketing legislation.‖ 

 

Those are the facts. You have here the enabling legislation which was put on the statute books in 1944, 

Mr. Speaker, which the Premier said was going to be the cornerstone of the edifice they were going to 

build in the Province, when they put through The Natural Products Marketing Act. It is still there, and it 

includes everything that is grown in the province of Saskatchewan, everything except wheat. It includes 

coarse grains. Why don‘t they use it? They have never used it for one solitary thing, except honey. 

Ontario has half a dozen marketing Acts and Boards set up for the purpose of marketing several of their 

products. British Columbia has it. Alberta, I think, has one, and they are introducing more now. Why 

then does this Government resist the temptation? — because I know the temptation is in this group to 

regulate and control everything. Haven‘t they the courage of their convictions to go ahead? If they do, 

they can get the enabling legislation that is ready to be extended to them by the Dominion Government, 

not only for this province, but for every province of Canada; and it has been there for four years now. It 

is four years since it was put on the statute books of Canada. What are you talking about? You don‘t 

know anything about what you are talking about. The real purpose of this resolution was never 

mentioned here, this afternoon. It wasn‘t mentioned once, because it says ―the establishing of national 

marketing boards for livestock, dairy and poultry products‖ etc., and ―the establishment of price 

supports which shall be related to parity prices based on an acceptable formula.‖ ―And further, That this 

Assembly recommends that the Government of Saskatchewan take all necessary steps, upon 

consummation of the policy herein referred to, to assure its proper and immediate implementation in this 

Province.‖ 

 

But you are the fellows who have the power right here in this province, and together with the other 

provinces you can control and market everything that a farmer grows, from peanuts to horses, if they 

raise them and cattle and everything. Why don‘t you get out the old legislation? It must be getting pretty 

musty and dirty by this time. That cornerstone of C.C.F. policy, of socialization of the province of 

Saskatchewan, with which you really intended to socialize agriculture, but you didn‘t have the guts to do 

it. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Or the courage, Mr. Speaker, pardon me. This isn‘t the first time they haven‘t had 

the courage to do what they said they were going to do. 

 

I would be remiss in my duties, I would be unworthy of the trust that the people of Arm River showed in 

me when they elected me to this House, if I voted for something like this. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Right. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I would be. And I can assure you I have been in touch with 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

50 

people here in this city of Regina this last week. Two of them sat down, Monday morning, to have 

breakfast with me, and one of them said ―if you ever support anything like this, you don‘t need to come 

back to Arm River and ask for our vote any more.‖ So that is the situation. That is about all I have to 

say. 

 

Mr. E.H. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, we have heard an awful lot from the hon. member 

over there in the last couple of minutes. I didn‘t think that he had the courage to misrepresent his 

constituents to that extent. I thought he would go a long way, but I didn‘t think he would ever go that 

far. 

 

A few days ago, when the mover and the seconder introduced this motion they covered the subject pretty 

thoroughly insofar as the depression which exists in the agricultural industry is concerned, and they tried 

to show what this province is already doing to help the livestock industry in Saskatchewan. The hon. 

member talked about the cornerstone . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — On which to socialize agriculture. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — As a matter of fact, it is cornerstone. The only thing we are waiting for 

is the rest of the foundation to come from the Federal Government . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — That‘s right. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — We have waited a long, long time and it hasn‘t come yet; there has 

been no indication of it yet. This province has not the legal power to do anything more until they can get 

some assistance or some co-operation from the Federal Government at Ottawa. 

 

They pointed out some of the things which this Government has done. They mentioned the fact that the 

Provincial Government, through its agricultural policies, had attempted to raise the standard of living 

and to stabilize the agricultural industry in this province. They have done it in a good many ways — 

through their livestock policies in encouraging higher standards of livestock, through better seed, 

through their forage crops, through drainage and irrigation, tending to raise the amount of production 

from agricultural land; they have opened up new areas and have spent a substantial amount of money in 

clearing new land, valuable agricultural land, upon which our youth could settle and make a living. They 

have also encouraged co-operatives in order that the farmers of this country could deal through their 

own organization to try to save themselves some money, and in an endeavour to prevent any more large 

monopolies from draining away the lifeblood of the agricultural industry of the province, such as the 

farm machine and meat packing industries and a good many others have been doing over the past few 

years. 

 

They also pointed out some of the reasons for the depression of the farmers of Saskatchewan. For 

instance, it is well known that, in 1943, the average capital investment per worker in agriculture in 

Canada, was $3500; by 1951 that had risen to $9500 — just a little less than three times as much. The 

record in Saskatchewan is even more glaring. In 1941, the average 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

51 

investment per worker in agriculture was around $4700; by 1951 this had gone up to over $13,400 — 

more than three times. Then the hon. members opposite have the stupidity to laugh and snicker and say 

that the agricultural manufacturers haven‘t taken advantage of the monopoly which they have in this 

province. 

 

The share of national income for the farm labourers in Saskatchewan, in 1951, even though we had very 

nearly 25 per cent of the total labour force in Canada, the share in Saskatchewan was only 7.8 per cent 

of the national income. By 1951, that had risen to a little over 13 per cent. By 1954, it had gone back 

down to less than it was in 1951 — 7.5 per cent of the national income going to 25 per cent of the 

agricultural labour force in Canada. 

 

The hon. member, a few minutes ago, mentioned something to the effect that the Liberal Government in 

Ottawa had made no commitments, nor had they any intentions of doing anything to stabilize agriculture 

in this province. Well, again, I want to quote you a few lines from Prime Minister King‘s speech away 

back in 1943. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If you are referring to me saying that, it is absolutely untrue. I never made such a 

statement. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — It sounded like it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I made no such statement. I never said that. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — It is quite all right. You made your speech; now I will make mine. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I never said that there was no intention to stabilize agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member rose on a point of privilege. He says you are ascribing a 

statement to him which he did not make. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — I won‘t argue, I will withdraw it. I am not going to argue with him; it is 

a waste of time. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If the truth slipped out of him, he doesn‘t know, but he did say it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And I insist that he doesn‘t know any more . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I heard him make the statement, but I do not know that he referred to it as a 

statement that you made. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He certainly did. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says he didn‘t say what I said he did, so 

I will take it back; I don‘t care 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

52 

but he has intimated and the other ‗dead-end kid‘ there beside him has intimated, that the Liberals in 

Ottawa aren‘t going to do anything to help agriculture in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member said that he made the statement he ascribed to you and he will 

rescind it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, he has repeated it right now: that I had made the statement that the Federal 

Government had stated that they were not going to do anything to stabilize agriculture in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You have already made your speech. You rose on a . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I know, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member rose on a point of privilege. The point of privilege is that the hon. 

member who is speaking has ascribed a statement to the member for Arm River which the member for 

Arm River said he did not make. And the hon. member who is on his feet has said if that is so then he 

withdraws the statement. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is correct, Mr. Speaker, but he just repeated it again. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! He has withdrawn it, and that is all there is to it. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — For his benefit, Mr. Speaker, I will repeat what I said a moment ago. I 

said that if I made a statement which the hon. member claims he did not make, then I will withdraw it; 

but I said the two members sitting on the other side of the House had intimated, in their speeches, that 

Ottawa has no responsibility insofar as protecting the agricultural industry in Saskatchewan is 

concerned. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Two members! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Name your members. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — So Prime Minister King, away back in 1943, in a speech over the radio 

is quoted as saying: 

 

―To help to win the war the farmers are asked to accept a ceiling on prices, we believe they are entitled 

to a floor under prices to ensure them against an agricultural depression after the war.‖ 

 

And then he goes on to say: 

 

―That in prescribing prices the Board shall endeavour to insure adequate and stable returns for 

agriculture and shall endeavour to secure a fair relationship between the returns from agriculture and 

those from other occupations.‖ 

 

And the hon. members say they cannot support our motion which is asking them to do that. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

53 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — He disagrees with that. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Now I want to give my endorsement to the portion of the resolution 

which asks for long-term markets . . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — Where are you going to get them? 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — I‘ll tell you in a few minutes; don‘t get in a hurry. 

 

I think the hon. members opposite should realize, and I certainly know that the people of Saskatchewan 

realize, that the farmers of this country are exposed to foreign markets and they have absolutely no 

protection whatsoever; but we are required to buy our essential commodities and services on a protected 

market, protected by tariffs and protected by subsidies from the taxpayers of Canada. 

 

In a letter on Canadian livestock products published, (believe it or not) by the Industrial Development 

Council of the Canadian Meat Packers — certainly not a Socialist organization, much as I would like to 

see it be . . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Minty‘s clients. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — And if I might quote a few paragraphs from this, I think it will bring 

out the points which I wish to make in support of this motion. The article is entitled, ―What is ahead in 

1955‖, and they are pointing out that the livestock and meat industry is expecting an unusually large 

amount of product to come on the market. They say: 

 

―From all indications 1955 will be another year of relatively heavy meat output in North America, 

which is revealed by recent surveys.‖ 

 

They point out that during the four weeks of 1955 the hog slaughter exceeded last year‘s by nearly 30 

per cent; Cattle slaughtering slightly exceeded last year‘s record post-war totals; calf slaughter held meat 

1954 levels and right on down to sheep and lamb slaughter, which rose by nearly 17 per cent. The article 

goes on to point out that the number of cattle reported on feed in the U.S. and Canada is considerably 

higher than a year ago. The United States Department of Agriculture has placed the increase in that 

country at around 8 per cent. The nearest figures that are available in Canada indicate an increase of 

from 15 to 20 per cent in the cattle that are being prepared to go to market from three to six months 

hence. They go on to point out: 

 

―Until larger supplies of fed cattle begin to reach market, the spread between higher and lower grades 

seems likely to remain wide. Cattle feeders should keep this possibility in mind, particularly if the 

demand for beef should happen to lag with the onset of warmer weather, just as if it is in good supply. 

Experienced cattle breeders know how essential it is to keep in close touch with the market and in view 

of the rather sensitive balance likely to prevail between demand and supply over the next few months, 

an orderly marketing programme for cattle as they attain the proper weight and degree of finish, would 

seem especially desirable.‖ 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

54 

Now we have the friends of the members opposite supporting us, but they haven‘t got around to it yet. 

 

In another article in the same issue, they talk about storage, and I think probably this article is one of the 

biggest reasons why we need a national livestock marketing board. We hear arguments from uninformed 

people, such as the members opposite, that one of the reasons they do not want national marketing 

boards for livestock is because it is a perishable product. Well that, my friends, is one of the big reasons 

why I think we do need a national marketing livestock board, because it is a perishable product, and at 

the present time the livestock producers are at the mercy of the packers. In this article on storage, an 

important marketing service, the Council for Canadian Meat Packers, say this: 

 

―Storage is generally an integral part of the marketing of any product. The products of farm origin, 

particularly those which fluctuate seasonally in supply and are perishable, storage operations help to 

equalize production and consumption and provide more orderly marketing and stable prices. Livestock 

and livestock products are in this category. It has been truly said that refrigeration has changed 

slaughtering and meat packing from a local trade to a national industry. Certainly without modern 

facilities to freeze and store meat and to ship under refrigeration, the whole livestock and meat industry 

could not have developed as it has on such a large and extensive scale. 

 

―Today it is possible to process livestock close to the point of production and to preserve fresh meat for 

shipment to consuming centres thousands of miles away. The widespread application of the 

refrigerating principle in retail stores and homes now completes the process and permits the meat to be 

sold on a volume basis the year around. 

 

―Pork requires the largest freezing operation because hog marketing rises to sharp peaks in the spring 

and fall, and without storage the surplus production at these periods would cause prices to be unduly 

depressed and the market demands could not normally be met during the summer months.‖ 

 

I doubt very much if the storage facilities have been used to their fullest extent, because if they have I 

sometimes wonder what is the reason for the tremendous fluctuation in the prices, today. Certainly there 

is no call for it, except the fact that the packers want to make undue and excessive profits and our friends 

across the way there like to help them out in doing that, at the expense of the stock raisers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — That‘s a wise statement . . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — It is too bad you couldn‘t do so well. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

55 

Mr. McDonald: — What about the Co-ops? 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — We can go back and look over this wheat agreement which the hon. 

member was speaking about a few minutes ago, and I think these figures are something that he should 

take a look at. To go back to 1943, they give the price of domestic wheat, the price of Class 1 wheat and 

the price of Class 2 wheat, and from 1943 to the end of 1947, under the Anglo-Canadian Wheat 

Agreement of 77 cents a bushel, Class 1 wheat was selling for $1.25, and class 2 wheat from $1.42 to 

$1.55 — a spread of approximately 48 cents for Class 1 wheat and 65 cents for Class 2 wheat, which the 

western Canadian wheat growers had to absorb — not the people of Canada as it was intended, but the 

western wheat growers were satisfied to absorb that loss in the price of wheat for the sake of long-term 

agreements and the promise of parity prices after the war was over. 

 

Then, in 1947-48, the International Wheat Agreement came into effect, and we find that the spreads 

were even greater. The domestic price of wheat was around $2.00 a bushel, in 1948-49-50, and then it 

started to drop down to $1.81, $1.82, to $1.70 at the present time. Class 1 wheat and Class 2 wheat were 

selling for around $1.55 and up, and the spread in those years was running around at least 60 cents a 

bushel, which again the Canadian wheat producers had to subsidize in the domestic market, and they had 

to subsidize the overseas market for the benefit of the manufacturing industry in this country. 

 

This motion is calling for a Dominion-Provincial conference to discuss these things. I don‘t know why 

the members opposite are so afraid of having our two governments get together to see if they cannot 

work out some agreement. Surely they don‘t have to be so afraid of a Dominion-Provincial conference 

to discuss these topics. Have they no confidence in their Federal Government at Ottawa? Are they afraid 

that they can‘t stand up to public pressure once our Provincial Government makes their offer to them? I 

suspect they have good reasons to be afraid of the people of this province and of the people of Canada. 

We are calling for this Dominion-Provincial conference to discuss the establishment of national 

marketing boards; for long-term contracts and for an internal price structure based on parity. 

 

The hon. members opposite have a great time trying to let on that this is something new in the world, 

that we are asking for something entirely new and something that hasn‘t been heard of before. I want to 

point out to them what some other countries are doing in this regard, and I want to assure you from the 

first that it is not provincial or state governments that are doing these things; they are national 

governments, representing the whole country. Australia has set up an Australian wheat stabilization 

scheme. I won‘t go into it in too much detail, but there are two or three points which I think are of 

considerable interest and could be of value if they could be adopted into the Canadian picture. For 

instance, in Australia, the growers will receive for wheat sold domestically, $1.53, approximately the 

International Wheat Agreement price at the present time, or at least they are guaranteed the International 

Wheat Agreement price if the latter falls below $1.53. They are guaranteed that price for the wheat they 

export. Then they are guaranteed the cost of production, the equivalent of $1.40 per bushel. That will be 

in effect for all export wheat up to a maximum of 100 million 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

56 

bushels shipped in any one year. The cost of production is to be estimated from season to season. The 

third point is their equalization scheme. A stabilization fund is created for the growers to which the 

growers will contribute a maximum of 16 cents per bushel, and where the export prices are above the 

cost of production, a total not to exceed $44 million; and if the price of wheat goes down below the cost 

of production, then they will draw from the fund which is built up. 

 

I see nothing wrong with our two governments getting together and discussing problems such as that. 

The Australian wheat stabilization scheme guarantees prices for all export wheat up to a certain 

maximum, based on the cost of production. The Australians have also gone a little further again than we 

have. They have given the livestock producers a pretty good deal. They have a marketing and 

stabilization scheme for all meat products. Australia has entered into 15-year meat contract agreements 

with the United Kingdom covering beef, veal, mutton and lamb. Although the contract calls for 

government selling, it also embodies provisions for the private trade. They point out that the contract 

provides that even on reversion to private trading, if the trade does not take all the Australia surplus the 

United Kingdom government is obliged to take the full amount. They are guaranteed a certain 

production of the meat which they may produce. If prices are higher in private trading than under the 

government provisions, then the producers get the benefit of such higher prices. If prices are lower, then 

the price formula contracts with the British government makes good the difference. There they have 

their 15-year meat contract under which they are guaranteed their cost of production. 

 

The Australian plan not only guarantees to the United Kingdom their meat for the coming 15 years, but 

it guarantees the producer in Australia that he will get his cost of production. It stabilizes the agricultural 

industry and I am quite sure helps to stabilize the whole Australian economy. The United Kingdom 

agreement is stated ―to develop further the production of meat in Australia, increase the export of meat 

to the United Kingdom, and provide a satisfactory market in the United Kingdom for the whole of the 

exportable surplus of meat from Australia during the term of the agreement.‖ 

 

In the short term, up to September 30, 1953, in the case of beef and veal, a detailed agreement applied. 

Under this a floor price is fixed, below which prices cannot fall before 1958, the floor price being the 

1950-51 contract price. Prices are reviewed periodically and adjusted accordingly, and here they point 

out that in prices under the agreement for 1952-53, they were 20 per cent higher than those under the 

1951-52 agreement. Those recently announced for 1953-54, show a 5½ per cent increase. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Would the hon. member permit a question? What is the price? You gave us the 

percentages; have you got the price per pound for any of that? 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — No, I don‘t see it here. I imagine it would be a little too detailed — yes, 

they do give it here in pounds. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Could you give it to me? 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — I will send it over to you and you can look at it. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

57 

Mr. McCarthy: — I think you will find it is away below our price. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — I think, Mr. Speaker, that the agricultural industry here in Canada could 

well use some of these long-term agreements to stabilize the agricultural economy and to try to 

guarantee us our cost of production. I want to suggest further that, if the Canadian Government sits 

around much longer, we are going to miss the boat. Practically every country in South America has 

signed long-term agreements with the various European countries to handle practically all of their major 

products. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — And gave it away. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — And I want to suggest that if this Canadian Government is going to sit 

back and hope for the Winnipeg Grain Exchange or some of the private meat packing firms to turn 

around and sell out products after we have already paid the packers for it, then I think it is going to do 

the greatest damage possible to our whole agricultural economy and to all of Canada. 

 

I want to call upon the members opposite to reconsider their decision and attempt to justify their position 

and support this resolution, because I do think it will help all the farm people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. L.F. McIntosh (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I am rather amused at the hon. 

member from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) in his remarks this afternoon, and also the hon. member from 

Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson), that I was probably responsible for costing the farmers of the province of 

Saskatchewan many millions of dollars because of a statement I made on the floor of the Legislature 

approximately five years ago. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — You cost them $145 million, I think it was. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — Now they are putting a figure on what I actually cost the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. Might I just say to my hon. friend from Arm River that I came back into the Legislature 

in 1952 with a majority much in excess of 100, and there were, elected on this side of the House, many 

more members than there were prior to my having made this statement on the floor of the Legislature. 

However, I very much appreciate the compliment that he extended to me when he inferred, along with 

his seatmate, that what I said on the floor of the Legislature some five years ago, had a profound 

influence on the government of Great Britain. I might just mention, in passing, that the Hon. Mr. Howe, 

on the floor of the House of Commons, stated that Britain had filled its obligations in full under the U.K. 

wheat agreement. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — When? 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — He made that statement prior to any final settlement being arrived at by the 

Government of Canada. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Do you know when the final settlement was? 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

58 

Hon. McIntosh: — I know when it was, yes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Arm River laid a great deal of stress on clause (a) of this resolution: 

―the establishing of national marketing boards‖ and he stated that the Government of Canada did not 

have the power to establish national marketing boards. I recall, back in 1934 when there was a National 

Marketing Act placed upon the statute books of the Dominion of Canada by the then Bennett 

government, that following the 1935 election and the return of a Liberal government, the National 

Marketing Act was referred to the Privy Council, but the enabling legislation passed by the provinces 

was not referred to the Privy Council along with the Dominion legislation for an opinion as to where the 

jurisdiction or divided jurisdiction lay. Had the Dominion Government sent along with the National 

Marketing Act the enabling legislation passed by the provinces, the decision of the Privy Council might 

have been somewhat different than what it was when they were just considering the National Marketing 

Act. 

 

What I wish to say is that we are a self-governing nation and somewhere within the Dominion of Canada 

lies the right for the people to govern themselves, and all that is being suggested in this motion is that a 

conference be called to give consideration to the whole question of marketing agricultural commodities. 

At such a conference surely the provinces and the Dominion, knowing that we are a self-governing 

nation, can arrive at where the jurisdiction and responsibility lie, having due regard to the fact that we 

are a self-governing nation and somewhere within the Dominion of Canada lies the right for the people 

to decide on their own course of action. 

 

The hon. member from Arm River also made mention of The Natural Products Marketing Act of 

Saskatchewan, which was passed at the session of 1944-45, and then proceeded to say that there were a 

few pails of honey being marketed under and through this type of legislation. It is quite true that there is 

only one group of producers, up to the present time, that has taken advantage of the Provincial Act, but I 

would like to say to my hon. friend that this Act is a vehicle for the producers of various kinds of 

commodities to use; it is a vehicle for their use to market their products if they so wish, co-operatively 

and jointly. 

 

This motion, as I interpret it, asks that there be a conference to discuss the possibilities of setting up 

national marketing boards that would assign to the producers the right, if they so wish, to market all 

kinds of agricultural commodities. I do not see anything very seriously wrong with finding out where the 

jurisdiction lies . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — We know where it lies. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — . . . and a Board set up by the Dominion Government, and then the producers in 

the various provinces of the Dominion of Canada setting up provincial boards under the jurisdiction of 

the provincial legislation that they have, and then the co-ordination of the operation of those boards in 

the national field of marketing. That is where I see the final clause of this resolution becomes important 

— if such legislation is made available and such boards are set up, that this province and its government 

do its utmost to see that there is nothing in the way, insofar as this province is concerned, of the 

producers carrying out the rights given to them from such a conference as mentioned in this resolution. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

59 

Mr. Speaker, having had some knowledge and experience in marketing and having had some knowledge 

of the 1934 National Marketing Act and the enabling legislation passed by this province, the province of 

Alberta and the province of Manitoba, at that time, and having had some knowledge of the purpose and 

intent of this type of legislation and the field of action that could be taken if there was a national 

marketing agency under Dominion legislation, I have no hesitation in supporting the motion as it is. 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to add a few words to this debate. I 

notice here, this evening, we have had a lot of words from the gentlemen opposite, others have done a 

lot of talking from their seats, but added little to the debate. 

 

They are opposed to asking the Federal Government to call a conference in conjunction with the 

provinces and other bodies in regard to these problems. It is most amusing to me, Mr. Speaker, before 

the Orders of the Day, to notice members on the other side of the House getting up and objecting to a 

headline which appeared in the ‗Leader-Post‘, a paper which is almost their Bible, objecting to a 

headline accusing them of supporting a Livestock Marketing Board. Now we even see them opposing 

the Federal Government for the establishing of a marketing board on a national basis. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It‘s your responsibility. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — The member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) said that we have in this province the 

necessary Act to set up these boards. As the Minister of Municipal Affairs has just pointed out, that is 

only a means of legislation under which a marketing board would have to set up their organization. 

 

We definitely know in this province there is something wrong. During the latter years of the war, and 

after the war, we were operating under a price control system. According to the Dominion Bureau of 

Statistics figures for the years just following the war, from 1944-45 on to 1945-48, using the suggested 

figures of 1935-39 being 100, we note that in only 5 years have the wheat producers of western Canada 

received the cost of production. In those 5 years we received, on that basis, the cost of production. Since 

then we have been gradually declining year after year. Our costs of production have been falling behind 

until today, we are down to 80 cents on the dollar to what we had in 1935-39. We are receiving for our 

wheat in the west only a little better than 50 cents on the dollar in comparison to what we were getting 8 

years ago, in 1945-46, just after the war when we had price controls. 

 

If those things continue the trend they have been following the past few years, in another three or four 

years we will be down to 35 or 40 cents on the dollar compared to what we got at the end of the war. 

The price for stock tells about the same story. I won‘t weary the House with statistics but I have the 

Dominion Bureau of Statistics prices here for all types of grain and butter, eggs, milk, and dairy 

products, cheese and so on, hogs from 1943 up to the present time. I will just come to some of the rates 

for the more recent years. I note in 1951, the average price at Winnipeg for steers up to 1,000 pounds, 

was $31.95 per cwt. In 1951 we had a good year. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

60 

But, now we find, in 1954, only three years later, the average price for the same type of steer is $17.63 

per cwt. So, on the return to the farmers for their good steers up to 1,000 pound in weight, we find today 

that they are only receiving slightly more than half of what they did three years ago. 

 

When the members opposite try to say that it was statements made in this House which caused the price 

of the farmers‘ commodities to come down, the reverse is quite the truth. The reverse is quite true 

because, if it wasn‘t for the resolutions that this legislature has passed asking the Federal Government to 

try and do more for the west than they have done, we would have had poorer treatment than we have 

now. It is this Legislature which has given leadership and guidance to a number of the farmers of this 

province, making them aware of the life they have been living, because we are in a position to get at the 

Dominion Bureau of Statistics a little easier than the average farmer, and we can make those figures 

available for them. I cannot for the life of me see how any member opposite can fail to support a 

resolution asking that the whole question of agriculture, the returns from agriculture and the cost of 

production, be discussed by a Federal-Provincial Agricultural conference. Mr. Speaker, I shall support 

the motion. 

 

Hon. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a word or two in 

this debate. Our friends opposite remind me very much of a little item that appears in the front page of 

the ‗Leader-Post‘ every day, called ―Today‘s Chuckle‖, and if they look at the bottom of the ‗Leader-

Post‘ they will see that Today‘s Chuckle says: ―A man who loses his head is often the last one to miss 

it‖. I sometimes think they are the last ones to realize how much they have lost their heads in the last 

hour or so of debate. 

 

I have in my hand here, Mr. Speaker, the agricultural policy adopted by the Saskatchewan Liberal party 

. . . 

 

Mr. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Not again! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — . . . at their last convention, and I notice, under its agricultural policy, three little 

items that have a close relationship to the three items mentioned in the resolution proposed by the hon. 

member from Bengough (Mr. A.L.S. Brown). We see (a) in the hon. member‘s resolution — ―the 

establishing of national marketing boards for livestock, dairy and poultry products . . .‖ When the 

member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) was speaking he said he was against all that kind of thing and 

was certainly going to be opposed to the establishment of a livestock marketing board, so I draw his 

attention to item No. 16 in the agricultural policy of the Liberal party, from its convention of last fall. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — But they have been re-born since then! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Well, verily you must be born again, the Good Book says, and I suppose they will 

keep in trying until they finally get the right type of birth. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

61 

Item No. 16 reads as follows, in the Liberal policy, in their platform: 

 

―Endorsement of the Canadian Wheat Board as the best method of marketing grain and extension of 

the powers of the Board to include full control over the marketing of all grains, with adequate 

representation of producers on this and other such Boards.‖ 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — What other such Boards are there for the marketing of agricultural products, 

except the kind of Boards that would market livestock, dairy products and poultry products? What do 

our friends mean? Where is the head that they do not miss yet? They should go back to last November 

and pick it up, because certainly that is what they say on this — meaning the Wheat Board, and other 

such Boards, and this is what this resolution calls for. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — Provincial Boards. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Now we will go along. This is a sort of hydra-headed monster — one of the most 

fierce of all times. They lost all three of them, I guess, because now we go to the next one, marked (b) in 

the hon. member‘s resolution which is being debated now, and this one reads: ―the effecting of long-

term contracts for agricultural products as a means of further price stabilization.‖ Section 15 of the 

Liberal party‘s platform on agriculture says: 

 

―Full co-operation with the Federal Government in securing for farm products the widest markets and 

the best possible prices.‖ 

 

The member for Maple Creek, when he was speaking — and I think the Leader of the Opposition, if I 

remember correctly . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Steady, now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — . . . stated that — I think I remember correctly, but if not I will stand for 

correction. Anyway, someone from over there (and I am pretty sure it was both of the gentlemen I just 

mentioned) stated that this Government should do the job itself. Certainly, the member for Arm River 

(Mr. Danielson) said that this Government should do the job itself. Now if this Government should do 

the job itself, and our friends across the way ever do find any of the heads they have lost, and should be 

some day inflicted by some set of circumstances on this side, are they going to accept their own advice, 

because, here in their platform, they will co-operate with the Federal Government — the very thing that 

this resolution is suggesting, co-operation with the Federal Government. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Sure, that is just what I said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, I love the member for Arm River. He is a source of never-ending 

joy to me, because whenever he is 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

62 

caught, he says ―that is what I said.‖ I agree with him. And whenever he gets up to speak, he says 

something else. However, that is fine. I like him that way and I hope he continues to be that way until 

1956, or thereabouts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — He picked up a head, but it wasn‘t his own. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Now we come to the other item in the resolution, the part which they wanted to 

cut out, which the member for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) tried to amend by cutting out completely — the 

third one, item (c): ―the establishment of price supports to the producer, which shall be related to parity 

based on an acceptable formula.‖ And now we turn to item No. 14 in the Liberal platform, the very last 

head under . . . 

 

Mr. Swallow (Yorkton): — Going backwards, eh? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Yes, This one says: 

 

―A permanent policy of adequate floor prices for agricultural products and the utilization of the 

agricultural prices support Act to maintain floor prices.‖ 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Absolutely. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — What is the difference? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The difference? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — And this ―the establishment of price supports to the producer, which shall be 

related to parity based on an acceptable formula.‖ The only difference, Mr. Speaker, is this . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You are losing your head, boy. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — The only difference, Mr. Speaker, is that this, in the resolution, is a vast 

improvement over theirs. The Liberals say they want to have agricultural prices support in maintaining 

floor prices. Do they want the floor down the basement or in the sub-basement, or where? This one says 

we want the floor and parity on an acceptable formula. Our friends should try and pick their heads up 

and make use of them, if it is possible, because in every one of these things here they have stated similar 

objectives in their platform, and now they say that they are going to vote against this. Well, I hope they 

do. It will show exactly what sort of an attitude they have, and when they have to face the public we will 

see what attitude they take. 

 

Mr. Speaker, anyone who doesn‘t support this motion tonight, can never, by any stretch of imagination, 

claim that he is a champion of the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

63 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough) (closing debate): — Mr. Speaker, in closing this debate which I started, 

I think it was on March 3rd, I presume that much has been said, much of which may be true, much of 

which may be new. The only unfortunate part about it is . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry, but I wanted to speak before the member adjourns the 

debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I gave the warning. Proceed. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Oh no, Mr. Speaker. I stood up and when the member stood up I didn‘t know 

whether he was going to close the debate or just what he was going to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Oh, I gave you the warning. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That was before the Minister of Health spoke, Mr. Speaker, if you recall. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Are you prepared to let him speak? 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — Certainly. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Go ahead, then. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, my good friend, the Minister of Public Health (Hon. Mr. 

Bentley) has referred to the Liberal platform which was drawn up in convention on November 25 and 

26, last, and surely to goodness he realizes that this is the Liberal provincial platform, and it points out 

the policies that a Liberal party would adopt when they sit on that side of the House. The things that he 

has referred to here, this evening, and the majority of the things that have been referred to by speakers 

on the other side of the House, are the responsibility of Provincial Governments and nobody else. The 

Federal Government has no constitutional responsibility, and they have no authority to do what you have 

been asking them to do here, this evening. The Federal Government has the responsibility, once the 

provinces have instigated legislation and started it on its way. Then the Federal Government will come 

into the picture and play their part in inter-provincial and export trade. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Hopeful, aren‘t you? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I wonder if we didn‘t have a Federal-Provincial conference not very long ago. I 

wonder if some of the people on that side of the House realize that the Minister of Agriculture for this 

province, and the officials of his department, were at a Dominion-Provincial Agricultural conference . . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — That was a Liberal caucus. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . not very long ago. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — That was your caucus. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

64 

Mr. McDonald: — And I wonder how many people over there even know that December 6, 1954, as a 

matter of fact which is only some four months ago, there was a conference, as a matter of fact it was the 

16th Federal-Provincial Agricultural conference, held in Ottawa, beginning December 6, 1954. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — What were the topics under discussion? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — At that time many of the things that have been discussed here, this evening, were 

discussed at that conference. It is too bad that the Provincial Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) 

isn‘t present here this evening, because he was present and took part at this conference, . . . 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — . . . ―Jimmy‖ Gardiner . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . and I think the Minister of Highways would be well advised to read the report of 

that conference then he would know what his colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, had to say at that 

particular conference, and he would know the answers that the different Ministers of Agriculture from 

across Canada gave to the Minister of Agriculture of the Province of Saskatchewan. I would recommend 

to all the members on the other side of the House that they look up the records of that conference. Then 

they will know where the constitutional responsibility lies for the things they are asking in this motion. It 

lies with this Government as far as the province of Saskatchewan is concerned; it lies with the Provincial 

Government of Manitoba as far as the province of Manitoba is concerned — and it lies with the 

Provincial Government of British Columbia, or Ontario, or Alberta, or any other province in Canada, as 

far as that particular province is concerned. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — That‘s what ―Jimmy‖ Gardiner says. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Once those provinces have looked after their constitutional responsibility, then the 

legislation is already on the statute books of the Dominion of Canada for the Federal Government to 

take its part. You are the people who are asleep at the switch. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — That is Jimmy‘s speech. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Once those provinces have looked after their constitutional responsibility, then the 

legislation is already on the statute books of the Dominion of Canada for the Federal Government to 

take its part. You are the people who are asleep at the switch. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — That is Jimmy‘s speech. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You were the people who passed The Agricultural Produce Marketing Act, and now 

you haven‘t the courage to implement the authority that you took unto yourselves under that Act. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — What happened at this last agricultural conference held in Ottawa, beginning 

December 6th? I want to read something that was said there by the Federal Minister of Agriculture for 

Canada, and he said this: 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

65 

―I have been reading in the press and hearing on the radio, during the last few days, demands that we 

provide, under The Agricultural Prices Support Act, parity prices. We have not the authority in 

peacetime to set the prices for farm products. That authority rests with the provinces.‖ 

 

Did the Minister of Saskatchewan deny that? Did he dispute it? No, he did not. But you have a lot of 

people here, tonight, who either know nothing or do not want to face up to their responsibilities, and 

endeavour to paint a different picture for the electorate, as the Minister of Public Health would like to 

create the idea. There is absolutely nothing wrong with the platform that was laid down by the Liberal 

party in convention. They realize that it is the responsibility of the Provincial Governments to do these 

things, and the Liberal party would be prepared to do the things that are in our provincial platform — 

not the Federal Government of Canada, because the Federal Government of Canada has not the 

authority, and you know it, and if you do not know it, you should not be a Minister in any province. 

 

Now, what did the Minister of Agriculture for Canada say regarding that? He said: 

 

―We, therefore, devised a plan under which the Federal Government, through the Department of 

Agriculture, could help to stabilize prices; it is embodied in the Agricultural Prices Support Act.‖ 

 

And he went on to point out the amount of money that the Federal Government had spent under The 

Prices Support Act in stabilizing farm products in Canada. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — For the Packers. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — For the Packers? That is the most ridiculous statement I think that was ever made, 

Mr. Speaker. If my hon. friend knows anything, he knows that the co-operative movement in this 

province are in the packing business; they are in the cream business, they are in the egg business. And if 

you knew anything about farming or farm products, you would know well the returns to a producer on 

products that he sells through a co-operative movement. How much of a dividend does he get from his 

co-operative? If the tremendous excess profits were there that you people claim are there, then there 

would be a big payment come back to the producer, wouldn‘t there? I know, because I happen to be a 

producer of butter and eggs and milk, and I know the amount of money I get back from my co-op. 

Certainly, we get some — and what about our chickens and turkeys? It is the same thing. What you 

people are trying to do is to kill the co-operative movement throughout Canada. You are wanting a 

Government Board to take control of products that the producer himself ought to control, and nobody 

can deny that statement. You are trying, with one hand, to be the great friend of the co-operative 

movement — and with the other hand, you are trying to cut their throat. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Did the Wheat Board kill the Wheat Pool? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — How much money has been spent under the Agricultural Prices Support Act for 

Canada? Approximately $300 million. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

66 

Mr. Gibson (Morse): — To the packers! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker — to the packers! 

 

Mr. Gibson: — You bet you. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I asked this Government, in Committee, to give consideration to helping our co-

operatives go into the meat-packing industry. What was the answer? They haven‘t answered. I asked this 

Government, also, to help the co-operatives go into the manufacturing of farm machinery. What was the 

answer? They haven‘t answered. Well, goodness me! If this Government was doing the job that it ought 

to be doing, it would see that our co-operative movements, as far as finances were concerned, were put 

into a position where they could go into the meat-packing business if they found that it was financially 

possible, and they could go into the manufacturing of farm machinery. But no, you sit there and do 

nothing! You are always complaining about past Liberal governments in this province being ‗do 

nothing‘ governments. If there ever was a government in this province that was doing nothing to face up 

to the situation that we have now here in this province, well, I would like to see a better group of ‗do 

nothing‘ people than those who are facing me here tonight, and including those people who are not in 

the House. 

 

Some Hon. Member: — Ask ‗Uncle Louis‘ to do it for them. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — What has happened? The only thing that you are prepared to do is go down to 

Ottawa, get Ottawa to help us; let Ottawa provide our education, let Ottawa build our highways, let 

Ottawa supply a national health scheme, which they claim Ottawa promised them some 30 years ago. 

Why, it is only 10 years ago, since you, the members of the C.C.F. party, promised free health services 

to every man, woman and child in this province, without cost. Did you do that? You promised every 

man, woman and child in this province that you would do that. That wasn‘t 36 years ago; it was 10 years 

ago. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — What are you quoting from? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — What am I quoting from? I will read it to you. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Read Mackenzie King‘s speech of 1919. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I will read it to you, Mr. Minister of Public Health. I have it right here, and I will 

quote you two pages of it. I quoted one of them here, a few days ago . . . 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, are we discussing health insurance now? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The hon. Minister has asked me a question and I am going to answer it. You don‘t 

like it, I know, but you are going to take it. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

67 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — It is not worrying me any. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — What am I quoting from? Well I am quoting from a broadcast, February 9, 1943 — 

that is just 12 years ago, that isn‘t 36 years ago; and the person who is now Premier of this province, 

said this: 

 

―Just as we have made education available to all . . . 

 

They thought they had already done that at that time; they hadn‘t included power yet; apparently they 

had made it available . . . 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — ―. . . the time has come . . .‖ 

 

Mr. Kramer: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, I was called to order once, this afternoon, for not 

speaking to the motion, and I think the hon. Leader of the Opposition is just as much, or more, out of 

order than I was. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I am replying to a question from the Minister of Public Health. He said 

this: 

 

―The time has come when we must make all the benefits of medical . . . science available to all without 

money and without charge.‖ 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — They can‘t take it. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, no member has a right to break the rules of this House on the 

pretext that some other member asked him a question, and I insist, as a member of this House, that the 

rules of this House be in force. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You have broken the rules of this House, many of you, and if I enforced them, many 

of you would be out of the House. If there were not so many interjections from both sides of the House 

we might be able to keep a little better order. When a question is asked, you simply provoke the answer. 

The member may continue. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Thank you very much for your fair ruling, Mr. Speaker. And then he said this: 

 

―By supporting the C.C.F. you can make this right of health and happiness the lot of every man, 

woman and child in Saskatchewan.‖ 

 

Then again, speaking in Biggar, on May 18, 1944, he said this: 

 

―A C.C.F. government would proceed to set up medical, dental, hospital services, available to all, 

without counting the ability of the individual to pay.‖ 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

68 

What has happened, Mr. Speaker! Without the individual‘s ability to pay? Today, if you do not pay your 

tax they fine you, and if you do not pay the fine they put you in gaol. 

 

Mr. Gibson: — But you have to have the ability to pay, first. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That is the philosophy of this Socialist party. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think the hon. member has answered the question now. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I think I have, too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You will proceed with the motion. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — There is another debate coming up later on, and I will read the rest of the paper to 

my hon. friends then. If they didn‘t appear to be so uneasy I wouldn‘t bother. 

 

I do want to refer to the amount of money that has been paid under this Agricultural prices Support Act 

to the different producers of agricultural products across Canada . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Packers, packers! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Under the agricultural prices set up in 1944, a revolving fund of $200 million was 

provided. It was first applied to potatoes, in 1946, in 1948 and 1950, and the net cost was $2,036,000. I 

presume my friends will say that the packers got that. For your information that support price was paid 

to the producers of potatoes in eastern Canada. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Hear! Hear! Remarkable! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — And what about apples? It was applied to apples from 1947 to 1949, and again in 

1954, at a net cost of $6,806,000. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — To the packers! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — To the packers, I suppose. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Packers of apples. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It was applied to white beans, honey and skimmed milk from 1948 to 1953, at a net 

cost of $667,000. It was applied to cheddar cheese from 1949 to 1953, at a net cost of $155,348. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Peanuts! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It was applied to butter from 1949 to 1954, and it is expected to result in a net cost 

of at least $2,606,000 . . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — To the producers? Or Packers? 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

69 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — While we are dealing with butter I want to point out the attitude of this Government. 

When the Federal Government was prepared to sell some of their surplus butter to the different 

institutions from across Canada, what was the attitude of the present administration, the farmers‘ friends 

in Saskatchewan? They said, ―Oh, no, these people have to eat margarine; we can buy it cheaper.‖ Well 

now, wasn‘t that a great thing for the farmers of this province who are engaged in the production of milk 

and milk products? You could buy that butter at one-third less than the Federal Government paid for it, 

and you said ―No, you people will have to eat margarine, we can‘t afford to feed you butter.‖ You were 

not prepared to put a nickel into the farmers‘ pockets to help those people who are living in the different 

institutions in this province — at one-third off the price. That is the attitude of the farmers‘ friends that 

sit over here. There isn‘t a friend of a farmer sitting over there, according to the actions of this 

Government. 

 

What has happened in regard to eggs? Referring to this same Federal legislation, it has been applied to 

shell eggs from 1950 to 1953 and has only resulted in a net cost to date of $65,408. It may cost $700,000 

in 1954, which would total $765,408 for shell eggs. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — What are you reading from? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The utilization of this fund to maintain prices on hogs and cattle, through foot-and-

mouth disease, cost the Board $70,144,000 and the total cost has been some $300 million. That is the 

total cost. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — Could I ask what the member is quoting from? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Yes, I am quoting from the figures that were given at the Dominion-Provincial 

conference on December 6, 1954. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — By whom? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — This is the only thing that the Federal Government can do, because this is as far as 

they can go under the constitution of Canada. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Subsidize tariffs, eh? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — But the responsibility lies with the provincial governments to work in co-operation 

with the Federal Government under this Act. Then, if the producers of western Canada want marketing 

Boards they can have them; but it is up to this Government in Saskatchewan and the other provincial 

governments across western Canada to pass the original legislation, and to nobody else. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are an awful lot of figures that one could refer to that were used at the last 

Dominion-Provincial conference, and, as I say, the Minister of Agriculture for this province was there. I 

met him in Ottawa. I was there, but not at the conference. I met members of his staff in the corridors of 

the House of Commons in Ottawa, during this conference. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

70 

And I am certain, according to the records of that conference, that many of the things that were said 

here, this evening, are certainly not the impressions that the Minister of Agriculture for the Province of 

Saskatchewan left with that conference. He talked sense at that conference, but this afternoon and this 

evening I never heard such ridiculous and unfounded statements in my life, to come from people who 

are supposed to be representing constituencies in this province. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — He was talking to a better audience. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this motion under any consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — Will the hon. member permit a question? Did this Government give any 

financial assistance to Canadian Co-operative Implements Limited, to the horse-processing plant, and 

did they offer assistance to any group of producers if they wished to go into the processing of livestock? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Well, certainly. And so did the government in Ottawa. If I wanted to go into the 

records and the figures that were used at that conference, the amount of money that Ottawa has spent in 

that direction to date, to help co-operatives across Canada, not only in Saskatchewan, it is a terrific 

figure; and with credit to the co-operatives, most of them have paid back that money to Ottawa. I am 

saying that if you have any respect at all, or any desire, or any wish to help the co-operatives in this 

province, then you ought to be talking about the co-operative movements in this province, and not be out 

with a rumor trying to cut their throats. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — Mr. Speaker, I am afraid the hon. gentleman did not get my question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think he did. He said, ―Certainly, they did.‖ 

 

Mr. Wahl: — Mr. Speaker, might I ask the hon. member a question. I would like to ask what is the 

difference between a national livestock marketing board and the Canadian Wheat Board? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Surely you don‘t expect us to answer that. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — If I attempt to answer the question here, I am afraid that I would have to adjourn the 

debate at 10 o‘clock. There is just about that much difference. I realize that my hon. friend doesn‘t know 

the difference or he would not ask the question. Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I shall warn members again, that the hon. member for Bengough is about to close the 

debate. 

 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, there has been much said here which might require 

considerable time to answer, but I shall attempt to keep my remarks brief though not quite as brief as the 

remarks of the hon. member for Moosomin when he tried to answer the question of the member 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

71 

for Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Wahl). I think the reason that he kept his remarks so brief was that the 

difference between the Canadian Wheat Board and any national marketing board is so slight that it 

requires no answer. In the method of operation and the National Marketing Board for livestock, for dairy 

products, for poultry products would operate in exactly the same manner and to the same effect as does 

the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

I was interested in the figures which the hon. member for Moosomin was quoting, and I asked him to 

designate his source. When he came to the figure of $300 million as having been paid out under the 

Prices Support Act since its inception, I knew full well he was not quoting from the report of the 

Agricultural Prices Support Act, because in this Act they indicate that it has cost the Federal Treasury 

not $300 million, but rather $80 million. The $300 million to which my friend referred . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. No, you have misinterpreted what I said. What 

I said was that the total net cost to the Federal Government has been $83,563,000, and when I used the 

figure of $300 million, that was the gross amount used in trying to stabilize prices of agricultural 

products in Canada — the gross amount was $300 million. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — I tender my apologies to the hon. member. I didn‘t catch his figure of $83 

million, because that is in effect all that has been used out of the Agricultural Prices Support Fund for 

the purpose of supporting agricultural prices. The difference between the $83 million and the $300 

million could be termed paid and returned into the Federal treasury after the sale of their products. So, in 

effect, it has been only the $83 million that can be referred to as having been used for the purpose of 

supporting agricultural prices in the agricultural case. 

 

When I was opening this debate I accused the Federal Government of deliberately and intentionally 

breaking the intent, if not the wording of the Act. I was interested in the figures which the hon. member 

for Moosomin was using. He was quoting the figures that had been paid, as he suggested, in support of 

apples, cheese, dairy products and others, and interjections were continually being made that it was 

being paid to the packers and not to the producers. I am going to suggest to him that there wasn‘t one 

single solitary penny of that money to which he referred paid directly to the producer. According to their 

own Act, they pay to the producers of an agricultural product direct. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Packers of potatoes, eh? 

 

Mr. Brown: — And irrespective of whether the packer is an independent or private enterprise, or 

whether it is a co-operative, the Act states that it shall be paid directly, not through a packing 

organization, whether it be co-operative or otherwise. It is true that in those co-operative concerns which 

are in a position to take advantage of the Agricultural Prices Support Act, the producer does get the 

advantage, but in our society today, in our farm economy, there is much of the processing done by 

agencies that are yet not socially owned, and they are not socially owned largely because of the 

philosophy of people such as my friends opposite represent. They have definitely opposed the 

development, in the agricultural industry and in our economy generally, of socially-owned enterprises 

whether they are co-operatives, or whether they are nationally or provincially operated. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

72 

He suggested that we were trying to kill the co-operative movement out here. I am telling him that there 

is no way you can kill the co-operative movement faster than to do exactly what he was suggesting here, 

that we should force the co-operative movement into the meat-packing plants, or in the processing 

plants. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — No one said that. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, oh, no. 

 

Mr. Brown: — That we support the co-operatives into the manufacturing of farm implements — that‘s 

exactly what you said. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, on another point of privilege. I will have to ask the hon. member to 

withdraw that. I did not suggest at all that co-ops should be forced. I said that this Government should 

make the money available to the co-operatives to go into any enterprises where they thought there was 

an opportunity to bring down the cost . . . 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, I was at the Committee to which he referred. As a matter of 

fact, I was the Chairman of that Committee. The answer which was given to him at that time was that 

the money will be made available under our Cooperative Guarantee Act if the co-operatives come and 

ask this Government for the assistance. He was given the assurance by the Minister in charge of co-

operatives that that assistance would be made available. If that is what he is suggesting, he is just about 

four or five years too late. We have already done that and, therefore, he has got no criticism of this 

Government in that respect. I humbly suggest that that is not what was in the back of his mind. By 

forcing them into something that they in themselves were not prepared to undertake with our assistance, 

then there would be nothing that would kill them faster than an action such as that. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I don‘t want to interrupt my friend but I don‘t want him to say that I 

said that this Government ought to force the co-operatives into anything, and I would request that the 

hon. gentleman withdraw his statement. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): - Well, if I misquoted my hon. friend I imagine I will have to retract it, and I 

do most humbly retract any suggestion of a misquotation. But it certainly left the impression in my 

mind. The thing we have already done that he has now asked us to do, if that isn‘t good enough, then 

there is an implication that might be there that we should force them into something that they were not 

prepared to do themselves. 

 

He said we are continually asking the Federal Government to accept that which is our responsibility. He 

tried to suggest that these three items to which we suggest a Dominion-Provincial Conference should 

have particular reference were a Provincial responsibility. I might point out that, in my opening remarks, 

I indicated that these were not all the problems that surrounded the agricultural economy of this 

province, but that these were the three main things around which a conference could be built and could 

work. He says we are trying to evade our responsibility; that it is a provincial responsibility to 

implement all three of these. Yet, he has not suggested one mere instance of how we here 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

73 

in this province could undertake to establish price support based upon any level. He realizes, or he must 

realize, that most of our agricultural products depend upon interprovincial trade or international trade, 

and he realizes, or must realize, that we as a province have no constitutional authority over inter-

provincial trade, that we cannot control a product either coming into this province or a product going out 

of this province. If my hon. friend believes in a federation, I am certain he will agree with the principle 

that we, as a province, should not have the right to bar a product coming into this province at a cheaper 

or lower level than we in the province are prepared to convey it on. The Federal Government has that 

constitutional authority. If he is suggesting that we have the authority to implement this, he is suggesting 

that we should create a Balkan state out here in western Canada in which we have got a state in 

Saskatchewan with constitutional authority to impose tariff barriers, tariff regulations, to impose excise 

duties, and regulate the inflow or outflow of products in our province. I suggest that that is not our 

responsibility, and the only one whose responsibility it can be is the Federal Government‘s, if we believe 

in a federation. 

 

He suggested that we are asking for a Dominion-Provincial Conference but that we have already had 

such a conference just back in the month of December. I am going to suggest that the questions which 

we raise in this motion were not on the agenda and could not properly be discussed. That Dominion-

Provincial Conference was a production conference which has been held annually for the last number of 

years. While not belittling a production conference — I think they are proper and should be undertaken 

— but they do not and cannot consider the problems we suggest here. The Minister of Agriculture at that 

conference asked that a conference should be called for the express purpose of devising a national 

agricultural policy, and it was because of the fact that he initiated it at that production conference that 

we are continuing that request through the medium of this Legislature. 

 

Much has been referred to by the member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald), the member for Arm River 

(Mr. Danielson) and by the member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron). With particular reference to the 

remarks made by the member for Maple Creek, when he comes to this last part and says the Federal 

Government is going to do all the first part and then you come down to the last part and what is left for 

the provincial government to do, I suggest that we on this side of the House have the welfare of the 

agricultural industry in mind and that we realize that we do have a responsibility in this respect. The 

reason that we have incorporated this as a clause in this motion is that every time that we have asked the 

Federal Government to implement any of these things, they say they haven‘t got the constitutional 

authority to do it. They might be right; maybe they haven‘t got the full constitutional power to do it; but 

let them point out to us what action we as a Legislature can take and we will take it. They have not. 

 

My hon. friends will recall that when the Federal Government asked us to pass the complementary 

legislation allowing oats and barley to be taken under the Canadian Wheat Board because they said they 

did not have the constitutional authority, we were the first Legislature in western Canada to undertake 

such action, and as long as this group sits on this side of the House, I can assure you that we will be the 

first to undertake and implement our part of what might emerge from this type of a conference, after the 

Federal Government has told us what action we shall take, or must take, so that they can implement 

national marketing boards, long-term contracts and establish prices support on the basis of parity. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

74 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — Why don‘t you ask them? 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — I might point out to my hon. friend from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) that 

his good friend sitting to the left of him there, the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) just about 

answered the question that he raised, because, he did point out that we have certain responsibilities; but 

it left the impression in my mind, at least, from the remarks made by the member for Arm River, the 

member for Maple Creek and the member for Moosomin, that the position they would like to see us get 

here in Saskatchewan, is that where marketing boards will fail, they would like to see set up the only 

type that we can set up, as a province, is on a producer marketing basis. That is the only basis upon 

which we can set it up. There is no greater assurance of failure for a producer marketing board than to 

have it operate without a national marketing board. The only way a producer marketing board can 

operate effectively, efficiently, and in the best interest of the agricultural industry is to operate within the 

frame work of a national marketing board. If there is anything that will defeat . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Who told you that? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Who‘s back of that? 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — If there is anything that will defeat, that could defeat or might defeat that 

marketing board, if the producers ask for it, is the realization of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan that they cannot depend upon the Federal Government to implement its part by which a 

producers‘ marketing board could operate. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Who‘s squirming now? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — The producers of this province do not forget what happened back in 1933 

and 1934 (my memory fails me as to the year), the time when we took a vote on a national scale for the 

implementation of a national marketing scheme for our poultry products. And it was the Liberal 

organization of western Canada that went out deliberately and intentionally for the purpose of defeating 

it. The producers of this province, in respect to orderly marketing, have no more faith in the Liberal 

party or in the Liberal Government in Ottawa than they had in the Liberal party or Liberal organization 

back in those years. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Who‘s backtracking now? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — My hon. friend from Arm River made the statement that nobody knows 

what parity is. I might suggest to him, Mr. Speaker, that we had a delegation of 400 farmers from 

Saskatchewan who went down to Ottawa in 1942. They asked for parity prices. Four hundred farmers 

from Saskatchewan knew that parity price was a concept that could be accomplished. The good friend of 

my friend from Arm River, at Ottawa, the Hon. Jas. G. Gardiner, has admitted and conceded that there is 

a parity concept, and I quoted it to him 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

75 

in my opening remarks in this debate, but for his benefit I will requote it to him. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — What does Benson say? 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — I quote: 

 

―Mr. Gardiner, speaking in the House of Commons on February 9, 1943, stated as follows: 

 

―‘Parity price is the price of a commodity which will give a purchasing power with respect to articles a 

farmer buys equivalent to the purchasing power of such commodity in the basic period.‘‖ 

 

Note, Mr. Speaker, he states parity price is the price — apparently in his opinion there is a parity price, 

and it is not too difficult to arrive at. Further, I would indicate to my friend that in my opening remarks I 

did not state that this might be the final conception of what a parity price is, but I said it was a basis 

upon which negotiations could be worked out as a concept until they could work out, if necessary, a 

parity formula and a parity structure which would be more successful. 

 

My hon. friend from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) in his remarks, which were rather hard to follow and 

apparently did not bear a great deal of relationship to the motion, tried to leave the impression, first of 

all, that the decline in farm income was not the fault of the Federal Government. The Federal 

Government controls the economic and fiscal policies of this province, and if it allowed one section of 

its population to get out of relationship with another section of its population, then the Federal 

Government, because it does control fiscal, economic and national policy of this country, must accept 

that responsibility. 

 

He stated, for instance, in his remarks that we have the highest price for beef anywhere in the world. 

Outside of possibly the United States, we have high prices for our dairy products, and he comes to the 

point where he reaches wheat and he says that we have got a price for wheat that cannot be sold at a 

higher price. I would point out to him that we here in Canada, producers of the best wheat in the world, 

have the lowest floor price for our wheat of any export country in the world. We are lower than any 

country to which my friend might wish to refer. We here in Canada . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It backfired. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — . . . have only a floor price under our wheat, at the moment, of $1.40. I 

might point to my friend also . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What is Australia? 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — Australia at the moment to the producers is the cost of production. Exactly 

what we are asking for in this motion. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The floor price. 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

76 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — The floor price, as far as wheat is concerned, to the producer is the cost of 

production, and that is what we are asking. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It‘s 90 cents. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — The floor price for domestic wheat in Australia today is $1.55. I would 

point out, as my hon. friends must realize, that the cost of production in Australia is much lower per 

bushel of wheat than it is here, and in the final analysis that determines what the value of your wheat is, 

and is the purchasing power of that bushel of wheat. But, even in terms of dollars and cents . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That‘s only for domestic use. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — . . . in Australia guaranteed cost of production $1.55 to the producer; here, 

we in Canada are guaranteed $1.40 basis Fort William, and approximately $1.20 to the producer. Even 

though their crop production is lower than ours, their guaranteed price is higher. 

 

I would further point out that Australia is one of the lowest, and it is still some 35 cents above ours. The 

United States, which also has a lower cost of production than we have, have a guaranteed price of $2.24. 

If you take Turkey, for instance, it has a guaranteed price from $2.28 up to $3.00 a bushel. We can go to 

Argentine, another exporter of wheat, with a guaranteed price of $2.72, and you can continue along the 

list and you will find that, in every instance, theirs is higher than we have here. As I was trying to point 

out to my friends a few moments ago . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, no! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — . . . we had a floor price back in 1949-50 crop year of $1.70. They cut the 

floor price under wheat in the last four years from $1.70 to $1.40. I would also remind hon. friends that 

when we introduced the motion in this House back in the Session of 1951, asking that the initial floor 

price under wheat be raised back from $1.40 to $1.70 my hon. friends did a mighty lot of hedging before 

they voted for it. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Who is talking against the marketing board now? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Make a circle and come back. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — I‘ll make the circle the same as he does, and will come back to it in a 

moment. But they did a mighty lot of hedging at that time, because we asked that it be done 

immediately. They wanted to strike it out, and asked that it be struck out; moved an amendment striking 

the word ‗immediately‘ out and putting in ‗as soon as possible‘. I guess we might as well have put in ‗as 

soon as possible‘, Mr. Speaker, they never took any action on it at Ottawa to bring it back to the level it 

was at that time. 

 

But we here in Canada have the lowest floor price under our wheat, and when my friend from Saltcoats 

suggests that we as producers are getting as 



 
March 24, 1955 

 

77 

much for our wheat as we have a right to expect, I am going to suggest that if these other countries can 

do it under much more difficult circumstances possibly then we would have to do it here in Canada, that 

we can certainly do as well. 

 

My hon. friend from Saltcoats also referred to the fact that it probably wasn‘t so much the price we were 

getting for our product as it was the fact of high-cost production which was involved, and I will agree 

with him that that is basically true. But, he tried to leave the impression that one of the causes of that 

high cost of production was due to the high cost of labour; that we in the C.C.F. organization, our 

political organization, have advocated and had caused the skyrocketing of labour prices. He mentioned 

as one of the reasons there was a high cost of farm implements today, the high cost of labour on farm 

implements. I am going to suggest to him that he read the report which he approved of back in 1952 in 

this Legislature, and which indicates that, taking 1945 as a base year, 100 per cent, salaries and wages 

had increased on farm implements from 100 up to 157. The cost of living during that same period went 

up from 100 to 150. In other words, the labour cost on farm implements did no more than keep pace 

with the increased cost of living, and labour in the farm implement industry had a right to expect that its 

wages and income should go up with our cost of living and our cost of production. 

 

I might point out to him — and once again this is in this report and I confess it is back in 1952, but the 

trend is exactly the same — that the profits increased from 12 per cent in 1946 to 33 per cent in 1951. 

There is the explanation of the increased cost of farm machinery. I could take another quotation, if my 

friend would like it, of the cost of wages that go into a farm implement today. Back in 1945, 42 cents out 

of your dollar for a farm implement went to pay for labour; back in 1950, 28 cents out or your dollar for 

a farm implement went to pay the costs of labour. That is not what would cause the increase in respect to 

our farm implements, but rather it has been the allowing of those people who in the past have controlled 

our economy, who control the final price of these products, which we have to pay, who are to blame for 

this increased cost of production. They have been allowed to have this increased cost of production due 

to the failure of the Federal Government to implement the commitments which it made to the people, 

and the commitment which was made in particular to the farmers back previous to 1946. 

 

There is much more that could be said, but I think, Mr. Speaker, in concluding these remarks, I should 

properly repeat one statement which I made at the opening of my remarks, because I think those remarks 

that I made at that time were missed by my hon. friends opposite. I stated at that time that we could not 

have a prosperous, secure agricultural industry in this country of ours unless it was based and built 

within the framework of a national economy based upon a high level of employment, full purchasing 

power and an ever-expanding production. That is the essential thing that we must obtain, and I am going 

to suggest that it is through this medium that agriculture can play its proper and fair share in the building 

not only of the Canadian national economy, but to make its contribution to international welfare, and 

through this medium bring about a day when we shall have peace and security in this world of ours as 

well as in Canada. 

 

The question being put on the motion (Mr. Brown (Bengough)), it was agreed to by 26 votes against 8. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 10 o‘clock p.m. 


