



















































Hansard: April 07, 1955


 
 

1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session - Twelfth Legislature 

41st Day 

 

Thursday, April 7, 1955 

 

The House met at 10 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

MOTION OF CONDOLENCE 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of the Session, the Assembly took time 

off to pay tribute to former members who have passed away between the last Session of the Legislature 

and the beginning of the present one. Since the Assembly commenced its sittings there has been brought 

to our attention one member who had passed away but of whom we had no record, and since this 

Session began, another former member has died. I thought it might be appropriate to make note of this 

event now, rather than leave the matter until the Legislature meets again in 1956. 

 

The two members to whom I have reference are, first of all, Mr. RICHARD FORSYTH, who was born 

at Camilla, Ont., on September 19, 1870, and who, in his early manhood, engaged in farming operations 

and ran an elevator at Crombie’s Crossing in his native province. He came west in 1900 to farm in the 

Oxbow district. He quickly identified himself with the community in which he had established 

residence, and was elected as the first reeve in the rural municipality of Moose Creek No. 33. He 

resigned that position on being nominated Liberal candidate in the constituency of Souris, and was 

elected in the general election of 1912. He thus sat in the first Legislature to meet in this Chamber. He 

was defeated in the election of 1917 by the late Mr. W.O. Fraser. He left the Oxbow district in 1920, 

moving to Regina where he held several government appointments. He finally returned to his farm in 

1938, and had been in failing health for some years prior to his death on June 21st of last year. 

 

A splendid entertainer in his younger days, Mr. Forsyth was in much demand at social gatherings in his 

home district. As a farmer, his primary interest was in livestock. At one time he owned a large herd of 

Hereford cattle. 

 

Mr. Forsyth is survived by one son, one daughter, a step-daughter, two sisters and a brother in Ontario, 

two grandchildren and five great-grandchildren. 

 

Since the Legislature commenced its sittings, word has come of the death of Mr. JAMES PATRICK 

GORDON, a resident of Alameda for more than 50 years, who died on April 1, 1955, following a stroke 

while visiting his sick wife in the hospital at Brandon, Man. He was 78 years of age. 

 

Born at Ballymena, Ireland, in 1877, he was educated at Marlborough Street College, Dublin, and came 

to Canada to settle in Saskatchewan 



 
April 7, 1955 

 

2 

in the year the province was established. He served as school principal at Alameda, and at one time 

published the ‘Alameda Dispatch’. For some years he engaged in the implement business, and acted as 

farm auctioneer and auditor. Later he operated an insurance and real estate brokerage office in Alameda. 

A member of the town council, and a director of the Alameda Telephone Company, Mr. Gordon was 

also prominent in Masonic circles until he left the district for Brandon, two years ago. Elected to the 

Saskatchewan Legislature for the constituency of Souris in the general election of 1921, he sat through 

one term as the sole Conservative in the House. Mr. Gordon is survived by two sons and a daughter. 

 

I would therefore like to move, seconded by Mr. Danielson (Arm River), in the absence of the Leader of 

the Opposition: 

 

That the names of Richard Forsyth who served in the third legislature and James Patrick Gordon who 

served in the fifth legislature, both as members for the constituency of Souris, be added to the list of 

deceased former members to whom the Assembly paid tribute on Friday, February 11, 1955, and the 

Clerk be authorized and instructed to amend the record accordingly, and that Mr. Speaker, on behalf of 

this Assembly, communicate the sincere regrets and sympathy of the Assembly, together with a 

transcript of the oral tributes to members of the bereaved families. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, it was not my privilege to know either one of these 

two members. I have a rather hazy recollection that I met Mr. Gordon just once, but I am not so sure of 

that. Otherwise, these persons who have passed away, Mr. Speaker, were not personally known to 

myself. I regret that members of this House are passing as time passes on, and as time goes on they are 

leaving us one by one. 

 

I have pleasure in seconding this motion. 

 

The question being put on the motion (Premier Douglas), is was agreed to unanimously. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before we go on to Orders of the Day I have received two messages which may 

interest the Assembly. The first is from Glen and Fern Campbell: 

 

“Please convey to Premier Douglas, the Douglas Government and the people of Saskatchewan, Glen’s 

and my sincere thanks for the beautiful tea service we received on March 23rd. It was indeed a 

memorial day in our lives and one we won’t ever forget.” 

 

And another one from another member of the family: 

 

“Members of the Assembly, thank you very, very much. I feel very highly honoured and ask myself, 

do I deserve it? — but a rose so willed 



 
April 7, 1955 

 

3 

to the living is more than sumptuous wreaths to the dead.” 

 

It is signed by Mrs. A.L. Campbell. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

TIME ENQUIRY REPORT 

 

The House resumed, from April 5th, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Heming 

(Moose Jaw City): 

 

That the first report of the Select Standing Committee on Municipal Law (Time) be now concurred in. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to take very much of the time of the House 

to deal with this very important matter; but I think perhaps it is only proper that, since the Committee of 

this Assembly has worked on it considerably, and since committees of the last two sessions also devoted 

considerable time to this problem, it is only fitting and proper that we do something about it at this time. 

 

The proposal which came from the Municipal Law Committee is not a very difficult one. You will recall 

that a questionnaire was sent out to all municipalities in the province at the request of the Time 

Standardization Committee, last year. The results of that questionnaire appeared very confusing until it 

was transposed onto a map, but when that was done a pattern began to emerge which I think provides 

some possibilities of an answer to this vexing problem. 

 

It was noted that not a single rural or urban municipality in the eastern third of the province disagreed 

with the proposition of Central Standard Time, and therefore, it has been possible to draw a map 

following municipal boundaries which separate that third of the province from the rest and it is possible 

to say there is perfect unanimity, so far as the questionnaire showed, in that part of Saskatchewan. The 

rest of Saskatchewan, however, showed a little different picture. 

 

First of all, there are some fringe areas around the boundary where the picture is confused. In the 

vicinity of Weyburn, of the 8 rural municipalities there, 6 favour Daylight Saving Time, 2 Mountain 

Standard and the City of Weyburn, Central Standard, the town of Radville, Daylight Saving Time, and 

the town of Yellowgrass and McTaggart also dissenting. So that that presents a confused situation 

which, I believe, can only be settled by a decision of the electors there. 

 

The rest of the province shows some dissent from the general picture of Mountain Standard Time. All 

rural municipalities reporting evidently favour Mountain Standard Time, with the exception of three, 

Warman municipality, Dundurn municipality, and one down here at Beechy, who favour Central 

Standard Time. The picture so far as the urban municipalities is concerned is one of a little more dissent. 

Of 334 towns, cities, villages in the western two-thirds of the province, 90 dissent from Mountain 

Standard 



 
April 7, 1955 

 

4 

Time, so that there are about 90 pins indicating villages, towns or cities that are in favour of some other 

time than Mountain Standard. 

 

The situation is complicated, however, by the fact that, although 90 is only a small proportion of 334, 

some of the largest urban communities are among that group. Saskatoon, Sutherland, Regina, Moose 

Jaw and Prince Albert all are among that group. The problem then is that the Committee felt it could not 

ask this Assembly to decide what standard time should prevail over that area. The Committee therefore 

felt that it was fair and democratic, if we are going to have uniformity of time at all, to allow not just the 

urban municipalities, but people of all municipalities in that area to vote on the proposition of Daylight 

Saving Time, Mountain Standard Time or Central Standard Time. 

 

Various results could flow from that vote, but it is safe to assume, I think, that in this district in the 

Weyburn region, where the people appear to be divided between Central Standard Time and Daylight 

Saving Time, a vote probably would reflect a decision in favour of either of those two times; that the 

Weyburn area would, therefore, merge into the eastern zone as a result of a vote. 

 

It is conceivable that the western zone might cast a decision in favour of Central Time, Daylight Time or 

Mountain Time, and, if it casts a majority vote in favour of Central Time, we would have achieved the 

ultimate objective of having complete uniformity over the entire province. If the western two-thirds 

casts a majority vote in favour of Daylight Saving Time (one hour n advance of Mountain Standard 

Time in the summer only), then you would have complete uniformity over the province during the 

summer months, and during the winter months you would have the re-occurrence of that line separating 

the two parts. On the other hand, if the western part of the province voted for Mountain Standard Time 

on a year-round basis, you would have a permanent line of demarcation somewhere in the vicinity of 

this red line that you see on the map, here. That would mean that the people of Saskatchewan would 

have to cope with only one time barrier in the whole province, the one to which I just referred. As it is 

now, of course, hon. members know that there is a time barrier around every city, town and village that 

adopts any other time than Mountain Standard. The people of every community have two times within 

their community, and to that extent it would represent a net gain in convenience to the people of 

Saskatchewan. It would eliminate all of these little time barriers around all these urban communities. 

 

Then, of course, I think it is only fair to pay more attention to the marginal districts. It was not possible 

from the questionnaire to say where some of these municipalities stood. They either did not send in a 

return, or otherwise failed to indicate what their views were. The recommendation of the Committee 

provides that the vote shall be held in all of that part of the province west of this most conservative line, 

the one farthest to the east, and provides that individual municipalities or block of municipalities around 

that line may, by the results of their vote favouring (shall we say) Central Standard Time, be added to 

the Central Standard Time zone. In the event that one of those fringe areas votes for Daylight Saving 

Time, however, and at the same time the western two-thirds votes for Mountain Standard Time, you 

would have this result. In the summer you would have the line going down and including the marginal 

area into the eastern zone of the province and, during the winter, you would have the line going 



 
April 7, 1955 

 

5 

down the other side of the Daylight Saving Time district in between the two major zones. That, of 

course, does not create a third zone; it does not create a third time barrier. It is important to note that 

there is still only one time barrier north and south of the province even if those results do occur, except 

that the time barrier would be on one side of the marginal area in the winter and it would be on the other 

side in the summer; that is, assuming that the marginal area adopted Daylight Saving Time while the rest 

of the province adopted Mountain Standard Time. 

 

It is inconceivable, of course (at least I hope it is inconceivable), that the major two-thirds of the 

province on the west side would adopt Central Standard Time and these marginal areas adopt Mountain 

Standard Time. Then, of course, you would have the whole province on Central Standard Time with an 

island in the middle on Mountain Standard Time. I hope that does not happen; but anything can happen. 

The electors of Saskatchewan have behaved in a pretty rational manner in the last 10 or 15 years and I 

don’t think we need to worry about something like that happening. 

 

That presents the picture, Mr. Speaker, and I think that I would be remiss if I did not present to you 

some of the arguments which were used in the Committee in support of that proposal. It is sometimes 

said that the cities ought to have the exclusive right to determine the time that they shall keep for 

themselves, and I suppose it is equally true that individuals ought to have the right to say that they 

believe there are 11 inches in a foot, or that there are five quarts in a gallon, or any other quaint or erratic 

system of standards which an individual may want to adopt for his own personal use. But it is still right 

and it is still not undemocratic to say to the individual that, in his public dealings with his neighbours, in 

his legal transactions with his neighbours, he shall adopt a standard which is commonly adopted or 

accepted by the general run of mankind. To say that the cities have a fundamental democratic right to 

keep any time they want is, of course, to completely misstate the case. No municipality has any inherent 

right to pass laws regarding interference with any of the standard measurements of mankind. No 

municipality could declare that a foot shall be 13 inches or that a gallon shall contain five quarts, unless 

the power to do so was reposed in it by the authority that is properly in charge of that jurisdiction, and 

here in Canada, that jurisdiction rests with the provincial governments; and the provincial government, 

many years ago, did, by a specific section in the Municipal Acts, confer upon cities, towns and villages 

the power to pass these bylaws. So they do not have the inherent right. This Legislature has the 

responsibility for deciding that question, and the mere fact that the Legislature chose to delegate it to the 

municipal authorities does not change the fundamental responsibility for that matter. 

 

This recommendation does not propose to abolish any democratic right at all; it proposes, instead, to 

repose that right in a larger constituency. Instead of allowing the individual municipalities to decide on 

an individual basis, it is proposing to allow, by this report, all the electors of the province an equal voice 

in deciding what standard of time shall be adopted for all legal purposes throughout the community. 

That may have been justified in the old days when municipalities were allowed this right; when people 

had to travel by oxcart or horse and buggy, they very seldom circulated very much beyond the confines 

of their own municipality or municipal boundary — and, of course, that is largely true of the cities 

today. Most people of the cities get up in the morning and go to bed at 



 
April 7, 1955 

 

6 

night without ever going outside the boundaries of their city. Rural people however, do travel about 

more freely around the province and, therefore, have I submit, at least as great an interest in the question 

of standardization of time as the urban people have. It certainly concerns their work, and so on, more 

seriously than it does the urban people. This proposal, however, is not to take anything away from the 

ratepayers of the cities, but only to require them to admit their cousins from the country on equal terms 

in the choosing of the standard time which shall prevail. 

 

There is one other thing I should mention before passing. The Committee, in recommending a zone for 

the Weyburn district, was guided by one consideration alone. For a small group of municipalities there, 

there appeared to be more disagreement than was apparent in any other part of the province. It may very 

well be that, since the present zone takes a bite to the east, with the city of Regina in the middle, that in 

drafting legislation or in approving legislation, the Committee may recommend that the Regina area be 

treated as a separate zone. It seems perfectly reasonable and logical to me. The reason that the 

Committee did not put it in the report was because the rural municipalities around Regina did not 

express disagreement as to their choice. It may be that, if the electors were consulted and given an 

opportunity to vote in that area, there is some difference of opinion, and a separate vote should be 

conducted in that area even as it is in the area just to the south of it; but there is no limit to the 

suggestion, I think, that could be received by the Committee for the erection of other boundary districts 

along that border, that time barrier. 

 

There is one thing I want to say about this, and it is that the Legislature has had this matter before it on 

many occasions in the past, and so far no proposal has been brought forward which has won the support 

of any sizeable number of members of the Assembly. This report is in a little different position. Out of 

some 20 members of the enlarged Municipal Law Committee, I think (if I recall correctly), there were 

only two members who opposed the adoption of the report, and I was pleased that it was not regarded by 

the Committee as a partisan issue. I would hope that, if there is to be any real solution to this problem, it 

should be treated in this Legislature in the same fashion. 

 

I think that this is only a report; this is only a recommendation. Next year, the Legislature would have to 

adopt legislation based approximately on the report, with refinements and additions as may be desired 

by the members of the Committee. The legislation, if it is drafted and presented and adopted at the next 

Session of the Assembly, would, of course, then go into effect and provide for a vote at some convenient 

opportunity after the legislation has been adopted. But I would earnestly submit to the House that this 

report is instructions to the next Legislative Committee only on general principles, and is not a finally 

worked-out programme or solution to this problem. 

 

I would therefore appeal to members of the Assembly to express the same degree of unanimity that was 

found in the Committee, and hope that the report will be adopted. 

 

Mrs. J.E. Cooper (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak against the adoption of this 

report, for several reasons. I think there are a great many things wrong with the recommendations that 

are contained in this report. 



 
April 7, 1955 

 

7 

I feel that a plebiscite would only point out the divergence of opinion regarding time preference that we 

already know exists, and I do not think it will settle anything really satisfactorily. 

 

In the first place, I think there will be a great deal of confusion among the people who have to vote, as to 

what is actually meant by ‘Mountain Standard Time’, ‘Central Standard Time’, and ‘Daylight Saving 

Time’. That would be a difficult thing to explain; I think there will be confusion. 

 

Secondly, I do not like the compulsory feature that is outlined in the second last recommendation, 

because it states there: “The voter will be told (that is, on his ballot) what action will follow as a result of 

the plebiscite.” Now, if a plebiscite is held, when the Government looks over that plebiscite, they may 

feel that there are certain exceptions that should be made, such as for certain cities, and I do not think it 

should be stated on the ballot at all what action will follow. It should be stated what action ‘may’ follow, 

and give them an indication; but the Government’s hands should not be tied. They should have a chance 

to look at the results of the plebiscite and then, on their findings, decide what action will follow; but the 

voters should not be told what action will follow, because that would bind the Government. 

 

Another thing I would like to say is that I sat on this Time Committee, as you know, and when the 

various delegations appeared, I asked every single delegation the same questions: “What is your 

problem?” . . . “Is it the cities going on fast time that is your problem?” . . . And without exception they 

answered, “No, we don’t care very much what the cities do; the real problem is where there are two 

towns nine or ten miles apart, on different times. That is where the real problem comes in.” It would 

seem to me that, surely, the municipalities, by mutual agreement, could straighten this problem out 

themselves, without, necessarily, action on the part of the Government. 

 

Then I think they way the vote is suggested — that we only take the vote in part of the province, and 

that the Central Standard Time zone be not asked to come in on the vote. Why? Because they want 

Central Standard Time, and it is very evident that that is what they want. But by taking the vote in the 

other part of the province, you are weighting the decision towards Mountain Standard Time, because I 

believe that, if a vote were taken all across the province, it might well turn out to be in favour of Central 

Standard Time. But if you cut out all the Central Standard Time people and only have the people in the 

part that are asked to vote for Mountain Standard Time, you are weighting the decision, and I do not 

think that is desirable. 

 

I would also like to say that I do not believe that many people in the rural areas actually appreciate the 

importance of fast time in the summer to working people. I mean people who work in stores and offices 

and banks, and so on. Farmers are out in the open all day long, and they can choose their time to come 

into the cities if they wish; but employees in offices or a bank or a store cannot choose their time. They 

have to abide by the time that is set by their employers, and that one-hour difference makes all the 

difference as to whether or not they can have a game of golf, or a game of tennis, or see a baseball game, 

or have an extra hour or so in the garden. The summers in this country are very 



 
April 7, 1955 

 

8 

short and, for health reasons, it is very important that people who sit in offices and work in stores have 

an extra hour in the fresh air and the sunshine during the summer months. For health reasons this is 

extremely important, and I do not think that many people in rural areas just understand how important it 

is. I firmly believe that the question, as far as the cities are concerned, anyway, and I think more than the 

cities, is something they should be allowed to settle for themselves. 

 

Some people have suggested that you could get around all this by saying that all we have to do in the 

cities is to open an hour earlier and close an hour earlier — start at 8 o’clock and close at 4; but that is 

completely impractical. Indeed I think it is almost ridiculous, because you would have all kinds of 

confusion. As I said, the employees cannot decide what time they are gong to work. You would have 

one office starting at one time, stores starting at another time, schools starting at another time, and it 

would make for all sorts of confusion. What is more, it would not satisfy, or would not help, anything if 

we did that, because, if a farmer came in in the late afternoon to shop, he would still find that the offices 

and stores are closed. If we closed at four instead of five, or 4.30 instead of 5.30, he would still find they 

were closed, and I think he would be much more annoyed than he is now, because he is prepared for fast 

time, and I do not think that it really inconveniences him very much. That suggestion is impractical. 

 

I had wished to move an amendment — I want to come back to the compulsory feature again. I feel very 

keenly that the ballot should certainly not state the results that ‘will follow’, but rather the results that 

‘may follow’, and I would wish to move an amendment that: 

 

“all the words after ‘that’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

“the said report be not now concurred in, but that it be referred back to the Select Standing Committee 

on Municipal Law with instructions that the said Committee have power to remove the compulsory 

features of the second last recommendation by deleting the word ‘will’ wherever it occurs and 

substituting the word ‘may’.” 

 

I wish to move this amendment, but I realize that the House is very close to proroguing, and that this is 

just proposing draft legislation, and possibly can be dealt with at the next Session. I realize that it would 

be difficult for the Time Committee to meet right now; but I wanted to make my position very clear, that 

I feel this is a very objectionable feature, and that I am going to vote against the motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Did the hon. member say that she was not now presenting the amendment? 

 

Mrs. Cooper: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to make my position clear. Since the House is so close 

to proroguing, I think I had best leave it at this time. I think I can accomplish the same thing at the next 

Session. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the House ready for the question? 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say one thing. I do not share 

the fears of my hon. friend in connection with 



 
April 7, 1955 

 

9 

this last point that she has just raised, because, after all, I feel that this is a recommendation to the 

Cabinet, and, having sat with the Cabinet for a number of years, I know that they have intelligence 

enough that they are not going to put some arbitrary thing in there that may prove to be not what will be 

carried out in the long run. 

 

I realize that this is a very difficult problem, but I think that the one step that should be taken has not 

been taken, and I would like to have seen this Committee recommend it to the Legislature. I would like 

to see this Legislature go on record as being in favour of inviting the Railway companies to be prepared 

to adopt Railway Time at different points from those they have at present. I think that would get away 

from a great deal of our trouble. One of the problems that was not referred to in the report, or in the 

remarks, is the confusion in communities because there are two times in that community — the railway 

time and the municipal time. I think that if we could agree to ask the Railway companies to change the 

time: say, instead of having it changed in Broadview, have it changed at Swift Current, and at 

Lloydminster, North Battleford, Wilkie, or wherever the divisional point is on the C.N.R.; I think that 

would then bring the whole province into Central Time, the same as it is in Manitoba. You see, there is 

no problem in Alberta. They don’t have to worry there, because there is one time only in the whole of 

the province, and that is Mountain Time, and it is an easy matter to deal with; but what has confused us 

here in Saskatchewan is the two times, Mountain Standard and Central Standard over approximately half 

of the province; probably a third and two-thirds would be a more accurate description of it. 

 

I am glad that the member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) pointed out that it would be possible, under this 

proposal, to take areas that may favour Central and put them into a certain zone, such as he is proposing 

for Weyburn. Frankly, I do not see why the Weyburn area should have been selected at all as a special 

district. I don’t think there is any more need for Weyburn. Frankly, I do not see why the Weyburn area 

should have been selected at all as a special district. I don’t think there is any more need for Weyburn 

having a special problem, a special section devoted to it, than any of the others. I think it should have 

been dealt with in exactly the same way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to say that, insofar as I am concerned, I am not going to oppose this; but I am 

going to reserve my right as a member of the Government, to use some discretion on these various 

things. I take them as recommendations to be considered and not as anything which is binding upon the 

Cabinet. I think, too, that the majority of my colleagues in the Cabinet would consider it in that way: that 

we are not being bound at all; that you are asking us to prepare legislation along these general lines. 

However, I want to reserve the right to change any of these sections that we feel should be changed, and 

to bring to the Legislature, next year, when we present the Bill, our reasons for doing so. 

 

In the meantime, I am wondering, when we know that the people from Moose Jaw east along the main 

line, for instance, are in favour of Central Time or Daylight Saving Time, if one of the first steps would 

not be to get the Railways thinking about this problem, about changing their time, because, even though 

we do adopt Daylight Saving Time or Central Standard Time in certain of these areas, if the Railways 

still continue to have their time change where it is not, we are still going to have the problem that we 

have today, and, until that is solved, you are going to have no real solution. You are still going to have 

the confusion that there is. Probably the railways should be approached after the plebiscite; but I think 

we could probably 



 
April 7, 1955 

 

10 

have avoided the plebiscite if we had approached this thing by going to the Railways first, and getting 

them to change their time further west. I think we would have eliminated completely the necessity of 

having to go to the people on this question at all. 

 

May I say, too, there is one dangerous thing about plebiscites. They do not necessarily give you public 

opinion. When you elect a council, for example, maybe 10 per cent of the voters turn out; I think our 

record in Regina has been somewhere around 15 or 16 per cent. Well, 15 or 16 per cent of the people are 

going to determine this question for the other 85 per cent. It may be democracy; but unless you get a 

good turn-out, we are not going to know what the people really want, and after we have put this into 

effect, we are going to have something which may be contrary to the wishes of the majority of the 

people. That is why taking a plebiscite of this sort at a municipal election can be a very dangerous thing, 

and can result in getting results which will not be much of a guide to the Legislature, the following year, 

to base legislative action on. However, the Committee have worked on it, and I feel that they have spent 

time, and in view of the fact that we have no alternative before us, I am going to support the 

Committee’s recommendations. At the same time, I am going to reserve the right, both as a member of 

the Cabinet and in the legislature, next year, when this comes before us, to change any of these sections 

that I think are not in the best interests of the people as a whole. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I do not want to prolong the debate, 

but I do want to make my own position clear. It has always been my opinion, and it is yet, that this is a 

matter for localities to settle themselves, and, because of that, I am going to vote against the motion. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, I do not think I can add very much, but I think 

the hon. member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) hit the nail on the head when he suggested that we should 

have no laws that would allow local communities to interfere with measures on such things as time. It is 

not just a matter of the Railways. The difficulty is all over the province where communities side by side 

set up different times and dislocate the whole life of the people. When we talk about democracy, I 

cannot understand why a municipality, even a city, should have the power to interfere with a right that is 

the prerogative of the Legislature. And it is not really democracy; I think it is much more, say, the 

functioning of democracy to go to the people have the people decide, even if it is by a small majority. 

That is the way we should be guided — by the opinion of the people of say, a large area, not just the 

opinion of a few councils here and there, and local communities. 

 

I am speaking for the northern area that I represent, not too far from Prince Albert, and I know the grief 

and the misunderstanding that has been caused by local municipal authorities setting up different times. I 

am certainly going to support the motion, and I am certainly going to try to acquaint the people with 

what the problem is, and then they will have the choice to decide what the consider is in the best 

interests of the province as a whole. I am certainly going to support the motion. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, someone has mentioned the fact that the 

province of Alberta is in sort of an enviable position in as much as there are no changes of time running 

north and south in the province. 



 
April 7, 1955 

 

11 

It is perhaps unfortunate that Saskatchewan is the province that has been chosen to make changes of 

time, and I would refer to the towns of Carlyle, Arcola, Broadview, Humboldt and Hudson Bay 

Junction. Being railway terminals, and the time has to be changed somewhere, these are the places that 

have been chosen by the Railways, many years ago. I believe the Railways have been approached some 

three or four years ago, but apparently have not been willing to go along with moving this time change 

farther west. I would agree with the Provincial Treasurer that they could be approached again. 

 

Back in the ‘thirties when a vote was taken in the cities, I always voted against Daylight Saving Time, 

but I have since changed my mind, and I rather like the daylight saving feature; but railway employees, 

as a rule, are against the change. 

 

I do not think it is too much of a mental effort, say, if a person lives in the town of Pense or the area 

around there, and say, the city of Moose Jaw wishes to remain on Mountain time and Regina wants to 

stay on Central time or go on Central time in the summer, for the people of those communities to 

remember that one city is on one time and one is on the other, with government all support it. I recall 

going up to Saskatoon, two years ago, leaving here very early in the morning. I got to the town of 

Hanley, and I was almost out of gas. I pulled into a filling station at 15 minutes to 9 by my watch, but it 

was 15 minutes to 8 by the clock in the filling station, and I would have had to wait 15 minutes. I 

decided I could make the next town, Dundurn; so I started out, and when I got about 10 miles out, I had 

no gasoline at all. Later on, however, when I thought things over a little differently, I realized it was my 

own fault; but for the moment, I thought the difference in time was no good at all. As I say, later I 

realized it was my own fault: I should have filled up with gasoline the night before, or not taken the 

chance of leaving Hanley until I had got some gasoline. 

 

Someone has brought up the matter of one town being on one time and another town being on another 

time and just eight miles away. It was said that people who are in the beer parlor in the one place can 

jump into their car and go and drink beer for another hour in the other town. I do not think that is a very 

serious situation either. I would not like to think that this is going to become sort of an urban-vs.-rural 

matter, and if we push this thing too far, that is exactly what is going to happen. Personally, I would 

agree with what the Minister of Health (Hon. Mr. Bentley) said, a few minutes ago. He feels the 

localities should be able to decide for themselves. I go right along with that; and eliminate any 

compulsory features that are in these recommendations. I think perhaps we could almost use a stronger 

work than ‘compulsion’; we might almost use the word ‘dictatorship’ — and that is a thing I do not like 

to see. 

 

I am strongly in favour of the municipalities using their own judgment; and I think it is more democratic 

for them to vote and decide which time they might want to adopt in the summertime. I intend to vote 

against the recommendations. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — I am against this report from the Committee and I am going to 

vote against it, because, to my mind, it does not solve anything. You have to have two times in the 

province of Saskatchewan in any case; and, as I listened to the member for Hanley — I did not listen to 

him 



 
April 7, 1955 

 

12 

now, because I heard the same speech in the Committee . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — He wasted an hour of our time, too. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — After all, when he gets through with these boundary lines of Standard Time and 

Mountain Time, he will have a more confused situation than there is now — much more confused. 

There will be more time variations between the municipalities than there are now if his scheme is put 

into operation. 

 

The people of the province of Saskatchewan have accommodated themselves to this. I can go up through 

the country where I live, and go to Saskatoon, and outside of the city, I do not think there are any towns 

on fast time any more. They have accommodated themselves to suit the community in which they live. 

As a matter of fact, my own town tried fast time one or two years, and it did not work satisfactorily, and 

about four years ago, when we had been on fast time for about a week, they got together and threw it 

out, and we have never heard of it since. 

 

I am going to vote against this, because I believe the people are taking care of the problem themselves, 

and I think one thing they resent is any interference in their daily way of living. 

 

Here is another thing, Mr. Speaker. I have heard the mothers on the farm complaining very bitterly 

because they cannot get their children to go to bed when the sun is still hi gh, which means they get to 

bed later; but in the morning they have to get up an hour earlier. The mothers complain about that, and 

that is the whole thing as far as I am concerned. You have farmed, Mr. Speaker, and you know that the 

whole process of farming depends upon long hours of work, and the farmers want to take advantage of 

the early morning hours in order to get their work done, and they do not like fast time. For those reasons, 

I am going to vote against this. 

 

The question being put on the motion (Mr. Heming), it was agreed to, on division. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber a 12.40 o’clock p.m., and, being seated on 

the Throne and having Assented to several Bills, was pleased to deliver the following Speech: 

 

MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: 

 

“It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I wish to 

thank you and congratulate you upon the work you have done. I wish also to express my confidence 

that the approval of the programmes and plans presented before you will continue to provide services 

necessary to the growth and future development of our Province. 

 

“I am pleased to note that you have approved payment for the cost of ‘work and wages’ and other 

emergency programmes made necessary by flooding and crop failure conditions last fall. 



 
April 7, 1955 

 

13 

My Government will continue to take whatever measures are considered necessary to ensure that 

hardships resulting from these conditions are minimized. 

 

“You have provided for a higher level of grants for education. Additional grants have been made 

available for municipal road purposes. 

 

“Your decision to increase the supplemental allowances to needy recipients of Old Age Security 

pensions will be welcomed, as will the increases in Mothers’ Allowance payments and payments to 

foster homes. 

 

“Arrangements have been made for Saskatchewan to be represented later this month at a meeting 

preliminary to a Federal-Provincial Conference. resolutions which you have adopted during the course 

of this Session will prove useful to my Ministers attending this Conference. 

 

“Reports of the Royal Commission on Agriculture and Rural Life have been placed before you. 

Additional reports delivered to the government during the course of the year will be made available to 

you. The work of the Commission has created widespread interest, and it is hoped that its reports will 

provide the basis for useful public discussion. 

 

“You have approved legislation amending The Credit Union Act, The Municipalities Seed Grain and 

Supply Act, The Corrections Act, The Child Welfare Act, The Vehicles Act, The Provincial Lands 

Act, and The Farm Security Act. 

 

“You have passed legislation revising and consolidating The Archives Act and The Cemeteries Act. 

 

“Increased benefits have been provided under the Workmen’s Compensation Act. 

 

“I am pleased to note that you took the time during this Session to extend suitable honours to the 

Campbell Brothers of Avonlea, 1955 Macdonald Brier Curling Champions. 

 

“At the close of this Session, held in the Fiftieth Year of Saskatchewan’s history, may I commend to 

you the many plans formed for the celebration of our Fiftieth Anniversary by all our communities. I 

trust that you will join with them and contribute to the success of their endeavours, and make 1955 a 

year to be remembered by our pioneers, by our young folk, and by the many visitors who will be in our 

midst. 

 

“I thank you for the provision you have made to meet the further requirements of the Public Service, 

and assure you that the sum of money voted will be used economically, prudently and in the public 

interest. 

 

“In taking leave of you, I desire to thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies 

to the activities of 



 
April 7, 1955 

 

14 

the Session and to wish you the full blessing of providence as you return again to your respective 

homes. 

 

The Assembly was then prorogued at 12.50 o’clock p.m. 

 

(signed) Tom Johnston, Speaker. 


