



















































Hansard: February 17, 1955


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Twelfth Legislature 

6th Day 

Thursday, February 17, 1955 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed, from Wednesday, February 16, 1955, the adjourned debate of Mr. Dewhurst for the 

Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Robert Kohaly (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, this is the second opportunity on which I have 

had the privilege to come into this House and deliver a speech in connection with the Reply to His 

Honor. Last year was the first occasion I had opportunity to speak at all in this Legislature, and I can 

assure you that I have attempted, over the past year, to bring myself up to the high standard of the ability 

and debate of the rest of the members of the House. This year I hope that my work will show a little 

progress, and I want to take part in the debate on the Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

With your permission, on behalf of the people of Souris-Estevan whom I represent, I have placed on the 

desk of each member a small box. This box contains samples of some of the products of our 

constituency. These samples, you realize, far from exhaust the products we in Souris-Estevan have been 

producing for many, many years. If it had been possible I would have brought with me samples of our 

livestock industry, of our nursery, which is undoubtedly the largest on the North American continent, 

and we would have brought some of our show prints which you find on billboards across the entire 

western provinces. I have brought, however, five little bottles, and in case some of the members are 

unable to follow what I have to say about them, I thought it would be a good idea so that they could see 

them, and feel them, and smell them; it has been suggested to me that I have been remiss in that they 

cannot drink them. It is not possible to produce, in Souris-Estevan, anything that would appeal to the 

taste of any of the hon. members. 

 

One of the bottles on your desks contains wheat which is being grown, and is of the highest quality, in 

the Souris-Estevan constituency, for not only the 50 years we are celebrating this year, but for more like 

70 years. We are very happy that we are able to produce this wheat in large quantities for these years 

and to swell the revenues of the province of Saskatchewan to the extent that the production of grain has 

in fact done. 

 

I hope that the Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) will bear in mind that we require, in this poor 

year, not only a little seed for next year and some fodder for this year, but an over-all solution to some of 

the problems which farmers in our constituency, and, indeed, in the province, are facing. 

 

I had hoped that the Speech from the Throne would give us some indication of a sound over-all policy of 

assistance to farmers struck down this year, through no fault of their own. Piecemeal assistance is not 

sufficient, but apparently it is going to be sufficient for us in this province in this particular year. I am 

sure that farmers in this province will have read 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

2 

the Speech from the Throne with much anxiety and probably concluded their reading without the 

comfort that they had hoped. Maybe it was too much to ask the Government for this group of people in 

this particular year. 

 

The second bottle you have represents a new industry. We have, in Souris-Estevan now, some nine 

producing wells, with many others capable of production of the highest quality oil found anywhere in 

the province of Saskatchewan. We have not as yet the most oil, but we are quite confident that we will 

be able to add this laurel to the already long list that we have. The sample what you have, you may be 

interested to know, is of approximately 40 specific gravity, and was found in the Frobisher area in the 

Charles formation, which is in the neighbourhood of 4,500 to 4,600 feet. 

 

We are happy to contribute our oil to the general welfare of the people of this province, and I am sure 

the farmers who have laboured for much longer than 50 years, through good and through bad, on these 

farms, looked to the Speech from the Throne for some hope that they who lived on land where the 

minerals were held by the Crown might be able, this year, to receive some small personal share of the oil 

which is now, or might be, produced from their lands. It is unfortunate that the Government has not seen 

fit to take this matter into consideration, or at least indicate it in the Speech from the Throne, and to give 

these people some small share. I am sure that the people are on Crown mineral land, and the allied 

industries in Souris-Estevan, look with hope that some of the revenue which we are producing and 

which we are fortunate to obtain in this province from oil, especially in non-recurring type of sale, might 

be put to a special use in this province in this our Jubilee year. 

 

We had a right possibly to expect, and I have called on the House before for, a development plan which 

would provide future generations, who are also entitled to a share of this oil, with some of the benefits 

which we are now enjoying. You may rest assured, Mr. Speaker, that I shall have, if opportunity affords 

it, much more to say later on about this particular problem. 

 

Now you have also a small bottle which contains pieces of brick produced in the Estevan plant. I notice 

in the Throne Speech that the Government has taken upon themselves considerable credit for providing 

a form of employment in the sodium sulphate division of Saskatchewan Mineral Products. I am a little 

fearful, living close to the scene, that this increased employment may be seriously offset by lay-offs in 

the brickyards, which is also a part of Saskatchewan Mineral Products. We hope that this will not 

happen, but the indications are, if present conditions continue, that there will be a very serious problem 

involved, and at this particular time it would be most unfortunate if these possibility should come about. 

 

The local and general management of the brickyard at Estevan has left, throughout the past year, and is 

presently leaving much to be desired — a great deal to be desired. The employees have themselves, over 

a period of time, taken great pride in producing a product which is now recognized as of the finest 

quality. They have endeavoured, consistently, to bring efficiency to the plant so that more and more of 

their products may be made and sold throughout this province and, indeed, across the entire Dominion. 

Unfortunately, the local, and again, the general management of the plant is not developed to that extent. 

We have a serious possible degeneration of employer-employee relationship which might well lead (and 

again we hope not) to the eventual collapse of this entire industry. 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

 

3 

In due course I propose to discuss this question more fully and completely and without any reservation 

whatsoever in an attempt to place the responsibility for this possible seriousness in Souris-Estevan in the 

hands and on the heads of those who are responsible. There can be no argument whatsoever amongst the 

people of my constituency who have been to the plant and the found their empty raw product bins, bins 

that should have been filled, last summer, if the plant was being operated properly. It is not possible or 

feasible to draw out the best clay to make the best bricks when the ground is frozen, and we are, 

unfortunately, finding that they cannot continue their operations in the plant without the raw product. 

That cannot be the responsibility of the employees in that particular plant. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that I 

shall not be required to return to Regina a few days after the Session, as I did, last year, to discuss the 

question of the future of this plant located in Estevan. 

 

Fourthly, you have a small bottle containing lignite oil. The coal industry in the Bienfait-Estevan area 

has been the backbone of that area for almost the same number of years we are celebrating as our 

Jubilee. This industry has employed considerable men over many, many years at a reasonably high rates 

of pay, and continues to do so to this day. The coal which you have on this particular occasion comes 

from the Western Dominion Coal Mines Limited, where, last year, they produced 1,000,000 tons of the 

approximately 2,000,000 sold from the entire field. It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that 

approximately 39 per cent of all the lignite coal sold in the province of Saskatchewan is produced by this 

Company and these men. Eighty-eight per cent all the lignite coal sold in Ontario, and 47 per cent of all 

such coal sold in Manitoba came from this relationship between these employees and this particular 

Company and, despite a poor season for coal, falling prices and markets and increasing competition 

from oil and natural gas, private industry in the form of this Company and two or three others in the area 

have been able to meet the local employment situation and have not been laying off men, have not been 

doubling up on jobs, but have been keeping their payroll high. I believe that some of the Crown 

Corporations might well look to this good business administration, this good industry, this good 

employer-employee relationship, and learn something which would benefit the corporations involved, 

and, of course, this province and all of us who live in it as well. 

 

And, finally, you have a small bottle representing the contribution which Souris-Estevan and the 

employees are making in the power plant there. We are very proud of our power plant and I love the fact 

that this Government has located such a large plant in Estevan close to the fields where they can use our 

coal. We are very happy that they have extended the plant there. We are pleased to notice that the power 

plant at Estevan probably produces power at a cheaper rate than any other plant operating the province 

of Saskatchewan, and we feel that, even if there is a hydro development in the province, the Estevan: 

power combination will still be able to produce power cheaper than the hydro. 

 

We hope that, in this time of need for works and employment, the suggestions of an extension on the 

plant will be carried forward promptly; that further extensions might be considered, even though they 

are not intended, for this year, that they might be put into effect so that we are assured that they can take 

care of some of the increased unemployment. 

 

I thought that the samples would tend to remind the Government of some of the products of our 

constituency, to remind them of the revenue that we have produced, the services which we have 

extended, and our desire to continue 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

4 

to advance and to serve and to provide revenue. We remind you as well that we have needs down there, 

and that these needs should be fulfilled by this Government. We hope that these needs will be fulfilled 

far more in advance of what we might expect from the Speech from the Throne. 

 

I wish, Mr. Speaker, to take this opportunity to congratulate the mover and seconder of the Address in 

Reply to the Speech from the Throne. Their review of the past accomplishments and the future benefits 

to be derived from this Government differs amazingly and entirely from the viewpoint taken by, I 

imagine, most members on this side of the House. It is most amazing that such a difference of views 

should take place merely because the member sits on one or the other side of Mr. Speaker. 

 

I should like, also, to congratulate the Leader of the Official Opposition (Mr. McDonald) on attaining 

his high office. I am sure that his background — occupational, service and political — will serve him, 

this House, his constituency and the province in good stead. He undoubtedly displays qualities of 

leadership which his Party has long been seeking. I hope that their choice will result in a strong and 

vigorous attack on the problems of our day. I wish him well, and I am sure that he will use his ability to 

the full extent while in opposition; and if and when his hopes come true that he might form the 

government, then I wish him well and hope that he shall serve his province, his party, his constituency 

and, of course, himself while in government. I only hope that he will continue to put forward policies 

which are peculiarly necessary for the province of Saskatchewan and not be dictated to and guided too 

much by some of the policies which the Federal Government and his party are advocating. I am sure that 

this man will once again show the sterling qualities we have come to be used to in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and be primarily interested in our province and all of the people live in it. 

 

I should also like to take this opportunity to congratulate our Attorney General, to wish him good health 

and good fortune should reports be true that he does not intend to return to the Legislature. As a lawyer, 

I can say that I have received nothing but courtesy, co-operation and assistance from him and, through 

him, from his Department, in all of the dealings, which are many, that I have had with that Department. I 

am sure that his quietness in the Legislature, which, of course, is a matter of legend, stems only from the 

fact that it is natural for a man of his profession. 

 

I wish to commend this Government for their foresight in setting up the Jubilee Committee and in their 

good fortune in obtaining Mr. Justice Culliton and Mr. Fred McGuiness to carry out this work. From this 

policy instituted by the Government at the proper time, I am sure that we will all benefit. I must 

commend the Committee for the long and diligent service which they have given to their work. I am 

positive that the results which they have obtained our most gratifying to them, and I am certain that it is 

a matter of pride throughout the entire province that they have carried out their work so well. 

 

I would point out to the Government, and to the Committee as well, that while the spirit of remembrance 

and appreciation of our pioneers is flowing so profusely from us, they might wish to accept the 

suggestion to provide a lasting honour for those who build the foundations of this province so firmly. 

Many of the citizens of yesteryear are no longer with us to receive the acclaim which we will be giving 

to those who are fortunate enough to live here, or we will be coming back to this province, they having 

long since passed to their reward. In this Golden Jubilee year the citizens should be remembered as the 

„golden citizens‟ of Saskatchewan. Many, however, of the last resting 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

 

5 

places of these golden citizens are in a deplorable condition. It is a mark against this province and the 

interest which we presume to have in them. It would not be too much for this province to give, at this 

time, some little financial and other encouragement to municipalities, whether they be urban or rural, to 

fix up these small cemeteries across the province. I realize that this is not a problem which has ordinarily 

been tackled by this Legislature, but in this particular year, with these things in our minds, we might be 

able to give them some assistance and some guidance in an effort to provide a memorial that would last 

for many years and make us feel much better, with our conscience much easier, at the time when we 

celebrate our Diamond Jubilee. It is most unfortunate, as you travel through the country, to find that the 

municipalities have been unable to keep up some of the smaller cemeteries. A little guidance and a little 

assistance might provide a little employment at this particular time, and this may be a suggestion that the 

Government and the Committee could give some consideration to. 

 

I should personally like to express my appreciation to the Cabinet Ministers and heads of departments on 

whom I have called in the course of representing my constituency during the past year. In all cases every 

request that I have made has been considered. In the great majority of cases my requests have been 

acceptable; in some cases the requests have been fair but denied. In the long run, when the citizens of 

my community have required the help of a department they have received it, and I hope that, in the years 

to come, the Government will continue to look upon the problems of the individual in my constituency 

is being of sufficient importance to consider them and to solve them. 

 

I should also express my special appreciation of the Minister of Social Welfare (Hon. Mr. Sturdy). From 

time to time, and more increasingly, we have had the problem of old-age assistance, supplemental 

allowance, mothers‟ allowance, social aid and so on, and they come to the member, and, if you happen 

to be a lawyer they come more increasingly, asking for assistance. I have always received courtesy and 

assistance from the members of the Social Welfare Department, and I am sure that any other member 

who has approached the problem in the same way has received this courtesy and assistance. 

 

I should also like to take the opportunity of commending the Minister of Public Health (Hon. Mr. 

Bentley) especially. Information was given to me, early last year, that the Saskatchewan hospital at 

Weyburn was in a deplorable condition. I took the opportunity, with his co-operation, to visit that 

institution from the attic to the basement and I found there not only a sorrowful scene but a busy 

institution. The Director, Dr. Osmond, has a tremendous problem on his hands to provide space and train 

staff for a very needed work. There are men and women there, however, who should not be the 

responsibility of Dr. Osmond. Some of them should be placed in houses for aged and in nursing homes, 

and the sooner we get at it the better, because they are not mental cases and would not be there except 

we have not a proper place to put them, and the place of last resort appears to be that hospital. This 

Government must make some substantial progress in this particular field immediately. I am told that 

some of the worst features are being removed at this very moment; that they will have a better institution 

almost immediately. I hope that members on both sides of the House will take the opportunity of visiting 

this institution. It is a most important problem and one we cannot shy away from; and if they go and see 

just exactly what is being done there, see the need there, they will realize just how important a problem 

it is. Then they can come back and use their weight to ensure that something is done to improve the 

facilities. I hope there will be sufficient funds allocated, this year, to look after this problem. 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

6 

I am very pleased to see that the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines) has accepted one of my 

suggestions of last year and placed the Public Accounts in the hands of the members for study at an 

earlier date than is usually done. I should like to thank the civil servants who undoubtedly worked long 

hours and extra hours to make this possible. We are sure that there will be a substantial profit coming to 

the people of this province from the extra „homework‟ which the members have undoubtedly done. I 

hope that the Minister, however, does not expect too much from us because the Public Accounts are 

very, very difficult to understand in their present form. 

 

I must also bear the responsibility for some of the worry which the Minister experienced in allowing 

copies to become public before they have been tabled in the House. I hope that I have not by that action, 

or by any action, Mr. Speaker, which I have taken, added any of the years which have been so 

unceremoniously added of late to the Minister involved. I only wish that he may enjoy the fruits of his 

age, and that he may live in peace and quiet for many years to come. 

 

I have read the Speech from the Throne and am very sorry to find that, in my opinion, the assistance 

which maybe there is piecemeal only. There is an over-all problem for which we have a right to see 

some solution. The material in such form is entirely unacceptable to me. The legislation neither meets in 

full nor in part the main problem, and I must reserve my comments until I have seen the full legislation 

tabled in the House. I cannot overlook the fact that this Government is going to give some further 

assistance to our old-age pensioners, and I hope that, whatever the amount may be, it will be sufficient 

to ease the minds of these old-age pensioners. We hope that the amount will be as much as can be given 

in these particular times, and that it will be sufficient. 

 

Now I want to come to employment, or, worse still, unemployment in the province of Saskatchewan. I 

find that in Saskatchewan there are some 150,000 people classified as self-employed. If we take from 

this figure all those who are in business for themselves or are professional men, we have approximately 

116,000 who make their living by work from day to day. On February 4th, the National Employment 

Service inform us that there were some 21,400 unemployed in Saskatchewan. This does not include the 

thousands of farmers who have come to the towns, cities and villages in an effort to eke out sufficient 

cash to get them through the winter. In percentage this means that 18 per cent of the labouring homes of 

Saskatchewan have no breadwinner whatsoever. This means that one out of every five of every worker‟s 

homes in the province has no earned income. Canada as a whole has from seven to ten per cent 

unemployment — we have eighteen. What is the Government going to do about this problem? The 

Speech from the Throne states that we are going to ask the Dominion Government for a conference and I 

assure you that I believe, as many others do, that this conference is an absolute necessity, but in the 

minds of these working people, those one out of five in the province of Saskatchewan who are 

unemployed, I believe that it will be of little comfort to them in their time of need. 

 

We find that Ontario wants a conference to, but in the meantime it is going ahead with what would 

appear to be a vast works-and-wage programme. The province of Quebec is doing something better than 

a conference at this particular stage. This province appears to be no better, Mr. Speaker, than the Federal 

Government that we heard so much about, yesterday, from the hon. Premier. This province has a 

responsibility which co-exists with the Federal Government, and it is not necessary for this Government 

to 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

 

7 

wait until the Federal Government does or does not do something which they feel is necessary. We have 

a responsibility which we have never hesitated to accept until we get into a situation such as we have 

here. To the working man it must be a gloomy Speech from the Throne and a gloomy future, and I 

charge that, in this first real test which this Government has faced in about 11 years, it has failed and 

failed miserably and is guilty of the very thing that we heard so much about yesterday in charging the 

Federal Government. 

 

As a member of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, I do not feel that I should be silenced by what might be 

the suggestion of the Premier that, in discussing this matter, we might be tending to drive a wedge 

between the groups of farmers and labour. I drive no wedge, but I do insist on action for both groups of 

this province in light of the need which they have from this Legislature, and should expect as our duty 

towards them. This province as long claimed leadership in many spheres of government, and this would 

be a very good time to prove it. There are 21,000 homes in Saskatchewan who will know whether this 

leadership has been provided. These 21,000 homes will not be satisfied with a copy of the Speech from 

the Throne. It is impossible to keep the family together on the farm and in the home and the city and 

town and village with a copy of the Speech from the Throne as it presently exists. 

 

I charge that this Government has failed to meet the problem of unemployment in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I wish (as I always try to do) to be very fair about this. I know that there is a wage-and-

work programme being carried on in the north-east portion of the province. I know that there is at least 

one contract out for stock-piling of gravel at this time, and that, of course, is a good idea. We must be 

very careful that we do not allow these general contractors, who employ large numbers of truckers who 

are in a very difficult position at this particular time, to put the trucker into the spot where he can make 

nothing whatsoever to take home to his family. There is some serious possibility that this is occurring, 

and while the Government may claim that they have no responsibility once they have let the contract, it 

is certainly up to us as our responsibility towards these truckers, to ensure that they are given fair 

treatment. 

 

I want to propose, Mr. Speaker, as I did last year, that we have a Development Fund. This fund should 

be available for self-liquidating projects, permanent public buildings and highways, to open up, amongst 

other things, the north for mining, the pulp industry, fishing and lumbering. Our towns and villages are 

long overdue for waterworks which they must have and should have. It is unfortunate that centres such 

as Moosomin must advertise to obtain capital at 4 3/4 per cent while the interest rates often go as high as 

5 1/2 per cent. In the province of Alberta they saw fit to make $100 million available, and on the first of 

January, 1954, there was some $46 million in circulation for this particular purpose. Within a year they 

had raised that figure to some $55 million, which indicates that the towns of the prairies will make use 

of it, will provide employment at the very place where it should be, right in the smaller centres, and 

provide them with a higher standard of living which all of us admit they should have, and this at some 2 

1/2 to 3 1/2 per cent interest. 

 

This is the kind of programme which we certainly should be entitled to have, and I hope that the 

Government sometime, sooner or later, will give serious consideration to the possibility of using these 

funds for this purpose 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

8 

I wish to turn for a moment to a proposal that is long overdue in this Legislature, as in all of the 

legislatures in Canada. I know that the Government agreed that we should have a stronger Opposition. I 

am sure that under the circumstances, students of political activity across the country realize that 

something must be done. Dean T.H. McLeod of the College of Accounting, stepped out and gave his 

opinion last year in Saskatoon. When a man of experience such as his, with his ability, speaks out on this 

problem, then it is high time that we as the Legislature get down to work and do something about it. It is 

too bad that we have to be prompted from the outside to ensure that our Legislature keeps up the pace 

with the other functions of our government. 

 

We find that members need better accommodation for stenographic services. I have been looked after 

wonderfully well, but there is still a great need on the Opposition side. But the important point is what 

we need in the Opposition is a small civil service of able advisers in accounting, law, economics and in 

government procedure. I am not asking for a civil service similar to what the Government have at their 

disposal. They have the best brains in the country, and they should have with them the best brains 

because this is becoming very big business. But what I am suggesting is that we have a small civil 

service of able men made available to us for a short period of the year, maybe a little before the session 

opens, to help us to carry out the functions which I am positive the members of the Government side of 

the House agree are necessary in a democratic country. We are doing our best, but we are few in 

numbers, and it is an impossible situation unless you have special training. Even the Cabinet Ministers 

do not depend on their own training, but gather around them men and women who have special training 

and special abilities. I am sure that this is one thing on which the Government could act and provide 

benefit to the House and to the province as a whole, without any tremendous cost being incurred. 

 

I want to suggest for a moment a new system of accounting, especially insofar as it concerns highways. 

It is high time we got rid of the old system (this Government did not institute it, I realize that) of 

reporting highways by constituencies. That went out a long, long time ago with the „pork-barrel‟ and the 

reward system, and it is high time we got rid of that. Let us be able to compare our highways and some 

of our other departments as well, with other highways in the province, with other highways outside of 

the province of a similar nature, and let us try to do a better job on highways, and we can do it if we get 

the accounting in the proper manner. 

 

Crown Corporations have been a new thing, and I feel that we have had enough experience now to be 

able to divide them into those Crown corporations which are operating for service primarily against 

those Crown corporations which are operating primarily for profit. A new set of rules peculiar to each 

one in our examination of their accounts should be established. We should not be looking at Crown 

corporations provided for service to see that they are operating financially profitably, because they are 

providing a service, but of those that are in the financial field we should certainly make sure that they 

are operating properly in a proper businesslike manner. And again, we must divide those in that group as 

against the ones which are monopolistic in nature, as against the others which are in private competition. 

A new set of rules will assist in ensuring that these Crown corporations are looked after properly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the people of this province have heard with interest in years gone by (good 

years, mind you) of the promises the present administration have given them over and over again that 

they would 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

 

9 

carry out in times which are difficult. I am quite sure that the people of this province would expect that 

these are not promises alone, not boasts but something that will be done in times of stress. We have a 

time of stress right now, and we are going to see, during the course of this Session, and the people of the 

province will know, whether or not these promises were in fact feasible, or rather they were just boasts. 

We are going to find out now whether this Government can do the things which they suggest they can 

do elsewhere. We hope that they will bring them into effect in this province, and I am sure that the 

people of this province will be very happy to see them brought into effect. You have an opportunity, 

those of you who sit on the Government side, to prove that your promises are not boasts. The people of 

this province directly affected will look forward to the implementation of your promises. You have a 

great opportunity. You have not seized it as yet; but I can hope, and only hope, that you will do so 

before it is too late. 

 

When I came into the House I agreed I would support those measures, which ever side they came from, 

which were for the benefit of my constituency and the people of this province, and that particular motto, 

Mr. Speaker, holds good today. 

 

Mr. H.C. Dunfield (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, since I do not see the member for Wadena (Mr. 

Dewhurst) in his seat I cannot very well compliment him on his address, but I was very interested in 

following his review of the industrial development that has taken place in our province during the tenure 

of office by this Government. It is indeed extensive, and it seems to me that it is a tribute to the courage 

and tenacity of private enterprise that they have gone ahead to the extent that they have under a Socialist 

government. I would say that they did that, and that great development has taken place, not because of 

that Socialist government but in spite of it. I do certainly wish to compliment the hon. member for 

Moose Jaw (Mr. Heming). It is always a pleasure to listen to him. His thoughts are carefully arranged, 

and I know that he believes in what he says. He certainly commands my respect at all times, and I give 

him the closest attention. 

 

When these compliments and congratulations are being handed out to our new Leader, I think some of 

them should be handed to the Liberal party for the good judgment they have shown in electing him to 

that position. I wish to say that we certainly think a great deal of „Hammy‟ as our Leader, and I would 

like to say that I think he is something like the motors in our new modern „55 cars; rugged in design, 

capable of carrying a tremendous load in peacetime, and by the same good, inherent qualities, also well 

adapted to the needs of battle when it may occur. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at various times in the past I have spoken here about the constituency of Meadow Lake, 

about its people, their problems and their achievements. Today, I wish to add to my former remarks, 

because ours is a very interesting constituency, one that differs in a number of respects from others, 

more particularly from those that are in the southern portion of the province, in the organized areas. 

 

In our constituency we have what might be called a divided economy, or two separate and distinct ways 

of life as between those who live in the north and those who live in the southern portion of the riding. 

Along our southern boundary, within a rectangle of approximately 30 by 100 miles lies all of the arable 

land within the constituency, and there our way of life is primarily that of agriculture with its 

accompanying occupations and its, 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

10 

more or less, varied opportunities for self-improvement. But in the northern part, comprising about 

three-quarters of the total area, and containing about one-quarter of its population, there the way of life 

is entirely different. It is still as it has been for generations, that of the hunter, trapper and fishermen, and 

their opportunities for self-improvement are very limited indeed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The constituency of Meadow Lake differs it in another important respect from those south of us, and that 

is in the administration of its public affairs. In the organized areas of the province, such as towns, cities, 

villages and rural municipalities, there we find within the framework of the provincial government 

administration, the junior or municipal type of government under which the people within these areas 

have a measure of local self government. They have something to say as to how much they should be 

taxed and in what manner, and how the money so derived may be spent, and in various other ways 

pertaining to their public life they have something to say in the formulating policies and of putting those 

policies into effect within their respective communities. But in the northern, unorganized areas of 

Saskatchewan, of which Meadow Lake constituency is a part, we have but one form of administration of 

public affairs, that of the Provincial Government. We have no say as to how much we should be taxed, 

and little or no say in formulating policies concerning our public life. 

 

Here we find a situation in which the governing body is separated by great distance from the governed 

people; a situation that, under the best of circumstances where the greatest of goodwill and co-operation 

might exist between both parties, and with the very minimum all of officialdom, it would still be an 

unwieldy form of administration and necessarily so, I admit. But it would appear, Mr. Speaker, that as 

governmental officials increase in number between the people and their government, so there increases 

in the minds of the people there a sense of irritation and confusion and oftentimes frustration. 

 

I have in mind an area in the north-west corner of our constituency, the boundaries of which I shall 

define more clearly later on; an area that under any Liberal government had but one administrator public 

affairs. He was well liked and trusted, and he seemed to carry out his duties in an adequate manner. In 

approximately that same area, today, there are, for similar duties, some ten government officials as 

enumerated to me, last year, at Buffalo Narrows. Several of these are liked and trusted and deservedly 

so, but others are very much disliked, distrusted and feared by the populace there — and with good 

reason, Mr. Speaker, as I intend to show. 

 

I have long known that the people in the northern part of the Meadow Lake constituency were not very 

happy under the C.C.F. administration, but it was not until I became their representative in this 

Assembly and had reason, possibly, to go among the more than I might have done otherwise, that I 

learned firsthand the causes of their discontent and the manner of their fear of this Government. May I 

say, Mr. Speaker, that fear of this Government is not confined to the constituency of Meadow Lake 

alone. I have seen ample evidence of the fear of this Government in the organized areas well to the south 

of us, and even to this very city of Regina. 

 

In the unorganized areas of the north the Government has control of all the natural resources, as they 

have elsewhere in the province; but here it is a matter of vital concern to these people, since it is their 

sole means of production from which they obtain their livelihood, and every act of government 

pertaining to those resources has an immediate reaction on their 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

 

11 

welfare, for better or worse. In addition to that, this Government controls all the administrative facilities, 

and in some places in the north they even have control of the means of distribution; so that actually we 

can say, Mr. Speaker, that, with control of the means of production, administration and distribution, 

there are some areas in northern Saskatchewan which we actually do have, in full effect, the „Regina 

Manifesto‟. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Behind the iron curtain. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — With this complete authority in the north, it is natural that it was here that this 

Government saw fit to implement its so-called planned economy; a planned economy that, according to 

spokesmen (whom I have heard) of this Government, was to abolish forever the waste, greed and 

corruption of the free enterprise system, and in its place, according to other spokesmen, there was to be a 

new life for the Métis. Mr. Speaker, in this planned economy of the north, the traditions and experience 

of generations of people who had lived there were simply ignored or cast aside, to be replaced with 

Socialist fear, and we, who have lived long in the north shall never forget the picture of those first 

arrogant officials of this Government who strode across that northland like little Caesars, bloated with 

power and personal ego, never seeking advice, never asking information, but telling us what they have 

planned for us, and what we would do — or else! That spirit of compulsion inaugurated in the north 

country by at C.C.F. government is still the basis of all their programmes in the north. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I intend to outline for you today some of the end results of 10 years of Socialist C.C.F. 

planned economy in northern Saskatchewan, and I wish to do that not only because of the immediate 

effects of that planned economy on the people there, but because of the very evident dangers to all of the 

people of Saskatchewan in any type of economy planned by the few and arbitrarily forced upon the 

many. At the outset, I wish to say that my personal opinions in the matter are immaterial and that I, as an 

individual, am of no importance whatsoever, except as I can interpret to this House the thoughts and 

opinions of those people whom I am very proud indeed to represent here and to act here as their 

spokesman. 

 

I have here, Mr. Speaker, a reprint from the Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science, 

printed by the University of Toronto Press. It is a reprint of a report arising out of the study of the social 

and economic conditions of a portion of the Meadow Lake constituency outlined in this report as the Ile-

a-la-Crosse—Buffalo Narrows—Portage La Loche—Dillon River—Ile-a-la-Crosse triangle. This study 

was initiated by this Government. The study was completed and the report compiled by a trained social 

observer, a social anthropologist from the University of Toronto. I can only commend the Government 

for initiating the study. Certainly I commend the writer for the manner in which he has compiled his 

report, and most assuredly do I commend this report to everybody in this House as worthy of study. It is 

the most amazing document, a most illuminating document concerning 10 years of C.C.F. planned 

economy. 

 

I find little to criticize in it other than to say, perhaps, although it is an excellent verbal snapshot of the 

conditions as this writer saw them in 1952, yet it has little or no historical background, nor does it offer 

any solution for the plight in which these people find themselves after 10 years of the paralyzing and 

corroding effect of C.C.F. administration. I intend to quote quite extensively from this report since 

nothing that I might say would have either the clarity of thought or the authority of opinion as have the 

statements in this report. Then, too, Mr. Speaker, much that is in 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

12 

it has already been said in this House by members on this side of the House; but when any member of 

the Opposition dares to criticize this Government in any act or end and, immediately the cry goes up on 

the government side of the House “Liberal muck and mire; dirty Liberal propaganda.” How often have 

we heard that story here? 

 

Some Hon. Member: — You said it! 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Mr. Speaker, by no stretch of the imagination can you call this report Liberal 

propaganda. As I said, the study was initiated by this Government and this report was compiled by one 

of the best-trained social observers, hired by this Government . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Conceited by their own works. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — In fact, in the early stages of this report this writer shows a very strong political bias 

in favor of the Government, but, strange to say, as the study progresses that bias disappears. I think it 

disappears wholly because of this writer‟s own mental integrity, and because of his deep regard for the 

traditions of his University; and for that mental integrity and moral courage I take off my hat to this 

young man, even though in doing so I might be considered partly undressed. This bias appears in the 

first three or four sentences, very early in the discussion. In the first sentences he said: 

 

“Prior to 1944 (the magic here) the Métis of the north obtained their sustenance from wild life.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is not a very penetrating observation and yet it is true. It was true prior to 1944, 

and it is true today. And in the sentence closely following that, he says: 

 

“Before 1944, for one reason or another the general populace of Saskatchewan was not greatly 

concerned about the manner in which the Métis of the north lived.” 

 

Nor is that a very discerning observation, Mr. Speaker, but it is equally true. It was true then, and it is 

true today. But, in another sentence following that he says, and again I quote: 

 

“But after the change of government a new attitude was accepted.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wish to leave that in the middle of that sentence because when I came to this point I 

asked myself, as „most anyone will — why did this writer in compiling this and making a study of social 

conditions, in a given portion of the province, at a set time; why did he have to make this clear-cut 

division in the political history of the country? What had that to do with it? I think, Mr. Speaker, that 

probably it was done unwittingly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, would he like me to answer that question for him? 

 

Opposition Members: — Sit down, sit down! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Can‟t take it, eh? 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

 

13 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, I can answer . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Perhaps he will get the answer. I think, Mr. Speaker, that the writer did it quite 

unwittingly, and I think possibly that he did it unwittingly because of this: that is because this 

Government has poured hundreds and hundreds of thousands of dollars into the north country since 

1944, tremendous amounts of which have been squandered uselessly, I think that both the Government 

and this writer thought that surely, with its vast expenditure of money, the condition of the Métis must 

have improved greatly after 1944. Unfortunately, that is not the situation, as we shall show a little later 

on. 

 

Now, may I continue where I left off in this sentence: 

 

“. . . but after the change of government a new attitude became accepted which can best be described 

as one favouring improvement of the social and economic conditions of the Métis through their 

participation in whatever new developments took place,” 

 

“Through their participation.” That word „participation‟ is important, Mr. Speaker. The writer does not 

say here how these people were to participate, whether they were to participate by consultation and 

agreement, or by compulsion. The answer to that becomes amply clear later on. But, therein lies the 

whole cleavage of thought between a Liberal philosophy of life and that of a Socialist; for our 

philosophy has, and always will be, agreement by consultation, and the philosophy of the Socialists must 

always be by compulsion. For Socialism can only survive on an ever-widening basis of increasing 

compulsion in public affairs, as we in the north know. 

 

Then, a little further along he discusses certain programmes entered into by the Government under this 

planned economy. He did not go too much into detail, because he is concerned with the end result, as am 

I. And he says this, of these programmes: 

 

“These programmes, though well meant, have met with resistance from the outset, since the Métis 

have seen in them threats to their entire customary mode of living.” 

 

These programmes met with resistance because the Métis have seen in them threats to their entire 

customary mode of living. Mr. Speaker, it is only that the lives of the Métis are probably less 

encumbered than ours that they saw so clearly, and so far in advance of the rest of us, the manner in 

which our rights and privileges as free citizens of this province have been steadily taken away from us 

by a C.C.F. government. 

 

The report goes on to say: 

 

“The programmes that were the focus of the greatest resistance and which have created the most 

problems for the Métis were the Saskatchewan Government for Fur Marketing Service and the Fur 

Block system.” 

 

And of these problems he says this: 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

14 

“These problems are due to the erroneous . . .” 

 

mark that — „the erroneous‟ — 

 

“. . . but common assumption on the part of the Government than an economic logic derived from a 

Euro-Canadian society can be imposed upon a people with a totally different background.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fish, game, fur, timber and land laws of this province as they pertain to the north 

country, provide ample evidence to us, and it would appear to us that this Government is trying to 

impose upon all of us an economic logic derived, not from a Euro-Canadian society, but from a Euro-

Caucasian society which is entirely foreign to our Canadian way of life. And then he continues: 

 

“That in compelling the trapper to sell his furs to the Marketing Board they have destroyed the Métis‟ 

greatest asset, his system of barter and credit.” 

 

This system of barter and credit that grew up through the generations, despite all its abuses, and all its 

faults (and I am well aware of them though I was never a trader), it still is a better system than anything 

is being considered by a C.C.F. government and its planned economy. 

 

Mr. Feust: — You were never an economist. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Mr. Speaker, the needs of the Métis were probably not as great as ours. They certainly 

were not; but credit was a fundamental need in their economy from the very first, because the fur crop 

was never constant from year to year. It fluctuates just as do grain crops, and every once in a while there 

is a complete fur crop failure. When such failures occurred, this much maligned trader stood as the sole 

barrier between stark famine in an orderly way of life as these people knew it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — What an angel! 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — I would like to give you a concrete example of this deep-seated feeling for a 

background of credit by these people. Many years ago, in the early days of Meadow Lake while it was 

still a considerable fur-trading centre and there were only a few homesteaders and ranchers there, one 

year, in the fall round-up, I was riding with a neighbour Métis and he had four good calves. I offered 

him $45 apiece for those calves. That is was a good price and he accepted it, and was to deliver them 

two days later, on Thursday. Thursday passed, and no calves. I was rather surprised because I had found 

these people to be very honourable in their dealings. However, turning it over in my mind I was quite 

sure I had come to the right answer. The next time I saw him, without preamble I said, “Memereux, how 

much did Mr. Roy give you for those calves?” He looked startled and hung his head and said, “Twenty-

five dollars apiece.” I said, “why on earth would you sell them to him for $25 apiece when I offered you 

$45?” And this was his reasoning. He 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

 

15 

said, “Mr. Roy has a store, and someday I might need a bag of flour bad, and I can always get it from 

Mr. Roy. You have no store. 

 

That may sound very illogical to you, Mr. Speaker; perhaps you have never been faced with the stark 

facts of existence. I know that you certainly have never had, as these people have had, to live maybe two 

months on and on mud-hen eggs, jackfish and the odd partridge. If you had that experience, Mr. 

Speaker, you would know that there were times when a pound of tea or a bag of flour was priceless. I 

understood his logic, and I agreed with that and I have no word of criticism. 

 

Mr. Speaker to a people not accustomed to budgeting their income, as perhaps we do, this cash system 

introduced by this Government under its planned economy was totally foreign to their way of life and 

has completely upset their economy, and this is what the report says: 

 

“This initial cash payment received by the trapper from the Board is spent quickly and sometimes 

unwisely. Then after a long delay, sometimes months, the final payment is received, and it is usually 

much smaller than anticipated, and the trapper found himself broke without credit, without a food 

supply and in debt. 

 

“Compulsory marketing has cut them off from the only type of wealth that they understood.” 

 

I have just given you an instance of that deep-seated instinct of the need for credit. 

 

We have heard a great deal in the past about the Métis debt: how they live from the cradle to the grave 

saddled with debt. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that the Métis debt never weighs very heavily upon his 

mind. I am quite sure that it did not weigh upon his mind any more than the so-called Provincial 

Government‟s self-liquidating debt preys upon the mind of our Hon. Provincial Treasurer, and I am sure 

he does not lose any sleep over that. 

 

Formerly these people were a nomadic people spread far and wide across the northland, camped by lake 

and stream and green forest from whence they obtained their livelihood. They were very self-reliant, 

individualistic in character. But, under this planned economy of this Government now they must come 

in — they could stay at camp all winter and when open water arrived in the Spring, they would come to 

the settlements. In former days they would trade their goods and go back to their homes. Today, as the 

report says, they gather together in settlements without services, and, as mentioned previously, they had 

to wait months for their final payment. And this is what he says: 

 

“They gather together in settlements without services. The Government has established four new 

hospitals, gives pre-and post-natal care, the rate of infant mortality is dropping, the population is 

increasing . . .” 

 

My, this sounds good, but just listen to the rest of it: 

 

“. . . yet the fur blocks with their rigid boundaries must provide this increasing population while wild 

life is decreasing.” 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

16 

Could not see this at all, Mr. Speaker,. Any Hudson‟s Bay Post man, any missionary, could have told 

him this, years ago; but this is all done off a blue print conceived in the back rooms here. And I continue 

from the report: 

 

“What happens is that a large number of young and middle-aged men leave the area to become 

migrant labourers . . .” 

 

where would you expect, Mr. Speaker? — 

 

“. . . in the North-West Territories.” 

 

No opportunities in Saskatchewan for them. They must go to the North-West Territories. I can give you 

literally names of several hundred young people, men and women, who have had to leave the 

agricultural area of Meadow Lake during the life of this Government solely because of the monopolistic 

policies of this Government in timber and natural resources and land; they have had to go elsewhere. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the next few sentences in this report will give you the most vivid picture of the so-

called C.C.F.-Socialist planned economy, and picture of the end results possibly it will have: 

 

“The effect of this migrant labour on the family structure has been shattering. Married men leave their 

wives and families for months, even years. Some send back money to keep their families, but more 

often than not families live on . . .” 

 

what would you expect? “Family allowances” from the Liberal Government at Ottawa. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Is that in the script? Is that in the article you are reading from? 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Absolutely, yes — not “from the Liberal Government at Ottawa” — just “family 

allowances.” You know where they come from, Mr. Premier; I do not need to tell you that. 

 

“. . . and what they can catch or collect by way of fish, rabbits and edible berries. With the growing 

number of men becoming migrant labourers, marriage has become unstable. Promiscuity has become 

the rule rather than the exception, an increase in the demand on the part of Métis women for white 

men as husbands or partners, because of the advantage of a stable income, has led to the loss of 

prestige on the part of the Métis man. This loss is being further aggravated by the current difficulties 

of obtaining credit which has been the core of the prestige system. Most children and adolescents are 

left with a minimum of parental control. They are no longer taught how to exploit the forest and 

stream efficiently, with the result that a generation of inefficient trappers is arising. An increase in 

venereal disease, tuberculosis, crimes, especially drunkenness and theft, and illegitimate births typifies 

modern conditions among the Métis — shades of Green Lake.” 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

 

17 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot conceive of a more damning indictment of C.C.F.-Socialist planned economy than 

is portrayed in this report. These people were much happier, and had greater family and economic 

security within the church and the trading system to which they had been accustomed for generations 

than they have ever had under this administration. 

 

May I point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that the native trapper is a natural conservationist. He is 

accustomed to taking only what he requires for his daily needs. It was not the trapper, the trader, nor the 

credit system that brought him to his lowest economic point. During the drought years vast fires raged 

across the northland, destroying much of that green coverage from when he derived his livelihood, and, 

to add to his difficulties, in those same drought years nearly a third of the population of Saskatchewan 

moved north into the five northern ridings. Many of these people moved into our park lands, many went 

on into the traditional hunting grounds of the natives, and stripped it to the last kit. They had no thought 

of conservation — a kit might be worth 15 cents today and $1.00 a year hence; but they weren‟t going to 

be there a year hence. Fire, drought and white man‟s greed brought the native to his lowest economic 

point, but from that he could recover; but it took 10 years of C.C.F.-Socialist planned economy to bring 

into his lowest point of demoralization from which many of them will never recover. 

 

Just before this Government came into power a Liberal government at Ottawa and a Liberal government 

in Regina were then exploring the possibilities of establishing three vast fur-breeding farms across 

northern Saskatchewan — and I know what I am talking about; I was intimately concerned in those talks 

and was to have been part of that general scheme, for which I am very thankful now I was not. This was 

to re-establish the fur economy of the north. These schemes were to be on a wholly voluntary basis, and 

they were to be for all the people all of the north, as the Act said — Indian, Métis and the white man 

who lives the way of an Indian. 

 

In the mid-thirties, just before that, Mr. L. Sargent of Meadow Lake, the late Mr. Ducluzeau and I 

presented to the government of the day a plan for the rehabilitation of the economy in the exact area 

outlined in this report; but, Mr. Speaker, the plan that we presented to the government of that day was 

not conceived in our minds. That plan was designed on the basis of the opinions of those people who 

were most concerned, those who lived there. It was they who told us what they wanted, what they 

thought should be done, and what could be done, to improve and diversify their economy. All of the 

many fine suggestions made the most outstanding then was a request for overland transportation, for up 

until that time the heavy goods win into the north country by winter freight, which, as you know, is cat-

swing and teams when they could cross muskegs, lakes and rivers, and what freight was left over in the 

summertime, heavy freight, went down in scows. The scows were built on the banks of Meadow River 

and then loaded, propelled or floated down Meadow River into Beaver River and on down through 

Grand Rapids and out into that vast waterways of the north. When the scows reached their destination 

they were unloaded and taken apart, and the lumber was used for building material. No scows were 

brought back upstream. And during those years of water transportation, the Federal Government, each 

year, put money into the Beaver River to open the channels through the Rapids (Grand Rapids) so that in 

the following year the passage would be comparatively safe through the rapids — if you knew the river. 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

18 

With one drought year following another, water levels dropped to the point where this type of transport 

was only possible for a short time in the spring; thus the demand for overland traffic. At that time there 

was only one trail into the north country — or only one into the northwest part of the province; that was 

an old colonization trails from Meadow Lake through Green Lake and on up Beaver River by Beauval. 

That was immediately brought into a fair state of repair for the traffic of that time which was only horses 

and wagons and half-ton trucks, but that served Green Lake, Beauval and Ile-a-la-Crosse with a five-

mile water jump. But there were large settlements of people who lived way north and west, at La Loche, 

Buffalo Narrows, Canoe Lake, and the only hope of ever getting an overland route to them was straight 

north from Meadow Lake. They pointed out to us the many good things that would follow and the 

manner in which their economy could be diversified with such a road. 

 

We placed that plan before the Government in the „thirties and, notwithstanding the terrific financial 

difficulties they were operating under, the Government saw the advantages of this plan, and somehow, 

somewhere, they obtained the money to start No. 4 Highway north from Meadow Lake some 50 miles. 

This Government, through its Department of Natural Resources, has bulldozed another 51 miles on to 

Canoe Lake. It only requires another 45 miles, and that could be bulldozed to Buffalo Narrows for a few 

thousand dollars. I know one man who offered to do it for $5,000, which would give a winter trail to 

railhead and make the road some 70 miles shorter than the present route; but from all appearances this 

Government intends to abandon that road now. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say something about the fish and fur policies in the north. These 

industries — the fish, fur and land schemes of this Government — as they pertain to the north are 

interwoven with endless regulations and varying interpretations of those regulations; no two officials 

seem to have the same interpretation of them. To enforce these regulations a vastly increased number of 

employees has become necessary. Among those employees I have met and do meet from day to day 

there are some of the ablest administrators that a government or the people could wish to have. They are 

men with years of training and years of experience; they understand the north and the northern peoples, 

and I have great sympathy for them. But even they, at times, seem to be completely frustrated by the 

fuzzy thinking of some of their Socialist superior officers, and for each one of these able administrators, 

there is an unholy number of employees whose sole apparent qualifications for being employed by this 

or any other government are that they were, and still are, good C.C.F. organizers and heelers. Some of 

these political appendages running around the north seem to be obsessed with but one idea, and that is 

not to assist their fellowmen in their grim struggle for existence, but to police them, to watch them 

closely, and, if possible, to catch them in the slightest infraction of any one of these regulations and, 

when they do so catch them, to penalize them to the limit of the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that all that these people ask of any government is that that government 

assist them in their way of life, and not to impose upon them a form of society for which they are not yet 

ready. They in their own way have a contribution to make to our Canadian culture and to our Canadian 

life, but we are fast losing that opportunity under this Government. Change and improvement will come 

in their mode of living, but only through a slow process of education as they understand it and desire it. 

It will never come under this crass programme all the modern citizenship which has been imposed upon 

them by this Government. 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

 

19 

One of the natural industries of the north is the raising of mink. An aggressive programme by this 

Government of education and practical assistance to many of these people would have yielded 

enormously greater dividends than has much of the money that has been spent there. Under a Liberal 

government — I do not say that mink ranch was encouraged, but nothing was put in their way; if any of 

them wanted to raise mink, a very nominal sum for fish for their mink was charged, no taxes were levied 

— they may have been levied, but I never heard of any being collected; but it is all different today. 

 

I would like to give you an idea of what some other province thinks of the possibilities of raising mink. I 

have here a letter and booklets from the Premier of Newfoundland, sent to all our mink ranchers in the 

north, in the west and maybe farther, and this is what he says: 

 

“I invite you to start raising mink in Newfoundland. We are determined to spare no effort in this move. 

We know that mink can be raised here cheaper than anywhere else.” 

 

And to back that up, for those who are accredited raisers of mink, they offer to take them down there 

free of charge by air. They will show them various ranch sites. If they decide to stay and take a site, they 

can have, free of charge, clear title, no taxes for years, and they offer them an unlimited supply of mink 

food practically at cost, along with various other things. They throw in everything but the sink. 

 

Let us see how this Government treats our mink ranchers, Mr. Speaker. In the first place, the would-be 

young mink rancher here is licked before he starts. They have set up so many of these blasted 

regulations with varying interpretations of them that they need a bookkeeper to keep them straight. To 

begin with, the taxes — mind you, all the areas in the north have been surveyed and, brother, the taxes 

are just as high there proportionately as they are down here. You can hear them kick about taxes up 

there, too, Mr. Speaker. There are a great many regulations. For instance, they tell me they are if they 

catch more fish than they are supposed to, today, they daren‟t give the surplus to their neighbour, nor 

can he do the same for you, under similar circumstances. It is unfortunate . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That is not true. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — . . . if you don‟t know these regulations. But listen to the price that is charged the 

mink rancher, today. My own figures were obtained up there last year; they are a little different to these, 

but not enough to make any difference. Years ago, it was 10 cents per mink per year for fish-food for 

mink; today, the price for each mink up to 100 is $1.00; for each mink from 100 to 250, it is $1.50 a 

mink; and over 250 it is $2.00. We hear about mink being worth $2,500 — a good male breeding mink, 

perhaps a mutation, which happens rarely; and we hear of mink pelts worth $40, $50 or $56. Thus the 

average mink rancher who is in the business . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, just to keep the record straight. I know 

the hon. member doesn‟t want to mislead the House, but the previous rate was on the basis of all 

animals, whereas this is on the basis of breeding animals, which is quite a different thing. 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

20 

Mr. Dunfield: — Well, it doesn‟t make a great deal of difference to the people up there, I am quite sure. 

 

As I was saying, we hear a lot about the high prices of mink and so on, but there are a lot of mink 

ranchers, just the average fellow getting along and making a living the way most of us are doing, and he 

will tell you that if he could get a sure price of $10 a year he could make a nice living; he might even get 

by on $8; but when you charge up to 20 and 25 per cent to begin with for food you can see that the 

opportunities are greatly reduced. 

 

I am going to discuss one last item, Mr. Speaker, and this is a „pippin‟. I want to give you an idea of just 

one instance of the arrogant attitude which is taken towards our people in the north by some of these 

government „gestapo‟ up there. We have a fish buyer in Meadow Lake who is quite a fish buyer. He 

buys about a million pounds here but he buys a lot more from Slave Lake; he is a real fish buyer. Now 

here is the story — it is hardly conceivable; it is hard to believe that this can go on . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You can believe almost anything. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — This buyer of ours had contracted with the fishermen of Dore Lake to buy their fish 

during the last summer fishing season. Dore Lake lies about 60 miles northeast of Meadow Lake. At that 

time there was only a clay road between them. We all know what roads were like, last year, and there is 

no blame attached to anybody. This man had a carload of fish almost completed, and needed one more 

load and, notwithstanding the weather and the roads, he went out for that load. Dore Lake is an „A‟ lake 

and for those of you who might not be familiar with the situation, our lakes are graded A and B for 

commercial purposes. An „A‟ is a lake in which the whitefish carry little or no infestation of parasites; 

„B‟ are those lakes that carry over a certain proportion of parasites, and they must be filleted. But Dore 

is an „A‟ lake and has long been known as a premium lake for whitefish, some of the finest fish in the 

north. 

 

When the buyer got to Dore Lake, in this instance, they did not have enough fish ready. He had to wait 

well on into the evening while they caught the fish, cleaned them, packed them in chipped ice, and put 

them in boxes. Now, one of the regulations (and a good regulation) says that all boxes for the 

transportation of fish must be stamped with the name of a lake from which the fish came; automatically 

it grades the fish, and Dore Lake is an „A‟ lake. These men were busy all afternoon catching these fish; 

the buyer stood there and the field officer stood there for hours. They were all so anxious to get this 

truckload ready that nobody thought of stamping the boxes, Mr. Speaker. The equipment was right there 

on the dock, and that field officer saw it there but said nothing, hoping, no doubt, that they would forget, 

and he could make a „pinch‟. They did, and he did! 

 

Finally, the buyer got away late in the evening. Incidentally, he was stuck three times and your field 

officer passed him, cussed him, and wouldn‟t even give him a hand; but that is neither here nor there. He 

beat him to town and was waiting for him, and when the buyer got into town the field officer put a 

seizure on the fish. The next day they were taken to the cold storage plant, and incidentally, they were 

delivered in a Department of Natural Resources truck, with a big sign on it, „poison‟; you can be put in 

jail for that kind of thing you know, but that didn‟t matter to them. Later those fish were sold to a mink 

rancher at a fraction of their cost and the charge was laid against the buyer, he was hauled into court. 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

 

21 

I went over to the court to see what went on. The Magistrate read out the charge under the section of the 

Act; the buyer was asked “Guilty, or Not Guilty”; the buyer said “Guilty”, of course. The Magistrate 

said, “Why didn‟t you stamp the boxes?” He replied, “it was wholly an oversight, when we were so 

concerned about the weather.” The Magistrate pointed out that it was the law — it is a good law, too, 

mind you; but the Magistrate turned to that Field Officer and said, “Let me get this straight. Dore Lake 

is an „A‟ lake, there was no chance of up-grading the fish, with the box unstamped. Do you mean that he 

had nothing to gain and everything to lose by failing to stamp the boxes?” The Field Officer replied, “I 

guess so.” “Well,” the magistrate said, “I cannot see in any way how the defendant is endangering the 

public welfare; yet it is the law and he has pleaded guilty.” He fined the minimum of $5.00, but that is 

only a part of it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder would the hon. member give me the name of the 

dealer and the date. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — You have all the information in your files; you cannot deny a word I say. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — On a point of privilege, I think I have a right to ask for the name of the 

dealer without the hon. member shouting at me. I can only guess unless he gives it to me. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the hon. member rising on a point of privilege or a point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — On a point of privilege 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will you state your point of privilege. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The hon. member has been very offensive in regard to the officers of the 

Department. I want at least one key, accurate, so that I will know what case to look up and check, and 

that is why I asked for the name of the dealer. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the hon. Minister is perfectly within his rights. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — And I would like the date, too, of the case. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You have made a specific charge against the Department. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Mr. Speaker, I will give the Minister the name and I will give him a lot more than the 

name before I am through. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is all he asked for. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, it is not adequate to say “before he is through.” The Minister has a 

right to ask, or on a question of privilege, for the name or the date of the case. The hon. member has to 

give it to him not later on, or some other time, but give it to him now, so that the case can be 

investigated and the facts checked. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Mr. Speaker, . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — What is the question of privilege? 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

22 

 

Premier Douglas: — You wouldn‟t know. You wouldn‟t know a question of privilege if you saw it in broad 

daylight. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Mr. Speaker, I am quite happy to give the name, but I do not think it is right to be made 

public. The Minister can have it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You have made it public. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You‟ve had it, and there is more coming up. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Now, I would just like to point out . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the hon. member prepared to give a name? 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Oh entirely, now or later on, any time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Give it now. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — The buyer is F.M. Clark, of Meadow Lake, and you are well acquainted with him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Do you know the date? 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — The charge wasn‟t laid against him; it was laid against Louis Bedard, and it was on June 

19th. I have some more information . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Oh, you‟ve heard about it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Louis Bedard? Yes. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — I have a lot more information here. The strange part about this is that when the fish are 

flown in from the northern lakes, they are flown in metal boxes and they are never stamped. You don‟t stamp 

the metal boxes because they are used over and over again; but this was just an instance where this particular 

individual had a chance to make himself obnoxious, even more so than I am. 

 

The rest of that story is this, Mr. Speaker. That Field Officer compelled those fishermen to wash the fish, 

inside and out . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That is not true. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — You just hold your horses, and I will prove it is true. They had to wash those fish inside 

and out, something that has never been heard of before in the north, against the bitter remonstrances of the 

fishermen. Whitefish will keep 14 days when well packed, iced and re-iced; and these fish reached Chicago 

well within the entire time; and when they were opened there that buyer (and probably the Minister knows 

his name, too) just about blew his top. He said, “these are beautiful fish.” But he phoned Meadow Lake to 

find out what the so-and-so was going on in the fishing business and, naturally, he refused the fish. Mr. Clark 

(and I can give his name now) immediately got in touch with the Department and asked for compensation for 

this loss incurred, and the carload of fish had been worth between five 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

 

23 

and six thousand dollars; that is whitefish at 20 cents a pound. Now I can give you the letter from the 

Department . . . 

 

Mr. Ripley: — Who made them wash the fish? 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — The field officer made them wash the fish, of course. When the matter of 

compensation was taken up with the Department, I told him he was wasting his time; I said, “I can write 

you a letter right now exactly the same as you will get from the Department;” and, believe me, when he 

got his answer there wasn‟t very much difference. This is the letter he received from the Fisheries 

Branch in Prince Albert: 

 

“With reference to your letter of the 28th we wish to refer to our previous letter of September 10th. 

We wish to advise that in view of the investigation which was carried out and the evidence secured we 

are unable to substantiate your claim”. 

 

One of the other letters was: 

 

“We have made a thorough examination and can find not the slightest vestige of any such action 

having taken place on the part of the field officer.” 

 

I have here a copy of a petition from these fisherman. These fishermen came to me two days after this 

case, presented me with a petition, and asked me if I would send it in. They were desperate. They said 

“This man is just ruining our business, will you send the petition to the proper authorities.” I said, “Yes, 

I will send it in.” They went away, and I held that petition. I know these people well, and I was afraid for 

them, afraid of the retaliation which would take place, which is not uncommon at all — I could give you 

more instances of that another day. I held out that petition; but sure enough, in five days, back came two 

delegates asking if I had sent in the petition. I said, “No, I didn‟t.” “Will you give it back to us?” They 

said. “Certainly” I replied, “it is your petition, not mine; you are welcome to it.” They took it away and 

five weeks after I got this petition, on June 22nd, returned to me again, and that was on October 24th. 

They were simply desperate. They said, “We cannot get along with this man; he is just ruining us.” 

Now, this is what they state and the hon. Minister says this isn‟t right. Let me read: 

 

“It is the opinion of the undersigned fishermen of Dore Lake that the present Field Officer, Clarence 

Williams, of the Department of Natural Resources, has shown gross ignorance of and incompetence in 

the proper discharge of his duties as a fish inspector in particular” 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I wonder who wrote that heading. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — As a matter of fact — this is off the record; but as a matter of fact, when a big catfish 

was thrown on the wharf he wanted to know what species of fish that was. He has persistently demanded 

that all fish caught be hand-washed in tubs, both inside and out, before being packed in ice for shipment, 

a practice that tends to rapidly deteriorate the product. Nature supplies the fish with a slime coating that 

is waterproof. Remove that waterproof coating and that flesh is as porous as blotting paper; pack it in ice 

or dip it in water, and it makes no difference . . . 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

24 

Mr. Speaker: — Did the hon. member transmit that petition? 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Oh yes, they have a copy on hand. There were two copies made — one for me, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — This is something new, too: 

 

“That he has repeatedly chopped in two perfectly good fish for examination. 

 

“That his method of prying open fish for inspection until ribs pop out of the flesh is unnecessary 

destruction of good fish, and costly to the fisherman. 

 

“That his whole attitude toward the fishermen and toward the fish buyers has been and is hostile, 

lacking in knowledge and understanding of the fishing industry, and is most detrimental to the 

livelihood of the people dependent upon this industry. 

 

“Therefore we ask, in the interests of our welfare, that this arrogant and incompetent officer be 

discharged from the service, or at least removed from this area.” 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Does the hon. member wish to table that? 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Oh, you can have it; you are welcome to it. I have no longer of any use for it. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Who asked to have it tabled? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I would appreciate having it tabled. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — I would like to get it back, because you already have a copy of it right in your file. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, there is no need for a request to have it tabled; 

the rules of the House call for it to be tabled automatically. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That isn‟t right. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, under the rules of the House all such documents are tabled 

automatically. My friend has been here long enough to know that. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) has no occasion at all to 

interfere. The hon. member who was speaking was perfectly willing to table it. And it is the rule. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Mr. Speaker, there is no appeal from the judgment of these little „Czars‟. There just 

isn‟t any possible appeal. As far as we are concerned up there, this Government has delegated so much 

of its authority to these various organizations that this Legislature is nothing but a rubber stamp that 

approves of the decisions by a few and for the few. And I repeat here, as I said last year, more 

emphatically than ever: some of you in this House may enjoy some of the fruits of Socialism but we in 

the north 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

 

25 

certainly pay the consequences — and how! 

 

This Government has created in northern Saskatchewan a huge administrative and organizational set-up 

far in excess of the value that the people in this province receive, and when I look at the requirements 

for the Department of Natural Resources and see that they need nearly $4 million in the estimates last 

year, I can well understand why they need it. Why, there are fully-modern homes built up there for their 

staff, warehouses, all kinds of buildings, fish plants have been built that were later abandoned . . . 

 

Some Hon Member: — Where? 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — . . . dictatorial powers, lavish expenditures and pressure and intimidation on many of 

our citizens. And, Mr. Speaker, these constitute the very essence of the planned economy in northern 

Saskatchewan. This is a sample of what this Government offers to the people of Saskatchewan as being 

a sure cure for all of our economic ills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this report ends with two questions. The writer hasn‟t the answer for them. Had he lived 

there a little longer he certainly would have had the answer. This is the way the report ends: 

 

“This brings the discussion to a point from which it might well have started: (1) What are we as 

administrators trying to do when we define other people‟s problems? (2) What are we as 

administrators really trying to do when we say we are trying to help other people?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the first question, to anybody who has ever lived in the north, the answer is very 

obvious; that, where the Government has complete and total authority as they have in the north, this 

Government has established a northern Saskatchewan the first totalitarian state in Canada. 

 

And to the second question, Mr. Speaker, “What are we administrators really trying to do”, it would 

appear that the real intent and purpose of this Government shows, from the tremendously increased civil 

service from Crown Corporations down to regulation in our schools, that this Government is determined 

to fasten on this province a political authority that will throttle the last vestige of local self-government 

and individual political liberty. 

 

Hon. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I almost forgot, in the entertainment 

we just enjoyed here, that I was to speak for a while this afternoon. 

 

I would like to join with others who have spoken before me in congratulating the new Leader of the 

Opposition, and, as has been said before also, to wish you many, many years in that position. 

 

I want to refer, if I may, this afternoon, to a few remarks that were made in the early part of the debate, 

by the hon. member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. Kohaly). I appreciated very much his remarks about his 

visit to the Saskatchewan hospital at Weyburn and the courtesy he was shown there, and I would like to 

assure all members of the House that I would like each of them to avail themselves of the same 

invitation that the hon. member from Estevan had from myself, to go to either of the hospitals at North 

Battleford or Weyburn, or to the Saskatchewan Training School, and ask to be shown through, and he 

will be given the same courtesy, no matter from which side of the House 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

26 

they come, as was given to the gentleman who spoke this afternoon. When they get there and see the 

things that he has seen, they will understand the tremendous problems that there is facing the Psychiatric 

Services Branch of the Department of Public Health, and the superintendents of those hospitals. We 

inherited a very serious situation at the two institutions (we didn‟t have the third one) and every effort is 

being made to correct it. 

 

The hon. member referred briefly to the fact that he had been told some corrections would be made, and 

are being made at the present time. That is so, and other plans are going forward to improve the very 

difficult situations that are facing us from time to time. He will be interested to know, I am sure (in fact I 

think he knows this, as other members probably do) that much of the difficulty that is presently in 

existence at Weyburn in the hospital will be removed in the coming summer when we are able to clear 

the basement wards of the defectives who presently live there, and where it is very difficult to give these 

people the same care and treatment and other custodial needs as they will receive when they get to the 

new institution at Moose Jaw. All members of the House will realize that we would like to have been 

there a year before this, or even two years ago, but the building progress has not been as rapid in the last 

few years, as many people would hope, in all fields of building. 

 

I was a bit surprised, though, at the hon. member in some of his other remarks. He mentioned that he is a 

lawyer, and one would naturally assume that one who is studied law and entered his profession as a full-

fledged lawyer and has, I believe, has several years of active practising in law, would have been more 

concerned with accuracy than with making statements, and would have taken the trouble to look up the 

evidence to support any statement that he made. This he completely failed to do, however, when he was 

dealing with the unemployment situation in Canada. If I heard him correctly (and he speaks well, so I do 

not think I was hearing him in accurately), his statement was that the amount of unemployed in the 

Dominion of Canada was 10 per cent, and in Saskatchewan, he said 18 point something — I have 

forgotten, but it was pretty close to 20 per cent; because he again referred to there being one person out 

of five unemployed in the employable ranks. 

 

Premier Douglas: — In Canada, 7 or 8 per cent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — In Canada, 7 or 8 per cent — I am corrected. That makes the situation even 

worse. Why would he do such a thing I have no idea, for he has access to the same information that I 

have are anybody else — the Canada Labour Gazette of Canada. If he had taken the trouble to look 

those figures up, he would have seen that, on January 1, 1955, in Saskatchewan, there were 15,417 

unemployed all those who are employable, who are generally regarded as employees when they are 

employed, making exactly 10 per cent of the labour force of Saskatchewan. And on the same date, and 

Canada as a whole, there were 465,864 unemployed, or 10.8 per cent of the labour force of Canada who 

are employable. I find it difficult to understand why the hon. gentleman would use the figures he used, 

when he has access to the same information that the rest of us have. 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I am not disagreeing with my hon. friend‟s 

hearing; but what I did say, if 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

 

27 

memory serves me correctly, was this: that the unemployment situation in Canada was between 7 and 10 

per cent. I may have mis-read my notes but that is what I said — it wasn‟t 7 or 8 per cent. It was 

between 7 and 10. Secondly, I have taken the figures for the province of Saskatchewan as of February 

4th (and I think I said that) not January 1st, and found those figures to be some 21,400 unemployed. I 

may be wrong, my source may be wrong; but I certainly did not intend to mislead anyone here either as 

a lawyer or as a member, and I hope the figures I presented are accurate. If they are not, I am very sorry 

about it. My hon. friend will undoubtedly give me the authority where he obtained his figures and I shall 

give him mine; but I did not intend to mislead. I did not say some of the things I am been credited with 

saying, and I did say some of the things which he points out at this time; but in all fairness, it was 7 to 10 

in the Dominion of Canada, February 4th, the National Employment Service, there were 21,400 

unemployed, and that worked out to be about 18 per cent, not 20 per cent. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Eighteen per cent of what? It doesn‟t even work out to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — My figures are from the Labour Gazette and the Labour Gazette is the official 

publication of the Government of Canada and I am using those figures. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — That is for January 1st; he said February 4th. 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — What date is that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — January 1, 1955. We haven‟t a more recent Labour Gazette. Did the hon. member 

get his? I accept the correction that he gave, if he said between 7 and 10 per cent, but I am sure it was 

considerably less. What I was pointing out, Mr. Speaker, is that he made it appear that the situation in 

Canada is better than the situation in Saskatchewan and by about 100 per cent, or pretty close to that 

figure. I am pointing out that the situation in Saskatchewan is less, in the unemployment field, than the 

situation in Canada. We can go right down the figures, starting from January 28, 1954, and taking every 

month right through for Canada and for Saskatchewan and find, in every one of those with no 

exceptions, the unemployment is less in Saskatchewan than in Canada. I will table these figures if the 

hon. member would like to have them, but they are available through the Canada Labour Gazette. 

 

I would also like to remind the hon. member that, if his remarks with regard to unemployment were 

intended to indicate that the Government of Saskatchewan is not interested, or is doing nothing about it, 

I would like to remind him of what the Premier told the House yesterday, that every time anything is 

done here to assist unemployment, 25 per cent of that assistance is for the benefit of Saskatchewan 

employees and 75 per sent for those outside, where the different materials are required to be made and 

where the people are employed to make them. So that anything that is done here resulted in three times 

the value for workers outside of Saskatchewan. That is the reason, and a very important reason, why a 

Dominion-Provincial conference should be called, and my friend from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) who 

never experienced, for many years, the difficulties of a man unemployed, doesn‟t need to sit and grin 

sheepishly about this. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Can‟t space cannot help it, with that reasoning. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Oh, I admit that the hon. member for Arm River cannot very well help looking 

sheepish, it‟s his natural expression; but, nevertheless, he should retain a certain amount of dignity while 

he is in his seat in this House. 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

28 

I want to deal with another phase of this debate and of things that have happened within the last few 

months in Saskatchewan. I will not endeavour to reply to some of the things that have been said by the 

hon. member for our northern regions, this afternoon; I think the Minister of Natural Resources will 

reply very adequately to those. But I am interested, Mr. Speaker, in some of the things that have been 

said about the programmes of this Government which I have the honour to direct, and I am a bit 

surprised to find that our friends across the way, both in their convention and through the utterances of 

their newly-elected leader, are imitating the only government that I know of in the world (and it is not in 

the western world) that claims to be first in everything. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Are you jealous? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I have a transcript of the radio talk of the Leader of the Liberal party of January 

4, 1955 and in that he is dealing particularly with matters in the field of health, and he quotes in that the 

things that the Liberal government is supposed to have done in the years gone by. Part of his remarks 

were to tell the people who are listening on the radio, that night, that the Liberal party set the stage for 

all the health programmes there are in the province today. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — That is correct. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — He said that, in 1943, the Liberals prepared for the passing of the Saskatchewan 

Health Insurance Act which passed the Legislature of 1944. I would like to remind the House, Mr. 

Speaker, that the government that sat on the side of the House in 1943 was elected in 1938 — five years 

before 1943. In 1943 they were already won year over, not their legal term of office, but the traditional 

term of office of most governments that have sat in this province. Then, in 1943, they made up their 

minds they were not even then going to go to the country, but took advantage of what appeared to be 

exceptional circumstances to provide themselves with another year in office. So, in 1943, to prepare for 

the belated election they passed the Health Insurance Act and the Cancer Control Act. They did nothing 

to implement them; no preparation was made whatsoever with the professional bodies concerned who 

were going to give the services, to make preparation for the implementation of the things envisaged in 

those Acts. 

 

I may say this, Mr. Speaker. If our friends across the way, through any of their leaders or spokesman, are 

going to claim credit for the foundation of these health services we have, then they should have said, and 

should be able to say, if they had had the kind of the government here that should have been here, that 

the government that was elected in 1938, in the 1939 session, passed these various Acts and had them 

ready to go into operation in the year 1940, or not later than the year 1941. 

 

The reason isn‟t hard to discover, as I pointed out a moment ago. They knew they had lost the 

confidence of the people of Saskatchewan. They knew they were very unlikely to be re-elected unless 

they did something drastic. Throughout the years before that, time and again, these people who in the 

past and who do now support the Liberal party were asked time and again to introduce necessary health 

programmes for the benefit of the people of this province and they did not do so; and because they found 

themselves faced with the possibility of the worst times almost in their lives, with one exception, defeat 

at the polls, then they introduced these Acts purely as election promises, and they did not mean a thing. 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

 

29 

I want to quote the Liberal platform as far as health is concerned, as passed at the convention held last 

November, at which our hon. friend was honoured. I am going to quote it completely, with all six planks 

in their health programme, and then, later on, I am going to comment generally on them, and then 

specifically on each one of their planks; but I am not going to quote the statements: 

 

“The Saskatchewan Liberal party, having by its legislation pioneered local health insurance schemes 

for a rural economy which provided hospital, medical, surgical services outstanding for their high 

standard and moderate cost, services which rapidly extended within the province to serve a large 

proportion of the people, and having as its objective the extension of such services until they served 

the whole province, and having also established in valuable diagnostic, preventive and treatment 

services for tuberculosis and cancer control, will, upon its return to power, continue and augment the 

health services within the province to provide: 

 

“(1) Continuation of the present hospital services plan; 

 

“(2) Financial assistance for the construction and equipment of approved hospitals, to provide essential 

services as close to the people as possible; 

 

“(3) Relief of present overcrowding of hospitals by provision of special institutions for the care of the 

chronically ill; 

 

“(4) A steady extension, in co-operation with municipalities, the Federal Government and existing 

health agencies, of contributory health insurance with the ultimate objective of providing a province-

wide scheme of medical, surgical, nursing, dental, pharmaceutical and optometrical service; 

 

“(5) Administration of health insurance by a central commission with adequate representation of those 

providing the services, those receiving the services and the government, such representation to be 

appointed only with the approval of the groups concerned; 

 

“(6) Maximum utilization by the province of health grants provided for the province by the Federal 

Government.” 

 

Those are the six planks in their health programme, if I have quoted them correctly, and I believe I have. 

 

I would like to remind the House and the hon. members opposite that, and during the summer of 1954, 

Prime Minister St. Laurent himself, and also the Minister of Health and Welfare (the Hon. Paul Martin) 

both made statements in and out of the House of Commons, purporting to explain why the Liberal 

party‟s promise to introduce national health insurance should not be implemented now. The reasons they 

offer included: 

 

“1. Defence expenditures and commitments are too heavy; 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

30 

“2. The number of hospital beds and trained health personnel is too low; 

 

“3. Only two provinces were ready to participate, and since general tax revenues were involved the 

consent of the majority of the provinces was necessary; 

 

“4. Perhaps a voluntary plan could do the job better.” 

 

The people opposite ought to get together with the Prime Minister. Now, while these statements were 

being made by the Prime Minister and the Minister of National Health and Welfare, the Liberal press 

across the country, particularly the Winnipeg „Free Press‟, began a campaign of vilification against the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. They carried numerous articles signed by „M. B.‟ who, I am 

pretty sure I could identify; but at any rate those were the initials on the articles supported by the 

Winnipeg „Free Press‟ in editorial comment. The purpose of the campaign was pretty clear, Mr. 

Speaker. It was an attempt to discredit the Saskatchewan experiment in pre-paid tax-supported hospital 

care, in the hope, of course, of postponing indefinitely any introduction of national health insurance. 

Efforts were made to show that the hospital care programme in this province was wasteful and 

inefficient, and led to abuse of services. 

 

Now it wasn‟t too difficult to refute those articles — I want to House to remember it would not be too 

difficult. As a matter of fact, I tried my very best to give the people the facts, because many of the 

allegations were false that appeared in that paper and were completely misleading, to say the very best 

about them. But when I tried to give the public the facts about it and to get the same space in the 

Winnipeg „Free Press‟ as M. B. was allowed to have, I was only allowed the barest fraction of space to 

tell my story. The word I got from Mr. Dexter was that any information I had to offer to the Free Press 

in retaliation to M. B.‟s articles and their own editorial would have to be contained in a letter, and that 

letters to Winnipeg Free Press are restricted to 300 words. Thousands and thousands of words by M. B.; 

thousands of words and editorials in the Winnipeg Free Press; and I was restricted to reply to all of them 

in 300 words. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Freedom of the press! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — After some argument with him, by correspondence, he finally agreed to double it 

to 600 words. Again I ask you, how could I possibly refute the allegations and the false statements and 

the misleading things that were said by these articles and editorials that appeared in that paper in one 

600-word letter? So it was impossible for us to get the facts before the people of Manitoba or other 

readers of that paper. 

 

Our friends across the way are talking, as I pointed out, in promoting their platform, about how 

concerned they are about health insurance, and they are going to promise the people of the province that 

everything we are doing will be done, only they will do it better. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — That is really what they are saying. They haven‟t done anything better than 

anybody else, Mr. Speaker, but they say „hear, hear‟ when I mention that. Well, if they say „hear, hear‟ 

with the 



 

February 17, 1955 

 

 

31 

same feelings as I mention their inability to do it, while then, of course, they are just laughing at 

themselves, which is a good thing for them to do. 

 

It is a funny thing though, Mr. Speaker, that at no time has a Saskatchewan Liberal member of 

Parliament from this province, or a Liberal M.L.A., gone on record as having risen in the House of 

Commons at Ottawa, or in this Legislature here, to defend the principles of health insurance now put 

forward as their own platform. I agree that these people across the way, sir, are tied to the Federal 

Liberal party, and that they will go along in health policies, as in any other kind of policies, with the 

present Prime Minister of Canada or they Minister of National Health and Welfare; but surely, Mr. 

Speaker, it should not have been too much to expect one of these people here, or one of their friends in 

the House of Comments, to rise up and support the very things that they now claim they are prepared to 

do. I don‟t know why they haven‟t done it. They can answer that question themselves to their own 

conscience; but the fact remains they have not done it, and even though we passed a resolution in this 

Legislature, last year, which I do not believe they opposed, if I remember correctly — I think they 

agreed, maybe silently but they certainly did not oppose it, they didn‟t dare oppose it; but why do they 

not rise up and support the very thing that the leader of their party says in his radio address they are so 

happy to do, and brags about this little plank here and other things in their platform that I have quoted 

here, this afternoon? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker these are general comments, but I want the House to know about them. I do not 

propose to let it rest at that. I propose to examine each one of those six planks in their health programme 

in order to show them up for exactly what they are — nothing but a shady attempt to copy a programme 

of health brought in by this Government over here . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Who‟s crying now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — . . . and to claim it as their own. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:40 o‟clock p.m. 


