



















































Hansard: February 22, 1955


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Twelfth Legislature 

9th Day 

Tuesday, February 22, 1955 

 

The House met at three o‟clock p.m. 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed, from Monday, February 21, 1955, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of 

Mr. Dewhurst for the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. J. Walter Erb (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I have a very bad cold in my head, but I am quite sure 

if I should suggest that that is all I have in it, my friends over there would agree. I nevertheless hope that 

you are not going to have too difficult a time hearing me. 

 

In joining this debate, I should first of all like to extend my congratulations to the mover of the Address 

in Reply to the Speech from the Throne, the member for Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst), and to the seconder, 

the member for Moose Jaw (Mr. Heming). These two members, in my opinion, very ably demonstrated 

a thorough understanding of the respective fields which they represent, and I believe it is for this 

understanding, together with their outstanding personal qualities, that they have been elected to this 

Legislature on three different occasions. When one considers the great majority with which these two 

members have been elected on each location, one is even more impressed by the esteem in which they 

are held by their respective constituents. 

 

It was of interest to observe that the mover and the seconder were a farmer and labourer, respectively. 

Listening to them one could not help but conclude that they must have, through the years, made a great 

and outstanding contribution to what has become the most outstanding farm and labour legislation in the 

North American continent. They have once again made it abundantly clear that the farmer and labourer 

have common aspirations and objectives, and that they must, of necessity, constantly take cognizance of 

each other‟s problems with the ultimate realization that they are vulnerable to the same institutions 

which have denied them their fair share of the national income; and that their final view must be one of 

consolidating their efforts to achieve that kind of the federal administration that will insure a fair 

distribution of wealth and a greater measure of social and economic security. 

 

To the hon. member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) I want to extend my congratulations on his 

becoming Leader of the Liberal party and Leader of the Opposition in this House. It is a great honour 

and an equally great responsibility which comes to very few — that of leading a political party, Mr. 

Speaker, and I am sure the hon. member will conduct himself in a manner that will reflect credit upon 

himself and the party which he leads. 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

 

2 

 

As was pointed out in the Speech from the Throne, the year that has just recently ended was one fraught 

with disappointment for the great majority of the farmers of Saskatchewan. The ravages of widespread 

rust, hail, frost and excessive moisture created a hardship for many of the thousands of farmers of 

Saskatchewan; but they nevertheless took it in their stride as, particularly, Saskatchewan farmers do. 

The farmers have no quarrel with the elements; they have unbounded faith in nature, for they know that 

nature has smiled upon them more often than she has frowned. They have faith in their own 

industriousness for they know that they shall, in the main, reap where they have sown; but, Mr. Speaker, 

the farmers of Saskatchewan have no faith in the Federal Government whose inaction in a time of 

emergency is tantamount to wanton disregard for the welfare of agriculture. And the farmers have a 

justifiable quarrel with the rebuke that they should be well off, having produced the equivalent of five 

crops in three years. Such a deduction is illogical and will not stand up in light of the facts. 

 

According to the D.B.S. index for western Canada, from 1950 to 1953 farm prices have dropped 8 

points; in the same time the index for farmers‟ living costs have risen 16 points. During the past three 

years prices for farm products have steadily declined so that hog prices, as compared to last summer, 

have dropped $13 to $14 per cwt., and I believe it is even more now. Cattle prices have been cut almost 

in half and the price of wheat is down by 18 cents per bushel. Had the farmers‟ cost of production 

dropped commensurately with the fall in prices for farm products, the farmers‟ position would have been 

reasonably good, but the reverse has been the case — namely, that the farmers‟ cost of production has 

continued to rise, while the price that he has received for his commodities has continued to fall. As a 

result there is an ever-widening gap between the farmer‟s income and his expenditures, and, therefore, if 

the farmer finds himself, after one poor crop, without financial reserved, it is obvious that he has, 

through these last years, been producing an enormous quantities of food below the actual cost of 

production. 

 

For years the C.C.F. has tried to impress the Federal Government that agriculture is the basic industry of 

Canada, that the welfare of all the other industries is dependent upon the sound and prosperous 

agricultural economy, and that this being the case the Federal Government has a responsibility toward 

the agricultural industry in seeing to it that it is maintained on a sound and stable economic level. For 

years the C.C.F. has pressed for such measures as would insure that kind of stability. Almost every other 

industry in Canada has secured its economic position. One needs only to peruse the Financial Post 

survey of industrials for Canada, in the year of 1954, to see that it is true, and I quote: 

 

“Based on an analysis by the Financial Post of the latest published annual report, the combined net 

income of 326 companies in 1953 was three per cent ahead of the 1952 level.” 

 

The profit return, incidentally, of these companies was 10.04 per cent, and I submit that the farming 

economy of Canada contributed very materially to the healthy financial position of these industries by 

having to pay unreasonable prices for combines, cars, trucks and the general needs for every-day living. 



 

February 22, 1955 

3 

 

For some of these industries a healthy position is maintained by Federal subsidies, and again, for others, 

protective tariffs and anti-dumping duties, which, in effect, are equivalent to subsidies. Then, of course, 

one must not overlook the removal of the excess profits tax by the Federal Government, in 1946, as it 

particularly applied to the industries. Yes, the Federal Government has gone to great lengths to see to it 

that the industries of Canada are kept in a flourishing financial state; and it apparently has become so 

satisfied by their success that it is completely oblivious to the needs of Canada‟s basic industry, 

agriculture. I contend that if the commercial industries of Canada are the recipients of such Federal 

paternalism as I have mentioned, it is high time that the agricultural industry be accorded such 

consideration by the Federal Government in order to enable it to carry on in a solvent position. 

 

The C.C.F., Mr. Speaker, have demonstrated again and again that it is the only party in Canada which 

recognizes the importance of agriculture as it relates to all other industries of Canada; that it is the only 

party which, as the government of Saskatchewan and comprising the only effective opposition in 

Ottawa, has recognized the needs of agriculture in a tangible way. 

 

For example, when, in 1944, the C.C.F. took office, what were the conditions of the farmers in the rural 

municipalities of Saskatchewan, and what did this Government do? Well, as everyone knows, in 

1942-43 the Associated Rural Municipalities asked the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan to settle 

the 1938 seed debt on the basis of 50 per cent of the principal, with the cancellation of all the interests, 

and as everyone knows, the Liberal Government failed to carry out that request. In addition to this 1938 

seed grain debt was the indebtedness of the rural municipalities and the farmers for other seed grain and 

relief debts, totalling some $17 million. Incidentally, the farm mortgage debt and Saskatchewan stood at 

the colossal figure of $92 million and the per capital municipal debt was the highest in Canada. 

 

What action did the C.C.F. Government display upon coming into office in 1944, in respect of the 

problems that I have outlined? Well, this Government first told the Federal Government that it was not 

going to pay the 1938 seed grain debt except on the basis as proposed by the S.A.R.M. to the Liberal 

Government of that day, namely, 50 per cent of the principal, with the cancellation of all the interest. 

The Federal Government, of course, refused to consider this. It proceeded to pay off the banks and to 

withhold Saskatchewan‟s subsidy. Only after lengthy negotiations with Ottawa did Saskatchewan finally 

get a settlement in which the Federal Government refused to accept any responsibility. The C.C.F. 

Government then cancelled 50 per cent of that debt, and all the interest, and it is continuing to pay the 

Federal Government $700,000 on this account. The $70 million that was owing by the rural 

municipalities and the farmers for other seed and relief debt was cancelled outright by this Government. 

 

The effect of these cancellations on the depressing obligations that the farmers and rural municipalities 

had was very materially to assist in improving their financial positions, so that, today, farm mortgage 

debt is down from $92 million to about $9 million, in 1954, and the per capita municipal debt, which 

was the highest is now the lowest in 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

 

4 

 

Canada. In addition to this, this Government passed The Farm Security Act thereby protecting farmers 

from unjustifiable foreclosure. And I might add that, in 1943-44, the Liberal Government of that day 

appropriated only some $493,000 for agriculture; this Government, in 1954, appropriated in excess of 

$5,000,000 towards agriculture. 

 

What I have enumerated are just a few examples of what this Government has done for the farmer in 

Saskatchewan, but it is tangible and unqualified evidence that the C.C.F. is the only party in Canada 

today which can truly qualify as representing the agricultural industry. That which this Government has 

done lay in the confines of provincial jurisdiction over agricultural matters; and it is in this regard that 

the C.C.F. in this House and at Ottawa, in session and out of session, have constantly pressed for such 

measures as would insure the stability of the agricultural economy. 

 

I should like to take only enough time, Mr. Speaker, to enumerate two such proposals which, if 

implemented, I am sure would make a significant contribution to that stability: first, cash advances on 

grain stored on farms and storage payments for properly stored grain; and secondly, the establishment of 

a board of livestock commissioners and the setting up of a national livestock marketing Board. There are 

those who say, and argue, that cash advances on stored grain are not necessary now in view of the crop 

failure last year, and the rate at which our present wheat stocks are diminishing. The fact remains that 

we may one day again have huge surpluses, at which time the farmer will once more find himself wheat 

rich and money poor, and unable to meet his daily living requirements. Therefore, an arrangement 

whereby the farmer can be paid cash storage payments on properly stored grain is long overdue. I think, 

Mr. Speaker, it is commonly known that the federal government of the United States has had, for a long 

time now such a policy for farmers in effect, and the cost to their federal treasury was surprisingly low, 

to which I shall refer particularly later. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, the Federal Government at Ottawa, which can allocate almost one-half of the 

national budget of $4 million for defence could provide for cash advances on properly stored grains on 

the farms. Surpluses, in reality, should give us no concern. They should be viewed, not in a domestic but 

rather in an international relation. There would then be no surpluses, for I contend that the combined 

agriculture resources of the world could never produce sufficient food, if it had only remotely proper 

distribution. I want to reiterate, Mr. Speaker, surpluses should cause us no concern, providing that the 

purchasing power of a farmer is maintained by an intelligent and realistic policy, and cash advances on 

properly stored grain would eminently qualify in such a policy. 

 

My second point, Mr. Speaker, is the establishment of a board of livestock commissioners and the 

setting up of a national livestock marketing Board. For years farmers have been producing livestock, 

poultry, eggs and dairy products below the cost of production as often as not. I contend that no 

commercial business could long survive if it had to operate on such a basis. But the commercial 

industries can put a price tag on their commodities and the farmer cannot; and therein lies the difference. 

The magnitude of this difference is particularly evident in the packing industry. The packing industry 

determines what price the farmer shall 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

5 

 

receive for his cattle, hogs, poultry and eggs; on the other hand, it also pretty well determines what the 

consumer of these commodities shall pay. Because the low prices the farmer receives are never reflected 

in the prices the consumer is required to pay, it is evident that the bleeding is not limited to the animals 

in the slaughter houses of the packing industry. I submit, Mr. Speaker, an excellent case could be made 

for the nationalization of the packing industry. The establishment of a board of livestock commissioners 

and the setting up of a national livestock marketing board with the purpose of paying guaranteed 

minimum prices for cattle, hogs, etc., to the farmer, and not to the packer, is long overdue. The fund of 

$200 million was set aside under The Agricultural Prices Support Act, of which only about $60 million 

is being spent, could be made available to a Board such as I have mentioned, in order to provide that 

 

I should like, very briefly, to make a comment or two in respect to the support prices in the United States 

and the attitude of both the President of the United States and the Secretary of the Agriculture 

Department there (Mr. Ezra Benson) in this regard. I quote Mr. Benson, wherein he says: 

 

“It is true that the Government has asked for heavy production during a period of years. That is why I 

said in my statement, today, that this abundant production of farm products is in response to the 

request of the Government. Therefore, the Government has an obligation to help make the adjustment 

now and to help them carry the load during the transition from a wartime to a peacetime economy. 

 

“I feel very definitely that the President was justified in recommending this set aside of $2 1/2 billion 

because the government does have an obligation. This excessive production of certain commodities 

has been due in a large measure to the stimulus and the urging of the Government itself.” 

 

That was on page 23 of the statement of Ezra Benson, Secretary for Agriculture, in hearings before the 

U.S. Senate sub-committee of agriculture appropriations for 1955. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to read something that sounds very familiar. It was given by the Prime 

Minister of Canada in 1943, and I quote: 

 

“If to help win the war, the farmers are asked to accept the ceiling on prices, we believe they are 

entitled to a floor under prices to insure them against an agricultural depression after the war. As an 

essential part of its post-war policy the Government intends to ask Parliament, at the next session, to 

place a floor under the prices of the main farm commodities.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, The Agriculture Prices Support Act was passed and a broad principle was set forth in 

that regard, by which the Board could be guided 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

 

6 

 

under the establishment of this Act, and I would like to quote that recommendation to the Board: 

 

“In prescribing prices they Board shall endeavour to insure adequate and stable returns for agriculture 

and shall endeavour to secure a fair relationship between the returns from agriculture and those for 

other occupations.” 

 

The only difference between these two commitments, Mr. Speaker, is that the one has been implemented 

in the United States, and the other in Canada has not. Surely, if this has been a desirable and successful 

policy in the United States, there is no reason why a policy cannot be worked out that will just as 

effectively stabilize the agricultural industry in this country. 

 

I submit that the proposals for the stabilization of the agricultural industry in Canada should not only be 

of concern to farmers. For a considerable time now falling farm prices and reduced farm incomes are 

being reflected in unemployment figures in those industries which depend upon the farmers‟ ability to 

buy. It becomes quite obvious then that a policy so designed as to stabilize the agricultural industry and 

increase the farmers‟ purchasing power would strengthen the entire Canadian economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government and we, the members on this side of the House, shall ceaselessly strive to 

win for the farmers, and not for the farmers alone, but for all other classes of people, a fair and just 

return for their products and labour in proper relation to the national income. The social and economic 

welfare of the people of Saskatchewan is a divided responsibility between the Federal and Provincial 

governments. This Government does not expect the Federal Government to meet its responsibilities 

towards Saskatchewan to a greater degree than the Saskatchewan Government has done and is prepared 

to do in its sphere of jurisdiction, but it expects no less. 

 

The Speech from the Throne eminently shows the extent to which this Government has carried out its 

responsibilities to the people of Saskatchewan, and it will, I am sure, be heartily endorsed by them. The 

Speech from the Throne is a documented panorama of our vast and diversified wealth, of forest, field, 

and mine and stream. It is replete with great achievements, inspiring in its confidence in challenging in 

its undertaking, and it is eminently in keeping with this great and memorable year of our Golden Jubilee. 

 

Before making a few observations in connection with our Golden Jubilee, I should like to extend my 

congratulations to the Golden Jubilee Committee and the various committees throughout the province 

who have done such an excellent job in arranging and co-ordinating the many activities that will 

followed during the coming months. I am quite sure that their efforts will be applauded, not only by the 

residents, but also by the visitors to Saskatchewan. Fifty years in the span of human life is a long time. 

In the life of a province it is a relatively short time. One measures, in the sense, a human life by its 

individualist achievement, a province by the collective achievements of his people and generations. At 

this memorable milestone in our history, we cause then, to reflect, to reappraise and resolve. 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

7 

 

It is with reverence and gratitude that we pay tribute to our early pioneers. Many who have passed on 

and others who, still with us, will re-live for us those challenging the early years. Our pioneers came 

from many lands, of different tongues and creeds, yet with one faith, that life, though sometimes hard, 

would be good; and they came with a vision of the good land. Our pioneers found Saskatchewan a good 

land and out of their faith, courage, vision and toil they fashioned for us a better land. It is we who have 

now entered into their labours and it is we who are reaping where they have sown. They have indeed left 

us an inspiring and challenging heritage with which we shall not break faith. 

 

I believe the Government is to be commended in making funds available to the Western Development 

Museum, for the preservation of the different types of farm machinery, and also for the erection of our 

present Museum of Natural History that will be dedicated this year. It is good to preserve those things 

that went into the making of our heritage, and while no one wishes to live in the past, no one wants to 

sever the links with the past, for some of life‟s richest and most rewarding experiences are of a 

yesteryear, and is frequently that we draw from them the inspiration and the courage to meet the 

problems of the contemporary world. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that in honouring the pioneers there is one class of pioneer that we should also 

remember, and that is the pioneer country physician, whose ranks are, with the other pioneers, now 

regrettably thinning. It was his steady hand and reassuring words that helped many a pioneer family over 

a crisis. For him no day was too long; no distance too far; no family too poor; for him there was no bag 

of gold at the end of the road; but his reward was one that comes to those whose minds and hearts and 

sinew are consecrated to the service of his fellowmen. It was his contribution in the field of health that 

gave impetus to the building of our sanatoria, our hospitals, our mental hospitals, which have become, 

today, and are ranked with the finest on the continent. And his consciousness of the great importance of 

health was further projected into the health programmes of Saskatchewan, inaugurated by this 

Government, during the last 10 years. Future generations, Mr. Speaker, will look upon us with pride and 

admiration, for this province in the short span of 10 years to have provided itself with the first hospital 

services plan on the continent, the first free cancer programme, with the finest cancer clinics to be found 

anywhere, a free mental hygiene programme and a psychiatric service that is the envy of the civilized 

world; polio clinics and restoration centres for the physically handicapped; a renowned free tuberculosis 

treatment programme, inaugurated many years ago; an air ambulance service, the first of its kind on the 

continent; all is indeed a memorable achievement. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there is another heritage not made by human hands, namely, our natural resources. 

There are many things for which governments can take credit; they cannot take credit for the natural 

resources, as some politicians would like to leave the impression. The natural resources were there eons 

before the politicians, and they will still be there when some of those same politicians are trying to 

convince St. Peter that heaven would be a better place but for their presence. Providence has indeed 

blessed Saskatchewan with untold natural wealth, such as oil, gas, salt, potash, sodium sulphate, 

fantastic strata of mineral ore, best forest stands, innumerable lakes, and lastly, the substance of 

breathtaking potential implication, uranium! I believe, Mr. Speaker, we 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

 

8 

 

should not regard ourselves as possessors of our natural resources so much as custodians thereof, for 

indeed, they are not only our heritage but also the heritage of generations yet unborn. They are a trust, as 

it were, to be used freely but wisely in the never-ending march of human progress. I believe, too, that 

this administration has nowhere demonstrated more eminently its regard for posterity than in its 

programme for the conservation of the natural resources of our province. 

 

So, as we stand in observation of our Golden Jubilee, we shall, as the year goes into history, highly 

resolve that we shall so build on our heritage that future generations will acclaim our faith, our vision 

and our courage. In this Golden Jubilee year we stand, too, on the threshold of a new era. It is the 

transition period of the forces involved that have, on one hand, filled men‟s hearts with fear and 

uncertainty, and, on the other, with glad expectations and hope. We have reached a point in human 

history wherein the accumulation of scientific data has accumulated a force which, if unleashed, could 

destroy civilization. We have also reached a point in human history were never has been so much 

available to mankind, whereby poverty, hunger, sickness, disease and inequity could be wiped from the 

face of the earth. The nations that possess the H-bomb — and Britain is shortly to have one too, and it is 

thought that Canada, too, should join that “elite fraternity” — all have minutely calculated the 

devastation that would take place as the result of hydrogen-bomb warfare, and they are afraid, Mr. 

Speaker. These are the nations that possess the bulk of the world‟s resources and technological skill. 

Predominate among them are the so-called Christian nations. I say, Mr. Speaker, let these nations now 

calculate, just as minutely, the needs of the under-privileged people of the world, and with equal skill 

and precision carry out the task of this great and noble alternative. 

 

I profoundly believe that the destiny of the human race lies not in becoming a charred and radioactive 

mass; it lies rather in a way of life to the fulfilment of which people of good will the world over of every 

race, creed and colour have consecrated their lives; and I submit, Mr. Speaker, when that consecration 

becomes the motivating influence of world diplomacy, then shall we have made the transition into the 

new era. 

 

The C.C.F. movement, Mr. Speaker, was born of men of such consecration. It and kindred movements 

the world over shall continue to draw unto them, in ever-increasing numbers, people of good will, until 

that day when they shall make up the councils of the world. It is then that we shall see the vast resources 

of the earth applied to human welfare in a massive and common endeavour. The exploiter, the 

oppressor, the warmonger and those who waxed rich on the spilling of human blood will have had their 

ignominious day. Then shall, indeed, men beat their swords into ploughshares and their spears into 

pruning hooks, nation shall not lift sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that Brotherhood Week, which we are presently observing, is a tangible effort 

towards realizing this ancient prophecy and hope for mankind. There is no nobler pursuit than that of 

breaking down the barriers which divide the human family, the barriers of corroding fear and blinding 

heat, of envy, suspicion, pride and greed, the colour of another‟s skin and what he calls his creed. 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

9 

 

In closing, I want to say that I am more than proud that this Government has taken recognition of the 

civil liberties and human rights and that it is the only government in Canada that has on its statute books 

a Bill of Rights. But, Mr. Speaker, a government cannot legislate morality, tolerance, forbearance and 

love of one‟s neighbour. These are the products of a refined and self-disciplined spirit. It is this spirit 

which is the motivating influence of the C.C.F. and kindred movements throughout the world. It is the 

lighted candle of hope in the hearts of millions of people and, by the grace of God, Mr. Speaker, we 

shall not let it go out! 

 

I shall support the motion. 

 

Mr. A.P. Brown (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, none of us would be very happy about having to follow 

the Premier immediately after he has spoken in this House. I would just like to say that following the 

very eloquent member from Milestone (Mr. Erb) is not too happy a spot to be in either. 

 

In rising to take part in this debate I, of course, want to congratulate the mover and a seconder of the 

address for the very able manner in which they presented their submissions. The choice of the two 

speakers in the presentations they made demonstrates the teamwork that exists between those who speak 

for agriculture and those who speak for labour on this side of the House. 

 

I also want to congratulate the member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) on the position which he has 

taken on since we last met in this Legislature. I want to go along with those who have already said in 

this House that we hope the member for Moosomin will continue to be the Leader of the Opposition for 

many, many years to come. 

 

In rising, this afternoon, I wish at the outset, before dealing with other matters, to address a few words to 

the people in the constituency that I represent, the constituency of Melville. The constituency of 

Melville is also that has felt the full impact of this past year. The abnormal amount of rainfall which we 

had all this summer, had much the same effect on the crops and on the roads in that area as it had 

elsewhere all across the province, the consequences being that considerable hardship has been 

experienced, not only as far as the farmers are concerned, but it will be carried through to the 

businessmen and the merchants in the towns and villages who are so dependent on the purchasing power 

and the income of the farmers in their community. 

 

Before this Session is over much will be said regarding the present position of our primary industry. It 

will be made clear, I have no doubt, by the able members of this Legislature who have adopted the role 

of spokesmen for our primary industry, that while we have had exceptionally good crops this past few 

years and it would appear that a reserve should have been built up to withstand a year such as we have 

just experienced, the average farmer has been in the unfortunate position of having his cost of 

production steadily going up while the price of the goods he has had to sell has been going down. 

Certainly no one, whether he is in the business of farming, or any other business, can build up reserves 

under those conditions. This situation applies to a good proportion of the area in the Melville 

constituency. 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

 

10 

 

We have a good agricultural district, with good proportion of mixed farming in our area which has been 

a big help, and we have some of the finest stock raised in the province. The community to the south of 

us, the Neudorf, Lemberg and Abernethy area has produced some of the finest grain grown in the 

country. It has taken top honours at some of the world‟s fairs at Chicago and at Toronto. The town of 

Melville in itself, with a population of less than 5,000 is predominantly a labour population, and 

Melville wage-earners are largely those employed in retail establishments, and offices and railways and 

stores. They appreciate what has been done to protect the unorganized employees in the lower income 

brackets, things like higher workman‟s compensation benefits, the statutory holidays, annual holidays 

act, minimum wage act. All of these things have worked towards providing a higher standard of living, 

and demonstrated that this Government has the interest of the wage-earner at heart. 

 

Melville, however, while having a largely predominately labour group, is predominantly an agricultural 

district; it has an agricultural background. As the community goes, so goes the town of Melville, as was 

very forcibly demonstrated during the „thirties. When agriculture was adversely affected, all of us, no 

matter what business we happen to be in, are also adversely affected. 

 

Melville is also noted as a sports centre throughout the country. It has been and is one of the outstanding 

hockey centres in the country, and the Melville Millionaire hockey team is known from one end of this 

country to the other. The town and the community, this year, suffered a very severe setback when a very 

fine building of ours, our stadium was totally destroyed by fire. It was one of the finest buildings of its 

kind in the province and, about a year ago, we had installed one of the most up-to-date artificial ice 

plants, which took a considerable amount of planning and financing. This year, when the league was 

practically all arranged and everything was all set to go, the building caught fire and was totally 

destroyed. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, of commending the Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance Office for the prompt manner in which they handled their part in settling the claim. Within a 

matter of few weeks a cheque for $100,000 was deposited and turned over to the town. It has enabled 

the people involved to lay plans and make early arrangements for a new building of much the same type. 

 

Another very vital factor in the general welfare of the people of the Melville constituency has been a 

gigantic programme of rural electrification that has gone on in our area. All the projects in the Melville 

constituency were completed, hooking up another 125 farm homes, something that is necessary in our 

rural life. In travelling through the constituency and other parts of the province, one of the real 

indications of the success of this Government are the miles and miles of power lines that cross this 

province. Anyone who has stopped to look at the gigantic problems of rural electrification marvels at 

what has been done. The generation of the power in itself, the miles and miles of power lines, the 

problems created by the widely-scattered farm houses, the huge programme setup that will mean an 

increase from 137 farm homes in 1944 to where by the end of 1956 we will have 40,000 farm homes 

electrified. As was mentioned by the member for Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst) there will be miles of 

transmission lines instructed that would, if extended in a straight line, completely circle the earth. 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

11 

 

On driving through the country there is no greater thrill than driving into a fairly isolated spot in a part 

of this province, and having the farmer come out late in the evening, turning on his yard light and 

lighting up the yard and the surrounding buildings, and going into his home where he has all the 

electrical appliances and modern conveniences so necessary for rural life. I found, on travelling through 

the constituency and other parts of the province this last while, that there have been many enquiries 

about the power situation in our province and the province to the east of us, Manitoba. People, of course, 

hear about the cheap rural electrification programme in Manitoba. They also hear the cheap promises of 

cheap power that are made by the members on the opposite side, even referring once in a while to the 

fact that if we are unfortunate enough to have them elected, they will return the cost of rural 

electrification to the farmers that they have already spent. 

 

I believe it is a natural question for a person to ask who possibly has not had the opportunity to obtain 

information regarding the enormous problem of rural electrification we have had in Saskatchewan, as 

compared to Manitoba. They do not realize that Manitoba has had for many years a cheap source of 

hydro power. They were electricity-conscious and had made plans to use their vast quantities of cheap 

power while we were still muddling around trying to electrify 137 farm homes here back before 1944. 

 

Manitoba has many advantages. It has the large city of Winnipeg which has turned over huge sums 

collected from their people from water rates, close to half-a-million dollars in one year, and all of this 

was used to aid rural electrification. A comparison of the maps of the two provinces shows the widely 

scattered farm homes in Saskatchewan as compared to the densely settled areas around greater 

Winnipeg, making the building of transmission lines a very simple job. I have never had anyone who, 

once the comparisons were made, has not agreed that it is ridiculous to compare the two provinces in 

this respect. 

 

The great question among the majority of the rural areas is to get the power connected. They are 

realizing more and more that this huge programme could have been handled in no other way. I always 

find, when meeting people like that and explaining our power programme and the difference between 

Manitoba and Saskatchewan, that it is always as well to also include the power programme in Alberta, 

and possibly suggest to them that, if we had been unfortunate enough to have had a Liberal government 

in this past 10 years, our scheme would work somewhere along the lines of Alberta scheme. The people 

of this province know that it could have been handled in no other way than by a public enterprise that 

has concerted its energy and its planning towards providing services rather than huge profits for small 

companies through the country. 

 

One thing I would like to mention, Mr. Speaker, concerning the town of Melville. In the past federal 

election we did have the misfortune in my constituency of being responsible for losing one of the most 

able members who ever sat in the federal House. I refer to Mr. Percy Wright from Melfort-Tisdale. Mr. 

Wright, as you know, was the member from that constituency for many years. The C.C.F.‟s loss was felt 

as much in Melville as anywhere else. However, we in the town of Melville did gain something by 

having Mr. Wright come down and contest that seat, something that will be a very valuable asset to us in 

the future. 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

 

12 

 

Possibly now, the mention of water and water supply does not seem to be so important with this wet 

year we have had and the quantities of water through the country. However, I do know that the town 

fathers of Melville (I happened to be one of them at one time) have had for a number of years, the 

serious problem in regard to water supplies in that area. It has to do, of course, with sewage and water 

connections in a growing community. I know that is a problem that is not related to Melville alone; 

every growing community has that same problem. Before the last Federal election, and with the 

appearance of Percy Wright on the scene, we had the beginning of the construction of the large P.F.R.A. 

dam to the north of town. It is now completed, and it dams up the huge body of water somewhere around 

between 1,200 and 1,600 hundred acre feet and this, when it is connected to the town of Melville, with 

our source of water supply that we now have that, should provide for a population, I believe, 10 times 

the size of Melville. I want to take this opportunity of bringing this information to the attention of the 

Minister of Public Works when he plans his construction works for the future. And the investigation will 

assure him that any of his future building plans in government buildings or nursing homes, or buildings 

of that time; an investigation will assure him that one of his main problems will be taken care of by 

building in that vicinity. 

 

I mentioned at the start of my speech the effect of this past abnormal year on the crops and on our roads. 

I know there have been many speeches and resolutions made in this Legislature on this matter of roads 

in Saskatchewan. It has been clear to us the amount of mileage and the standard of road that has to be 

built with our small population: 38 per cent of the highways of Canada are in Saskatchewan and we only 

have 7 per cent of the population. The terrific increase in traffic and tonnage in the past few years has 

made this problem of roads an increasingly difficult one. We are also more than ever aware of the 

increasing importance of good roads in our province, their importance to agriculture, to the industrial 

growth of our province; the fact that it is vitally essential that we have main arteries of highways 

connecting up with the other provinces and the United States to the south of us. Good roads are essential 

to the well-being of our people, in the economic and in the social and in the security sense. In the past 10 

years this Government has had the responsibility of building roads to a new high standard and 

maintaining them with the increased traffic and tonnage we have had. 

 

To begin with, we inherited in 1944 a maze of dilapidated roads with a highway department with no 

equipment and no personnel. In 39 years prior to 1944 only $87 million had been spent on highways in 

Saskatchewan. When this Government took over in 1944, $32 million of that $87 million was still 

owing; 75 per cent of the roads were worn out. Worse than that was the fact that the whole matter of 

roads and road construction had become so tied in with patronage and politics that it was impossible to 

plan a programme for the future. When this Government took over it had to embark on a programme to 

reconstruct the entire system. 

 

This past summer in the Melville constituency was a hectic one as far as roads are concerned. Early in 

the Spring and on through practically the whole summer, while the rains continued and washed out 

portions of the highways and the grades, people were forcibly reminded of how dependent we are on 

roads and how used they had become to travelling on roads that were well maintained and kept open all 

the year round. Ten years ago people fully expected to be stuck in the mud after practically every 

10-minute shower. This summer, every day meant phone calls; people in to see about a portion of the 

road 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

13 

 

washed out; how soon it would be fixed. I kept track of all the calls I had in one day after it had rained, I 

believe, for about 10 days steadily, and the first call I got at 7 o‟clock in the morning, and from picking 

up the mail at 7:30 and from calls that I got all through the rest of the day and people in to seeing me I 

counted 22 different enquiries about roads and grades that had been washed out. That was not including 

a couple of belligerent and pugnacious gentlemen (I think they were from Manitoba) who came into the 

shop all covered from head to foot with mud. They had heard that I was a member there, and that I was 

possibly responsible for a good quantity of the water that had been falling. I think I was on about my 

22nd phone call at that time, and I did not greet them in my usual affable and courteous manner; and, 

very fortunately for me, when things were getting beyond the stage where peaceful negotiations were 

going on, a good friend of mine came in and was able to persuade these gentlemen that they should go 

on their way and drop the whole matter. I just mention this, Mr. Speaker, to show you how critical the 

situation was down in my area. 

 

This Fall was a life-saver in that we had six or seven weeks of good, dry weather. Those few weeks 

demonstrated the high degree to which our Highway Department has grown and in that short space of 

time they did a tremendous amount of work improving the roads in our area. No. 10 Highway east of the 

Abernethy junction, which had been washed out from an overflowing lake in the Reserve, had a great 

deal of work done on it, and was widened out and is now ready to be blacktopped. It is the only link 

week between Canora and Regina that is not blacktopped. No. 15 Highway east of Melville has a grade 

built up to standard in preparation for an over-all construction which will be (I understand from the 

Minister of Highways) going on possibly this year. No. 15 east of Melville, being built up, will allow the 

people from the southeast part of the province to come into Melville instead of going on into Yorkton 

where they would much rather come, I am sure. No. 47 has been built up south of Melville. No. 22 from 

Killaly to Grayson has been reconstructed and low grades build up to standard, and a lot of 

reconstruction and gravelled. 

 

Our Board of Trade wrote a very nice letter to the Minister of Highways congratulating him on the work 

that had been done there, and also intimated that they hoped their letter of congratulations would not 

influence the work that might be done there, this year. In spite of the few bouquets handed out to the 

Minister of Highways, this matter of building roads and maintaining them is a much greater problem in 

Saskatchewan than in any other province in Canada. There are a number of very apparent reasons why 

this is so: the mileage of the roads in Saskatchewan and our population — 38 per cent of the highways 

and 7 per cent of the population; we have 24 miles of surveyed road for every man, woman and child in 

this province, nearly three times the mileage of Manitoba and 2 1/2 times the mileage of Alberta. 

 

In Saskatchewan, I think the people are doing everything they can to finance highway construction. I 

just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the machine age and some modern means of transportation have 

moved ahead so fast that we have fallen behind in trying to provide the type of roads that this 

transportation needs. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, there is not time to go into the matter of providing Federal aid for roads at this 

time. A resolution will possibly be brought in, and I will have a chance to see more on this problem later 

on. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention that the people in the Melville constituency have been 

preparing for some considerable time 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

 

14 

 

now an active and wholehearted participation in the 50th Anniversary of our province. Considerable 

planning and work has gone into preparing, each month, some outstanding event that will underline the 

remarkable progress that has been made in this province in the last 50 years. All of these events will 

stress the debt that we owe the pioneer residents of this province, and give an opportunity to the present 

generation to discover the rich heritage of experience to be found in the history of this province. They 

will stress also that Saskatchewan has been built on a foundation of tolerance and co-operation among 

the many people who have come here from different lands. I want, in closing, to congratulate the 

organizations and the people who have devoted so much time to assure the success of our Jubilee Year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the Motion. 

 

Hon. J.H. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation): — Mr. Speaker, since ten minutes 

of my time is gone, I shall have to forgo the parliamentary amenities customary at this time. I would, 

however, like to congratulate the hon. Leader of the Opposition on his elevation to his high post, an 

important post. I sympathize with him; I realize that he has a Herculean task ahead of him in trying to 

rehabilitate the Liberal party in this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am limiting my remarks to the two programmes of the Social Welfare Department 

which have been brought under attack by the Opposition. I refer to our Old Age Security programme 

and also to the rehabilitation of the Métis people. Since these are the only two of many programmes of 

the Welfare Department, I assume that the others are progressing splendidly. I hope at the end of my 

remarks that this House will conclude that the Opposition made a very poor case indeed in their attacks, 

and that all is well within the Department of Social Welfare. 

 

As has been said, Mr. Speaker, this is our Golden Jubilee Year, and in the history of a state or a country 

50 years is indeed a short period of time. Nevertheless, in Saskatchewan we have observed a remarkable 

growth attributable in large measure to the sacrifice, the toil, the initiative of our pioneer citizens. We 

are happy and proud, Mr. Speaker, to have so many of these pioneers of ours with us today; but we must 

not forget that the labour and sacrifice of pioneer life, the long grim years of depression and drought in 

this province, and the fact that they were deprived of many of the services, such as health, that we enjoy 

today, all of these have left their mark on these fine citizens of ours, and it is up to us to do something on 

their behalf. I would ask, Mr. Speaker, how better can we celebrate our Golden Jubilee Anniversary with 

pride and with pleasure than by helping to bring to fruition an overall security programme that will be 

for their benefit, — a programme in which they can take pride, a programme in which there is no taint 

nor vestige of charity, and one which is theirs by virtue of the fact that they have rendered long and 

invaluable service to the province and to this nation. 

 

The overall security programme for Saskatchewan‟s senior citizens had its beginning in 1945, when this 

Government introduced free hospitalization, medical, dental and optical services for aged people. Over 

20,000 of our pensioners and their dependants enjoy these services today. Then followed the 

establishment of nursing homes for the care of those suffering from the crippling ailments associated 

with old age. Four such homes, with a bed capacity of 500, are now in operation, and we trust that 

within a relatively short period of time, we shall extend the bed capacity in nursing homes to 1,000 beds. 



 

February 22, 1955 

15 

 

For several years, Mr. Speaker, private homes, operated largely by church organizations, provided 

housing and care and food for needy, aged persons. The housing of 975 persons is presently being met in 

this way. There is an estimated minimum of 5,000 aged persons in this province who are living presently 

under adverse housing conditions, in isolation very often, and far from the hospital and health services. 

These are active citizens who wish to continue to reside in the communities they pioneered. I cannot 

speak too highly of the fine services rendered particularly by church organizations, in providing for the 

housing and food needs of many hundreds of our aged people. Indeed, this would appear to be a natural 

church activity, and it demonstrates in a very fine way Christianity in operation. 

 

You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that less than two years ago this Government, through the Department of 

Social Welfare, offered to assist municipalities or groups of municipalities forming a housing area, or 

church organizations and other organizations — offered to provide 20 per cent of the capital cost of any 

housing projects and an annual grant at the rate of $40 per bed. The response to this offer has been 

gratifying and most heart-warming. This is indeed a programme organized by the people and operated 

by the people solely (not by the Government) and in the interests of our finest and best-loved citizens, 

our aged people. This, Mr. Speaker, is democracy in operation in its finest way. 

 

During the past 18 months, 14 church organizations, municipalities, and groups of municipalities, 

comprising housing areas, have constructed, or are in the process of constructing, or have entered into 

agreements to provide, housing units for aged married couples, and hostels with common dining rooms 

in kitchens for single people, in the amount of $1,578,000 of which the Provincial Government has 

contributed, or is committed to contribute, $315,000, besides an annual maintenance grant of $49,860. 

 

I know it would interest members of this House and the people throughout the province to know where 

these housing projects are located, and who are responsible for organizing them and operating them: 

 

(1) there was an addition to the Lutheran Home in Melville, operated by the Lutheran Church and 

opened in 1954; 

 

(2) the St. Joseph‟s housing project in Radville at an estimated cost of $225,000, operated by the 

Sisters of St. Joseph of the Roman Catholic Church, which should be completed in 1955; 

 

(3) there is the Sunset Lodge in Saskatoon, at a cost of $200,000, operated by the Lutheran Church 

which will be opened early this Spring; 

 

(4) the Herbert Housing project, operated by the Youth Mennonite Society, opened last year, 1954; 

 

(5) the housing project at Nipawin, operated by the Pentecostal Assembly of Canada, opened in 1954; 

 

(6) the St. Mary‟s project in Weyburn, operated by the Sisters of Our Lady of the Cross of the Roman 

Catholic Church, opened in 1954; 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

 

16 

 

(7) the Service Centre and Housing project in Regina operated by the Canadian National Institute of 

the Blind, costing $250,000, presently under construction in to be opened this year; 

 

(8) The men‟s hostel at Saskatoon, operated by the Salvation Army and expected to be opened this 

year; 

 

(9) The Weneda Park Lodge of Wadena owned and operated by a group of municipalities, 

construction to start in the Spring; 

 

(10) the housing project at Lloydminster, which will be operated by a Board of Directors from the 

municipalities comprising the housing area, construction to commence in the Spring; 

 

(11) the Borderline Housing Company of Congress operated by a Board of Directors, construction to 

commence in the Spring; 

 

(12) the housing project at Kindersley to be financed by a municipal levy, and to be operated by a 

Board of Directors or by a church organization as may be decided on, building to commence this year; 

 

(13) the Zenon Park Housing Company, to be financed by a loan from Central Mortgage Company 

and the Provincial Government grant, to be operated by a Board of Directors; 

 

(14) and the City of Yorkton housing project, at a minimum cost of $150,000, over $100,000 of which 

was bequeathed by a grand old pioneer of this province, Mr. Anderson; it is expected that construction 

will commence this Spring. 

 

It is interesting to know, in passing, Mr. Speaker, that when the matter of this most generous and 

munificent bequest was discussed with Mr. Anderson, shortly before his death, he had this to say: 

 

“I don‟t wants this housing project to be called the „Eventide Home‟ or the „Last Round-up‟ or any 

suggestion that the old guests have one foot in the grave and are waiting to take the final step, or to be 

shoved in. I want this housing project called the Yorkton Hotel.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, to me these words of Mr. Anderson personify the indomitable spirit of the pioneers 

of this province who never say „die‟. 

 

There is another bequest of over $100,000 by a Saskatchewan man whose will is being probated at the 

present time. The condition of the will is that the home, or the hostel, shall be called after his mother, 

who herself was a very early pioneer in this province. She was noted throughout the land for her 

hospitality and for all the other fine qualities which characterize our pioneer women. This guest house 

will bear her name and it will be devoted to the housing and care of pioneer prairie women. 

 

I know the members of the House and the people of Saskatchewan will also be interested to learn of the 

areas where housing projects for our pioneer citizens are in the planning and organizational 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

17 

 

stage: 

 

(1) in the Assiniboia Health Region, the municipalities, towns and villages are interested in planning 

to homes, one at Assiniboia and one at Gravelbourg; 

 

(2) in Tisdale, where the Senior Citizens‟ organization have interested the municipalities in a housing 

project in that fine town; 

 

(3) in the North Battleford Health Region, where the United Church is sponsoring a housing project of 

self-contained units for married couples and also a hostel for a single aged persons; 

 

(4) Saskatoon City is definitely going to have a very fine housing project; there, in Saskatoon, the 

Pastmasters‟ Association of the Masonic Order expressed its desire and intention of going into the 

larger project, with fancy family units, and also the Teachers‟ Federation, with the approval of the 

S.T.F. Council, propose putting 20 family units for retired teachers on relatively low pension in 

Saskatoon, and also 20 units in the housing project that is proposed for Regina; the Service Clubs of 

Saskatoon are wholeheartedly behind the project and will assist in its financing; 

 

(5) the Sisters of our Lady of the Cross of the Roman Catholic Church are planning a $200,000 hostel 

in Prince Albert; 

 

(6) the City of Moose Jaw has expressed interest in self-contained units for married couples; 

 

(7) the town of Nokomis where groups of municipalities are organizing and hope to establish a 

housing project; 

 

(8) in Foam Lake and Pierceland, housing projects are in the discussion and organization stage; 

 

(9) in the Health Region of Swift Current, I am confident that housing projects both in Swift Current 

and Shaunavon will get under way this year. I am hopeful too that one will be established in Maple 

Creek to serve the needs of the fine old pioneers of that area. I might say that, with housing projects in 

Swift Current, Shaunavon and Maple Creek, and a nursing home in Swift Current to serve the needs of 

that Health Region, Swift Current Health Region will be able to boast the best over all security 

programme on the North American continent. 

 

You know, I have been amused at the clumsy attempt of the gentlemen opposite in their efforts to 

politically seduce my friend the hon. member from Swift Current (Mr. Gibbs). Do they think that Harry 

Gibbs would leave the Olympian heights on this side of the house, Mr. Speaker, to dwell in the Valley of 

Despond of my friends opposite? And, also, do they think that this champion of the working people who 

has on many occasions not only avowed his Socialist principles, but has demonstrated them, would give 

up these principles for the empty shallow hypocritical promises of the gentlemen opposite? Why, they 

don‟t know Harry Gibbs. 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

 

18 

 

I wish I had time to tell you of the fine housing project that is being planned for the City of Regina. We 

are hopeful that this will be a joint City-Provincial Government project. I only wish, Mr. Speaker, that 

we had television so that the people of the province could see these plans which I am showing to you 

now. This is the proposed pioneer village, with double duplexes and multiple unit housing. These are for 

married couples. It is proposed that this be located on, fortunately, government-owned property at 

Government House, and the married couples will be housed in these housing units, the single people in 

Government House, and I do not know of a better use to which Government House could be put than 

that. The charge for the rental for housing — that is the self-contained units — will be a maximum of 

$25 a month and for full care — that is, food, rooms, laundry and other services — for single people will 

be a maximum of their pensions less a generous amount for spending money. 

 

You will be interested in knowing the types of housing that we have here. This is a duplex. Each family 

of two aged persons will have a total area of 570 square feet, fully modern housing, oil heated, or gas 

when it comes to the city. Each home is provided with an electric stove and with a Frigidaire. There is a 

bathroom, of course, bedroom and an over all space of 570 square feet. This is being beautifully planned 

and will be beautifully landscaped, and if this goes forward in Regina, the city will be able to boast the 

best housing project for aged people on the North American continent. 

 

I am proud and happy to report on the rapid expansion of our provincially-operated nursing homes for 

the treatment and care of our chronically-ill aged people. Our newest home of 300-bed capacity is 

located in the most picturesque area in the city of Regina. It is being built in conjunction with our 

Saskatchewan Boys‟ School — an institution that always interests the gentlemen opposite. They should 

know that, at the present time, that school is being largely used as a treatment centre for those suffering 

residual effects from polio. So this nursing home of ours will operate in conjunction with it, and the boys 

who are in the Saskatchewan Boys‟ School will be moved to a treatment centre wherein handicapped, or 

rather, seriously disturbed boys and girls (whether they have run counter to the law or not, their 

problems are exactly the same) will be treated. 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — Good idea. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Already we are starting to plan for a 300-bed nursing home on the campus of the 

University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon adjacent to the medical college and to the University Hospital 

there. There are those, I know, who will say that I have a personal and selfish interest in such a home, 

but I assure you that such is not the case. It is the wish of every person, on this side of the House, at 

least, Mr. Speaker, that a start be made in research and treatment, experimentation and prevention of the 

crippling diseases associated with old age. In the past 50 years the expectancy of life has increased from 

48 years to 68-plus years, and with further discoveries in medical science and with investigations into 

the field of geriatrics, which is the science of diseases afflicting aged persons, I am sure that the 

probability of life in the next few years will extend to 75 years, to 80 and even to 90 years. Even hon. 

gentlemen opposite may look forward to a ripe old age if they watch their step. 

 

Now, I would say that we on this side of the House are not so concerned about having people live 

longer, but we want them to 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

19 

 

live young longer, free from the crippling and painful effects of these diseases — arthritis, rheumatism 

and others associated with old age. 

 

I am very proud indeed to be associated with a Government and with the people of Saskatchewan who 

are dedicated to the humanitarian principles of helping those who are unable adequately to help 

themselves. I personally regret that everything that should be done cannot be done overnight, but it 

won‟t take long until the people of this province will achieve a degree of security such as does not 

obtain anywhere on the North American continent if in the world. 

 

When it became evident, last fall, that we were going to suffer a crop failure and falling revenues 

brought on by fiscal policies over which this Provincial Government has no control, but is the 

responsibility of the Federal Government; when we were faced with a crop failure and falling revenues, 

and this crop failure especially had resulted in the small equity which many of our pensioners have in 

crop shares being entirely wiped out, I am glad that, in spite of these reverses and in spite of our falling 

revenues, this Government has seen fit to improve the financial position of many thousands of our 

pensioners by guaranteeing to them an irreducible standard of living below which no one in needy 

groups will be able to fall. This is a budget matter, Mr. Speaker, and it will be reserved to the Provincial 

Treasurer to outline it to you. But, in passing may I say that that one group will have the highest 

supplementary allowance of any in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

May I recapitulate our senior citizens‟ security programme, Mr. Speaker: first, for the Sick, 

hospitalization, medical, dental and optical services; second, for the Chronics — those afflicted with the 

crippling diseases associated with old age — fine, modern, comfortable nursing homes; third, for the 

Ambulatory — those who wish to remain in the community they have pioneered, but presently living in 

isolation and under adverse housing conditions — good housing, comfortable modern housing; and 

fourth, for All, Mr. Speaker, a pension more adequately related to the cost of living and to the needs of 

the individual. 

 

No part of this programme — and it is a very fine programme, the most enlightened programme on the 

continent I would venture to say; no part of this programme with the exception of a miserable total 

pension $17.53 per month existed prior to this Government coming into office. One would think that the 

Liberal Party which had been in power in this province for 35 years and had done so little in this and 

other welfare fields, would not constructively criticize our welfare programmes, including health and 

education, and in some instances actually tried to sabotage these programmes — and there are many 

instances of that, too, of which the people of this province are well aware. I suppose it is axiomatic, Mr. 

Speaker, that those who criticize the most do the least, and as I look across the floor of the House I do 

not know of a single Liberal constituency, with the exception of one or two, in which a housing project 

for the care of senior citizens is being planned and projected. That is a pretty poor record for the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — You just spoke about Maple Creek. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I‟m not through with you yet. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — You are doing well; go ahead. 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

 

20 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — There is, Mr. Speaker, as I have said, a wonderful response on the part of 

thousands of Saskatchewan citizens, of church organizations, to this programme, and a wonderful 

response on the part of municipalities and groups of municipalities for housing project; but my friends 

opposite seem to think, or seem to take the view that, although this programme may be good for aged 

people, it may be bad for the Liberal Party. I don‟t understand their reasoning, but that almost seems to 

be the case. And how wrong they are, Mr. Speaker, because if they would throw their wholehearted 

weight and support behind this programme it would reflect to their benefit in no uncertain way, besides 

being a great blessing to the pioneer citizens of this province. I have waited, and so far I have waited in 

vain, for some interest on the part of the members opposite in this programme — from the member from 

Arm River (Mr. Danielson), some interest from the hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. McDonald) . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — I tried you out last year and you . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — . . . or the member from Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — . . . you turned us all down. Did not have any money. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — . . . or your seat mate over there, the hon. member from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson); 

but so far there has been no interest and no activity in the constituencies which these gentlemen 

represent. And I would say this to the gentlemen opposite: if you cannot help in this programme, for 

goodness sake, don‟t hinder! Surely the welfare of our pioneers far outweighs any political partisan 

consideration. 

 

I hope to have the opportunity of answering a radio talk which was given by the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition — I think it was on February 25th, criticizing our welfare programme. I hope to be able to 

do that in the budget debate, Mr. Speaker, in this House where I can be challenged, and not to give it in 

the cloister and the shelter of a radio broadcasting salon. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You will be more sheltered here than you would be there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to deal, briefly . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Prize joke. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — If it doesn‟t bother you, Mr. Speaker, it doesn‟t bother me in the least. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, I would like to deal, briefly, because that is all it deserves, with that masterpiece of 

bias, of inaccuracy, of hysteria delivered by the hon. member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Dunfield), relative 

to the Métis people of this province. The fact that the speech was eulogized editorially in the 

„Leader-Post‟ should damn it completely without any comment on my part, Mr. Speaker, but I feel 

constrained to remark on it. And I say this, that down through the years, ever since Confederation, if 

there is one thing the Liberal Party and governments should be ashamed of it has been their callous 

disregard of the needs, yes, and the rights, of the Indian and Métis people in this country. They have 

permitted these people to be debauched, 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

21 

 

exploited, cheated, neglected and outcast, and this has being going on ever since Confederation . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — For ten years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Mr. Speaker, the Indians and the Métis should not be relegated to a second-rate 

people in our society. They have certain qualities of character, and they have certain strengths that, if 

they had been given a chance, if a decent programme of assistance had been given a chance, if a decent 

programme of assistance had been inaugurated, if there had been a degree of understanding and 

sympathy and helpfulness on the part of the Liberal government in days gone by, and the Federal 

Government since Confederation, these people might well have been among our most valuable citizens. 

And now, because the C.C.F. have dared to tackle what has become, through Liberal neglect, the 

greatest of all our social problems, we are castigated by the people who should help and by a press that 

should have some understanding of this problem . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Is that the „Commonwealth‟? 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — And I will tell you this, there is no one knows better than those who have worked 

on this problem — the churches, educationalists, administrators, welfare workers; they all know that 

they are doomed to many failures in trying to solve this problem, to many disappointments, and to a 

great deal of discouragement. But I do not know of anything that tends to discourage a programme as 

the destructive, abortive type of criticism that emanates from such gentlemen as the hon. member for 

Meadow Lake: not one iota of suggestion or constructive criticism; merely to again take political 

advantage of an unfortunate situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know that you cannot eradicate the results of generations of callous neglect and 

exploitation, as well, in a few short years you cannot change overnight the habits of people, the way of 

life, the pattern of living which have become almost inherited characteristics of these people in 10 years 

either. If it can be done in a generation, it will have been a great accomplishment, and a great wrong to 

these people will have been righted. I know that, down through the generations the churches, which had 

been alone in this field, have carried on an impossible and losing battle against greed, exploitation, 

dishonesty and injustice practised against the Indian and against the Métis people. And unless 

governments and responsible citizens, especially those holding office, assume the responsibilities which 

are theirs, the souls of these people may be saved, but their lives never. That is the position of the Indian 

and the Métis people that we found when we attempted to institute programmes for their betterment in 

this province. We in the Department of Social Welfare are collaborating with the Departments of Public 

Health and Education, of Northern Development, of Co-operatives and with our greatest ally, the 

Churches, and with interested, sincere, understanding citizens everywhere throughout this province, to 

do something to solve this problem. 

 

In the prairie region of the province, the Department of Social Welfare has nine projects involving 2,000 

Métis people. I might mention some of these. The Lebret Métis farm of 2 1/2 sections, 1,000 acres, 76 

head of cattle, 40 pigs, 1,200 chickens and other farm activities, supports a total of 75 persons. The 

homes are comfortable 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

 

22 

 

and hygienic. The children go to school in Lebret, and Sister Oliver, the principal of the school there, 

whom I have known for many years, is a fine teacher and a great humanitarian. I was very proud to hear 

her say that the Métis children from the Lebret Métis farm attending her school were regular in 

attendance, they were well fed, they were neat in appearance and that they were doing well in school. 

 

At Willow Bunch there is a community of 35 families of 170 people; it has an irrigated co-operative 

market garden of 25 acres, with a recently purchased ranch of 100 cattle and with 600 acres under 

cultivation. There, within the past three or four years, with improved nutrition of the children, and better 

and improved homes, the teachers of the Willow Bunch school have reported that there has been a 

marked improvement in the scholastic attainment of those children and their ability to withstand fatigue 

and ailments of various sorts that hitherto have kept them out of school. 

 

At Lestock (and that is a prize example of Liberal treatment of the Métis people, if I ever saw one) there 

the Métis were brought in from here, there and everywhere, plunked down on road allowances so that 

they would be handy to the municipality to get relief during the depression and many families in this 

area . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It was the C.C.F. who did that. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Who burned their shacks? 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — The C.C.F. did it? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — And who burned the shacks down? 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — That, my friend, is not true. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Oh, yes . . . 
 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I could find stronger terms to express it if Mr. Speaker would allow me, and you 

know it isn‟t true. 
 

Mr. Danielson: — He will tell you more about it than I can. It was in his constituency. 
 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — When we cane into office in 1944 . . . 
 

Mr. McDonald: — You burned their homes. 
 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — . . . in Lestock there were, living on road allowances, over 100 persons in that 

area. They were found living on road allowances, squatting on private land under the most deplorable 

living conditions . . . 
 

Hon. Mr. Douglas (Rosetown): — Liberal housing! 
 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Many were isolated and living in houses with sod roofs, dirt floors, and those 

poor, unfortunate people were without the energy and without the means to make the homes suitable for 

human habitation. We purchased a quarter-section of land for home-sites, with 100 acres under 

cultivation, and our first problem was to build decent homes for these 21 families, totalling 100 persons 

in this community. The new 



 

February 22, 1955 

23 

 

project is close to the village school, to hospital, to medical facilities, and a very decided improvement 

has been accomplished in that area. Several activities have been organized, but our principal objective 

was to see that the children were well clothed, well housed, well fed, so that they could attend school 

regularly and secure the benefits of an education. 

 

At Crooked Lake, Mr. Speaker, is a community situated in the Qu‟Appelle Valley, south of Grayson. 

This project includes a two-room school which was built by the Department of Social Welfare and is 

operated jointly with that Department of Education. There are 65 pupils attending the school, and the 

average daily attendance is astonishingly high — 90 per cent during the past year. Mr. and Mrs. Saleski 

are the teachers, and they are doing a wonderful job there. They are the friends and the counsellors of 

the Métis people of that community. They have a co-operative garden there and they have cows, with 

milk for the children, which they did not have before; they have a chicken raising project and certain 

other activities. 

 

The next prime example of Liberal and neglect is at Crescent Lake, which is located, as the hon. 

member for Yorkton knows, some 12 miles south of Yorkton. This project consists of the school which 

we built, and a co-operative project. Mr. and Mrs. Hirsch are the teachers of the school there, which has 

an enrolment of 55, with a high average daily attendance. This, Mr. Speaker, had been an outcast 

community living on an abandoned Indian reservation, with the children so neglected — yes, and so 

diseased — that they were refused admittance to adjoining schools. Now I am happy to say (and this 

may astonish you) that so great has been the improvement there that two or three applications have been 

received from white families to send their children to the Crescent Lake School. Two years ago, I saw 

the same Métis children give a demonstration in gymnastics such as I had not seen for many years, and I 

was entertained by the Crescent Lake school band — it was a fine band, one that any school in the 

province of Saskatchewan could be proud of. But best of all, there are 10 graduates from that school 

now attending high schools elsewhere, six of them in the city of Regina. Mr. and Mrs. Hirsch were your 

guests in the Speaker‟s gallery last Friday, Mr. Speaker. They had come to Regina in a truck with a 

portable electrical outfit that they were sending on down to Willow Bunch, since the Crescent Lake 

school and project are now supplied with power from the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. This is 

what Mr. and Mrs. Hirsch told me; that their greatest difficulty in keeping children in school, especially 

in high school, was the attitude of the children‟s parents, who were illiterate and who failed to appreciate 

the benefits of education. Mr. Hirsch quoted that old Japanese proverb: “A frog in the well knows not 

the great ocean”. He said the adults, parents who had had the benefit of Liberal education in this 

province, who were completely illiterate, could neither read nor write, did not know and appreciate or 

understand the benefits of education . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Hirsch said all that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Now, my hon. friend from Maple Creek, I wish you would not assume such a 

vinegar aspect; you are going to sour the milk of human kindness which is in such abundance on this 

side of the House. 

 

The great majority of the adult Métis people (the parents) 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

 

24 

 

in this province are illiterate. They are the victims off Liberal neglect down through the years; but I want 

to tell you that, today, Métis children are being educated, at least up to grade 8 standards and, I would 

venture to say, for the first time in this province many hundreds of them are going on with high school 

education and into the various professions. I am glad to see that one of the boys from our Lebret Métis 

farm as an example is attending the Teachers‟ College at Moose Jaw, and I am told he is doing 

extremely well. There are several of them at Campion College, and I do think Mr. Speaker, that, given 

one generation and seeing to it that the Métis children have educational opportunities to go through 

public school, through high school and university, if necessary, they will rapidly become assimilated in 

the society of this province, and there will not be any Métis problem here. The same should apply to the 

Indians, because as I have said before, these people have many qualities and strengths which could be 

exploited — and I don‟t mean in the Liberal sense. 

 

If time would permit, Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak of our projects at Duck Lake, Glen Mary and 

the Lebret village group, and other aspects of our Métis programme. I do want to mention this, however: 

I cannot speak too highly of the work of Father Blanchard, who has been a member of the staff of Our 

Department for the past two years. He was born and brought up among these people, and I do think he 

understands them better, certainly, than any man whom I have met in the province of Saskatchewan. He 

has a greater love for them, a greater understanding, certainly, than the hon. member for Meadow Lake, 

whose conception as expressed last year, of a well-adjusted Métis was to picture to us a Métis sitting in 

his cabin eating a fish, and after he had finished the fish he smacked his lips and he turned to Mr. 

Dunfield and he said: “My, wasn‟t that a good fish!” That is his conception of human dignity and 

well-being. One would think he was referring to a well-fed animal. Thank goodness, we have a little 

more exalted opinion of human dignity than that. 

 

With respect to Father Blanchard, he certainly has an understanding of Métis problems; he understands 

and believes in co-operation as the way of life, and is a great student of co-operation and co-operative 

organizations. It is he who teaches the Métis people their first lessons in thrift of establishing saving 

unions. He organizes co-operative gardens and co-operative projects of all kinds. He is at one and the 

same time an idealist and a very practical man. No one realizes better than he does the immensity of the 

problems which confront him, but he is undaunted in the face of disappointment and discouraging 

failures. He is patient to a degree I have seldom seen in any man. He is understanding, sympathetic and 

kind. He is an indefatigable worker, and I only hope that his health holds up so that he can carry on his 

work to which he is dedicating his life. Isn‟t it strange, Mr. Speaker, that the worst possible insult you 

could heap on a Métis or an Indian is to compare him to a white man. “Johnny Beavertale is a liar . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I don‟t blame them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — . . . he talks like a white man;” or, “Henri is a cheat and a liar, he is the friends of 

the white man.” What a poor opinion they have of the white man. They fear and are suspicious of a 

white man — engendered in the minds of these people by Liberal governments and policies and the 

adverse impact that the white man had upon the Indian and the Métis. But Father Blanchard‟s greatest 

strength lies 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

25 

 

in the fact that he is loved and trusted by the Métis; they trust him as they trust few white man — and 

with good cause. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have proceeded beyond the time I had intended to talk. I would like again to 

congratulate the Leader of the Opposition on his elevation to a very important position. I wish him well. 

I regret, however, that he has inherited a worn out, broken down, dilapidated Liberal political machine 

that has cluttered up the highway of progress in this province for the past 50 years. Unfortunately for the 

Leader of the Opposition, he has to spend all his time in trying to patch up and repair this old machine 

that he is inherited. I would advise him to shove the thing into the ditch, to set fire to it and then devote 

his time and his ability and energy to the good and welfare of the people of this province. Forget about 

that old political machine . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: —I‟ll set fire to your machine. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I had hoped, too, that you would get rid of some of the „stains‟ on the Liberal 

escutcheon that you inherited, but evidently are not you are never going to be given the opportunity of 

doing so. The hon. Leader of the Opposition has delved into the must be an unreliable files of the 

„Leader-Post‟, and he has made a spurious attempt to prove that I have lost the respect and the affection 

and the loyalty of the aged people of this province. I think that I have demonstrated, this afternoon, that 

such is not the case, that it is the Liberals in this province to have lost the respect in the confidence and 

the loyalty of the aged people of this province. If I were inclined, Mr. Speaker, to be unkind to the 

Leader of the Opposition, I might read to him some of the statements concerning himself published just 

prior to the Liberal convention, last fall, in the „Yorkton Enterprise,‟ the „Leader-Post‟ and other Liberal 

dailies of the times. At that time the Liberal daily newspapers were vainly trying to pull „Jimmy‟ 

Gardiner‟s chestnuts out of the political fire, and they had a very poor opinion indeed of the hon. Leader 

of the Opposition; and they expressed it in no uncertain terms. But, as I said, then they were courting 

L.B. Thomson and he was courting them . . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — No wedding bells, though. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Who are you courting? 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I don‟t have to court. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Your courting days are over. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I merely wish to point out . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member knows very well that the Speech from the Throne is pretty 

much of a free for all, but I think he is going pretty far afield. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Let him go. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — I regret if I have transgressed, Mr. Speaker. It must be my national origin. I 

certainly did not intend to cause my friends of the Opposition any mental disquietude or qualms of 

conscience. Every- 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

 

26 

 

thing I have had to say he has been intended in a kindly and helpful manner. If they have listened and 

taken to heart what I have said this afternoon, I am sure that I will be able to count the members of the 

Opposition among my most loyal friends and, in due course, my supporters. 

 

I will vote for the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. T.R. MacNutt (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to move the adjournment of the debate. 

 

(Debate Adjourned) 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, we have with us, this afternoon, a very distinguished guest and I am 

going to move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, that the proceedings of the Assembly be 

suspended at this stage in order that the Assembly may extend their welcome to the Hon. Richard Wood, 

member of the British House of Commons: 

 

“Ordered, That proceedings of the Assembly be suspended at this stage (5:15 p.m.) in order that the 

Assembly may extend a welcome to the Honourable Richard Wood, a Member of the British House of 

Commons.” 

 

(CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY) 

 

Address by 

the Honourable Richard Wood 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am deeply sensible of the honour which you have done me in allowing me, for a minute 

or two, to interrupt your important businesses afternoon; and I can only hope that honourable members 

here will give me the latitude and kindness which I remember was extended to me when I made my 

„maiden‟ speech in the House of Commons at London not very long ago. 

 

I can assure you that I shall not interrupt proceedings for very long, because I feel very diffident in rising 

to address this House. I only comfort myself by remembering that I have never yet met a British member 

of Parliament who was deterred by lack of qualification for making a speech about anything. I gather 

that it is entirely different with your House of Commons in Ottawa, and naturally, entirely different with 

this Legislative House here; but that is the way I am afraid it is in England, and if it did not occur like 

that we should all get to bed very much earlier in the evening, and spend fewer of those all-night 

sessions in the House of Commons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my purpose in this great and exciting trip which I am making across your country is really 

as much to look and to listen as to talk. I have been asked to make a number of speeches in the various 

cities which I shall visit, but my real purpose is to keep my eyes open and my ears open; to hear the kind 

of things which you are thinking, and to see the kind of things which you are doing, because I can 

honestly assure you that the things 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

27 

 

you are thinking and the things you are doing are going to be extremely important to Britain and to the 

whole world in the next 30 or 40 or 50 years. 

 

I have been immensely impressed already by the almost limitless (as far as I can see) economic 

opportunities which stretch before all of you in Canada — in this province and in the other provinces 

which I have already visited. I have thought a great deal, in the last few years, and no doubt you have 

thought a great deal more, about the future of this great country, and I suppose the thing that strikes an 

Englishman who visits Canada most forcibly is, as I say, these almost limitless economic opportunities 

in front of you; this great frontier still to be pushed back and an immense amount to be done 

everywhere, and immense possibilities, as I see it, for anyone who is willing to make for himself or 

herself a full and satisfying life — immense possibilities of doing so. 

 

I happen to have visited, for about four weeks before visiting Canada this time, the United States. I 

travelled right across the United States, and the Americans south of the border have suggested to me in 

the meetings that I have attended something which I believe is the most important part which Canada, as 

a whole, can play in the whole future of the world — even more important than these great economic 

developments which are ahead of you. I believe that probably all of us here, and probably all of us in 

this North American continent, would find ourselves in entire agreement about one thing above all. And 

that is the vital necessity and importance in the future of close co-operation and understanding between 

the United States on the one side and all the nations of the British Commonwealth on the other. 

 

You have only to imagine for a few moments what might happen if we allowed a deep and serious rift 

and diversion to divide us. As I see it, your country, Canada, is uniquely well-equipped to play the part 

of a mediator, ambassador, particularly between my country, Britain, and the United States, because 

you, situated right along their border, have very close ties, economic and otherwise, with them. I have 

been particularly impressed at all my meetings, wherever I went in the United States, to find the trust 

and respect and affection which your neighbours to the south have for you; and I remember, when I 

crossed the border about a week ago, thinking that all of this great long border between the Pacific and 

the Atlantic must be the model frontier for the whole world, the most friendly frontier that exists 

anywhere. If any other frontiers were the same as that then we perhaps shouldn‟t have quite so much to 

worry about. Therefore, you have, as I say, these great contacts and ties with the United States. 

 

You also have the advantage, such as no other nation has who has ties with the United States, all 

knowing about the Commonwealth, because you are a member of the Commonwealth, and I am 

absolutely convinced — I have said this often in Canada and I have to say it often again, because I 

believe that it is profoundly important; I am absolutely convinced that if you, in Canada, can play in the 

future, as you have played in the past, the role of mediator, interpreter, ambassador between the United 

States and Britain and the rest of the Commonwealth, then you will be owed a debt which I don‟t 

suppose we will ever be able to repay, not only by Britain, not only by the Commonwealth, but also by 

the whole world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much indeed for giving me this opportunity to say a few words and 

interrupting your business, and I do hope that I have not presumed for too long on your time. 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

 

28 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I may express on behalf of the members of this side, as I 

am sure my friend, the Leader of the Opposition, will want to express on behalf of the members on that 

side, our thanks to Mr. Wood for being here today and particularly for the remarks which he has made. 

To those members who are not familiar with Mr. Wood, you will be interested to know, of course, that 

he is a Conservative member of Parliament, representing a constituency in Yorkshire; that he is at the 

present time, what we would call, in Ottawa, parliamentary assistant to the Minister of Agriculture, or, 

as they call it, parliamentary private secretary to the Minister of Agriculture, and that he is very much 

interested in agriculture. One of the things he is doing in his trip across the United States and Canada is 

to take a good look at the agricultural picture and to gather what information he can. 

 

I am sure that most members are aware of the fact that he is a distinguished son of a very distinguished 

father. Most of us remember his father, Lord Halifax, quite well when he was the British Ambassador to 

Washington, and before that the British Foreign Secretary. Most of us who have met him in Ottawa 

when he visited Ottawa, were impressed with his kindliness and his dignity and his deep wisdom. 

 

Mr. Wood, as many members know, was a member of the very famous 8th Army which fought in Africa 

under Montgomery. I would like to say, on behalf of our group here, how delighted we are to have him 

here. We do not consider that we have interrupted our proceedings. We think it was a privilege for us to 

have him here, and to give us this opportunity of hearing him say a few words to us. 

 

I was especially pleased that he said something about the interpretive role of Canada between the United 

States and Great Britain. On the 1st of July, 1953, I happened to be in London when the Canadian Club 

held its annual dinner, and His Excellency, the Governor General spoke at the dinner and expounded the 

same feeling. He said that Canada was a bridge between the Commonwealth and the United States. He 

also said that half of our function was to explain Britain to the United States and the United States to 

Britain. When I was asked to make a few remarks I suggested that they should begin by teaching the 

British how to make coffee and the Americans how to make tea. I suggested that would be the basis of 

the beginning of international goodwill. 

 

But levity aside — of course that is one of the roles in the international picture which Canada can fulfil. 

We are privileged to be a member of the Commonwealth in close association with the other members of 

the Commonwealth, and we are also privileged, geographically, to be very close to the Americans. To 

some extent we think like the Americans, read the same magazines, the same papers, listen to the same 

radio programmes, and most of the time see the same type of movie, and so we understand the 

Americans probably better than any other group of people. I think that Canada can do much in 

establishing goodwill between the Commonwealth and the United States. 

 

I think it is significant, Mr. Speaker, that members from the United States Congress have sat in on the 

Commonwealth Parliamentary Conferences, as associate members. That is interesting. First of all they 

started to come to the Canadian Parliamentary Association and sit in on discussions there. From that 

they have now moved into sitting in on the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association meetings. That 

speaks well for the future, and for the time when the United States may be considered part of this great 

Commonwealth of free and independent nations. 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

29 

 

I am delighted that Mr. Wood touched on that aspect of it, and I am delighted that he is going to be 

saying that kind of thing as he makes his journey across Canada and the United States. 

 

I should like, again, on behalf of the members on the side of the House, sir, to convey to him, through 

Europe, our pleasure of having him here, our thanks to him for speaking to us, and our best wishes for a 

very successful journey on his way back to Great Britain. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): — I was quite unaware that we had such a 

distinguished guest in the House, this afternoon, as the Hon. Mr. Wood, or I certainly, Mr. Speaker, 

would have exercised a good deal more restraint than I did. I want you to understand, Mr. Wood, that 

these gentlemen opposite are my friends, and they always operate much better if they are „needled‟ a bit, 

and I made a clumsy attempt at so doing. My apologies to you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I do wish to mention what is a strange coincidence. I had the pleasure of meeting Lord Halifax, your 

father, Mr. Wood; I am not sure whether it was in 1916 or 1917 during a military exercise outside of 

Etaples in France. At that time I was a rear rank soldier in the Canadian infantry, and I held your father‟s 

horse for, I remember, what appeared to be an unconscionably long time, and I also remember that the 

conversation which we had was very, very brief, much briefer than my speech today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I want to express our gratitude to Mr. Wood, on behalf of the Assembly, for his kind 

words, this afternoon. We do hope you have the opportunity of coming back to Saskatchewan in a more 

salubrious season than we are enjoying now; the next time, instead of a blizzard, we hope we will have 

good sun and lots of flowers. 

 

Mr. McDonald ( Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, there is little that I can add to what has 

already been said by the Premier, but I do want to say to the Honourable Richard Wood, on behalf of the 

people on this side of the House, that we do consider it an honour to have had the privilege of being 

present here with you, this afternoon, and to have listened to the message you have for us. We do realize 

here that probably we are not as great a nation as the country to the south of us, but we know that we 

occupy the position of a mediator between the great powers of Great Britain and her Empire, the 

Commonwealth, and that great nation to the south. We are certainly pleased to do everything we can to 

see these two great nations work in harmony for the belief that we have in the western world. 

 

I am very pleased, personally, on behalf of the Opposition, to have members come from the British 

House of Commons to visit us here in Saskatchewan. It is only unfortunate that you had not been able to 

come during the summer months to have seen our western country at its best; probably it would have 

been even better had you been able to come, this summer, when we will be celebrating our Jubilee. We 

want to say thanks to you, and I hope that you will not consider it was anything but a pleasure for us to 

have had the opportunity to be present here with you, this afternoon. 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

 

30 

 

I do hope that you will have an excellent trip across Canada, that you will have safe passage home, and 

that you will take the message back to your people in Britain that we are 100 per cent behind them in all 

their activities; and anything they would like us to take a part in, not only as a province, but as the 

Dominion of Canada, I am sure we will be prepared to do anything we can do to help, not only with 

dealings between Canada and the United States in between the British Commonwealth of Nations and 

the United States, but also those dealings between Canada and your country, and especially between 

Saskatchewan and Great Britain. 

 

The business of the House being resumed. 

 

Mr. McDonald moved — That an Order of the Assembly do issue for a return showing: 

 

1. (a) The make, model and registration number of the Saskatchewan Government Airways aircraft 

which crashed at Buffalo Narrows, Saskatchewan, on Thursday, January 6, 1955; 

 

  (b) from whom this aircraft was purchased; 

 

  (c) the date of purchase; and 

 

  (d) the purchase price. 

 

2. (a) The total flying time for the airframe at date of purchase; 

 

  (b) The total flying time of the port motor at date of purchase; and 

 

  (c) The total flying time of the starboard motor at date of purchase. 

 

3. (a) The total flying time of the airframe on January 6, 1955; 

 

  (b) The total flying time of the port motor on January 6, 1955; 

 

  (c) The total flying time of the starboard motor on January 6, 1955. 

 

4. The total flying time of same aircraft for the day of January 5, 1955. 

 

5. The total flying time of same aircraft for the day of January 6, 1955. 

 

6. The total flying time of the late Stuart Millar for January 5, 1955. 

 

7. The total flying time of the late Stuart Millar for January 6, 1955. 

 

8. (a) Whether or not pilots of Saskatchewan Government Airways are permitted to do maintenance 

work, either airframe or mechanical, on Saskatchewan Government Airways aircraft; 

 

  (b) If so, the time Stuart Millar spent in maintenance work on January 5, 1955; and 

 

  (c) If so, the time Stuart Millar spent in maintenance work on January 6, 1955. 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

31 

 

9. (a) The total flying time logged by Stuart Millar; 

 

  (b) Of this total time, the part logged on (i) single engine aircraft and (ii) on multi-engine aircraft. 

 

  (c) The part of the total number of hours which was day flying on (i) single engine aircraft, (ii) 

multi-engine aircraft. 

 

  (d) The part of the total number of hours which was night flying on (i) single engine aircraft and 

(ii) multi-engine aircraft. 

 

10. The type of licence held by Stuart Millar. 

 

11. The date of Stuart Millar‟s last medical examination 

 

Hon Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural and Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I want to 

move an amendment to the Motion for Return. I am only moving this amendment to add certain 

questions to the motion for the purpose of getting as complete a picture as possible, and as other 

members of the Legislature haven‟t got the amendment before them I will read it: 

 

That the following words be added to the motion (for Return): 

 

“12. (a) The make and model number of the motors used on this aircraft; 

 

  (b) The frequency of overhaul of motors on this aircraft as required by the Department of 

Transport for the operations of Saskatchewan Government Airways; 

 

  (c) The total flying time since overhaul of the starboard motor on January 6, 1955. 

 

13. (a) The frequency of service inspections of the entire aircraft; 

 

  (b) The total flying time of the aircraft since the last check. 

 

14. The standards of maintenance and overhaul. 

 

15. (a) The frequency of issuance of the Certificate of Airworthiness issued by the Department of 

Transport for this aircraft; 

 

  (b) The date of the last Certificate of Airworthiness.” 

  



 

February 22, 1955 

 

32 

 

I think the purpose in introducing this amendment is obvious, and it is to get the full and complete 

information in regard to this question. Of course we could not give that unless the House asked for, and I 

think particularly it is very important that we have the information as to the Certificate of Airworthiness 

and the date of the last Certificate. I don‟t think I need to debate the question further, Mr. Speaker, and I 

would move, seconded by Mr. McIntosh the amendment which I have read and submit it to you. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, there is just one question that I would like to ask the Minister. I note 

that (c) and (d) parts of question 12 are the same, only referring to port and starboard motors. Reading 

number (c) “The total flight time since overhaul of the port motor on January 6, 1955.” Now, just what 

does that mean? 

 

Hon Mr. Brockelbank: — May I have the privilege of House, Mr. Speaker, to answer that question and 

make a suggestion. I noticed that. It is not too well phrased, and I would suggest that it would be 

clarified if we changed “on” to “to”, making it read “to January 6, 1955”; that was the meaning, so if the 

House would accept that, Mr. Speaker, I would appreciate it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That clears up the question, Mr. Speaker. The only other thing I want to say is that I 

am pleased the Minister has seen fit to add this to the questions that I had already asked, and if we could 

have this information as soon as possible I would very much appreciate it. 

 

Hon Mr. Brockelbank: — It won‟t take very long to get it. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:40 o‟clock p.m. 


