



















































Hansard: March 17, 1955


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session - Twelfth Legislature 

26th Day 

 

Thursday, March 17, 1955 

 

The House met at three o‘clock p.m. 

 

ON ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

LEADER-POST REPORT 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. Before the Orders of the Day are 

called, I want to draw to your attention a report in the ‗Leader-Post‘ making reference to the fracas that 

occurred in Crown Corporations Committee, whereby the hon. member for Hanley (Mr. R.A. Walker) 

proposed to throw out the member for Saltcoats unless he produced some evidence. I have scouted 

around for some of the evidence upon which I based my suggestions. Of course I never said anything 

definite . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, are we discussing Crown 

Corporations Committee business here now? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, I am referring to this report, Mr. Speaker. Does my hon. friend refuse to accept 

proof of the statements that I made? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Take it to Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — It is quite ‗okay‘ with me if he wants to refuse to listen. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think you are out of order. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Then I take it for granted he doesn‘t want any proof. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You can continue the controversy in Crown Corporations Committee, where the 

incident took place. 

 

ST. PATRICK’S DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might draw your 

attention to a very important subject. As you know, it is the 17th of March, that is beloved by Irish 

throughout the world and by countless millions of other people who would like to be Irish. I would like 

to point out one of the many characteristics of the Irish that is recognized by everyone, and I am being 

exceedingly modest, and that is the unselfishness that is associated with the Irish people. You have heard 

countless times, undoubtedly, that the Irish have won everybody‘s battles but their own. I remember, in 

the last world war, I, on one occasion, picked up three Irish boys in Royal Air Force uniform, just south 

of London, and drove them into the city. This, I believe, was in 1941, shortly after the Irish Parliament 

had declared our Eire‘s neutrality. I remarked to the boys that it was rather surprising to me that in view 

of the circumstances, since Ireland had declared its neutrality, they were in the Imperial uniform. One of 

them remarked: ―That may be all right as far as a declaration of government is concerned, but whoever 

heard of an Irishman being neutral?‖ And that, indeed, is a characteristic of the Irish people. 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

2 

I am sure you join with me, Mr. Speaker, as do all members of the House, in paying tribute to the Irish 

people on this the occasion of the anniversary of the patron saint of Ireland, the beloved St. Patrick. 

 

Mr. R.A. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, if I may take just a moment, I enjoyed the 

Minister‘s remarks, but I think he is slipping. As I look around over there I cannot see anybody with any 

ribbon on, and his is so inconspicuous that I can hardly see it from here. There are a great many people 

who have said that St. Patrick was English, Irish and French and everything else, but to a true Irishman 

there is no doubt but what he was Irish. In fact, our Leader came almost to be Irish; he had a birthday, 

yesterday, and he just missed by a few hours being born an Irishman. Of course on a day like this there 

are only two classes of people — the Irish, and those who wish they were, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Arnold Feusi (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, it seems that, today, we are all Irishmen here, and I have a 

little poem here given to me by a Scotchman that I think is appropriate  

 

Three Hebrews they sat talking 

Of the time when they would die, 

Of the place where they would go to 

And where they‘d love to lie; 

 

Old Isaac chose Jerusalem, 

New York for Rubenstein, 

But when it came to Cohen — 

He said, the place for mine 

Is near the river Shannon 

That‘s where I‘d love repose 

In an Irish cemetery with shamrocks 

on my nose; 

And the devil, he‘ll be trying 

To find me, I suppose, 

But he‘ll never think of looking 

Where the river Shannon flows! 

 

Mr. Harry Gibbs (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I have had a letter from my cousin ‗Dinty‘ over in 

Ireland (he comes from Ballymena you know), but I don‘t think it would be appropriate to read that 

letter here, today, so I had better pass that up; but it just says ―keep sending the money.‖ 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed from Wednesday, March 16, 1955, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

the Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair. (The Assembly to 

go into a Committee of Supply). 

 

Hon. L.F. McIntosh (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, begorra, this is a great day. 

This is a great year in the history of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, coming 



 
March 17, 1955 

3 

 

into the Legislature, as we do, with a balanced budget from the previous year, and presenting a budget 

that, as a result of the great measure of diversification that has taken place in Saskatchewan‘s economy 

in recent years, has made it possible for this Government to maintain a very high level of services 

without increasing taxes. This is brought about, largely, through the construction and building trades, 

through industrial development and concerns establishing distribution centres. Royalties on minerals, oil 

and gas, have all added substantially to a better-balanced economy. 

 

Then to make this rather official and to make it more important, I would like to quote, in part, from an 

editorial published in the ‗Leader-Post‘ under date of March 8th, under the headings: ―A Province to 

watch‖, and, in part, it says  

 

―When the fate of the nation‘s curling title hinges on where those rocks come to rest, they cannot be 

expected to enthuse greatly over the fact that Saskatchewan, in the last few years, has sprouted 

something like 1,000 producing oil wells, while the potentialities of its 100,000 square miles of likely 

oil land has only been scratched.‖ 

 

Further down it says  

 

―Ontario has had its sensational uranium finds, but Saskatchewan claimed first richer ore, the extent of 

which is not yet known. These discoveries were on the western fringe of 85,000 square miles of 

mineralized pre-Cambrian shield, which embraces the northern third of the province. Over on the east 

is the Flin Flon mine, of the Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company, which has taken hundreds of 

millions of tons of copper, zinc and gold from Saskatchewan. The Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting 

Company found a substantial new ore body in Saskatchewan, only a few miles from where it has been 

operating since the ‗twenties.‖ 

 

A little further down the editorial says  

 

―Fish and fur also make contributions from our north to the diversification of our economy, and both 

are capable of expansion. 

 

―Coming back to the prairies there are the beds of potash now being developed. Our resources of this 

important fertilizing chemical are believed to be the most extensive in the world. We also have beds of 

common salt, which now provide a product being marketed for table and other use. 

 

―We are a wheat province, because, for the time being our production of this cereal overshadows 

everything else, but it will be somewhat different as the development of our other natural resources 

quicken. Saskatchewan is a province to watch in the second 50 years of its existence.‖ 

 

That makes some of the things we have been saying in this Legislature on this side of the House rather 

official, Mr. Speaker. 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

4 

Then it is also rather interesting to note, for the peace of mind and the happiness of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, an editorial in the ‗Free Press‘ under date of March 15th, headed ―Political 

Innocence of Mr. Howe‖  

 

―Saskatchewan Liberals must have squirmed a bit, last week, when they read Mr. Howe‘s defence of 

the appointment of Mr. Stanley Loptson to the Board of Grain Commissioners, since Mr. Howe told 

the Commons that when the appointment was made he wasn‘t aware that Mr. Loptson‘s father was in 

public life. 

 

―It is true that Saskatchewan Liberals have not made much of an impact on Ottawa in the past ten 

years. It is equally true that Mr. Howe‘s time has been largely taken up recently with high-level 

dealings of various kinds. Nevertheless, it is a bit shattering that the name of Loptson should have 

failed to register with him. 

 

―When Mr. Walter Tucker gave up the provincial leadership to return to greener Liberal fields at 

Ottawa, Mr. Loptson Sr. was made acting Liberal leader in the Provincial House. He served in that 

capacity until a new leader was elected, last fall. Unfortunately, it seems that his virtues have gone 

unnoticed by the Deputy Prime Minister in the Liberal government. It was left to Mr. Gardiner, he 

said, to bring Mr. Howe‘s attention to the political affiliations of Mr. Loptson.‖ 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Big brother knows! 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — So if the failure of the Liberal party to register in the province of Saskatchewan 

and in the Dominion of Canada, and with the Regina Leader-Post stating that this is a province to watch, 

and with the 1955-56 budget maintaining services on a very high level, without increasing taxes, I think 

that our people in the province of Saskatchewan, in this our Golden Jubilee year, can look forward with 

a great deal of pride to the leadership which they have chosen to guide the destiny of the affairs of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I do not intend at this time, Mr. Speaker, to reminisce into some of the history of the pioneers of this 

province, but I think it worthy of mentioning at this time, particularly in view of the great success of 

four farm lads of the province in winning the Macdonald Brier, emblematic of our Dominion (and 

possibly, the world‘s) championship in curling. Back in 1883, a curling rink left Prince Albert by 

snowshoes, skis and ponies, to take part in the Royal Caledonian Association curling bonspiel in 

Winnipeg. It is also of some interest, too, to note the answer to a question published in our local paper. 

The question was, ―Was there ever a stage-coach hold-up in Saskatchewan?‖ The only stage-coach hold-

up in western Canada was on July 17, 1886, when the Prince Albert mail was held up on the train near 

Humboldt. The highwaymen robbed the mail of some six registered letters, containing $1,165.45 . . .  

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — We‘ll have to be careful going through Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — The mailman later recognized the thief on the streets of Prince Albert, and the 

latter was sentenced to 14 years in the penitentiary. 



 
March 17, 1955 

5 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — He wouldn‘t be another Wilks, would he? 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — Mr. Speaker, I don‘t think I had better reminisce any further in case we forget 

about the contribution the Irish have made to the history of this province, and start tackling the Scotch. 

 

Rural western Canada, and Saskatchewan in particular, harvested its poorest crop in 17 years. Not since 

1937 has Saskatchewan experienced such a low yield per acre — from a record-breaking wheat crop of 

435,000,000 bushels, in 1952, to a low of 151,000,000 bushels, in 1954. Further, the Board of Grain 

Commissioners have estimated that not more than 40 per cent will grade 4 or better. This leaves 60 per 

cent to find a market as livestock feed. A crop failure of this magnitude has, in the past, caused an 

economic disaster to those provinces and those industries depending upon our wheat economy. 

However, with the wheat pipelines filled, and grain of the 1953 harvest on the farms at the time of the 

last harvest season, our people are accepting this crop disaster in the spirit that reflects the stability of 

Saskatchewan farmers and the spirit inherited from their pioneers. 

 

The Wheat Board has taken delivery of more than 690,000,000 bushels of all grain in the 1953-54 crop 

year; this, notwithstanding excellent world wheat crops and abnormally heavy stocks in store. Coupled 

with the United States of America and Australia pressing the marketing agencies to offer wheat under 

the International Wheat Agreement floor price of $1.55, the Wheat Board secured for all farmers a price 

such in excess of the floor. This reflects the good judgment of our agricultural people, and fully justifies 

their long and untiring efforts so have a system of grain marketing that recognizes the producer as the 

most important player in this grain marketing drama. May their success in the past continue to be a 

beacon light and guiding star to the present generation of our agricultural people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there has been a substantial amount of criticism levelled against this Government, 

but more in particular levelled against the administration of local governments by those sitting to your 

left. History of local government in the province of Saskatchewan is, I believe, rather unique. From 1883 

the one township local government, known as the Statute of Labour and Fire Districts, governed by an 

overseer, sometimes elected, but in the majority of cases, appointed, up to the present time, when our 

municipal governments, at all levels rural and urban, are now levying and collecting approximately $60 

million per annum in order to discharge their obligations in the field of local government. In our own 

province, there are some 296 rural municipal governments. 

 

In the province of Alberta, 54; in the province of Manitoba, 109. When we add the urban municipal 

governments to those of the rurals in the province of Saskatchewan, we find that we have 783 local 

municipal governments looking after the interests of less than 900,000 people in the field that was 

assigned to them by the Legislature of the province of Saskatchewan. While we hear a great deal said 

about the problems of rural municipal governments, may I draw to the attention of this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, that the urban municipal governments also have many and varied problems in their field of 

service to the people of this province. A great deal has been said about the mill rates and the increase in 

the mill rates, particularly in the rural areas of this province. But might I respectfully suggest that the 

important base on which mill rates are fixed is that of the taxable assessed properties of this and other 

provinces in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

A new formula of equalization in assessment was conceived in 1938, and between the years 1939 and 

1946, there was a re-assessment of all rural lands in order to bring about a greater measure of 

equalization based on a formula worked out and generally accepted as one of the foremost formulas in 

the Dominion of Canada. And might I draw to the attention of the House, Mr. Speaker, that, in 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

6 

1938, the rural land assessment of this province was $833 million; $833 million was the taxable base of 

assessment in this province when the new formula commenced to take shape. 

 

In 1947, the first year in which the equalization formula was fully applied in the province, the 

assessment was reduced to $590 million, or a reduction, as a result of the equalization, of $243 million 

of taxable assessment. By 1953, there had been an increase of $21 million over the assessment of 1947. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, in 1953, there was a net reduction of taxable assessment in the rural areas of 

this province of $206 million. If we add the present mill rate to that reduction in assessment, it would 

bring up rather an interesting figure. In other words, if we had a similar assessment for taxation purposes 

in the rural areas that we had in 1948, or 1949, or 1950, or 1951, based on the present rural mill rate, the 

rural municipalities would be receiving an additional $4,320,000, or 30 per cent over their present 

revenue. The same principle would apply to the school taxes in the rural areas. They would be receiving 

some $18,000,000 in school revenue, if they had the same basis of assessment that prevailed prior to the 

equalization assessment. It is rather interesting to note that some $15,000,000 of the rural assessment is 

derived from oil, pipelines and oil-well equipments, and from railway assessments. 

 

I might mention here, Mr. Speaker, that the Interprovincial Pipeline and the C.P.R. Railway were rather 

anxious that their assessment be paid into the Provincial Government. Their taxes, based on their 

assessment, amount to some $300,000. The Provincial Government said, ―No, we would prefer that you 

deal directly with the municipalities and pay the municipalities the taxes on the assessed properties that 

you have in the individual municipalities across the province.‖ 

 

The mill rate, in 1953, was, in the cities, for municipal purposes, 24.43; in the towns, 32.10; in the 

villages, 24.15 and in the rural municipalities, 19.8. For school purposes, the cities levied a mill rate on 

their assessment of 38.30; towns, 30.93; villages, 27 mills, and rural municipalities, 21.26 mills. And 

might I hasten to say here, Mr. Speaker, that if the schools had the benefits of the taxes derived from 

businesses, amusement tax and licences in the hamlets scattered throughout the rural municipalities, 

their mill rate for school purposes would be no higher than the mill rate for municipal purposes in the 

rural areas of this province. 

 

A great deal has been said about the total expenditures of all levels of government, and the figures reveal 

something, I believe, of interest to this Assembly. In 1938, the expenditures by all levels of government 

— Dominion, Provincial and Municipal — were $1,027 million. This worked out on a percentagewise 

basis is the Dominion Government spent 46.1 per cent; the Provincial governments across Canada, 25 

per cent, and the local governments, 28 per cent. In 1952, the total expenditures of all levels of 

government were $5,910 million, and percentagewise it worked out on this basis: The Dominion 

Government, 72.2 per cent; the Provincial governments, 15.7 per cent, and the local governments, 12.1 

per cent. So it is noted that, in that comparatively short space of time, the Dominion Government‘s 

expenditures increased 26 per cent, while Provincial government‘s expenditures, on the average, 

decreased 10 per cent, and local governments‘ decreased 16 per cent. So we find the Dominion 

Government‘s expenditures have been rising faster, both absolutely and relatively, than either provincial 

or municipal expenditures. 

 

Might I draw the attention of this House to a report prepared for the Union of Alberta municipalities by 

the Citizens‘ Research Institute of Canada, dated November, 1954. It is rather interesting to note the 

comparative payments to local governments, giving you a breakdown of the grants in aid and sharing 

costs by the Provincial governments of the three western provinces to the municipalities. 



 
March 17, 1955 

7 

 

In 1946-47, the Alberta share worked out on a per capita basis to $4.68; Manitoba, $3.84; Saskatchewan, 

$4.76. In 1951-52, Alberta, $15.27; Manitoba, $8.60, and Saskatchewan provincial government‘s share 

of grants in aid and sharing costs for health and other services, had increased from $4.76 per capita to 

$11.11 per capita. 

 

It is rather interesting to take a look, also, at the municipal debt in the three prairie provinces. We find 

that the municipal debt in the province of Manitoba for the year ending December 31, 1952, amounted 

to $72 million, or $98.39 per capita; the Alberta debt at that time amounted to $142.89 per capita, and a 

total of approximately $120 million; in the province of Saskatchewan, the municipal debt was just 

slightly under $38 million, or $49.86 per capita, with the total rural municipal debenture debt amounting 

to less than $70,000. Might I again point out, Mr. Speaker, that, in 1946, the municipal debt in the 

province of Alberta, on a per capita basis was $52.86; at December 31, 1952, it was $142.89. 

 

I would like to quote from the ‗Listening Post‘ which is the official publication of the Canadian 

Federation of Mayors and Municipalities, following their convention at Windsor, last fall. This national 

gathering of municipal officials laid a great deal of stress on the need of national assistance and national 

recognition of the municipal problems, and in their submission to the Federal Government they had this 

to say  

 

―Provincial assistance to municipalities in the form of grants and subsidies has decided limitations. 

Because of the disparity of available resources between the various provinces, it is obvious that the 

scope of financial aid provided must vary considerable from province to province. It is therefore 

unlikely that the municipal finance problem can be resolved satisfactorily by all of the provinces. 

Consequently, it must be considered as constituting, in a very real sense, a national problem.‖ 

 

Now, speaking of Alberta — and we have heard a great deal about provincial-free debt in the province 

of Alberta — you will probably recall that I just mentioned that their municipal debt, in 1946, per capita, 

was $52.86, and in 1952, $142.89. Then published in the ‗Star Phoenix‘ of February 22nd, under the 

heading ―Municipal government discussed in Alberta‖, the Leader of the Opposition, in the Alberta 

Legislature, on Monday had this to say  

 

―J. Harper Prowse, Liberal member for Edmonton, said in the Throne Speech debate that a commission 

should be set up with a view of restoring to local governments a degree of local autonomy necessary to 

insure responsible self-government at the municipal level. 

 

―Mr. Prowse quoted figures to show the combined municipal-provincial debt in Alberta, at the end of 

last year, stood at $272,300,000, $38,000,000 more than the combined debt of 1935, when the Social 

Credit government took office. This has resulted from an increased municipal debt from $67,641,000 

in 1936, to an estimated $187,000,000, last year; and a decrease in provincial debt from $167,000,000, 

in 1936, to about $85,000,000. Mr. Prowse goes on to say the municipalities now had the debt once 

carried by the provincial government.‖ 

 

I think we are all agreed that, following World War 2, there was a terrific backlog and accumulation of 

work, both for rural municipal governments and for school trustees. This backlog was undertaken from 

1945 on, which, with a 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

8 

60-cent dollar, created a condition whereby the amount of money that the municipalities had available 

prior to World War 2 was not sufficient to do the kind of a job that they, as conscientious administrators 

of local government, felt it was necessary to do in order that their ratepayers would receive at least the 

minimum of services. So I find it rather interesting to take a look at the breakdown of the expenditures 

of the rural municipal taxes, in 1953. The 20-mill rate gave the rural municipalities $12,822,000; then 

there was the health and hospital taxes, giving them $1,572,000, in round figures, and all other income, 

including grants, amounting to 3.6 mills, or $2,358,000. So rural municipalities had the equivalent to 26 

mills on a 20.4 mill levy, or $16,752,000, to carry out their year‘s work. I believe it would only be fair to 

say that, because of climatic conditions, because of excessive rainfalls and floods, in the road 

construction year of 1954, most of the $8,000,000 spent by rural municipalities on roads was largely for 

a repair and maintenance job. 

 

Something was said in this House, the other day, about the centralization of control. I would just like to 

state here, Mr. Speaker, that during the calendar year of 1954, 8,000 of our Saskatchewan agricultural 

people, spread over an area of 100 townships, were given local government. 

 

Now, a word or two in regard to the Municipal Advisory Commission. Mr. Prowse, in the Alberta 

Legislature, called upon the Social Credit government of that province to appoint an independent 

Municipal Advisory Commission to study municipal-provincial problems. The municipal Advisory 

Commission in the province of Saskatchewan was created by an Act of the Legislature, in 1952, 

assented to on April 4th of that year. The three members of the Municipal Advisory Commission were 

appointed in July of that year. Thus the Commission has only been in existence 2½ years, and, as I 

stated to the Municipal Association, I want to indicate to you some of the work this Commission has 

undertaken. 

 

It was created in the first place not by an Order in Council or a Ministerial order, but by a separate Act 

of the Saskatchewan Legislature. I think it is rather important to note that. The appointment of the 

Commission by the Government was made with great care. The three members combined bring long and 

valuable experience in rural and urban government and educational affairs. Dean Cronkite, Mr. Fisher 

and Mr. McGillivray are men who have made great contributions in the field of local government and to 

its advancement in this province. Those are the members of the Municipal Advisory Commission. One 

of their major undertakings was to assist, in co-operation with the Department of Highways, and in co-

operation with the personnel of the Department of Municipal Affairs and the local L.I.D. Branch, to 

carry out a resolution that was recommended by the rural Municipal Association and approved of by the 

Government of this province, which has become commonly known as a system of all-weather main 

market municipal roads. It is rather interesting to note that, back in 1925, there were 25,000 miles of 

main market road mapped by the government of that day, and 20 years later, it was still on the map. 

 

One of the outstanding problems — and here, again, I am quoting what I said at the Rural Municipal 

convention — being faced by rural municipalities, is, of course, providing reasonable roads for 

communication with marketing centres and for reaching provincial highways. Municipalities have had 

an active interest in this for many years, and have been spending money on local roads throughout the 

province at the rate of over $7,000,000 annually for several years. In 1953, rural municipalities spent 

$8,000,000 on roads. It is by now well known throughout the province that the Municipal Advisory 

Commission have been advocating for some time the establishment of a grid of high-quality all-weather 

roads and that investigational work has been proceeding through the Department of Highways, the 

Advisory Commission and the staff of the Department of Municipal Affairs. 



 
March 17, 1955 

9 

 

First and foremost, we have to point out that the financial plans and cost estimates of this proposal have 

not yet been finalized, although a good deal of work has been done in this respect. A number of other 

factors are still being investigated, but the various agencies at work are prepared to proceed rapidly once 

research is completed. It should be emphasized here that a solution to the problem of planning and 

providing for an adequate system of rural roads is one which has eluded municipalities for over 50 years. 

We must now be sure that what we plan will endure, and we cannot afford to rush into a scheme without 

making certain that all the problems that can be foreseen will be worked out in advance, and that the best 

possible plan, with our ability to pay, is devised. 

 

Some of the aspects of the problem which are being looked into are the desirability of total mileage, the 

distribution of that mileage over the province, standard finish of roads, location and condition of existing 

roads, relative fiscal ability of municipalities, machinery available and its general utilities, legal 

requirements, surveys, telephone and power lines, accounting problems, mapping requirements at 

various stages, inspection of roads, preparation of checking of prepared programmes, consideration of 

what should happen after the proposed grid is completed, the bridge problem and problems of 

maintenance. 

 

The foregoing will give us some idea of the magnitude of the proposal and the extent of the 

investigational work required. Arrangements are underway, Mr. Speaker, to interview individual 

municipalities during the coming spring and summer, in order that we may get their final endorsation of 

the proposed plan, and make what alterations they may suggestion, in the hopes that we will be in the 

clear and ready to go when the frost goes out of the ground in the spring of 1956. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I note that my time is running out, and I have not said very much about the various 

branches of the Department of Municipal Affairs, and I hope to have an opportunity to do so when our 

estimates are before this Assembly. 

 

I think I would like to say, in reply to a remark made by my hon. friend, the member for Rosthern (Mr. 

Carr), when he accused this Government of moving towards centralized control, that it is the ambition 

and the desire of this Government to strengthen municipal governments in such a way that they will be 

able to discharge the responsibilities placed upon them by an Act of the Legislature of this province. I 

would also like to remind the member, now that he is in his seat, that some 8,000 of our citizens, spread 

over 100 townships, were given local government in the calendar year of 1954; and might I say to my 

hon. friend the member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) who said in his address in this budget debate the 

other day, that all that would have to be done is to call in half-a-dozen reeves and secretary-treasurers of 

municipalities and they would map out and finalize this main market road grid in a short space of time; 

might I just remind my hon. friend that the Municipal Advisory Commission, the Department of 

Municipal Affairs and the Department of Highways, to some extent, are in constant communication and 

consultation with the executive of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, and we are 

taking suggestions on behalf of the municipalities through the elected officials of their Association. 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

10 

I was very happy to note that there was some increase in the budget for rural municipal grants. 

 

In conclusion might I just add, Mr. Speaker, that this Government has made substantial strides in taking 

communications into the northern sections of the province of Saskatchewan. The road to Lac la Ronge 

has been mentioned on several occasions; the road is now well under construction from Big River to 

Green Lake, and it is completed from Meadow Lake to Green Lake, and is heading in the general 

direction of Beauval. The radio communications into the north are another means of contact. 

Saskatchewan Government Airways is rendering a very important service. At the same time, with the 

fast development that is taking place in the north and the great potentialities that there are there, I hope 

that the distance is not too far into the future when there will be further extension and new development 

and access roads leading into the rich mineral areas of the northern part of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope, as I said before, that I may have an opportunity to deal with the various branches of 

my Department when we are dealing with our estimates. I have no hesitation in saying, that I support the 

budget wholeheartedly. 

 

Mr. A. H. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, at the outset there is one point I 

would like to make clear, and it is a statement of the Minister of Municipal Affairs who has just taken 

his seat, when he said that there were people on this side of the House who had criticized local 

governments. Neither I nor any member sitting on this side of the House have criticized local 

governments. We have done nothing but praise local governments and have endeavoured to point out 

that the local governments in the province of Saskatchewan are doing a far better job with the resources 

at their disposal than is the Provincial Government in this province. We will certainly continue to press 

along that line. 

 

It seems to be the accepted policy, during this debate, to congratulate the other speakers and I, too, want 

to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer for the able manner in which he read the budget address. I also 

want to congratulate my desk-mate for the able manner in which he criticized the budget on behalf of the 

Opposition. It also seems to be an accepted policy to say something about the pioneer days of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would just like to say that, although I am a very young man myself, my forefathers both on my 

mother‘s and father‘s side of the family, came to what is now Saskatchewan almost a quarter of a 

century before the province was formed. Neither one of my parents was in the happy position of being 

able to live in a sod shack or in a log house; they moved into one after they could afford it. My 

forefathers came to western Canada and lived in the open until such time as they had the time and 

money to construct a shelter to live in. I might say that my grandfather represented what is now half of 

the province of Saskatchewan in the federal House of Commons back in 1892, and that was some years 

after he came to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — What party? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Yesterday, when the hon. member for Swift Current (Mr. Gibbs) was speaking, he 

referred to a vote that was taken, last year, with regard to the increases for the supplementary allowances 

to our senior citizens 



 
March 17, 1955 

11 

 

and blind persons in this province. He accused the Opposition of voting against that motion. In the first 

place, Mr. Speaker, the motion was moved by Mr. Danielson from Arm River and seconded by Mr. 

Loptson, the member for Saltcoats. The government members moved an amendment to this original 

motion. Those people who voted against the amendment — the first one was the hon. member for Swift 

Current; he voted with the Opposition. Then, when the amendment was turned down, if you look in the 

Journals of 1954, page 129, you will find that all the members of the Legislature voted in favour of the 

motion. 

 

I wanted to keep the record straight, and if the hon. member for Swift Current figures that we voted 

against an increase in old-age pensions, then so did he, because he voted with us. The case is that he, and 

the members of the Opposition, were the only people who consistently voted for an increase to be given 

to our senior citizens. 

 

There has also been an awful lot said during this present Session with regard to the removal of the 

Public Revenue Tax. It was done only after the Opposition in this Legislature and the municipal men 

about the province had badgered this Government into the position where they had to take the Public 

Revenue Tax off. All you have to do is go back to the Journals, Mr. Speaker, of 1951. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Who put it, and kept it, on? 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Who put it on? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Who voted against removing the Public Revenue Tax at that time? I would like to 

read it. The people who voted against it were: Douglas (Weyburn), Wellbelove, Bentley, McIntosh, 

Fines, Corman, Lloyd, Brown, Gibson, Swallow, Thair, Darling, Nollet, Howe, Sturdy, Williams, Gibbs, 

Heming, Dewhurst, Stone, Erb, Kuziak, Denipe, Walker, Willis, Buchanan and Larsen. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Who put the Public Revenue Tax on? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — And, again in 1952 what happened? The same people, almost exactly, those that 

were left in the Legislature after the election on the Government side of the House, again voted against 

taking off the Public Revenue Tax. This was in the Session of 1952. Then, what happened? This 

Government found that the fact that they were opposed to taking off the Public Revenue Tax had got 

them into difficulties with the rural people of Saskatchewan, so then they came out in the provincial 

election that followed that session and they did promise to take off the Public Revenue Tax as of 

December 31, 1952. They did take it off and I will give them credit for it; but, it was only after the 

Opposition and rural municipal councils and the rural people in this province had insisted that that tax 

come off. It took the Opposition three years to badger this Government into moving. 

 

There are a few things we are badgering them about now and I am convinced that, probably within three 

years, if they are still in office — which I hope they won‘t be — they might act at that time. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They won‘t be there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — You have been saying that for a long time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Now, I would like to say a word or two with regard to old-age 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

12 

pensions and supplementary allowances. Unfortunately, I have to devote a good deal of my time, this 

afternoon, to answering some of the statements that have been made by those members who sit on your 

right, sir. I would far rather have dealt with the budget in another manner, to have criticized it 

constructively; but I find that, because of the mis-statements, innuendoes, half-truths and ‗weasel‘ words 

that are used by the Government members of this Legislature, one has to set the record straight; and 

anything that I say here, this afternoon, I can substantiate. It reminds me of when one of my hon. friends 

here spoke in the House some years ago. Somebody asked him for proof of his statement, and he had a 

pile of books about so high on his desk and he said, ―There it is.‖ Well, I have mine here, too. 

 

It has been said here by many members during this debate that it was the responsibility of the Federal 

Government to pay pensions to our senior citizens. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — It is the constitutional responsibility. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It certainly is not the constitutional responsibility of the Federal Government to pay 

pensions to our senior citizens. The constitutional responsibility lies with the provincial government, not 

only in Saskatchewan, but with all provincial governments; and what has happened? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That‘s true. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The Federal Government by arrangement with the provincial governments across 

Canada have contributed in big sums to the pension of our senior citizens. As a matter of fact, in the last 

fiscal year in the province of Saskatchewan the Federal Government paid some $20 million to those 

people receiving old-age security. They and the provincial government paid further sums in pensions for 

those people receiving old-age assistance. The Federal Government also paid some $20¼ million in 

family allowances in the province of Saskatchewan in the last fiscal year. Therefore, I think, when 

members make statements of that type, they should stick to the actual truth of the matter. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — How many millions did they take out? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I want also to refer to a statement that was made here just the day before yesterday 

(I believe it was), when the Provincial Treasurer asked my hon. friend the member from Saltcoats how 

much grain he had delivered to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in years gone by. I would like to point out 

that the hon. member for Saltcoats has delivered many thousands of bushels to the Wheat Pool. I would 

like to point out that he was for many, many years on the local committee of the Wheat Pool in his home 

district. He was also secretary of the first Co-op Creamery that was set up in that area, and I think his 

record speaks for itself as far as the co-operative movement in the province of Saskatchewan is 

concerned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — We agree — his record speaks for itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It is just amazing to me that anyone like the Provincial Treasurer should make a 

statement such as he made on that occasion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I didn‘t make such a statement. 



 
March 17, 1955 

13 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I just wonder how many bushels of wheat the Provincial Treasurer ever delivered to 

a Wheat Pool elevator or into any of them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I must insist that he withdraw that. I made no statement. I merely 

asked a question. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — O.K. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — What is the point of privilege? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — The point of privilege is that the member claims I made a statement. I did not. I 

merely asked the hon. member a question. Maybe the hon. member for Moosomin would tell us how 

much wheat he shipped, before he was nominated, to the Wheat Pool. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — That‘s exactly what he will do. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — O.K. that is exactly what I want to tell you, Mr. Provincial Treasurer. I don‘t mind if 

it is a statement or a question: what is the difference? As a matter of fact, you made it, and you have 

never grown a bushel of wheat in your life, and never delivered one. As a matter of fact you have never 

created any wealth of any description for the province of Saskatchewan or the Dominion of Canada, and 

the same thing can be said about your seat-mate. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Just writes cheques out for somebody else. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Now, if the Provincial Treasurer wants to know how much grain I have delivered to 

the Wheat Pool ever since I became engaged in the business of farming, I have delivered all the grain 

that I could to the Wheat Pool. There are times when you cannot deliver to the Wheat Pool because the 

elevators are full, which is unfortunate; and if you want to go into the statistics on that I would be 

prepared to do that. 

 

I have here two cheques from the Wheat Pool this year for deliveries — excess charges refund — two 

good cheques that I got from the Wheat Pool. I wonder if the hon. Provincial Treasurer has any, or if he 

ever had one. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — How childish can you get? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Another comparison was made in this Legislature when the hon. member for 

Canora (Mr. Kuziak) spoke and he was endeavouring to point out the difference in tax rates in the 

province of Manitoba and the province of Saskatchewan, and he wanted to use my own particular area 

as an example. He said this, and it is taken from the report of the debate on Monday, March 7, 1955, 

page 12  

 

―And I can go on further; in fact I want to. I want to go to the R.M. of Moosomin. The hon. Leader of 

the Liberal party, I believe, lives in Moosomin and I am going to make another comparison here. The 

R.M. of Moosomin No. 121, the combined municipal and school rate is 36.4. Stepping across the 

boundary into Manitoba into R.M. No. 2, the R.M. of Archie, the mill rate there is 64.8 mills — 28.4 

mills higher there than in Saskatchewan. Why doesn‘t the hon. Leader of the Liberal party go over into 

Manitoba and show his Liberal administrators how to reduce taxes?‖ 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

14 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in the first place I do not live in Moosomin. In the second place, I do not live in the 

Moosomin municipality. And in the third place, the Archie municipality is not across the boundary from 

my home. But I do want to point out the comparison in taxes between my municipality and the 

municipality right across the boundary in Manitoba. I am not just going to make loose statements. I have 

here the tax receipts for land in Saskatchewan and in Manitoba. As a matter of fact, I wanted to get this 

information correct, so I ‗phoned a gentleman I know at Elkhorn, Manitoba, and asked him what his tax 

rates were. This is the letter that I received back from him  

 

―Since talking to you on the phone I have decided to send my tax notice up to you as there is nothing 

like the proof in an argument. You will figure out by this that my school tax is $32.16 on one quarter 

and $37.18 on the other, or $69.34 on the half-section.‖ 

 

Now, what is the picture of a half-section just across the border in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — That‘s a particular case. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Particular case nothing! This is a half-section on the west side of the boundary in 

Saskatchewan and a half-section on the east side of the boundary in Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Well, what is the mill rate? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Just a minute — let me finish. Don‘t get in a hurry. You don‘t like it, do you? It is 

not a loose statement — you can come over here and look at it. There is the tax receipt for Manitoba and 

there is the one for Saskatchewan. Here the assessment on one quarter in Saskatchewan is $1,800; the 

assessment on one quarter in Manitoba is $1,850 — pretty close, isn‘t it? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That‘s what you thought you had him on, eh? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The assessment on the second quarter in Saskatchewan is $1,700; the assessment on 

the second quarter in Manitoba is $1,600, so there is a difference of $50 in the assessment of one half-

section of land. All right. The mill rate for school purposes in the province of Manitoba is 20.1 mills; the 

mill rate for school purposes in the province of Saskatchewan is 25 mills. The total taxes for school 

purposes in Saskatchewan on a half section if $87.50; in the province of Manitoba it is $69.34. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — You are just referring to one part. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, you can see these, or any member of the Government side of the 

House can look at them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Take the whole average along the border; not a particular case. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — They don‘t like it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That is exactly the case in that area. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — What case? 



 
March 17, 1955 

15 

 

Mr. McDonald: — And as I said a moment ago, the evidence is here and anyone can look at it. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — What is the average? 

Mr. McDonald: — It is only in statements such as this, Mr. Speaker, that I feel I have to correct the 

false impressions that have been left in this Legislature and left with the people in the rural areas. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, is the hon. member going to table those 

documents? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I have made the offer . . .  

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Is the hon. member going to table those documents he quoted from? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, there isn‘t any necessity whatever for me to table my own personal tax 

receipt and the tax receipt of a neighbour of mine who lives in the province of Manitoba. This 

information is available to any member of this Legislature who wants to see it, and I am not tabling it in 

this House. Any member of the Legislature has a perfect right . . .  

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker . . .  

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Sit down. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I think it is a well-established rule that 

when a public document is quoted from in this House it must be tabled. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — These are not public documents the hon. member for Moosomin is quoting, and he is 

taking the responsibility for what they say. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I realize that the hon. member for Hanley — I have a name for him, 

but I am not going to use it here . . .  

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — You‘re afraid to table it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You are just trying to waste radio time and it shows the mentality of certain 

individuals. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — You can see it; you can come up and see it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — However, I do want to go on with this school question. I happened to notice in the 

Free Weekly ‗Prairie Farmer‘ of March 9, 1955, a letter written by a Manitoba resident and the heading 

of the letter is ‗No compulsion‘. I would like to read this and I will table it if my hon. friend wants me to  

 

―Sir: The C.C.F. members in the Manitoba Legislature 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

16 

should be called the Compulsory Co-operative Federation. Everything they advocate for the farmers is 

compulsory. If the Manitoba farmers want larger school units it would be this form of school 

administration all over the province. Our rural people are better judges of the form of school 

administration they need than the C.C.F. ‗brain trust‘ in Winnipeg.‖ 

 

Here is another article that I took from the same paper of the same date, and this has to do with the 

S.A.R.M. convention in Saskatoon here, a short while ago, and it says this  

 

―The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities feels that the rising education costs are too 

heavy for rural municipalities to bear without assistance, it was disclosed in the directors‘ report to the 

annual convention in Saskatoon.‖ 

 

That is exactly what we have been trying to tell the Government that sits on your right ever since this 

debate started, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is very interesting to note what the Minister of Education had to say to the Trustees‘ convention in 

Saskatoon, just yesterday. Now, I have not had time to peruse this press report. There are two of them in 

this morning‘s paper, but it does show that the Trustees‘ Association are very concerned with this school 

problem in Saskatchewan today; they must have more help from the Provincial Government. This 

Provincial Government, before they came into office, said that they would accept the sole responsibility 

for education. What do we hear today? All we hear today is that the Federal Government ought to pay 

part of the cost. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Yes. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I made a statement, just a moment ago, that this Government, or the C.C.F. party, 

said they would accept the full responsibility for education, and I want to quote from a speech made by 

the Rev. T.C. Douglas, now Premier Douglas of this province, and he said this  

 

―The first thing which a C.C.F. government would do would be to recognize education as the 

responsibility of the provincial government. There has been a tendency on the part of the provincial 

government to pass the buck to the municipalities and local school boards for maintaining educational 

facilities. The time has come when we must recognize that Canada‘s constitution places the 

responsibility for teaching our children squarely upon the provincial government and it cannot be 

passed on to any other body.‖ 

 

That is what the Premier of this province said in 1943, but what does he say today? And what do all the 

C.C.F. members say in this Legislature and throughout this province? It is a far cry from what was said 

when this Government was originally seeking office back in 1943. 

 

Another question I want to deal with before I get into the budget proper is the question of the Trans-

Canada Highway in my own constituency. I want to read from the ‗Commonwealth‘, page 11, March 16, 

1955, and the heading 



 
March 17, 1955 

17 

 

is ―Jack Douglas fights statement of Liberal members.‖ He said this  

 

―At this point Mr. McDonald, Leader of the Liberal party, challenged Mr. Douglas to prove the 

statement. He was quickly slapped down by Premier T.C. Douglas who reminded the Moosomin 

member that he himself quoted the particular M.P. in his address in reply to the Speech from the 

Throne a few weeks ago.‖ 

 

That was referring, Mr. Speaker, you will remember, to the statement that the hon. member of the House 

of Commons for Qu‘Appelle made that a dam constructed in the Moosomin area, or in the Broadview 

area, had caused flooding this past season. 

 

I have looked up the speech of my friend, the hon. M.P. for Qu‘Appelle, and he never made any such 

statement. Again, another half-truth. It isn‘t a half-truth; there is no truth at all to it. I want to quote what 

the hon. member said in the House of Commons in the Throne Speech debate on February 1, 1955, page 

746 in the House of Commons Debates, and I quote  

 

―Conditions are not too good. We have in that area — and I mention this for a particular reason — a 

drainage problem, with which we hope the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Gardiner, who has control of 

P.F.R.A., will assist us. The precipitation was so great there this year that water which should have 

drained into the Pipestone River to the south actually changed its course and flowed into the 

Qu‘Appelle River to the north. This resulted in the flooding of municipal roads and many thousands of 

acres of land in that area. 

 

―As member for Qu‘Appelle, I do want to express our appreciation of the work done under the Prairie 

Farm Rehabilitation Act and under the direction of the Minister of Agriculture and Dr. Thomson. Last 

year a dam was completed on the Pipestone River, which will create a lake some nine miles long. This 

will help with the drainage problem and alleviate the flooding in the Souris valley. It will provide also 

a water level for the many wells that this stock-producing area needs so much. We want to express our 

appreciation for that undertaking. I hope that, next summer, when some of you go along the Trans-

Canada Highway, you will stop at Moosomin and go nine miles south and see what the P.F.R.A. are 

doing for us in that area.‖ 

 

There is no reference at all that the dam had anything to do with the flooding in the Broadview area. As 

a matter of fact, the flooding in the Broadview area started on June 9th. The natural flow of the river was 

closed off on September 25th by the P.F.R.A. dam referred to by the hon. member for Qu‘Appelle. I 

don‘t see how a dam that was not constructed and had anything to do with the natural flow of the river 

until the 25th day of September could cause a flood in the Broadview area on June 9th. 

 

I want now to refer to what the Minister of Highways had to say about this matter in this House when he 

spoke, a short time ago. He was referring to the hon. member for Saltcoats and myself and he said this  



 
March 17, 1955 

 

18 

―Both of these men criticized the work that has been done by this province on the Trans-Canada 

Highway in eastern Saskatchewan and they blame the flooding conditions down there on the work of 

the engineers of this Department. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is one of the most dastardly 

statements that could be levelled at a group of young men who did an excellent job. In spite of all they 

said, it was not due to any misconceptions or any mistakes made in the building of that road or in the 

providing of any structures.‖ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have reviewed for you just what the hon. member for Qu‘Appelle said in the House 

of Commons, pointing out that the dam had nothing to do with the flow of water in that area at that time. 

To further substantiate what I have said in this House and outside with regard to the conditions in the 

Moosomin area caused by the construction of the Trans-Canada Highway, I want to read a resolution 

that was sent in, not to the Liberal convention of last summer, but to the C.C.F. convention, by the 

Moosomin C.C.F. constituents, and what did that say? It said this  

 

―Disputes re surveys — Whereas the Trans-Canada Highway in this constituency has diverted water in 

various places from its natural course, and whereas it seems the engineers do not consider the opinions 

of local residents, and whereas their resulting mistakes have caused considerable loss and hardship and 

inconvenience to local residents, therefore be it resolved that this convention recommend to the 

Department of Highways that in cases of complaint or dispute, the Department employ other engineers 

to make further surveys and to determine more accurately the source and quantities of water to be 

disposed of and make better provision for its disposal, and further, that the Department of Highways 

act as quickly as possible in all cases.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is a C.C.F. resolution that was sent in to the C.C.F. convention. It isn‘t the hon. 

member for Saltcoats or myself. We are not the only two who are complaining because of the conditions 

in that area. The C.C.F. in that area are complaining, and they have every right to complain. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I wonder if he slapped them down. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — And when the Minister makes the statement that the engineers were right, well, I am 

not an engineer, Mr. Speaker, and I don‘t profess to be one; but you wouldn‘t have to be an engineer . . .  

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — You don‘t have to tell us that. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . to be able to see with the naked eye that there are certain drainage structures that 

were put in, in that area, that were two feet eight inches above the river bed. That statement is absolutely 

true, and there is nobody that can dispute it. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — I made that statement in the House here and that statement is absolutely correct. 

Wherever drainage structures were installed, they were installed .8 feet above the floor level of the 

structure under the C.P.R. tracks. The condition to which the hon. member is now referring 



 
March 17, 1955 

19 

 

was after we had heavy rainfall and there was over two feet of erosion took place in that area. If he 

knows anything, he should know that. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. Minister of Highways knows anything, he would not 

make that statement . . .  

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — That is correct. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . because I have visited that area perhaps twice a week all during the last season. 

The Canadian Pacific bridge under the Canadian Pacific railroad, just a few feet north of the Trans-

Canada Highway, has a rip-rap stone floor. It was put in there back about 1882, I believe. The floor has 

never changed from 1882 to this date. Certainly there is erosion outside the rip-rap area, but it has 

nothing to do with the capacity of the bridge and it has nothing to do with the fact that you placed that 

culvert two feet eight inches above the floor of the bridge under the Canadian Pacific railway. I am not 

at all convinced that, after spending over $9,500 to tear the culvert out and to lower it, you have rectified 

the problem. I am not at all convinced that you are not going to have flooding again, this year, caused by 

that same culvert. And that was the object in replacing the culvert, Mr. Speaker. Is it any reason that the 

C.C.F. would come out and condemn the Minister and his engineers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Ah, you‘re talking nonsense. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — They left that water on the farmers‘ land for the whole summer until the water level 

went down enough that they could take the culvert out and lower it the two feet eight inches, or four 

inches or three inches or whatever it was. I am not going to argue over a few inches, but when you get 

into feet I am going to argue. If the Minister of Highways is not satisfied with that I will read him some 

more. It is his party, not mine. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — Read it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Things that his party have said in regard to the Department of Highways. What 

happened at the convention in Saskatoon, July, 1949, as reported in the ‗Leader-Post‘ of the following 

day? A resolution was passed and it said this  

 

―The resolution stated much dissatisfaction existed among C.C.F. workers and public with policy and 

general administration of the Department of Highways. It declared the situation worsened and 

warranted a complete investigation by the Committee satisfactory to the provincial council and further, 

should the investigation reveal incompetence on the party of the Minister in charge that he should be 

asked to resign.‖ 

 

That is not a Liberal resolution; that is a C.C.F. one. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — While that resolution was introduced, it was defeated. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It certainly shows the discontent of your party. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I am sure the hon. member would not want to leave the impression — I know 

something about . . .  



 
March 17, 1955 

 

20 

Mr. McDonald: — What is the point of privilege? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don‘t think the point of privilege is well taken. If you were contesting what the hon. 

member is saying, if you are refuting what the hon. member is saying . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Yes, I am refuting what he is saying. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — It‘s a breach of point of privilege, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — It would not have made any difference whether that culvert was down another two 

feet or not, with the precipitation we had . . .  

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Minister making a speech, or what? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is not a point of privilege. Sit down! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — How long are you going to be in this House before you learn the rules? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I will say this to the Minister of Agriculture, that when some of his engineers came 

down into that area, we did have some success. But I am going to say that, as far as that area is 

concerned, you now have a major drainage problem on your hands. This Government built that highway. 

This Government dammed water and shut off natural flows for miles. In one instance they take it down 

the south side of the highway almost from the town of Percival to the town of Whitewood, turned it 

through the highway, and when it went through the fence on the north side, they said ‗good-bye‘ and 

would accept no responsibility. The same thing can be said with regard to the north side of the highway. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker. When the Leader of the Opposition says 

we have no responsibility, he is making a statement which he must know, if he knows anything about it, 

is not correct, because we do assume responsibility and we have assumed responsibility where it can be 

proven that we were in error, or our Department was in error. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I don‘t know what kind of proof you need then. The Department of Highways has 

done nothing, but I will say this, that the Department of Agriculture under the C. & D. branch have done 

some work, and I sincerely hope that they will do a lot of work there in this coming season. 

 

The same thing can be said of the water that you took down the north ditch of the Trans-Canada and 

then ran into the creek just on the north side of the town of Broadview. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — It saved the town of Broadview. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I will admit that when you dammed up the water right near the town of Broadview, 

you did help the town. The people in Broadview would like me to express my thanks to you for that. But 

that is only a part of it, a small part. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I am sure they all appreciate it. 



 
March 17, 1955 

21 

 

Mr. McDonald: — And there is no use trying to rectify your present position, because you did do one 

little thing that was good, and it was a good job there and I will admit it, and I will commend you for it. 

But, there are several drainage structures in that area that are not large enough, and are not in the right 

place . . .  

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — They carried off the rain . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — They carried off five inches of rain without damage. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Now, there is another statement, Mr. Speaker, that I must correct. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member is simply giving his opinion. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Ah, they can‘t take it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — They carried five inches of rain, the Minister said, and took it. What happened to all 

your approaches on the north side of the highway east of Broadview? How many times did they wash 

out, last summer? And how many times did you have to put them back in? You haven‘t got them in 

today, so they are going to stay. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Whose fault was it? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The hon. member for Moosomin . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! When the hon. member is speaking he is taking responsibility for what he has 

said. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Like you did yesterday. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — If the hon. Minister of Agriculture would like to accompany me down there, I will 

pay his expenses and we will go down — and you haven‘t heard anything yet! 

 

I want to refer to a few more resolutions that were sent in to the C.C.F. convention. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I‘m having a good time — let them go, Mr. Speaker. These resolutions are the same 

thing as all the people of the province of Saskatchewan are demanding today. They are resolutions that 

are included in this group of papers that I have here, much the same as some resolutions that went to 

Liberal conventions. But the difference between a C.C.F. platform and a Liberal platform is that a 

C.C.F. platform is written by Ministers of the Crown. 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

22 

They have got every one of them sitting in one or other of the panels and anything that they don‘t want 

to come onto the floor of the convention never gets there. In a Liberal convention, every resolution goes 

on to the floor of the convention, and it is the people of this province who write the Liberal platform. If 

your platform was written in the same way, and you included the things that your followers are asking 

you to do, then you would have an entirely different platform than you have at the present moment. 

 

What are some of the resolutions? Here they are: This one has to do with highways  

 

―Resolved that a minimum of $4 or $5 million be set aside for the improvement and building of rural 

main market roads.‖ 

 

And that comes from Nipawin. Here is one from Canora — the seat of the hon. Minister of Telephones 

(Mr. Kuziak)  

 

―Resolved that the provincial government make available at least an additional million dollars per year 

to be used as special grant for construction of municipal roads between highways and the other main 

market roads.‖ 

 

Mr. Cameron: — They are crying, too. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I have dozens of these that should be read into the records of this House, but I am 

not going to take all that time and this information is available to members on both sides of the House. I 

am sure all my colleagues can look at this copy, and I am sure somebody over on that side of the House 

must have a copy that the members over there can look at. 

 

Then there are other resolutions in this platform that I would like to deal with. The only reason I am 

bringing this to the attention of the House, Mr. Speaker, is because the tremendous amount of effort the 

people on your right have endeavoured to point out inaccuracies in the Liberal platform. Here is one in 

regard to C.C.F. organization and it comes from the Melfort-Tisdale constituency  

 

―Whereas it is desirable to show a token of respect to the pioneers of our movement, be it resolved that 

we print a number of copies of the C.C.F. manifesto as a tribute to those who compiled it and a guide 

to those who read it, thus preventing the disappearance of Socialism with the passing of the present 

generation.‖ 

 

Apparently, Mr. Speaker, when the present generation has disappeared, there will be no more Socialism 

according to this resolution. And there are many more in that regard, but I am not going to take the time 

of the House to read them here this afternoon. 

 

There is another one on government administration and one refers to ‗government publicity‘ — this 

comes from Yorkton  

 

―Resolution — if we educate our youth to the work that the C.C.F. have done in the past ten years of 

office . . . ― 



 
March 17, 1955 

23 

 

That is under ‗Government Publicity‘. Why on earth should the Government of this province pay for 

publicity to educate the youth of this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Were these resolutions passed? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — ―Selection of Government employees‖ – from Canora  

 

―Resolved that we request the Provincial Government to exercise more care in selecting employees.‖ 

 

There is a lot more. One from Notukeu-Willowbunch  

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — In favour of that? 

 

Mr. McDonald: —  

 

―Resolved that the constitution of the C.C.F. be so amended as to provide that the number of Cabinet 

Ministers never exceed more than one-quarter of the seats in the Legislature.‖ 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That‘s a smart one. Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Another one from Cannington  

 

―Resolved that all the deputy ministers who are not working in the best interest of the Government be 

replaced.‖ 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Better join up, ‗Hammy‘. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, as I said a moment ago, anyone can go through these platforms of 

either the Liberal party or the C.C.F. If you go through the platform of the Liberal party you will find 

that the resolutions from the people out in the province have been embodied and they are part of the 

Liberal platform. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Is that the way it‘s done? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — On the other hand, the platform of the C.C.F. party certainly was never taken from 

the resolutions that went to their convention, and if you want to compare the democratic process 

followed by the two parties, well, there isn‘t any comparison, obviously, by what I have read here. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, I would like very much to have had the time and opportunity to have dealt 

at further length with the budget itself. There are many things in the budget that I cannot agree with; 

there are many things that I think ought to be included in it, but which, unfortunately, are not there. 

There is one thing that I feel I should say a word or two about before I take my seat, and that is the fact 

that this Government has continued to pursue the policy of charging farmers for rural electrification at 

an exorbitant rate. 

 

I have had it brought to my attention by many people, since this House sat, that many of our farmers 

today are taking their P.F.A.A. payments and turning them over to the Provincial Government for rural 

electrification services. I think we are all in agreement that the rural people of Saskatchewan do want 

rural electrification and they are prepared to pay the $500 if they have 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

24 

it. But, I have said before, and I will say it again, that there isn‘t any reason in the world why this 

Government cannot take electricity to the farm and put the poles in the farmer‘s yard without any initial 

cost; none whatever. And the people and the farmers would be only too glad to pay for that service over 

a 20-year period. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Pay for it all your life. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — But why should you, a provincial government, take money out of the economy of 

our province at a time when that is the very thing we need most? We have a Federal Government that 

has injected some $23 million into the farmers‘ pockets in P.F.A.A. payments and the Power 

Corporation are taking it out. They are taking a portion of it out, and it shows the difference in the policy 

between a Liberal and a C.C.F. administration. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — How silly can you get? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I don‘t want to take any more time because my hon. friend next to me 

is going to follow me, and I know that he will have considerable to say to you, this afternoon. I do want 

to say, however, that unless this Government does something to implement the promises they have made 

to the people of Saskatchewan, and unless they are prepared to provide services to the people of this 

province that the people are demanding, then I cannot support this budget or any other budget that does 

not include the money for those specific expenditures. I will not support the Motion. 

 

Mr. M.J. Willis (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I may ask the hon. Leader of the Opposition a 

question prior to the next speaker? Do you agree with the sentence that you read out from the clippings 

in Manitoba in regard to the larger units for school administration? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Certainly I will answer that question. I believe that before any larger unit is 

established the people in the area should have the opportunity to vote, and if they want a larger unit, they 

should have it, by all means; but, if they don‘t want it, it should not be pushed down their throats. 

 

Mr. Willis: — I‘m sorry, but you haven‘t answered my question. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I answered it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Is the House ready for the question? 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I could not let this opportunity pass 

without congratulating the hon. Provincial Treasurer for the very excellent preamble to his budget that 

he gave us this year. It certainly is the best history of the accomplishments and the great work that the 

Liberal party has done in this province that I have ever read, and I hope he has persuaded the Minister of 

Education to have that pamphlet printed and put into libraries or anywhere else where the people might 

have the opportunity to read it. I certainly want to make use of mine when I get out in the next election, 

and there is nobody going to be able to say that I am biased or anything else, because I am going to 

quote the Provincial Treasurer. If he says so, it must be true. I wish to thank him very much. 



 
March 17, 1955 

25 

 

There are a few things that I would like to say before I begin on the topic I intend to discuss. There have 

been many things said here in the last few days. The member for Swift Current (Mr. Gibbs) yesterday (I 

enjoyed his speech very much) spoke of what this Government has done and what we have in 

Saskatchewan. He was speaking about social services and he said it is socialistic democracy. Well, if 

that is Socialism, there is no monopoly vested in this Government in the province of Saskatchewan, 

because every province in Canada has social services, and some of them have a good deal more than we 

have in Saskatchewan. There is only one province in Canada that can boast of, or shall we say, has been 

afflicted with, a socialistic government. So there is absolutely nothing in that argument, because social 

service is not a monopoly of any particular political party. Every political party in this Dominion of 

Canada — the Conservatives, the Liberals, the C.C.F., the Social Credit — have all strained their 

financial resources to give social services their people have asked for and that they can pay for; so there 

is no need of anyone to brag about it because it doesn‘t hold good. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet), yesterday afternoon, must have been pretty hard up for 

some topic to talk about, because he went back to the 1930‘s and spoke of certain things that were done, 

and certain agreements made whereby the farmers would have had certain rights with regard to their 

crops, and certain expenditures which had priority, and he said that was all good legislation; and the 

peculiar thing, Mr. Speaker, is that that was a Liberal government legislation in the 1930‘s, but he forgot 

himself. He should have his brain washed, because everything started in 1944 here, according to the 

C.C.F. So you should discipline that gentleman when you get together. Tell him not to pull off any 

stunts like that again, because it will knock all your arguments into a cocked hat. 

 

After all that, he commenced to give particulars of the agreement made with the machine companies and 

the implement agents in this province, with the consent of the rural municipalities. Here was the 

situation; I want to go back to it, and you know this, Mr. Speaker, because you were sitting here, on this 

side of the House. You know that, in the old days, when a farmer bought an implement, no matter what 

it was, if he didn‘t pay the notes when they became due, the agent wasn‘t a bit anxious to go and 

repossess the implement, because the implement could be used up, but the debt remained. That means 

there was continued liability on his assets to pay that obligation which he assumed when he bought that 

implement. I have forgotten exactly what year it was, but it was after 1934 that we passed an Act here, 

removing that factor. We said that no attachment could be made, except the implement itself; that if the 

farmer failed to pay the amount due against the implement, the company or the agent could not sue or 

attach any other property that the farmer had in satisfaction of that debt. All the security was in the 

implement, and that condition existed in 1938. For that reason, some agreement had to be made, because 

year after year there was no payment made. And after all, it wasn‘t altogether the implement companies, 

although they might have been in the majority in cases of that kind. There were agents in all the local 

towns in the province of Saskatchewan who had their own money in these implements and probably had 

collected part of it, but, as far as the company was concerned, they were out; and these men were losing 

this security. The security they had was the implement itself, and every year it depreciated; it was one 

year older, which depletes the value of any implement. For that reason a small charge was allowed to the 

dealer against the crop to at least offset the depreciation of that implement for that particular year, and it 

was worth a little more that was allowed to be collected out 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

26 

of that crop. Of course the Minister of Agriculture didn‘t tell you that. He thought it was a monstrous 

thing; and, of course, it didn‘t amount to anything, as far as that goes. But this Government is very short 

of material which they can use as being derogatory to the Opposition on this side of the House, so they 

resort to these things. 

 

He also said something about his land policy. Well, everybody by this time should know something 

about the C.C.F. land policy. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, after the war I think it was over a year 

and a half before the Dominion Government was able to force a concession out of this Government. The 

Dominion Government had no land in this province, because it had all been turned over to the Provincial 

Government previous to that time, and when the veterans wanted to go on the land they must secure the 

land from the Provincial Government. There were certain cases, of course, where they were able to 

procure the land from private parties; but all the Crown land, including the school land, belonged to this 

Government, and this Government stood out for a least a year or probably a year and a half from giving 

any person the right to purchase land for his own use. Finally, before the Dominion Government would 

complete the gratuities and the loans, they grudgingly consented to put a clause into that agreement that 

the veterans would be permitted to buy that land after ten years. That is the history of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, that statement is 

completely erroneous. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He doesn‘t know what I am talking about at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Would you state your point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — The reference is to veterans‘ settlement (is it not?) on Crown lands, under our 

agreement with Ottawa whereby the veterans could get the allowance of $2,320 for settlement on Crown 

land. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don‘t think that is a point of order. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is just what I said. And you held out for many many months, until you 

grudgingly gave that concession to the veterans. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — That, Mr. Speaker, is completely false. There never was a question as to the 

purchase, after a period of ten years . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is what I said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — . . . because that is what Ottawa insisted on. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is the least you could do; that is it. I have, Mr. Speaker, in my possession a 

complete report of the evidence of everything that took place before the Veterans Committee. Mr. 

Tucker, at that time, was chairman of that committee, and I have read the Minister of Social Welfare‘s 

evidence that is spread on the pages of that report, and I know what I am talking about. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker. I would suggest that this so-called evidence 

be tabled so that we may have the opportunity of examining it. 



 
March 17, 1955 

27 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I would suggest to you that any time you have a little time you go back and turn up 

that volume (you no doubt have it in your possession) and re-read it again. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — He is referring to an official report that he says it comes from. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — He hasn‘t got the report. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I have it at home, at Davidson. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — He is not quoting from it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the hon. member who is speaking . . .  

 

Mr. Loptson: — You have it in your office. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There is no difference between me and the Minister of Social Welfare. I spoke 

before he came in, and he has admitted every word of what I said: that he gave that concession after 10 

years, and that there was no loan or any gratuity coming through until that . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker. The Department of Veterans Affairs at 

Ottawa, the V.L.A., insisted that a period of ten years settlement on this land be undertaken by the 

veterans before they would issue title to the land. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, the title belongs to this gentleman over here and not to the Federal 

Government. If the Federal Government owned the land, it would have nothing to do with him at all. 

The thing is ridiculous. Absolutely ridiculous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to go ahead with my few remarks, because I can‘t make him understand 

anyhow. He has admitted everything I said, and now he says it isn‘t so. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — You‘re wrong from beginning to end. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — But you haven‘t told me where I am wrong, anyhow. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Were you there, Charlie? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, probably I was there just as much as you were, because I don‘t think you are 

lucid all the time, anyway. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Well, I have this advantage . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! I think the hon. members should desist from this cross talk. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The Minister of the Power Commission (Hon. Mr. Darling) spoke 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

28 

on his Department, yesterday, and I was very much interested in what he said, and I want to congratulate 

him on what he has done, the last two years, because he has done a tremendous amount of work and he 

has extended a service which the people of this province need and welcome. So there was no trouble 

there. But he couldn‘t sit down without going back to the ‗thirties. Well, Mr. Speaker, I lived through 

the ‗thirties, and so did you. I remember a little town in my district which wanted the power line 

extended for just a few miles, and do you know that, when an investigation was made, there was nobody 

in that town except one storekeeper who could pay the bill to wire a building and take advantage of that 

power. Now he forgets that; conveniently forgets, but he knows, because the Minister of Power is a 

practical man. You could hear in his speech, yesterday, that he deals with practical problems and he 

knows what he is talking about; but when he commenced to do his little bit to try to throw some 

aspersion on the Liberal party, he went off the track. 

 

I will point out another thing. I think it was in the 1949 session that he stood over there, and, replying to 

somebody on this side, he stated very emphatically: ―It is only in the last two years that we have been 

able to buy cross-arms, insulators or anything else to do any work with‖, and, of course, that was true. 

Why then, in the name of heaven, go back and try to smear anything? The war commenced in 1939, and 

ended in 1944 or 1945, and that wasn‘t the end of it, because everything was rationed. Could you buy 

copper wire during the war? There was five years of it. Could you buy anything? No. Everything was 

rationed. These were materials that were very vital to the war effort, and it just wasn‘t possible to buy 

them; and my friends found the same condition whey they came in, in 1944. The same condition existed 

in regard to supplies for this particular service, so what is the use of talking. It is silly, that is all. 

 

The member for Hanley (Mr. Walker), the other day, had to say something, too, and he said, speaking on 

March 11th, that the rural municipalities never were consulted as to where the grants should be spent 

during the time there was a Liberal government in power here. He meant road grants, I suppose. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — On a question of privilege, Mr. Speaker. I never said anything about 

consulting as to where road grants should be spent. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Is the hon. member reading from the records of the House, or not? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, I haven‘t got the records of the House here, but I can tell him that I was in 

municipal work for 16 years and I was reeve for eight years and the statement is absolutely incorrect. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, the statement was never made. Not only is it incorrect, but it 

was never made. I think what the hon. member is thinking of is a statement which I made in reference to 

school districts, and the charge was made that under The Larger School Unit Act . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! We can‘t have another speech. You rose on a point of privilege and stated 

same. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Well, I suggest that he was wrong in making an allegation that I made any 

such statement as he quoted here today. 



 
March 17, 1955 

29 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I will accept his statement. Mr. Speaker, many things have been said in regard to 

taxes this Session; but, of course, this Government is one of the governments that never has enough 

taxes, because they are continually trying to pick up a little bit more money in every way, shape or form, 

or at any opportunity that presents itself. You take a year ago, when they started to charge switching fees 

or central fees in the towns of this province. They used to pay $11 twice a year, and that made $22; then 

they started to collect it monthly, and they added a quarter, so today they can collect $27 a year, and it 

was done so quietly and so efficiently by the Provincial Treasurer, that many people didn‘t wake up to it 

and then they suddenly realized what had happened to it; but it amounts to an increase of $5 a year, 

making an increase of almost 25 per cent, and that is the way it was done. 

 

Back in 1934, when the Liberal government came into power, we found a condition that was none too 

rosy. The total revenue of the province of Saskatchewan on current account, in 1933-34, was 

$11,700,000, and we had a relief problem. Dr. Anderson had a relief problem the last year he was here, 

and a very severe problem; but in our budget, in 1934-35, which amounted to about $13,500,000, we did 

something anyhow — it wasn‘t much, but we did something to show that we appreciated the straits of 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan. We reduced the licence fees by $2.50 a car; we reduced the 

telephones connecting fee by $2.00; and this Government, in 1950-51, when their budget was $52¼ 

million (that is a C.C.F. budget) stuck on another $2.00 on the connecting fees of the telephones. 

 

Here is another thing. As it was before, you know, Mr. Speaker, they had a gas tax on — not a big one, 

but it was a gas tax, and, so far as the farmer was concerned, that gas tax was refundable. The Anderson 

government didn‘t refund the whole tax, but they did refund all except one cent, which they retained. 

We increased the gas tax that year by one cent, and we refunded the whole amount to the farmers — it 

amounted to about $10 per farmer each year. These were things that we did. 

 

There was an income tax in the province of Saskatchewan at that time, Mr. Speaker, and if you had any 

tax payable at all, the minimum payment was $5. We did away with that minimum payment on the 

income tax, and I don‘t think there were very many farmers who paid the tax, or had a high enough 

income to pay on; but at least there were some, and these persons were relieved of that surtax of $5. A 

farmer told me that the assistance that brought to him for that one year (he wasn‘t a big farmer) was 

$19.50. Now these were things that we did, in spite of the fact that our total revenue, before 1934-35, or 

1935-56, was $13½ million. 

 

Now what has this Government done? Well, they have increased taxes ever since they started, not only 

by legislation but by increasing, by Order in Council, certain fees and licences and things of that kind. 

 

Something was said about Manitoba taxes, a few minutes ago, and in Manitoba — and this comes from 

the Treasurer of Manitoba, Mr. Turner. He said, a few days ago, in the House in Manitoba, that the 

combined per capita levy by the provincial and municipal governments in Manitoba, for 1953, the last 

year for which he had the figures, averaged $71.10 per capita. That was the Provincial Treasurer 

speaking. He quoted Saskatchewan also; he said that, in Saskatchewan, provincial and municipal taxes 

per capita, in 1953, were $106.61 per year. 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

30 

Mr. Loptson: — Now you are getting it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If you take them separately — municipal and provincial: in Manitoba, provincial 

taxes were $21.88; in Saskatchewan, they were $55.52. Again that was the Provincial Treasurer of 

Manitoba speaking that was his statement. 

 

No matter what you juggle, those are the facts, and they are taken from the Dominion Bureau of 

Statistics, which are correct. There is no doubt about that. The Provincial Treasurer can, of course, tell 

another story, if he wants to; but it will not do for him to say it isn‘t true; let him prove that it isn‘t true. 

 

I said a little while ago, Mr. Speaker, that in this province, this Government has never lost an 

opportunity to increase taxes. I don‘t think there is a province in Canada where so much taxes have been 

paid where the people got so little return for those taxes. I say so, and I say so for several reasons. I have 

some figures, but I am not going to use them because they are not absolutely correct. What amount of 

your $80 million budget today — and that isn‘t all the budget, because all the money isn‘t in there, by 

many millions of dollars; what amount of that is really reaching the taxpayers of this province in 

benefits to them? A very, very small amount of it, Mr. Speaker. The rest goes to pay for an overstaffed 

civil service and administration. We have 14 Cabinet Ministers over here. We have this province full of 

civil servants far beyond anything this province of Saskatchewan needs, and I am not throwing any 

reflection on the civil servants. I know they are going to get up on their feet and say so, but I am not, Mr. 

Speaker. I have been around this administration building, and I cannot help but notice that there is a 

tremendous staff, and they are not very busy or very well occupied to my way of thinking, at least. It is 

the same wherever you go, all through; and I think with the number of people we have in this province 

(about 850,000) that we are overburdened with civil servants which takes millions and millions and 

millions of dollars to carry. With the hundreds of cars that are running over the province‘s highways, 

carrying civil servants in many of these services, I think probably two out of three, leaving one, could do 

the job. 

 

I asked the Minister of Social Services on two previous years, and he said that he had 85 social service 

inspectors; I think, last year, there were 82 — I am not sure, but it was around 80 anyway. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, in the worst part of the ‗thirties, when we had 167 rural municipalities and hundreds of towns 

and villages with a tremendous amount of individual relief all over this province, and with $56 million 

for feed and fodder and human relief, not seed, we had 42 relief inspectors. You can go back and check 

the records and find out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — And all your ag-reps were doing relief work. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And I say to you, this Government should check up and see if some of these millions 

and millions and millions that are taken out of the people‘s pockets could not, in some way, be returned 

to the people, where they would actually reach the fellow who pays the shot and the people who need it. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — What about the P.F.A.A. and P.F.R.A.? 



 
March 17, 1955 

31 

 

Mr. Danielson: — We never did have an overburdened staff like you have. They would only employ a 

large staff for about three months in the year. 

 

I have said all I want to say on that, but there isn‘t, in the province of Saskatchewan, a licence fee or 

permit that hasn‘t been increased, doubled or trebled during the last few years, except the education tax, 

and I will speak about that a little later on. There has been a new tax added for health purposes. I don‘t 

think anybody seriously objects to that, because it goes to pay for a service that the people appreciate 

and that they need; so I am not going to speak about that. 

 

The other day, Mr. Speaker, when my friend from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) was speaking, he said 

something about oil; and I am going to say a few words about oil now. I am not going to be very long 

either. But first of all, I wish my friend the Minister of Natural Resources (Hon. Mr. Brockelbank) 

would stay in his seat. You know he sat in the Opposition here a few years ago, and on March 3, 1942, 

he said this  

 

―Even now, when oil is the very lifeblood of mechanized warfare, the Government hands over to 

private corporations the right to this essential natural resource in large areas of this province. These 

companies will be developing these new fields and will be producing oil there for profit, because the 

heritage of the people has been given to them in return for a mess of pottage.‖ 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, page Mr. Rubbra, Mr. Hershorn, Mr. Newkirk, Mr. Shumiatcher and his business 

associates; because that is exactly what they have done. That is exactly when they have done. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Who is Hershorn working for now? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, he must have got his start with you. He surely did. 

 

When my friend from Saltcoats was speaking, the other day, the Premier got up on his feet and offered 

an investigation. Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Loptson merely stated the facts. I have never heard of anyone 

investigating facts, Mr. Speaker. The Hon. Mr. Fines, acting Attorney General, signed an order to 

investigate the Bata Petroleums, resulting in the company‘s office books, bank account, etc., being 

seized entirely. While many serious allegations were made against the Bata company not a single charge 

was substantiated by that investigation. Bata lost approximately 1,800,000 acres of their acreage of 

valuable petroleum rights. Brian Newkirk, the Toronto promoter, walked into this valuable acreage 

formerly held by Bata, which was owned by 2,700 Saskatchewan shareholders, all living in 

Saskatchewan. Brian Newkirk — I am holding a letter from Premier T.C. Douglas offering al kinds of 

co-operation, and the letter is dated April 12, 1949; and I have a photostatic copy of that letter, and I am 

going to table it in this House, today, Mr. Speaker. Dr. M.C. Shumiatcher, who had been legal adviser to 

the Cabinet and Executive Assistant to the Premier, became the solicitor for the Albercan Corporation 

and received a block of stock in the Albercan Corporation free, along with a retainer of $1,800 a year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order . . .  



 
March 17, 1955 

 

32 

Mr. Danielson: — The Albercan Corporation had capital of only $2,000 . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — On a point of order. I think when the hon. member states that he is going to 

table the letter he should do it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, sir. I am going to table two things, and I am going to give them to you just in a 

minute, both of them. But before I do so I want to read you one paragraph of this letter, and then I am 

going to give it to you. Here is the paragraph in the middle of this letter that I am going to read  

 

―The Government is desirous of encouraging mineral and petroleum exploration development and 

production to the greatest extent possible, and to that end it has embarked on a programme designed to 

lend technical assistance and advice to bona fide persons and organizations able and willing to proceed 

with this work. In addition, it gives a firm undertaking that no steps will be taken to expropriate or 

socialize the mining or petroleum industry in this province.‖ 

 

Now you can have it, and I will give you another one in a little while. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Ask him whether it was a public . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — Let me repeat, Mr. Speaker: Dr. Shumiatcher, who had been legal advisor to the 

Cabinet and Executive Assistant to Premier Douglas, became the solicitor for the Albercan corporation 

and received a block of stock in the Albercan corporation, free, along with a retainer of $18,000 per 

year. The Albercan corporation had a paid up capital of only $3,000 and it received the 1,800,000 

acreage. Albercan stock jumped from a few cents to $4.90 bid, and was incorporated in the State of 

Delaware in the United States. The Bata Petroleum stock dropped to 15 cents after the leases had been 

taken away from them, although this company had pioneered and drilled over 30 wells and discovered 

oil, gas, salt and potash. The 2,700 Saskatchewan shareholders received no consideration as compared to 

Albercan, whose solicitor was Mr. M.C. Shumiatcher. 

 

This is not the first time the hon. Premier has had the chance to straighten this thing out. He told us, the 

other day, he was going to have an inquiry. Well, he can have it. That is his business. I am going to lay 

on the table a copy of ‗Our Way of Life‘ in which the late Don Hood made a very serious charge against 

this Government and its members, and he challenged any of them to take the matter to court, but they 

haven‘t. And I want to tell the hon. members that the people of Estevan didn‘t think that these charges 

were unfounded, because they got their answer in the Estevan by-election; they gave the Premier his 

answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what was represented in Estevan — and I am going to read just a few lines from the 

front of the paper ‗Our Way of Life‘  

 

―One important fact to bear in mind is this. There are libel laws in this country which protect innocent 



 
March 17, 1955 

33 

 

individuals from untruthful attacks. Mr. Hood is well aware of this fact. If what he reveals herein is not 

true, it is up to those that he accuses to take action.‖ 

 

There you have it. Now I will put it on the table. 

 

They have had this almost two years now. Why haven‘t they taken any action? Why the grandstand play 

by the Premier in this House, yesterday? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It‘s true. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It must be true. Yes, you won‘t have any Rawluk inquiry if that happens. There 

won‘t be any interruptions and packed committees. 

 

Now then, I say to you, when the hon. Minister of Natural Resources, in 1942, said  

 

―Now when oil is the very lifeblood of mechanized warfare, the government hands over to private 

corporations the right to this essential natural resource in large areas of this province. These companies 

will be developing these fields and will be producing oil there for a profit, because the heritage of the 

people has been given to them in return for a mess of pottage.‖ 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, page Mr. Rubbra, Mr. Newkirk, Mr. Hershorn, Mr. Shumiatcher and all his 

associates. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Millionaires! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Are you going to table that one, too? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If you want the facts clean them up. You have the facts now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You have the charge there, and you sit, Mr. Minister, in that place where you sat in 

the Session of 1950, when you said that your conscience was clear and that you didn‘t know anything 

about it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member hasn‘t got the courage to make a charge on 

his own responsibility. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I don‘t need to. The charges are there. The charges are there in print. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — They have been there for years. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Why did the Premier need to write that letter to Mr. Newkirk . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — It‘s the old story. If the hon. gentleman wants to know why, I will tell him why — 

because of the propaganda of the Liberal party. This letter was published in practically all of the 

financial papers. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — . . . to Mr. Newkirk, an oil promoter from Toronto. Why did he 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

34 

need to write him? You are the Minister of Natural Resources; why didn‘t you write to him? 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — Don‘t shoot, Hermie! I‘ll marry the girl. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Of course, you were in the dark, there were others looking after that. But, after all, if 

I was Minister I would know, Mr. Speaker. I would go to the Premier and say, ―here, am I running this 

Department, or are you?‖ 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — There is no use introducing a hypothetical case like that; you will never be 

Minister. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That isn‘t a hypothetical case — that is a fact. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That‘s just funny. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You‘d better toot your horn while you can. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You bet. You can clean this up and I wish you would, now, and I challenge you to 

do it. I challenge you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, might I ask the hon. member a question again? Does he want 

to lay a charge of corrupt practice with regard to the resources and take responsibility for laying that 

charge as a member of this Legislature? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, the charge is already made in the daily press. That was printed, and 

along with it a notice was printed: ―if these charges are not true, then you can lay a charge.‖ 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — You can‘t sue a dead man for slander. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — This was two years ago. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — That this was circulated in the press? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Just like the Rawluk case. You had lots to say about the Rawluk case until after the 

session was over; and after the session was over you never mentioned it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Make a charge then. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I want to say a few things about these Crown Corporations, and I hope the Provincial 

Treasurer will take note of what I am going to say, and I hope when he speaks, either tomorrow or any 

other time, that he won‘t say that my speeches are wrong, because I want to assure him that there are 

other people who know figures just as well as he does, and better. 

 

The Minister of Telephones (Hon. Mr. Kuziak), a short time ago, 



 
March 17, 1955 

35 

 

when he spoke in this House, had a great time. He was telling us all about the millions and millions he 

already had made and all that sort of thing, and you would think, to listen to him, or you would get the 

impression, that there wasn‘t any tax, there was no need of taxes in the province of Saskatchewan, that 

Crown Corporations supplied all the money. That, by the way, is what Premier Douglas told us before 

the election in 1944. That was where he was going to get the money! But, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

these enterprises showed very clearly that, in the main, this Government is able to make a modest profit 

only when operating monopolies. Heavy losses on several of them, after years of failure, have caused 

these particular corporations to be thrown out the window by the C.C.F. Government. 

 

The Crown Corporations have always enjoyed special privileges. They have never paid any Dominion 

corporation income taxes. For most of their lives, they have paid no municipal taxes. On all the money 

they have been loaned by the Government, they have not paid a cent of interest. Only the power and 

Telephones have paid interest on their advances. The C.C.F. corporations have received and used large 

sums of money borrowed by the Provincial Treasurer at 3½ per cent. Whenever the Government talks 

about their profits, they are talking of profits from which no interest charges have been deducted. No 

other business would call such profits ‗net profits‘. They would can them ‗gross profits‘. Net profits are 

what is left after interest and any other carrying charges are deducted. 

 

Let us look at the large profit makers referred to by the Minister of Telephones. He mentioned 

Government Insurance. This enjoys partial monopolistic powers and other special privileges. All 

institutions which receive government grants are obliged to purchase all their insurance from this office. 

This includes schools, hospitals, charitable and a number of other institutions. All this business is 

obtained at non-competitive rates and with no solicitation costs. In addition to this the Government 

Insurance Office gets a large amount of insurance on the provincial government-owned buildings, again 

with no solicitation costs. This corporation flourishes because of monopolistic power and special 

privileges conferred upon it by the Provincial Government. 

 

Similarly, the Guarantee and Fidelity company obtains a considerable part of its business by the use of 

compulsion. Individuals and companies which require provincial government licences to operate and 

have to be bonded, must purchase their bonds from the Guarantee and Fidelity Corporation. This applied 

to commercial truckers, to electrical contractors, dealers and manufacturers, and to others. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Are you going to table that document? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The Minister boasted of the profits of the Government Printing plant. This 

corporation gets all the most profitable government printing jobs at non-competitive prices. We have 

been frequently told that the Government Printing plant is paid at standard rates. Most printing 

businesses use a book of standard rates for estimating jobs, but they have to do much of their printing at 

prices much below these standard rates. Standard rates are charged for small jobs, but when larger jobs 

are available the printing plants are asked for tenders and they bid prices well below standard rates. Any 

printing firm will tell you that is the practice followed. But the Government Printing plant is protected 

from all competition and is paid standard rates for all the government printing it can handle. This simply 

means that government 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

36 

printing is costing the people far more than it would if this printing were let by public tenders subject to 

competitive bidding. The Government does supply some of its printing to privately-owned printing 

plants. These plants are also paid standard rates. That is to say, they are paid more than they would bid if 

they were asked to tender. The reason for this strange practice on the part of the Government is to 

attempt to justify themselves in paying standard rates to their own printing plant. This is an example of 

the extreme length to which this Government is prepared to go to make it appear that its socialistic 

business enterprises are successful. 

 

When talking of the Insurance Office, the Guarantee and Fidelity and the Printing Corporation, the 

Minister quoted the profits they had made since they were organized. Being well fortified by 

monopolistic privileges, these enterprises have usually shown some profit. When, however, he turned 

his attention to the Clay Products he ignored all the past history of this enterprise and said that, last year, 

it made a profit of $40,000. Had he given you the full story he would have said that since it was 

organized, this corporation has shown operating losses for each of six years and profits for only four 

years. When you subtract its total profits from its total losses, you get, for the 10-year period, net losses 

of $233,000. If you add to that the interest on its advances at 3½ per cent (about $200,000) you get a 

total loss of over $400,000. This plant was closed down for part of last year because it had accumulated 

a large inventory of unsold products. I venture to predict that when the present building boom slows up, 

this business will cease operation and will follow the others which have been thrown out of the window 

by the Government. There will then be another very heavy loss on the $900,000 of public money which 

has been advanced to it. While this enterprise enjoys some special privileges because of government 

purchases, it must sell much of its produce in competition with private enterprise. It is, therefore, losing 

large sums of money. 

 

The Minister of Telephones boasted of the profits made by the Telephone Corporation. He should be 

ashamed to mention it. One of the first things he did after he was made a Minister — in fact the only 

important thing he has done since he got the job — was to make another heavy all-round increase in 

telephone charges. Other increases had previously been made by this Government. There have been 

heavy increases in the charges made to urban telephone users. Rural connection fees have been 

increased in many cases well over 100 per cent. There have been tremendous increases in long distance 

charges. But for these increases, this enterprise, because of its huge additional overhead, might well be 

‗in the red‘. But this again is an example of what a monopoly can do. When a government has a 

monopoly of any necessary service it can, in good times, push the charges up and make almost any 

profit it wishes to make. 

 

Just to keep the record straight, I want to refer, briefly, to a part of the Crown Corporations record which 

was entirely ignored by the Minister of Telephones. I want to refer to those Crown Corporations which 

this Government has already included in the caboodle which has been thrown out of the window. 

 

I refer first to the Tannery, because it furnishes a typical example of what has happened to the socialistic 

enterprises of this Government when they have come into contact with the competition of private 

enterprise. The Tannery commenced operations in 1946. This was a period of short supplies and high 

prices, the best possible conditions under which to commence operating 



 
March 17, 1955 

37 

 

an industry. Weekly, during this period, C.C.F. propagandists were telling us of the large profits being 

made by privately-owned industries. They were clamouring for the restoration of wartime price controls. 

The Tannery closed down in December, 1948, and the employees were thrown out of work just before 

Christmas. 

 

In its short life, the Tannery had received advances of $175,000. It had paid no interest on this borrowed 

money, but had accumulated operating losses of over $73,000. Add to this the interest of $25,000 which 

it should have paid, and you have a total of $98,000. The Provincial Treasurer paid the operating losses 

and each year he paid the interest on the money advanced to it at $3½ per cent. This was part of the 

public debt of the province, and incidentally, part of that public debt which the Provincial Treasurer calls 

‗self-liquidating‘ debt, Mr. Speaker. It was in truth self-liquidating! 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — What is he reading from? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — When the Tannery closed, the Department of Public Works purchased its assets at 

book value for about $86,000. This, keep in mind, was not the value of the assets but the book value. It 

proved to be about twice what the Government thought the assets were worth, because later, the 

Government offered to sell them for $45,000. The $86,000 was paid into the Finance Office by the 

Department of Public Works, Mr. Speaker. This is the device by which huge sums are paid into this 

sink-hole so that the Government can make statements about the increase in its assets. In 1952, this 

Tannery was leased to Continental Leather Limited, and this firm was given an option to purchase the 

property for $45,000 — not $86,000 — despite the fact that the Department of Public Works had 

already paid this sum into the Finance Office. To get the Tannery ready for the Leather Company to 

lease it, the Government spent a further $40,000 on the property. They were so desperately anxious to 

get rid of it so they could say it was not entirely a lost cause. 

 

From what I have already told you, it would appear that this Government does not have the business 

experience of a group of school children. But that was not the end of their folly. The Government loaned 

Continental Leather $12,600 from the Industrial Development Fund and the Provincial Treasurer signed 

guarantees for further loans of $53,000 at the bank. Isn‘t this an amazing transaction? This is how a 

socialist government does business. Before Continental Leather had paid any rent the property was 

destroyed by fire. No wonder! How else could such a mess be liquidated? The insurance was carried by 

the Government Insurance office, so as a result of the fire, the Government paid $41,000 to itself. 

 

At the very start of this Tannery venture the Government sold to the Tannery Corporation a lot and 

building for $2,000. This property had been purchased by a previous government for $19,000. This was 

a loss of $17,000 before they ever got started; and this, by the way, is an example of another practice 

followed by the Government in dealing with Crown Corporations. In hundreds of ways they have been 

dipping their hands into the public treasury to give the Corporations something for nothing. 

 

Let me summarize the Tannery venture. The Government has not yet owned up to what the entire losses 

are, but to date the score is  



 
March 17, 1955 

 

38 

 

Loss on turning over lot and building  $17,000 

Operating losses  73,000 

Purchase of Assets at book value 86,000 

Getting plant ready to lease 40,000 

Loans for which government is responsible 65,600 

  

Total sunk into the Tannery $281,000 

 

We have other things here and I am soon going to be through. We have the shoe factory, which closed 

up at the same time as the Tannery. Here is its score  

 

Operating losses paid by Provincial Treasurer $82,700 

Interest on advanced paid by Prov. Treasurer 26,800 

Purchase of Assets at book value by Department 

of Public Works 

59,700 

  

Total paid out $169,200 

 

The purchase of the assets, which the Government already owned, sunk a further $60,000 into the 

Government Finance Office. The Government has not risked showing that this figure was far too high 

by selling these assets. The Shoe Factory has been turned over to the Department of Social Welfare 

without any cost to the Department. The Minister of Social Welfare bought himself a golf course, and 

the Government has given him a Shoe Factory. Isn‘t Socialism amazing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — What is the hon. member reading from? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Might I ask the hon. gentleman if he is quoting from notes, or is he reading . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am quoting from my notes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Who wrote them? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I have the figures here and they are accurate, and he can prove that they are wrong, if 

he wishes. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If you are quoting from your notes you take the responsibility for them. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There is $169,200 sunk in that Shoe Factory — of course the Minister of Social 

Welfare now has a Shoe Factory. 

 

Larger losses still were incurred by the original Fish Board. It was closed after milking the treasury of 

large sums of money  

 

Operating losses paid by Provincial Treasurer $364,000 

Grant paid in 1947 to keep its losses down 40,000 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Interest on advanced paid by Provincial Treasurer — $94,000 . . .  



 
March 17, 1955 

39 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — On a point of order . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — . . . purchase of assets at book value by the Department of Natural Resources — 

$261,000 . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Will the hon. member please take his seat while the point is being stated? Will 

you please sit down! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, it is very obvious that the hon. member is reading his speech, 

line after line, and that is, with rare exceptions where . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — It is against the rules of the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . it is customary to give consent, for example, with regard to the budget 

speech, but otherwise you are not supposed to read your speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! There have been quite a few occasions where very extensive notes have been 

used and read. This was applied to both sides of the House. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I noticed the Provincial Treasurer, the other day, did exactly what I am 

doing now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — The budget speech, do you mean? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, pardon me, the Provincial Secretary, not the Provincial Treasurer; I beg your 

pardon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Burton: — Mr. Speaker, just as a correction, I did not read it line by line. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Just like this. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — All right, proceed. I take it from the hon. member that this is not a document that was 

prepared by someone else. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, this is mine. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, while we are all in a good mood. I always extend the courtesy of 

sending my speech over as soon as I have delivered it. I wonder if the hon. gentleman would do that 

with me in order that I might have a chance to look over it tonight, to reply tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is your budget speech. You never gave me that courtesy two years ago. I didn‘t 

get it until the next day. 

 

Mr. Erb (Milestone): — We‘ll take the rest as read. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I said this: operating losses on the Fish Board . . .  



 
March 17, 1955 

 

40 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think it would be appreciated if we could get that so that it could be used for 

the records. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, I have no objection to that. It will be on the records anyhow. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Oh, but I wanted to reply tomorrow. You asked me to reply to it. Mr. Speaker, the 

hon. member wants me to reply to it and he is going so fast I cannot make notes; he is really going too 

fast. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, I shall be pleased if I can get somebody to type it out and give you a copy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — I will give it back. Mr. Speaker, I promise to give it back. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am sure you can get a copy of my speech from the stenographers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Not by tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I‘m not so sure you can‘t. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will the hon. member proceed. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, anyhow, the operating losses on the Fish Board were $364,000, paid by the 

Provincial Treasurer. Grants, in 1947, to keep his losses down, $40,000. The interest on advances paid 

by the Provincial Treasurer, $94,000. Purchase of Assets at book value by the Department of Natural 

Resources, $261,000. Total paid out by the treasury — $759,000. And the Natural Resources 

Department got a bargain there; that is the best deal you ever made. You got $759,000 for $261,000. 

Congratulations! 

 

A further $261,000 was sunk into the bottomless pit of the Government Finance Office when these 

assets were purchased for far more than they were worth by this Government, which already owned 

them. It has cost the people of this province $3/4 million to convince this Government that they cannot 

buy and sell fish in competition with private enterprise. The situation is all the worse because they were 

frequently paying the fishermen less than they could get from private buyers. Fishermen over large areas 

were compelled to sell to the Government Fish Board. 

 

The corporation which most recently joined the caboodle outside the window was the woollen mill, and 

the Provincial Treasurer admits that this cost him $830,000. He does not tell you that he paid an 

additional amount of $200,000 for interest on it, which he borrowed and loaned to the woollen mill. The 

mill has been sold, but the sale has not yet produced any money; only an agreement for sale for 

$264,000. And the Minister of Telephones worked himself into a frenzy because the ‗Leader-Post‘ 

published a statement saying that some of the corporations are showing losses. 

 

The Leader-Post has never given the public the true facts about the onerous losses sustained by the 

socialistic enterprises. Through the years the Leader-Post has erred on the other side; year by year they 

have published statements made by members of this Government about the tremendous profits made 



 
March 17, 1955 

41 

 

by these corporations, statements which have been extremely false and misleading in many respects. I 

do not blame the newspaper for many of these statements. I blame the Premier and the members of this 

Government of making them. Why don‘t they give the true picture of the Crown Corporations up to 

date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — If I give it back tomorrow night, Herman, can I have it? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If I can get this typed out you will have one tomorrow. I‘ll do my best to get it typed 

out. 

Some Govt. Member: — None of the rest of them would read it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I have lots more. I could keep on going another two hours; but seeing 

that it is almost six o‘clock I just want to tell you this — After all, I don‘t think you need wonder what I 

am going to do. I am going to vote against this budget, because a good big part of it is a waste of money, 

a waste of public funds in the financial condition we are in at the present time and liable to be in for 

some years to come. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — You are going to vote against increased supplementary allowances, eh? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, I‘m not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — You sure are. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is just your tactics. 

 

Mr. Feusi: — That is your tactic. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If I do, you voted against it three times on the floor of the House during the past few 

years, the very thing that you are putting into effect now. The Premier told you that he would not 

increase the supplementary at this Session. 

 

Mr. Feusi: — And you are going to vote against it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The Premier of this province told you just before the House, in caucus, that it 

wouldn‘t be increased. 

Some Govt. Member: — And you are not going to vote for it now. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! This constant crossfire across the floor of the House is absolutely out of order. 

 

Mr. Feusi: — Would the hon. member answer a question? That large document which he just read; was 

it engraved by Mr. Staines? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Is the House ready for the question? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say this about the remark that has just been made. The 

Speaker gave a ruling here a while ago, that many . . .  



 
March 17, 1955 

 

42 

Mr. Danielson: — Oh, I don‘t care, that is just about the size of him. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . that many speeches have been given from notes. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I just wonder when he comes into the House and brings his speech, if he has 

prepared that speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I rule the hon. member out of order in asking that question. It being six 

o‘clock, I shall leave the Chair until 7 30. 

 

At 7 30 o’clock 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the House ready for the question? 

 

Hon. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to do like some of the 

other speakers have done, because I promised the hon. Provincial Treasurer I wouldn‘t. Everybody has 

congratulated him and I will refrain from that; but in case the House might have any doubts of what my 

intentions are, I will relieve the suspense immediately and tell them that I am going to support the 

budget when I have finished speaking. 

 

In another debate in this House I analyzed the Health planks in the Liberal platform, and I think I 

exposed them for what they are. So tonight I do not propose to deal to any extent anyway with the 

idiosyncrasies of our friends on the other side of the House. I am going to devote my time to a report on 

the actual operations of the Department of Public Health over which I have the honour at the present 

time to preside. 

 

I believe the House will be interested in knowing what progress we have made and what the 

developments have been and, if time permits, possibly a comment on what we hope to do in the future. 

The last year saw some steps taken which will add to the things that were done in the past and to 

complete, up to the present time, ten of the most important recommendations of the Sigerist Health 

Services Survey Commission of 1944. 

 

During the 1953 session of the Legislature, I mentioned why this Government, on assuming office in 

1944, appointed Dr. Henry Sigerist to set up a fact-finding commission on health needs. I also told how, 

step by step, we have progressed in carrying out the recommendations of this noted authority on rural 

health. Early in 1945, we made it possible for municipalities to pool their resources in preventive health 

by assisting them to set up health regions. Two-thirds of our population, over 500,000 people, are now 

receiving modern health services in the province; that is, the two cities and the eight regions that are in 

operation. In the same year we established virtually complete medical care programmes for the needy 

people; that is, the aged, the widows, and pension person on mothers‘ allowance and so on. There are 

approximately 35,000 people on the roll for this service most of the time. 

 

In 1947, we put into effect the first prepaid comprehensive hospital insurance programme on the 

continent, which everybody is familiar with at the present time and does not need any further 

elaboration. Before the Federal Government came into the picture at all, the province was providing 

construction grants to encourage the construction of hospitals, to help communities 



 
March 17, 1955 

43 

 

build hospitals and improve hospitals in locations where the greatest number would be most effectively 

served. It would be well to remember that in the days when the Provincial Government alone was in the 

field of construction grants, before the Federal Government showed any interest in the matter at all of 

providing any money, those were days when price controls were in effect, also days when the budgets of 

this government were not nearly as big as they are at the present time. When I say that nearly a half a 

million dollars are provided for this purpose, we can consider that half a million dollars did a 

tremendous amount of work in the way of helping our people improve, enlarge or acquire new hospitals 

during that period. 

 

I have already told the House on more than one occasion the increase in the number of beds because of 

that work. It might be well to remember, also, that since the Federal Government has come into the 

picture, a great deal more provincial money has gone into construction grants. 

 

We have established a first rate medical school (that was one of Dr. Sigerist‘s recommendations), and a 

University hospital of 550 beds in order to round out the operation of that school, and we will begin to 

graduate fully-trained physicians by 1957. The hospital is already admitting patients, and the last time I 

visited it, nearly three weeks ago, there were something (if I remember correctly) over 60-odd patients 

and some coming in every day, so I could not give the exact number as of today. We will continue 

taking patients as the building becomes furnished and ready for operation and as the staff gets ready for 

them, and we expect, as was announced by the Minister of Public Works the other day, that the hospital 

will be completed and fully occupied by the end of the present calendar year. I would like to mention 

here, however, that the official opening date of the hospital will be on the 14th May, this spring, at 

which time there will be a ceremony in connection with the opening. 

 

We are in the final stages, as everybody knows, also, of the completion of the training school at Moose 

Jaw. I don‘t think I need to go into the reasons why it was necessary to build that school. I believe even 

our friends opposite, who have been very critical of the budget so far and have been every year, have not 

offered any criticism of the construction of the training school at Moose Jaw; so I assume, at least, that 

that is one phase of the budget that they would wish to support. While they vote against it, we will have 

to assume that their vote is against the total budget, I am going to assume that they agree that this is a 

service that the province should provide. The tentative date of the official opening is 18th May; that will 

be four days after the opening of the University hospital. 

 

We have greatly increased the number of qualified physicians and nurses and other workers in our 

mental institutions. I think the House will be interested in that statement, because it will be noticed, 

when the estimates come up and you have them on your desks now, that the larger share of the budget 

has been allocated to the Department of Public Health because of the tremendous responsibility it has in 

the caring for people who are ill, or in assisting people who are not ill to maintain good health and 

endeavouring to find ways to prevent illness striking those who may be in danger of attack of illness, 

and that includes, of course, the field of mental illness, also. 

 

A good deal of the success that we have achieved in the field of providing health services of all kinds, 

and particularly in the stage I am dealing with now, mental health, is because we have increased the 

number of people 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

44 

who are operating in these institutions. We have increased the number of physicians and the psychiatric 

nurses and ancillary personnel, and I think that we should recognize that the 500-hour in-service training 

programme, which we carry on for psychiatric nurses over a three-year training period, has resulted in 

the acquisition of a number of trained people that did not exist before, and do not exist in very many 

places in the world that I know of and have information about, even at the present time, although there 

are a number of places that are, to some extent, doing a similar job although not as extensive as we are, 

and not as concentrated and expansive a training. 

 

So we have now a highly qualified type of psychiatric nurse who is a tremendous help to a psychiatrist 

and the doctor in making up the total team for the care of those unfortunate people who become stricken 

with mental illness, or who are born with deficiencies that make it impossible for them to develop to 

what we might call normal, like most of us are when we get outside the House. 

 

We have, of course, the free diagnosis for the treatment of cancer cases, and the House will be 

interested, I think, in the most recent report that, since the first of this calendar year, there have been in 

the neighbourhood of 450 new cancer cases come to the two clinics at Regina or Saskatoon, this year, 

and in the month of February, I believe, the number was something over 150 in each case, making about 

300 in that months. So, the service that is being given by the Cancer Clinics and the Commission is 

being extensively used and used to very good advantage, in most cases. 

 

I would like very much, Mr. Speaker, to be able to report to the House that we have found a definite cure 

for every cancer that is seen. Unfortunately, as everybody knows, that is not the case; but I believe that 

the kind of research work that is being done by our people in the cancer clinics and the service that they 

are giving are rendering a tremendously good service to the people, and good many cancers are being 

cured where they are in a position where they can be got at by the most modern equipment, which we 

have. 

 

We have set up a complete range of treatment training and rehabilitation programmes for several types 

of crippling conditions which I will deal with later on, and we have established for the first time really 

effective programmes in such preventive fields as the use of health education and nutrition. I might 

mention that our farm and home safety programme is the first that I know of, certainly the first in 

Canada and the first that I know of on the North American continent; in fact, I do not know of any other 

place where they have a similar programme. 

 

Mr. Thair: — Yes, it was tried out in the constituency of Lumsden, near the town of Lumsden. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Yes, and it is extending across the province. The House should be interested in 

this particular programme for the reason that accidents that occur on the farm and in the home are one of 

the most serious and most plentiful reasons for hospitalization, strange as it may seem. If you read the 

reports that we issue you will find that that is the case. A good many accidents are preventable, if people 

would just give attention to those little details that can be used in the home and on the farm to prevent 

the things that do happen that are certainly regrettable and are never intentional, of course; but they 

happen largely because, in many instances we are all inclined to be a bit thoughtless when we should be 

thoughtful. 



 
March 17, 1955 

45 

 

We have embarked upon an extensive and long-term training programme to increase the number of 

nurses, laboratory and radiological technicians and similar specialized services. Because of that, we have 

improved and increased the whole team of health workers in the province. I think the House would be 

interested in the figures I am going to give now in regard to doctors in active work in this province. If 

we look back to the year 1943 on the registrar, you would find that there were 409 names, active doctors 

in the province — that was one for every 2,054 people. We have at the present time 777 active doctors 

on the roll in the province — that is one for every 1,130 people, almost 100 per cent increase. I believe 

the House will be glad to know that the team of health workers particularly in the professional field is 

developing to that extent. I don‘t mean that we do not need some more. We do need more people in the 

health team yet, and as I go along I will try and point out what efforts we are making to improve the 

numbers and the quality. 

 

Ten years ago the public health services in the province were virtually non-existent. This is not a 

figment of imagination; this is a statement of fact. There were only public health departments in the two 

main cities, Regina and Saskatoon. There were no organized public health services in the province 

outside of those two cities. It is true, there were some public health nurses, stationed here and there in 

the province, and there were a few other health personnel, but there was no organized region where the 

local people took an active part in governing and in the operation and provision of these preventive 

services. I say that for the reason, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member for Rosthern (Mr. Carr) no doubt 

rather from lack of information than anything else, stated, I believe the other day, if I heard him 

correctly, that there is a tendency towards centralization. I want to assure him that we are not 

centralizing. We are doing our utmost to decentralize these services, to get the people in the various 

parts of the province to be prepared to work together in a collection of municipalities for the provision of 

hospital services in the case of union hospital districts, and for the provision of public health services in 

the case of health regions. When they do join together and they form a health region, then they take on 

the active job, away from headquarters altogether, of directing the operation of the public health services 

in the region that they are in. 

 

We have eight of those now and when I say that 10 years ago we had none of those kinds of services, 

that is a statement of fact. We had about 13 per cent of the total population in Saskatchewan (that is, 

those in the cities of Regina and Saskatoon) who had public health services available to them. We now 

have over 57 per cent since we got these eight organized regions going. 

 

To give you some idea why we require a larger vote, which I hope this Legislature is going to pass when 

we come to our estimates (certainly a larger vote has been provided for us) one of the reasons is because 

of the very services that I have mentioned. We have at the present time now eight regional medical 

health officers, which we did not have in the province 10 years ago because there were no regions. 

These are supported by 76 public health nurses — and I don‘t think anybody would object to the public 

health nurses we have giving this service, because they are a most important factor in any health 

programme of any kind. We have 33 sanitary officers. We have three nutritionists, four health educators, 

four teacher psychologists and 25 of ancillary people who serve them in a clerical or technical capacity 

in order to make their professional work as effective as it should be. 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

46 

To give you some idea of the kind of service these people give and the increased volume of service, you 

may be interested in the following comparisons. I want to make clear to my friends to your left, Mr. 

Speaker, that I am not trying to make odious comparisons now, but I must give comparisons to show and 

justify why we require a larger staff and what we are doing with them and compare that with what used 

to be. 

 

We take the year 1943, for instance; our public health nurses that were in the province made home visits 

amounting to 15,141; in 1954, they just doubled that to 30,500. Now, if home visits are good on the part 

of public health nurses, then the more homes you reach, the better the service, the more people are 

getting something from it and we believe that it is important and therefore, we are endeavouring to reach 

the time when no home will be left without this type of service. 

 

Again, we put great emphasis on the home visits where there are infants of less than one year of age, 

because that is a very important year in the life of every individual. A good start in that first year could 

presage a much more healthy, or likely to be a more healthy, life in the future. Home visits to infants 

under one year of age in 1943 were 2,262; in 1954, 11,550. That would mean that in that year 

approximately one half of the babies born in that year were visited in their homes. In 1943 our infants — 

that is those who are pre-school age but over a year; there were 3,054 visits; and in 1954 well over 

35,000 visits. 

 

To give you some idea of the results of this, assuming that we regard human life as something that is 

worth preserving once it appears among us, then we must assume that we want to keep babies alive after 

they are born, and so we wish to reduce the infant mortality rate. In 1943, out of every thousand babies 

born, 47 of them died before they were one year old — that is of live births. That is what is called infant 

mortality. Our estimate — we have not got the final figures, but the indications are it will be 28.5 for the 

year 1954. That is a definite reduction in infant mortality, and I think that is something that we should 

regard as very important in our lives, and therefore, indicating that the service we are giving in this field 

is producing results. 

 

Another factor that goes into that, of course, is that in the year 1943, 62 per cent of the babies were born 

in hospitals, the other 38 per cent wherever the mother happened to be; and frequently in a province like 

this, it could happen that the place of birth was not the best place for it to take place. Last year, 95 per 

cent of the babies were born in hospitals. 

 

I want now to refer to some comments made by the hon. member for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) when he 

was speaking in this debate, when he dwelt on the history of the early years in this province. While I 

cannot claim to have quite as long a residence in the province as the member for Saltcoats, I have had 

nearly as long, I suppose. At least, I came here two years after the province was formed and have been 

here ever since, with the exception of one little jaunt over to France and Belgium, a few years ago, for 

the preservation of democracy, when I did my little humble part in that fray. I want to remind the hon. 

member that I know (many of us here know quite well) the hardships that the pioneers did put up with. 

There is nobody on this side of the House who is not aware of the difficulties the early people faced, and 

nobody over on this side discounts for one moment the courage and the resource and the energy that 

those people displayed in looking after the various problems that beset them and solving them in their 

own way. Whether it had to be going for the doctor 



 
March 17, 1955 

47 

 

behind an ox team, or running to get the doctor on horseback, or even on snowshoes, or without 

snowshoes — I know all those things, because I have done them. My children were born in some of the 

years when we did not have near the services that we have now. But, I want to remind the member for 

Saltcoats of this. Those very people, those of us who were young then and going through that; most of 

us looked forward to the time when we wouldn‘t have those hardships to face, when we would solve 

those difficulties in the co-operative manner such as we are trying to do now through a service such as 

the Department of Health is providing. 

 

So I am rather proud of the progress we are making, though I will have to humbly admit that my part in 

it isn‘t great. My part is mostly that I preside over the Department that does the job. I want to say at this 

point that I probably am a very fortunate person in that I suppose it would be difficult to find a better 

staff than the people who presently are on the payroll of the Department of Public Health; and that goes 

right across the board from the Deputy Minister, the branch heads, division supervisors and 

superintendents of institutions. Every single one of them is devoted to the job of providing a good health 

service within the means that are provided by the Legislature. 

 

Another rather important comparison I think the House would be interested in and, I believe, be glad of, 

is in the field of maternal mortality. Again, we say we want to preserve babies when they are born, and 

we do. We also want the babies to have a mother after they are born, and so it is necessary, if possible, 

to save the mothers. Now, maternal mortality rate has not been as great as the infant mortality rate, but 

still in 1943 for every thousand births, 2½ mothers died — 2½ mothers died out of each thousand that 

gave birth to a child, and that meant that there were that many children who did not have natural mothers 

even though they themselves lived to grow up. Last year we had reduced that figure to .89. I look 

forward to the time when we will reduce it to zero. I suppose that we never actually cross the Jordan or 

reach the full glory of God, but we can and must try, and our aim is, of course, to reduce that to zero, or 

as close to zero as is humanly possible. 

 

I mentioned the number of public health nurses we have in the health regions. We have other health 

nurses, too, in the areas outside the regions, so we have a total of 99 women in the province operating as 

public health nurses, or establishment for that many. We have been able to keep the establishment pretty 

well up in the last year or so, because the recruiting has not been as difficult, and because we sent a team 

over to Britain and were able to recruit a number of well-trained women from the United Kingdom who 

were interested in coming over here and undertaking with us the activities in the health department. We 

are very grateful for these people because they are well trained in their various fields and, as soon as 

they become oriented and acclimated here, we find them especially good at their work — not better than 

ours, but certainly fitting extremely well into our work. 

 

In our sanitation services the same kind of comparison could be used. For instance, in 1943, there were 

total inspections of 15,306. In 1954, there will be something closer, when we get the final figure 

tabulated, to 54,000 or 55,000 visits. This includes, mind you, a number of inspections that did not occur 

at all ten years ago, or before that, in the field of milk sanitation. I think everybody here knows the 

importance that milk has to the health of the community, and we regard the inspection of milk supplies 

and the source of supply as extremely important. So in 1954 we had well over 15,000 inspections 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

48 

by our sanitary inspectors in milk, besides plant inspections and field tests in milk, and inspections right 

on the farm — a total of around 27,000 altogether. 

 

We have also increased the number of inspections that are taking place in the public eating places, and 

again I would be the first to admit that some of our public eating places leave a good deal to be desired. I 

have good reason to believe (although it is very difficult to document things of this kind) statements that 

I am going to make, and one might say that I am simply making an assertion that could not be supported 

by evidence; but I believe, myself, that the evidence I have is sufficient to show that the bulk of the food 

handlers in the province are trying their best, that if they were not as good as they might have been in the 

years gone by, they want to give a good service and they are anxious to provide good eating places and 

places where people gather to drink, or where they have public living places and so on. Most of them 

really want to, and the response in most cases to our efforts to get them to improve their services is 

extremely good. Because of that I think we can look forward to the time when most of the restaurants in 

our province will be places you can walk into with as much confidence as you can into your own dining-

room and know that everything is as it should be. 

 

There are other fields of work, however, for the sanitation officers in the Department, and one is in the 

field of disposal of wastes. Since the Provincial Treasurer has made available a certain amount of money 

for the purchase of debentures to assist in the establishment of local self-liquidating projects such as 

sewer and water and drainage, there has been quite a bit of interest around, and last year, we had 103 

applications for assistance by our sanitary engineers‘ division, from villages, for the installation or 

extension of existing facilities of water or sewage or both. That is an increase of 24 over the preceding 

year. While, again, I am the first to admit that we have a lot to do yet in the province to see that 

everybody has access to good water and good sewage disposal, the fact remains that we are making very 

substantial progress along those lines. 

 

I mentioned infant mortality and maternal mortality a while ago, and I pointed out the improvement that 

we have been able to see come about through, I think, much of our efforts and the assistance and co-

operation of people. After the children have come and have gone through the first year, it is important 

that they be given the best of attention then. So, back in 1948 there was a Child and Maternal Health 

Division set up with a pediatric doctor as a director of it, Dr. Best, and he has carried on with a 

programme ever since. One of his jobs was to do a case-finding job, and we find that, so far, there are 

around 1,200 disabled children in the province through our case finding. About one half of those have 

been seen and examined to determine the extent of their disability and the care required and what the 

hopes are for their future with treatment, and, to follow that up, we recently, two years ago, established 

the Physical Restoration Division with a specialist in the field, Dr. Kanaar, who is a specialist in 

physical restoration and we operate the two restoration centres, one in Regina and one in Saskatoon. It 

might be well to remember that the Saskatchewan Council for Crippled Children established the one in 

Saskatoon some years ago, but the job got too big for them to handle, and, after discussions back and 

forth, it was agreed that the Department of Health should take it over and so it was taken over in 1953 

and we have operated it ever since. 



 
March 17, 1955 

49 

 

These two restoration centres are not yet able to handle all the cases we would like to, but we are, at the 

present time, looking after 1,148 persons in these two centres. We believe we are giving a very useful 

and valuable service to these people, most of them young people, in restoring them, if not completely, to 

health, at least as near completely as it is possible as far as medical and restoration sciences are known at 

the present time. I guess the House would be interested also in knowing that the provision is being made 

in the new Nursing Home being set up in the building out here by the Boys‘ School, for 50 beds for the 

use of the Department of Public Health, because we have now taken over quite a large area of the Boys‘ 

School as a physical restoration centre, where we operate the restoration services and the therapy 

services that are required. We expect that, as provision is made for the boys who occupy the other part 

of it to move out of there, we will take over the whole of that place as a physical restoration centre and, 

with the nursing home built adjacent to it, 50 beds will be allocated to the use of the Department of 

Health for people who require the services of the restoration centre and require also bed care; that is, 

they cannot live at home or be in foster homes and be brought in every day; they are required to be right 

on the grounds. So, I thought the House would be interested in that particular procedure at the present 

time, and what is envisioned. 

 

Another field that we believe we have made some fairly good progress in is in the field of dental health. 

We try to encourage the organized regions to undertake a preventive dental health programme. Dental 

health is something that does not excite people. You get a toothache and you get it pulled out. Or you 

stick it out until you grow up and can afford to get it filled and then, someday, you go to the dentist and 

have it looked after and so on through life, until finally, you do as I did: You go in and the dentist says, 

―Well, if you will buy and pay for a good set of teeth, I‘ll make them for you and you will have no more 

trouble.‖ That is what I did; but they are never as good as the ones you started out with as long as the 

original ones were in good shape. We would like to reduce the number of people that have to have the 

experience that many of us have had and retain their good teeth as long as possible. So, we want a public 

health or preventive programme in the dental field. We are having some pretty marked success. Four of 

the regions have undertaken to do this kind of work, in different degrees it is true. But, in last year, there 

were over 15,000 people examined in the health regions, and to assist in this examination and to develop 

a consciousness of the need for care of teeth in children, and the parents of the children, we are training 

and sending out into the regions young women trained in dental hygiene. These are not like the dental 

nurses of New Zealand. They cannot pull teeth; they cannot give any treatment at all except topical 

fluoride; but they can clean teeth. They can give topical applications of fluoride right there, and they can 

give the child and the parents a good deal of valuable information and encouragement in looking after 

their own teeth. If we could only learn not to eat and drink so many sweet things, or at least teach the 

children not, or at least to clean their teeth thoroughly immediately after they have used those, a great 

deal of misery would be prevented. 

 

This is important for several reasons, but the chief reason (and I will only deal with the chief reason) is 

that if we are going to look forward to the people only getting their teeth attended to when they have to 

have them taken out or filled or something of that nature, then we cannot for many, many years look 

forward to a complete dental service in this province, because we have not sufficient dentists. If you 

realize that in the armed services they 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

50 

regard the need for dentists in the ratio of one dentist to every 750 persons, we have in this province one 

dentist for every 4,000 persons, and the situation across Canada is not a great deal better. Every place is 

short of dentists and there isn‘t any likelihood of there being a big supply for the reason that there are 

not the training facilities for dental students at the present time, and if there were the physical facilities 

for training dental students, there are not the teachers. If you took enough teachers out of the presently 

active operating dentists to provide a teaching staff, you would reduce even further the number of 

dentists in active practice. So we cannot look forward with any degree of optimism for a number of 

years to as complete a supply of active dentists as we should have. 

 

However, there are other ways in which we are encouraging people to provide preventive health in 

dentistry. Wherever there is a communal water supply we are encouraging the people in that community 

to fluoridate their water. I know this is controversial, but it isn‘t with me, because we took the trouble to 

find out from over 80 Universities on this continent that have health departments in them, what their 

opinion was. All except three reported they favoured the fluoridation of communal water supplies. These 

are people who are in the field of examining these things and they are responsible people. The three who 

did not agree did not disagree with it; they simply said they had made no study and, therefore, would 

make no comment. 

 

I have before me a clipping from the ‗Leader-Post‘ of yesterday. While I could sometimes criticize the 

Leader-Post for its editorial attitude and some other faults which I think it has, nevertheless it does also 

provide the means of communication which is necessary. So I don‘t say it is always wrong, although 

sometimes I think it is wrong in parts. In this case I agree with them, because they are giving a factual 

report and you will find it on page 21 of last night‘s paper if you care to look at it. In that they tell of the 

experience the city of Brantford in Ontario has since they fluoridated its water supply. When they started 

in 1944, they had an examination of the children‘s teeth. They found that of all the children they 

examined — and that was nearly all of them, as nearly as possible to 100 per cent — 5.218 of those 

children had perfect teeth, the rest of them had faulty teeth. After 10 years in fluoridation in their water 

supply, their last examination showed that over 21 per cent had perfect teeth. There is a shining example 

of what the fluoridation of communal water supplies can do, and that isn‘t something that is pulled out 

of a hat by what some people refer to as a ‗screwball‘ or something. That is a statement from the city of 

Brantford where responsible individuals undertook this, and this is a result of what they undertook. 

 

In 1944 there were no health educators in this province. Again I am giving comparison to show the 

development and what is done and trying to give you some idea of the result of what is being done and 

the progress made. Now, in 1954 we had nine health educators in the province. Our Health Education 

Division distributed over 300,000 items of literature dealing with the whole field of health. I should 

mention also that the Health Education Division does a splendid job of recruiting young people from the 

high schools, particularly those we need to enter the psychiatric services and become students to 

graduate as psychiatric nurses. Among other things besides this, we have in this province I am informed, 

the largest library of health files in Canada. We have over 500 prints and, in the year 1954, these 

pictures were shown to 625,000 people in this province. Nearly everybody agrees that visual education 

is a good thing; that you can show pictures to people and they will register more in the mind than all the 

speeches that all of us here in the House could make, 



 
March 17, 1955 

51 

 

except when we say something that annoys somebody and that registers. But, when you show pictures 

mostly it registers. And when you can show worthwhile pictures dealing with matter of health to 

625,000 people, it is safe to assume that you have given information to enough people to help to spread 

the gospel of good health. 

 

Another thing I think I mentioned in a previous debate that will bear repeating because it is quite 

important in its implications although it is not as widespread as it will be in the future, and that is I 

mentioned our rheumatic fever control programme. When young people are afflicted with Rheumatic 

fever, unless something is done to check it and to keep it in check until they grow up, they are very 

likely to wind up with a very bad heart condition and be cripples or invalids all their lives. After a good 

deal of research and experimentation and so on, we became convinced that the proper application of all 

penicillin to children with these afflictions, rheumatic fever, if continued until about 18 years of age, 

will prevent in a great measure the onslaught of a serious heart condition. We started in Moose Jaw with 

approximately 50 or 60 of these young people after a full discussion with the medical society that 

operates in that city and around that city, and the health region officials and the local people generally 

and, of course, the patients and their parents, too. We find that we are able to carry on this experiment 

there, and we believe it is going to produce very good results. We are hoping that we will be able to 

extend this service throughout the province as rapidly as the localities and the people concerned, all of 

them are prepared to undertake it as they have in Moose Jaw. 

 

The laboratories, of course, are not new. There has been a provincial laboratory for some time, but the 

service in the Provincial Laboratory has been expanded very considerably. For instance, in 1943 there 

were total examinations of 87,916 — nearly 88,000; last year there were 207,000 examinations. We 

have increased the type of examinations, particularly in the field of virus diseases, diagnosing virus 

diseases, and the general practitioners and the smaller hospitals in the province depend to a very large 

extent on the work of the provincial laboratories in biochemistry, haematology and things of that nature. 

Besides that, they do a great deal of work in the examination of water supply and milk supply and so on; 

and so, in those fields, we feel that very good progress is being made justifying the kind of work that we 

are trying to do. 

 

I dealt a moment ago with the mental institutions. Again I just want to make a few comparisons. We had 

4,074 patients in 1943, and we have 4,700 in 1954. That does not mean that the 10-year period caused 

an extra 626 people to become mental patients. It simply means that by the new provision that we are 

making, and by the provision of a training school for defectives, we are able to take in more people than 

we have before. We have increased the number of graduate psychiatric and student psychiatric nurses 

from almost nothing to 843 trained since the programme of training started in 1947. We also, of course 

have the Munro Wing and we find that our quality of care has improved greatly. 

 

Again, I want to point out that we quite recognize that there is a lot to do yet in that field. In the field of 

mental illness there is no general agreement on specific treatment, or the cause of these things, in the 

profession concerned. That is there is no full agreement, but there are areas of agreement, and as those 

are developed we endeavour to introduce them into our treatment programmes here, and we have been 

told, by people who visit them from outside, that our treatment programme is very highly regarded. 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

52 

In connection with those (and I mentioned it at the start of my talk), if you can prevent things happening 

to people that is a very important phase of a health programme. As a matter of fact it is the most 

important phase, because if you can prevent a thing from happening, then you haven‘t the suffering and 

the distress and the expense of having to cure it afterwards. If we are going to have preventive services 

in the field of public health — physical health — then we need it in mental health also, and so we have 

our part-time and full-time clinics which we did not have 10 years ago. There are three full-time clinics 

now and five part-time clinics, and we have teacher psychologists. These are people who are trained to 

deal with parents and teachers who are closely associated and guiding children in the early stages of 

their life so that any behaviour problems that develop might be discovered early and the corrective 

methods found in order to prevent a mental illness from striking that child. 

 

I could say the same thing about the development of our services in the northern part of the province to 

carry on as well as possible with four little hospitals we had, and now another at Uranium City, making 

five; but recently we felt that the people up there were entitled to a service as nearly as possible 

approaching the services that we give in the southern part, and so we appointed a full-time health 

officer, a fully qualified doctor and a sanitary officer for operation in the north. I think it is probably 

producing good results. We are having a good deal of success, and also some difficulties, of course, as is 

natural in getting the hospital at Uranium City established and in smooth working order. We look 

forward to the time when the people up there, if those mines develop and the area really gets organized 

properly, will provide, as a union hospital district would do, a bigger and better hospital and one that 

will give the service that is required. In the meantime we are doing our best to provide them with a 

service and seeing that staff is available as that they are not destitute of the proper type of care when 

they become ill. 

 

I think that most of you will be interested also, and also be glad with me, that in 1954 we did not have 

the polio epidemic that we had in 1952 and 1953. We have quite a load of people in our restoration 

centres who are sufferers from those two serious years when the epidemic was widespread. We are 

trying our best also to provide whatever can be done in the field of prevention there, and I think I 

announced to the public, and I will mention it again now, that this year we are providing enough Salk 

vaccine (that is the new Dr. Salk vaccine) for the immunization of people against polio, which was 

developed by this Dr. Salk in the United States and tried out in a big experiment there all last summer 

and last fall. The results of that experiment have indicated to Canadian and Saskatchewan authorities 

that there was a good deal to be hoped for in this Salk vaccine, and when we had the opportunity to 

place an order with the Connaught laboratories in Toronto for a limited amount, we took a chance and 

placed an order immediately. Recent reports from the United Stated would indicate that we were wise in 

doing so, and we expect to have, along about the end of this month or early in April, enough Salk 

vaccine to be able to administer it to all the 5- and 6-year-old children in the province who want it. 

There will be nothing compulsory about it; but it will be available to the five- and six-year-olds, and I 

expect most parents will want to take advantage of it. That will be ready for the complete course, we 

hope, before the children go away for the summer holidays when the schools close, and we hope it is 

going to result in a very definite immunization against polio. If it does, and it is shown to be good, then, 

of course, provision will be made to see that there is available enough of this for all who want it just as 

rapidly as it can be acquired. 



 
March 17, 1955 

53 

 

In the field of pollution of water supplies, I think, so far as the province is concerned, we have done a 

very creditable job. We have not been as successful in the field of inter-provincial waters. Everybody 

knows the regrettable circumstances that occurred in Prince Albert and in the town of Battleford and at 

the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford and to some extent the village of Maymont in the winter 

of 1953-54, when the North Saskatchewan River, from which they draw their water supply became so 

polluted it was hardly fit to drink. I think some of you probably had an opportunity to smell that water if 

not drink it, and I know my hon. friend sitting on my right here would describe, if he were given to 

profanity, with some very lurid adjectives the qualities of that water at that time — it was terrible! That 

came from outside the province and there was nothing the province could do about it: one province 

cannot sue another. 

 

There appeared to be no Federal Legislation which the Minister of Justice there could invoke, or would 

invoke, to do anything to protect us and the result is that Mr. McIntosh, the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs, and I were assigned by the Government to go and see the authorities in Alberta, to see what 

could be done to alleviate this worse than nuisance, this affliction. We were to some extent successful 

after visiting with the authorities of the plant at Edmonton which was deemed to be the guilty plant, and 

with the city authorities and the provincial authorities, but we had no assurance at any time that steps 

were going to be taken that would be sure of preventing it happening again and we were very worried 

and the province of Manitoba was worried. It had two causes of worry. It was afraid that if the province 

of Alberta was going to continue to offend Saskatchewan and not feel too responsible about it, the 

province of Saskatchewan might someday itself offend Manitoba. I can assure the House and everybody 

here that this Government is taking definite steps to see that any industry established here will not 

offend either the people who live in this province, or offend the people in adjoining provinces because of 

carelessness in the discharge of refuse in the water. 

 

However, in order to try and bring some established order out of this difficulty, the Provincial 

Government called a conference of the governments of Canada, Manitoba and Alberta to meet with the 

Government of Saskatchewan here in Regina. We asked them to send both technical and ministerial 

representations. The Government of Canada responded and sent the Minister of Justice with technical 

people from his own department and the Department of Health and Welfare. The province of Manitoba 

responded by sending two Ministers of their government, along with some technical people. The 

province of Saskatchewan was represented by the Premier, by the Minister of Municipal Affairs, by a 

number of technical men and by myself, but the province of Alberta did not send anyone from their 

government. They sent the deputy minister of Health and Welfare and technical men, and because of 

that it was impossible to come to the type of agreement which we had hoped for. What we had hoped for 

was what was recommended by the conference itself, after a careful study by all concerned and then the 

technical men retiring and bringing in their advices as to what could be done, what was practical to be 

done in this field, from a technical point of view and a legal point of view. 

 

After their advice, the conference recommended that a joint pollution control board be set up, with the 

three prairie provinces having representation on it, a minister from each of the governments besides 

technical men, and with the Government of Canada represented on it on behalf of the North-West 

Territories, with technical representation on it. The recommendation of the conference was that this 

pollution control board would be able to examine all effluent that was being discharged into water 

supplies that were going across 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

54 

provincial borders, and would be able to isolate the places where offence was occurring, or was initiated, 

and to recommend the necessary steps that should be taken to prevent that pollution. 

 

The province of Alberta flatly refused to have any part in that. The province of Manitoba was willing; 

the Government of Canada was willing; the Government of Saskatchewan was willing. The Government 

of Alberta was, and is yet, unwilling to be a part of a pollution control body of that kind. They have said 

they are willing to set up an advisory committee of technical people who could meet once in a while and 

could make recommendations; but the conference here thought it would be proper to have a control 

board that would have a pretty good area of authority — not final authority, of course, but whose 

recommendations would be backed so well as to be very impressive to any government it made 

recommendations to. We think that is the proper way to handle matters that are going to be of inter-

provincial concern. Possibly some day the government of Alberta will change its mind. 

 

However, unfortunately, the willingness expressed by the government of Alberta to see that no offensive 

effluent did get discharged into rivers that were flowing across Saskatchewan and Manitoba borders, 

was not effective and Prince Albert on two different occasions this year was again offended with some 

of this discharge — not as bad as last winter, but enough to indicate that it can happen any time. The 

first time it happened the report was that somebody who had a plant somewhere had not discharged his 

duties properly, or had someway failed to discharge them. Whether it was neglect or inability or what, 

nobody knows, but anyway the fact remains that there was offence because of it, and if you would read 

the Moose Jaw ‗Times Heralds‘ editorial, Saturday, March 12th, headed ‗Control of pollution of inter-

provincial rivers is of top importance to five cities of the Province‘, you will see how they are greatly 

concerned. The city of Regina could be concerned, too, because, at the present time, there is 

contemplated the building of a $20-million chemical plant at Medicine Hat on the South Saskatchewan 

River, and if it should do the same thing in the South Saskatchewan River as the celanese plant is 

charged with having done in the North Saskatchewan River, then, of course the city of Moose Jaw and 

the city of Regina which, at times when Buffalo Pound Lake should become low and it is necessary to 

pump water from the South Saskatchewan River into Buffalo Pound Lake to increase the water supply 

here, then both Regina and Moose Jaw could be offended by a similar action on the part of that plant. So 

I think it is perfectly logical that we should expect here, and the province of Manitoba has a right to 

expect, that those who are at the head waters of any inter-provincial stream should be part and parcel of 

a controlled body to see that nobody offends his neighbour in this way, and we sincerely hope that that 

will take place. 

 

I do not think I need to spend a great deal of time in dealing with our treatment services in this province. 

Everybody knows, I think the health services that are available to the people who are called the ‗public 

assistance group‘, and we are rather proud of the co-operation we have had from the groups that render 

this service. The medical profession, the dental profession, optometrists, nurses, chiropodists, 

physiotherapists, and other people, who have been part of the whole team of looking after these people, 

have rendered a good service, and we think it has been worthwhile to these elderly people. I am sure the 

people themselves recognize it also. So I do not think there is any need for me to spend any time in 

reporting on that particular aspect of our work. Suffice it to say that our Medical Services Division does 

a most notable job in its administration of the care of these people, and if there are any who feel it is 

abused — I expect someone would say it is abused and we recognize that 



 
March 17, 1955 

55 

 

there is always the possibility of abuse and therefore probabilities of it sometimes; but we do not regard 

the abuse as important enough to warrant any serious curtailment of the service. One of the things that 

does cause us some concern is that there are about one-third of these people who could have this service 

available who never go near a doctor, and we believe that, in the interests of their own good health, they 

should have a check-up once a year anyway, as a means of preventing them from becoming ill, because 

when you get along in years something might happen any time which is going to precede an illness on 

the part of an elderly person. If that can be caught by an annual check-up, it might be a saving in both 

suffering and in money in the long run. But in the main we do not regard the service abused to any great 

extent, and it is not used as such as it might be in some other directions. 

 

I would want to mention here the Air Ambulance Service, because it is such an important part of the 

whole health programme, particularly in the treatment field. It is awfully hard to separate treatment from 

prevention, or vice versa, because they merge into each other. So far as the getting of a patient who has 

been injured or become seriously ill rapidly from the initial point where the attack takes place to the 

place where they can be treated, that, of course, is getting into a treatment service. But, so far as the 

getting him there quickly so he does get that treatment service, it could be prevention, because if he 

wasn‘t got there quickly then it is possible that death or a life-time of invalidism might be the result of 

failure. So, it is both prevention and treatment that the air ambulance is concerned with. 

 

I won‘t go into all the statistics of it, but I think the House would be interested in knowing that since its 

inception, we have never had a patient injured in a trip on the air ambulance, and for 2½ years now (I am 

rather proud of this record) we have not had serious damage to any of our aircraft. That, I think, speaks 

very well for the personnel, for the ground crew who see that those planes are airworthy at all times and 

enable the pilots and nurses to undertake the work, because they fly in very hazardous conditions. I think 

some of you since we have been in the House will recall what happened when a flight was coming in 

from the east to Regina and had to stop at Balgonie on a very bad blizzardy night. But he got down at 

Balgonie, and the patient was brought in by ambulance. That will give you some idea of the hazards 

these pilots have to undergo, and the nurses that fly with them. 

 

In the whole field, since the time it was set up in 1946, the ambulance was flown 2,025,000 miles and 

has carried a total of 6,534 patients. As I say, never has a patient been injured on a flight and for 2½ 

years we have not had any serious damage to any aircraft. I think we can regard that as a good record. 

Certainly there are over 6,000 people who very likely might have been seriously ill and many might not 

have recovered at all had they not had this service; others might have been invalided for life. Probably 

every one of those 6,000 people received a service that was almost in every case actually a life-saving 

service, and so we regard the Air Ambulance to be an important branch of the Department. 

 

I don‘t know if it is necessary for me to deal to any extent with the Saskatchewan Hospital Services 

Plan, Mr. Speaker, because it is so well known. I recognize, of course, that the costs of operating the 

plan have gone up. Nobody regrets it any more than myself, and at the risk of offending some of my 

hon. friends across the way, or at the risk of being called guilty of running to the Federal Government 

for every trouble, I would like to say some things about that. And I say this because I am a Canadian 

citizen, even of longer duration than my friend from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson), because my people came 

to 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

56 

Canada in 1753. So I have no imported ideas of any kind. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — You didn‘t come then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I came along after that; we can argue that out some other time. What I am trying 

to point out is that I recognize there are certain areas of responsibility, whether it is in the village of 

Churchbridge, the town of Bredenbury, the municipality of Saltcoats, the province of Saskatchewan or 

the Dominion of Canada. 

 

There are certain areas of responsibility, and I don‘t believe that any child or any person in Canada who 

is a Canadian citizen should be treated any less favourably in any field whatsoever, because he or she 

lives in Nova Scotia, Newfoundland, Quebec, Saskatchewan British Columbia, or the North-West 

Territories, any more than I believe a child in Churchbridge, or Bredenbury, or Yorkton should have any 

less favoured treatment in this province than a child in Swift Current or Leader or Kindersley. I believe 

these are all citizens of Canada. Therefore, I believe there are certain responsibilities that must be 

fulfilled by the Government of Canada, which has an overriding responsibility and authority, and when 

you reach fields that provinces or municipalities cannot deal with, you must go to the senior government 

who can deal with it. 

 

The senior government did a noble job of dealing with what I am going to mention now, during the war. 

When we were at war with a visible enemy whom we know, we had to defeat him or else surrender all 

the things that we had spent generations in trying to build up — what we call our way of life and which 

suits us, whether it suits anybody else or not and, therefore, is our business. That Government of Canada 

did maintain a set of price controls to see that, while you could not have everything equal, while our 

young people were shedding their blood for the rest of us, the rest of us were at least, each one of us, 

getting our share of what was available here and making our contribution in our own humble, individual 

way, to the general war effort. 

 

My opinion, Mr. Speaker, is that whether you are at war with Nazi Germany, or no matter what other 

physical enemy you can see, it is no different from a war on poverty, or a war on disease, or any of the 

things that can afflict mankind, and we have a war against disease on all the time. We gained some very 

notable victories over it on some fronts, notably T.B., diphtheria, smallpox and things of that kind; if not 

complete victory, at least we have got the enemy where we don‘t believe he can attack us as effectively 

as he used to, some years ago. But there are other diseases we haven‘t, and there are illnesses striking all 

the time that require hospitalization and that require the services that go to restore good health. To do 

that we should have a measure of control over the cost of those things, but the only people who can 

operate that control is the government of Canada. It is the only one with the authority. We have not got it 

here. And one of the reasons why our hospital bill was up to over $16 million, last year, and will likely 

be in the neighbourhood of $19 million for the year 1954, is because of the tremendous increase in the 

cost of building materials, equipment and other things that go into the establishment of a hospital. 

 

Our hospital bill has gone up and I regret it very much; but if we are going to make these services 

available, then they have to be paid for, and we have to pay the prices that are charged for the things 

required to make these hospitals go. But I would like to say this. The people of the province 



 
March 17, 1955 

57 

 

have responded nobly to this scheme. I am amazed every year, and more amazed than ever this year, or 

last fall, I should say, that after one of the worst crops we had ever experienced — not going back to 

1907, which I admit was bad because that is the year I came here and I had a heck of a time earning a 

living harvesting that year; and I have been on the bread-line in this country, too, when there were no 

jobs; don‘t anyone forget that. I know I have been through the whole lot of the difficulties that face 

people in this country. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I had lots before that, boy; you‘re just a junior. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Sonny boy, I was earning my living since I was 12 years old. I haven‘t cost 

anybody a cent since I was 12 years old. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I was working since I was eight. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Nobody can tell me anything about a workingman‘s lot in this country, and I am 

not complaining. I don‘t complain about anything at all. I am saying that I, and every one of us, should 

recognize the difficulties of the past and try and see that we don‘t pass on those kinds of things to those 

who come after us; that we leave them something better that they in turn can improve upon. I believe we 

should all be shooting for perfection even though we never achieve it. 

 

However, as I mentioned, I was amazed at the response of the people of this province. Even after the 

difficulties of the crop last year, we find that our tax collections are about equal to what they were in 

other years, and that is pretty amazing when you consider that it is a per capita tax. It is true it is 

collectible if the person has got anything to collect from, but when you consider a per capita tax that is 

paid to the extent of 97 per cent — only 3 per cent year by year who fail to pay their tax — then I 

consider that a remarkable response and, therefore, I think it proves beyond all shadow of a doubt the 

popularity of the scheme. 

 

We have no strings attached to it of course. Everybody knows the conditions. There is no waiting 

period; there are no limitations. If the doctor says you need to go in, and there is room, in you go, and as 

long as the doctor says you need to be there, you stay there until he says that you don‘t require it; and 

because of that, the scheme, as I say, has become very popular. I know there are some who would be 

willing to say that there are other schemes that are better. I think I mentioned once before the 

controversy I tried to have with the Winnipeg ‗Free Press‘ in which Mr. Dexter, the editor, would not 

grant me the courtesy of the same amount of space that he gave to the person who wrote the other 

articles — ‗M.B.‘, who undoubtedly was Michael Best, although I cannot prove that; but the initials 

indicate it and that is his line of thinking, I guess. Anyway, I was not allowed to deal with it. 

 

I would like to point out some things to my friends here, that have been mentioned about the value of 

other services and the one we operate. There was mention made in a Labour Research publication — 

that is a bulletin put out by the Canadian Congress of Labour — about the Ontario Blue Cross plan. The 

report of this was carried in the Toronto ‗Daily Star‘, of January 24th, called ―High Cost Health 

Insurance.‖ They point out that the Ontario Blue Cross plan operates at an administration cost of 8.14 

cents, leaving 91.86 cents to go into services. Under the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan we have 

reduced the number of employees to 121; we have reduced the amount of work put into it; we have 

increased the amount of work that can be put out by one employee, so that now 8/10ths of an employee 

does the work that 1½ employees did in 1947. We 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

58 

operate at a cost of 4 cents out of every dollar, leaving 96 cents to go into services. Now, that may not 

sound like much, but when you get into a service where the total bill is getting close to $19 million, then 

the difference between 91.86 cents and 96 cents going into that service is very important to the people 

who are paying the bills. 

 

I have had other people tell me that private insurance companies can do a better job, so again I call on 

the experience of the Ontario people as reported again in the Toronto ‗Daily Star‘ of January 24th, when 

they point out that, in some of the health insurance schemes run by private individuals, out of every 

dollar paid by the premium holder only 42 cents goes into the actual provision of services; the other 58 

cents goes into promotion costs, advertising, administration and profit for the company operating the 

service. These are not figures I dressed up out of my own head, they are not dressed up by any so-called 

‗backroom boys‘. These are from a report carried in the Toronto ‗Daily Star‘ of January 24th, and 

anybody can look that up and read it. 

 

I would also like to mention the insurance plan presently being operated in Sweden. I have a report from 

the Toronto ‗Daily Star‘ of January 4th. It is headed ―Health Insurance in Sweden.‖ I would just like to 

quote a couple of paragraphs of it for the benefit of the House, to show what we should be aiming for 

here and which I am going to continue to press for as long as I have the health to do so  

 

―A compulsory health insurance plan, with comprehensive benefits to all permanent residents 

regardless of age, physical condition, or income, has just been adopted by the Swedish parliament. It 

will be financed by contributions for insured persons, employers and the national treasury. The only 

exempt groups are those receiving old age and disability pensions from the government and they, too, 

will be eligible for the health services. The benefits — (and I would like you to listen to this); the 

benefits included in Sweden‘s new health programme are the services of physicians, dentists, hospital, 

some medicines, and cash maternity grants for women who are employed. The latter is to consist of 

from 65 to 70 per cent of the working woman‘s normal wages during maternity leave, together with 

free hospital and free obstetrical in hospital or in home care.‖ 

 

Someone will say, well, why don‘t you do that? You cannot do that in Saskatchewan. I just pointed out, 

a while ago, that there are certain areas over which provinces have no control, and one of those is 

making money available. Only the Federal Government has control over finance and hence over how to 

organize the finances of a nation. Sweden is a nation, and as a nation has done this job, and I would say 

that anybody now, with that in mind, should be prepared to support a national health insurance 

programme, not only support it by saying they believe in it, but by actively working for it. I am 

wondering if our friends across the way will state their position on national health insurance in a 

vigorous manner. I would also like to see it happen from the gentleman who is absent, the as-yet-

unclassified member from Souris-Estevan (Mr. Kohaly). However, we have, so far as is possible within 

the province, made some very vast improvements in the type of hospital service and I think we will all 

be glad for that. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that this rather sketchy report — I cannot take up too much time; I have already 

been an hour and a half, I guess, and I 



 
March 17, 1955 

59 

 

should not monopolize the ears or the patience of the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — And we quit at ten o‘clock. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Yes, and we quit at ten, that is true. So, I think maybe I have given some 

reasonably convincing reasons why I propose to support the budget, and why I find it difficult to 

understand the attitude of the gentlemen opposite who take a different view. I think they should be 

happy to know that not only themselves, but all their friends and those who support them, have these 

services available to them. They are services that have either been vastly improved in the last ten years, 

or else have been instituted during that period, and are equally as valuable to them as they are to 

members on this side of the House and to the people and the families who support them. 

 

I find it difficult to realize that our friends over there are actually going to vote against a budget of this 

kind. I know that they have different reasons. For instance, the member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) 

when he was speaking (I think if I remember what he said correctly) said something like this: that the 

reason Alberta gets industries is because they encourage the local municipalities to provide serviced 

lands for them to set up on. Well, now, I think he mentioned the celanese plant at Edmonton. I beg to 

advise the member for Maple Creek that the celanest plant is not in the City of Edmonton municipal 

area; it is in a rural municipality. It was not put up on serviced land. That was not the reason for it going 

there. The reason the celanese plant went to where it did and settled there, is that because, right there, 

there are two refineries, and the celanest plant utilizes the by-products of those refineries. All of them — 

the two refineries, the building products factory near it, and the celanese plant are in a rural area. The 

City of Edmonton would like to have them in, and I think some day it is likely going to be able to get 

them into the metropolitan area and acquire them as taxpayers, or are going to try to, but they have not 

yet; so that is not why they settled there. The same can be said of the Sherrit-Gordon. The Sherrit-

Gordon that settled in Fort Saskatchewan, about 18 miles east of Edmonton, went there because there 

was lots of natural gas, the kind they can use . . .  

 

Mr. Loptson: — You shoot enough of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — . . . not the kind we find here, Mr. Speaker, but the kind that can be utilized and 

applied. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — We would have had it here, if we hadn‘t had a C.C.F. government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Oh, Mr. Speaker, that is wrong. If we had had a C.C.F. government many years 

before we did, or, on the other hand, if we had had a Liberal government that really and truly had 

imagination enough to try many years ago. My friend from Saltcoats cannot tell me a thing about 

Saskatchewan. I remember the years when we tried . . .  

 

Mr. Loptson: — You have lots to learn yet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — . . . to press the government of this province, when he was supporting those 

governments, that they should be trying to get industries in here. I remember the fights we had to get 

even the Hudson Bay railroad. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — He was learning to build roads then. 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

60 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Well, I don‘t know if he learned anything about building roads, but apparently he 

has learned nothing about development, and the consequence is that we didn‘t have any. If we had had 

the natural resources developed, or the search for natural resources, 20 or 30 years ago, as they did in the 

province of Alberta — they were at it many years ago, Mr. Speaker. I remember quite well in 1908 (I 

can remember that far back quite easily) when they were starting to develop oil in the Turner Valley and 

finally got it going. There was no reason why the government of Saskatchewan at that time could not 

have had exploration going on here, to see if it was here, because (mark you this!) there was no lack of 

belief in those days about oil being under Saskatchewan. Oil papers of that day were telling us that, right 

from the Gulf of Mexico across this continent to Fort Norman, oil people and petroleum people in those 

days believed there was a vast reservoir of oil, and they said that a great deal of it was under the 

provinces of Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — That‘s right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — They said they did not know how far down it was. It might be 400 feet or 40 

miles; but they believed it was there. Alberta did not have a Social Credit government; it had another 

kind of government; but it had vision, and it got exploration. A vigorous government in Saskatchewan 

might have discovered long before this the resources we hope to discover, and are discovering every 

day, and had we had plenty of natural gas in Saskatchewan, the Sherrit Gordon might have come here, 

regardless of a C.C.F. government, because they like the dollar from a C.C.F. province as much as they 

like it from a Liberal or a Social Credit or any other kind of a province. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — You wouldn‘t give it to them in 1944 and 1948. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — The hon. member from Saltcoats should not talk nonsense in this House. So I say, 

Mr. Speaker, there is every good reason why the people opposite there should support this Government. 

However, each one of them, as they have spoken, said they are not going to. However, I will defeat at 

least one of them, Mr. Speaker; I am going to support it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural and Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, today I came 

to this House with all possible charity in my heart, the milk of human kindness running in my veins, 

because I wanted to do honour to the patron saint of my grandmother‘s native land I even got my notes 

printed on green paper, Mr. Speaker, to remind me of that; and I am just a little bit sorry to say that some 

of the things that the hon. member from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) said curdled the milk of human 

kindness a little bit. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That‘s why I said them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — If I fail to carry out the spirit of that patron saint, sir, the fault will not be his 

and the fault will not be all mine; but some of the responsibility will lie on the head of my hon. friend 

who sits across the way. The hon. member for Arm River said this Government is continually trying to 

pick up some more taxes. It is a funny thing! I just got a clipping out of a newspaper which says, ―Nova 

Scotia gasoline tax 17 cents, the highest in North America.‖ It is a Liberal government down there; 

apparently there are other governments that are after a bit of revenue, too. 



 
March 17, 1955 

61 

 



62 

 

There was no Department of Social Welfare. There was only a branch of a department; it was considered 

a secondary affair. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It was attached to Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, the Minister of Highways was the Minister in charge of the Bureau of 

Child Welfare . . .  

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Minister of politics! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . and then the Relief Bureau was under another Minister, so to make a 

comparison it just cannot be done at all. 

 

I was very interested in clipping out of the ‗Leader-Post‘ a reprint fro the North Battleford ‗News 

Optimist‘. It was in the ‗Leader-Post‘ of March 14th, and said  

 

―The North Battleford ‗News Optimist‘ chides both the major Saskatchewan political parties for 

dwelling too much on the past . . .‖ 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is correct. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — It goes on to say . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is all you‘ve done here lately. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — It says  

 

―A province which has so much growing to do has little time to be continually reminded of how its 

past was built. We have dams to build, homes to modernize, resources to develop, wilderness to 

conquer and highways to be hard surfaced. The time is rushing by; it waits for no man. Let our 

politicians talk about our future. Let them tell us what they plan for the next 50 years. We in 

Saskatchewan are young and energetic. Let us dream of a better land and chart our course towards the 

dreams of better things for all people.‖ 

 

I agree with the writer of that article to a very great extent indeed, and I can assure you, sir, that a very 

large part of my time is given to planning and working on the future development of the resources in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and I am sure that the time of every Minister is directed in the same way, 

towards the future. The Liberal party, however, should not be chastised too harshly by the North 

Battleford ‗News Optimist‘, because we cannot blame the Liberal party for spending a lot of time 

looking backwards, when they have no future. 

 

I am going to show to you, Mr. Speaker, tonight, one or two of the reasons why they have little future or 

little hope for any future, and that isn‘t a very difficult job to do. Some of our time, of course, must be 

spent looking backward. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Here we go! 



 
March 17, 1955 

63 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — One of the reasons for looking backward at history, provided we do not 

continually stay in that position, is that there are things to learn to help us to get along better and do 

better in the future. Another reason why it is absolutely essential that we look back into the past is so 

that we can prevent the ‗phony‘ future platform of the Liberal party from taking in the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. It is a phony platform, Mr. Speaker, and where you can prove it is a phony 

platform is when you look at the performance of the Liberal party in the past, and I intend to do some of 

that, tonight: to check their performance of the past with their promises for the future. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I thought you were going forward, and not back. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — We‘re going to go forward. The hon. member for Saltcoats, who poses as 

an expert in pretty nearly everything — the salt plants and lumbering, and I suppose farming and road 

building — found his reputation slightly damaged, and shown up as pretty much of a phony as an expert 

in road building, last night . . .  

 

Mr. Loptson: — It was evident that the member for Pelly (Mr. Feusi) didn‘t know much about it or he 

wouldn‘t have read it. I heard all that 25 years ago. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — My hon. friend also poses as a bit of an expert in oil exploration, too, and in 

this programme he is just as much a phony as he is in road building. He is no better. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I have done a little more of it than you have, anyway. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The member said . . .  

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — He‘s a phony of long standing. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . that an investigation was held to prevent Bata from carrying on so that 

they would lose their land. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Yes, sure it was. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is what the result was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Now, actually, Bata, on a large tract of land had a three-year agreement 

extending from November, 1945, to October, 1948. It was after the expiry date of this three-year 

agreement that the investigation was ordered, on November 12, 1948 . . .  

 

Mr. Loptson: — So they couldn‘t raise the money till after it was lost. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . on November 12, 1948, after the expiry date. My hon. friend had his 

chance to spout, yesterday; I hope he will give me a chance to say what I have to say about this matter, 

this evening. 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

64 

Bata was actually given the limit in the greatest consideration and leniency in regard to holding land. 

They held land for a long time. On a good many occasions they did not completely fulfil the 

requirements and still they were given a chance to go ahead. And any person who stands up in this 

House, or any place else, and states that any actions of the Government took their land away from them, 

is telling something that is absolutely false and incorrect, and he can only be telling it for the purpose of 

creating misrepresentation. 

 

The investigation, Mr. Speaker, was on the request of the shareholders. The shareholders were very 

suspicious that something was wrong; and the investigation was ordered. I have here with me the Currie 

report and I am going to show you . . .  

 

Mr. Loptson: — I have it, too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, my hon. friend hasn‘t read it. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — You wouldn‘t think so. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Or he didn‘t pay any attention to it if he did. I am going to show you, from 

what is reported, that the suspicions of the shareholders were certainly justified. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — It was created before they lost their leases. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — The suspicion was created before they lost their leases. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, is the hon. member going to keep quiet, and allow the Minister to 

make his speech? We have had two or three days of this member sitting here making comments all the 

time other people are speaking. I think he ought either to rise and ask on a question of privilege, or either 

remain seated and keep quiet. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That has been happening on both sides of the House, and if it keeps on I will have to 

adjourn the House. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, I learned it from my hon. friend, the Premier of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — You never learned anything yet in your life. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I thought I had a good audience, but I am sorry that they have 

left; the hon. member in the Opposition who was without an opinion, the other day, has left. 

 

Mr. Horsman (Wilkie): — We never ran out of the House, yet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The shareholders of Bata, Mr. Speaker, formed an organization known as 

the ‗Bata Shareholders‘ Association; to get together to raise a little bit of money to hire some legal 

advice to look after the interests of the shareholders in Bata. It was through that organization that the 

demand came for this investigation. Let us turn, first, to 



 
March 17, 1955 

65 

 

page five of the report, in the main body of the report, and it is signed by the Commissioner. Here is the 

last paragraph  

 

―It will be noted that the evidence discloses a course of conduct on the part of the Bata Company‘s 

officers indicating that they used their fiduciary relationship and their position as trustees of the 

interests of the shareholders to advance their personal interests. The operations of the interlocking 

directorate of the above Company and the Prairie Salt Company transactions appear to be particularly 

unfair to the shareholders, who have contributed their money for the development of the province‘s 

natural resources in the expectation of a reasonable return therefrom. The particulars concerning these 

and other transactions which follow deserve the careful consideration of those who have invested in 

Bata Petroleums Limited.‖ 

 

That is the first statement. Let us go on to the next one, on page eight, Mr. Speaker. I cannot read nearly 

all of them and I do not want to take much of your time. You will find this on page eight of the report . . 

.  

 

Mr. Loptson: — I‘ll follow you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — It says here  

 

―As mentioned in section (a) above, A.J.B. Fell received 1,500,000 shares of Bata stock to undertake 

certain work out of which he netted 835,000 shares and they were issued accordingly April 28, 1944. 

In addition, Mr. Fell received a further 20,000 shares from treasury for his share 1/8 of certain 

assistance to the company, totalling $8,000 as outlined by the Directors‘ meeting, June 12, 1944. 

 

―Mr. Fell‘s holdings at October 21, 1948, totalled 234,950 shares, hence — (and listen to this, Mr. 

Speaker) — from April 28, 1944, to October 21, 1948, he disposed of some 620,050 personal shares. 

During this period, Mr. Fell was responsible for the selling organization in connection with company 

stock.‖ 

 

So when that kind of thing is going on . . .  

 

Mr. Loptson: — Did you prosecute him then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . you can be sure it is time it was looked into. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Did you prosecute him? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Now let us go to page 15, Mr. Speaker. The Associated Development 

Company was not a subsidiary company of Bata, but it was a private company with an interlocking 

directorate with Bata. The shareholders of Bata owned nothing of Associated Development Company, 

but the secretary and solicitor of Bata was the secretary and solicitor of Associated. The director and 

general manager of Bata was the president of Associated and the president of Bata was the vice-

president of Associated. It was incorporated as 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

66 

a private company, with 50,000 shares at a nominal par value of $1.00 each. The president was H.E. 

Denton; vice-president, J.A. Whalihan; secretary-treasurer, F.W. Turnbull. Now I quote  

 

―Following are the shareholders of the company with their holdings shown below  

 

Denton-Spencer —  7 

A.J.B. Fell —  7 

J.A,Whalihan  3 

F.W. Turnbull —  3 

  

Total share capital 20 

 

The agreements that this Associated Development Company had with certain other companies: first, 

they had an agreement with Bata Petroleums, under which Bata contracted to sell their natural gas to 

Associated at six cents per thousand cubic feet, at the gathering system . . .  

 

Mr. Loptson: — That was a cent more than we were getting at Lloydminster. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Then, Associated had a contract with the Unity Gas Supply Company, too 

— with regard to the construction of pipeline. This private company put itself in between the producing 

company, Bata, and the market where it could reap the profits. That is what was done. 

 

Then they had an agreement with F.W. Turnbull for the acquisition of salt rights in the vicinity of Unity. 

Then they had an agreement with the Prairie Salt Company where they provided for the erection of a salt 

plant by Dominion Tar and Chemical — now this wasn‘t Bata that had the agreement, it was Associated. 

It provided for the purchase of natural gas by Prairie Salt Company from Associated and the payment of 

salt royalties by Prairie Salt to Associated Development Company — not to Bata. 

 

Here is a comment in a letter written by Mr. Denton, general manager of Bata, to Steele Bros. & 

Company Limited of London, England, wherein he stated, among other things  

 

―Through the efforts of this Company the salt deposit was discovered and a deal negotiated between 

the salt company and the provincial government retaining a royalty on the salt and at the same time 

creating an outlet for the gas. Contract with the salt company for 21 years, renewable at the end of that 

period for an additional 21 years.‖ 

 

They also had other agreements; but before I take those up I want to go on to a bit of advertising of Bata  

 

―A full-page advertisement which appeared in the Regina ‗Leader-Post‘, August 7, 1948, was 

published without the approval of the registrar of Security Frauds. This is a contravention of section 16 

of the regulations pertaining to The Security Frauds Prevention Act. This advertisement contained, 

among other things, the following  

 

―In addition to the sale of natural gas, Bata will receive a royalty on all salt produced. Mr. Turnbull 

advised 



 
March 17, 1955 

67 

 

the writer of this report, on January 21, 1959, that no agreement had been completed in connection 

with salt royalties.‖ 

 

The agreement was with Associated Development Company. I could go on and read more and more of 

these things, Mr. Speaker, but I don‘t think it would serve any particular purpose. I think I have read 

enough to show that the shareholders had cause for calling for an investigation and they got an 

investigation. Now my hon. friend, as he sat in his seat there a little while ago, said: ―Did you prosecute 

him?‖ These investigations are not carried on for the purpose of the Attorney General instituting 

prosecution, but for the purposes of getting information for the shareholders so that they can take that 

action they see fit. 

 

A circular letter was sent out from the Bata Shareholders‘ Association to their members, dated August 

23, 1949, and this letter read  

 

―The annual meeting of Bata Petroleums Limited was held on Friday, July 22, 1949. Your committee 

regrets to report that we were unable to elect a new Board of Directors favourable to our Association. 

While we had the support of a great majority of the members present we were out-voted by the use of 

proxies held by directors in addition to their controlled shares. It is noted with regret that many 

shareholders have been persuaded to give their proxies and support to the directors, regardless of the 

disclosures and drastic criticisms of their activities. We doubt that our company can survive this 

detrimental conduct, but we cannot remedy the situation in any satisfactory manner without control of 

the company.‖ 

 

The letter goes on further, but I shall not take the time to read the rest of it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in looking through the files to get the history I found a letter that I had written, on 

July 9, 1949 (this was after the investigation) to the president of the Company. I shall table a copy of this 

letter so that members can see it; but I do not want to take the time to read all of it now, but I do read 

this  

 

―I am now going to instruct the officials of my Department to prepare geophysical permits in favour of 

Bata Petroleums Limited covering the petroleum rights in the area which has been held in Crown 

reserve for this purpose, which will include approximately 500,000 acres. These permits will be 

executed and delivered to you when I am assured that an election of the directors will be held at this 

meeting.‖ 

 

That was the July 22nd meeting; and the end of the story, Mr. Speaker, these permits were issued to 

them early in September, 1949. Bata has always been treated more than fairly and the member for 

Saltcoats, yesterday and today, and also the member for Arm River, were guilty of trying to cook up a 

perfectly fictitious case to serve their own evil ends and for their own purpose. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You gave all the rest of it away. 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

68 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That was over 2,000,000 acres. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — It was not done to help Bata. It was not done to help Bata shareholders. It 

was done for one purpose and one purpose only and that was to raise suspicion that something might be 

wrong. The old tactics of the Liberal party in this province that they have been carrying on for years. In 

my opinion, Mr. Speaker, any member who departs from decent ethics and integrity as these members 

have done in spreading this kind of stuff, are no ornament to any Legislature or Parliament. And I am 

sure that there are lots of respectable members of the Liberal party — if they knew the whole story of 

what these gentlemen try to do, and the tools they use to do it, they would hang their heads in shame. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What a joke. What about your 2,500,000 acres? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — My hon. friend over there is yapping about some land. All right, we‘ll talk 

about the land right now. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — All right, explain your actions. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The land which previously had been held by Bata . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — You gave it to Shumiatcher! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Will the member for Arm River kindly keep quiet for a little while. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . and on which the agreement had expired, and on which they were 

unable to carry out work was not given to Albercan. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Oh, well, now! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Two private, persons, Graham and another gentleman . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — Who are the persons? Name them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . got permits in that area, and months later assigned them to Albercan. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — It came out then. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Albercan got them by assignment from these private parties. Now, on April 

9, 1949, a number of permits were issued to Albercan. They come in here and they talk about Albercan, 

with a capitalization of $3,000. You would think these people were ignorant or stupid, but they are not; I 

cannot give them credit for being that ignorant or that stupid. They say these things, knowing that they 

are giving a false impression, and that is what they want to do. They are dedicated to misinforming the 

public 



 
March 17, 1955 

69 

 

of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — This issuing of permits on this land had no relation whatsoever to Bata. The 

Albercan Company was one of the most effective companies in doing oil exploration in Saskatchewan 

that we have had, and they have done a very excellent job. 

 

Some Govt. Member: — That is what they are mad about. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — A mysterious rise in their stock. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The hon. member for Arm River, this afternoon, raised another name, the 

name of Mr. Hood, and I wouldn‘t like to sue such a character, even if I could. I do not like to talk about 

the departed and I would not do it except for the one reason that my hon. friends sitting over there have 

disinterred this body, and brought it up as a witness, and, therefore, I must have something to say about 

it. 

Mr. Danielson: — You have waited a long time before saying anything. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — This man had no respect . . .  

Mr. Danielson: — For years . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . or no influence in his own community . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will the hon. member for Arm River kindly stop this interrupting? If not, I shall have 

to discipline him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . and yet he was appointed the honorary president of the Liberal party. 

He was almost deified in the eyes of the Liberal party. My hon. friends probably don‘t know some of the 

things this man did, and I am not going to go over the whole lot of them — just one, which is very mild 

and very gentle. The town of Hudson Bay is located on a gravel ridge and the soil is extremely porous, 

and there is free water about 15 feet down below. There is no sewer and water system; everyone puts 

down a well to this very excellent free water, for water supply. Certain people in the town of Hudson 

Bay put in individual sewage systems, with septic tanks, with a sewage tank built of concrete, and then a 

wagon with a tank and a pump came and pumped these sewage tanks out and hauled it away. Mr. Hood 

put one in. He didn‘t have to call the tank to haul the sewage away out of his, and shortly it was found 

out there was no bottom in it . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — Did you look in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — There was no bottom in it. The sewage was running into this porous soil 

and did contaminate a number of the neighbours‘ wells, and he had to be compelled to put a bottom in it; 

and if I remember rightly he was mayor of the town at that time. 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

70 

Mr. Howe (Kelvington): — Oh, my, my! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I would be ashamed to call the man as a witness; and I could tell you a 

whole lot of other things . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — A big lot of . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — On a point of order, I do think it is regrettable to be spreading things like that. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — What did you do? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — There may have been a lot of reasons why he didn‘t know that tank was bottomless. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Not one shred of proof submitted that those things are correct. You haven‘t tabled 

one document in support of it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — We‘ll pass a motion on you. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Might I remind the hon. gentleman that I did everything possible to allow you 

to have the courtesy of reading the indictment that is now being answered. I think you should do the 

same. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The hon. member said ―probably he didn‘t know.‖ He was a chemist, a 

university graduate; he knew, but he didn‘t give two hoots whether his neighbour‘s kids got typhoid or 

not, as long as he saved a little bit of money. And he has done other things that have been just as callous 

and heartless as that, and yet, Mr. Speaker, they call him as evidence. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Keep it up ‗Brock‘, you are doing a grand job. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You‘re doing a fine job as a sewage cleaner, now. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You‘re really in the gutter tonight. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — And in this thing that was tabled in the House, tonight, it says, ―Bata built a 

pipeline distributing system in the town of Unity.‖ They never did; it is not true: Bata didn‘t build a 

pipeline. Again it says: ―The Bata company arranged for a modern salt refining plant.‖ It wasn‘t Bata, it 

was Associated; they got away with it. Again, ―During this period, many of the Company‘s valuable oil 

and gas rights over an area of about 2,000,000 acres were, by government force, caused to lapse.‖ 

Entirely false. You can go through the whole thing and it is false. 

 

I have never before in my life taken the time to answer the rantings of this man, never; not even in my 

own constituency. I don‘t need to. But because they thought they would deify the man by making him 

honorary president and then call him up as a witness, I have to deal with this. I don‘t like doing this kind 

of thing, but I hope I won‘t have to deal with it any more. 



 
March 17, 1955 

71 

 

The hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) said that the province should start a lot more work-

and-wages programmes to cure unemployment. Isn‘t that the greatest confession that ever was made of 

the failure of the private enterprise system? My friends, who always rant and rave about free enterprise 

and all that sort of thing, when it breaks down and fails to provide employment then they holler to the 

Government . . .  

 

Premier Douglas: — Socialism. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Yes — Socialism. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . to start a work-and-wages programme. My hon. friends over there, 

including the two sitting on your extreme left, sir, cry and weep tears about the conditions the 

Government had to face in the 1930‘s. Now I know the Liberal party did not make the depression in 

1929; they just maintained the economic system that made it, that is all. That is all they did. And they 

are still maintaining that kind of an economic system, under which, if there is not war or continued 

rearmament, there is going to be a depression. It just doesn‘t work. And then they come hollering and 

crying to us about taking care of it, when it isn‘t our responsibility anyway. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — It is Ottawa‘s! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — My hon. friends laugh. All right, we will get it from the Rt. Hon. Louis St 

Laurent. In the ‗Financial Post‘ of September 25, 1954 . . .  

 

Mr. Loptson: — He‘s ‗Uncle Louie‘ now. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The Prime Minister said this  

 

―We cannot guarantee to all employment exactly according to their taste, but we believe it to be our 

duty to have a sufficient number of jobs on hand in order to say to all that there is employment. I am 

convinced that if my colleagues and I cannot set up the controls of our economy in such a way that 

there will be no long unemployment periods for those who want to work, then the people should throw 

us out and put in our places persons who could do a better job.‖ 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Can‘t find any. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — When my hon. friends start talking about responsibility, we are not the 

people who have been talking about the responsibility. It is their own ‗Uncle Louie‘ that has been saying 

―that is my responsibility.‖ Why don‘t they go down to him and tell him to get jobs here in 

Saskatchewan! They would get nothing, and they know it! They would go to their Uncle Louie and they 

would ask for bread and they would get a stone as they have always got before. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas: — He got some jobs. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You forgot your speech, last time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

72 

Mr. Danielson: — Answer some of the things we said this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Some more fantastic suggestions were made by the hon. member for Maple 

Creek, and one was ―why shouldn‘t the Government get a road or railroad into Uranium City?‖ He 

probably doesn‘t know there is 40 miles of water between here and Uranium City. He probably has 

never looked at the map. He was talking about Saskatchewan getting benefits from that mining area but 

he probably doesn‘t know that if a railroad did go there it would very likely go from Lynn Lake north, 

across the north end of Saskatchewan back down to Waterways in Alberta, and cut out Saskatchewan 

altogether. Maybe that is what he wants, I don‘t know; but these suggestions are completely 

irresponsible, either from people who don‘t care, or who don‘t know, and I don‘t know which is the 

worse. 

 

The member for Rosthern (Mr. Carr) said the Government should build roads for dairy industries instead 

of the mining industry. Now I would like these gentlemen to get together and decide which they want. 

They probably want both; they always want both — both of everything. Then the member for Rosthern 

said the C.C.F. Government spent approximately a quarter of a million dollars to buy a big plane to steal 

business from the Canadian Pacific Airlines. Wrong again! First of all, it didn‘t cost a quarter of a 

million dollars, only a little over $100,000; and secondly, it wasn‘t bought to steal business from C.P.A. 

It was bought to give better service from Prince Albert, in the heart of Saskatchewan, to mining 

communities in north-western Saskatchewan. If my hon. friend is against that sort of thing, we would be 

very interested in having him stand up here and say so. Otherwise, the story was correct — we bought a 

plane. 

 

The member for Maple Creek said Eldorado took heavy material in by air at a rate of 28 cents a pound. I 

put this down when he was speaking — oh, oh, if a C.C.F. government ever did that it would be terrific 

and terrible waste, it would be criminal. Actually I do not believe they ever took much in at 28 cents a 

pound air freight, because the actual air freight now, either from Edmonton or Prince Albert to Uranium 

City is 12 cents a pound, and Eldorado operated its own planes. There is a waterway there which is open 

a good part of the year, and then they can get freight in, including the trucking over the road that we 

built for them into Uranium City, for about three or four cents a pound, so I think he was wrong there 

again. 

 

Then the hon. member for Maple Creek took great pleasure in saying it was rumoured that the pulp mill 

won‘t come to Saskatchewan because of having to deal with the Saskatchewan Timber Board. The 

Premier got up in this debate and corrected him, but I just want to add that the agreement between the 

Government and the Anglo-Canadian Pulp and Paper Company was tabled in this House, last year, 

Sessional Paper No. 93, and if ever I met a group of people who are supposed to be responsible and who 

don‘t want to know, who want to remain ignorant, it is the hon. gentlemen who sit on your left, Mr. 

Speaker. I don‘t know why they deliberately try to mislead. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Do you know what is in it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I know what is in it. I helped to draft it. 

 

The great modern puzzle, Mr. Speaker, of course, is what is the platform of the Liberal party, today? 



 
March 17, 1955 

73 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Why don‘t you go on and answer what I told you, this afternoon? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — He doesn‘t like that. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He hasn‘t answered a word of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I would just say this to my hon. friend from Arm River . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — He‘s choking on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I said in this House that I have never answered this gentleman who wrote 

this stuff in this paper, ‗Our Way of Life‘. It is senseless; it is ridiculous; it is dirty . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — Not as dirty as you are. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member must contain himself and he must retract that statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You take it back. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is going to apologize or I shall insist that steps be 

taken to discipline him. No member is going to refer to another member in this House ―as dirty as you 

are.‖ Now the hon. member is going to apologize and apologize right now. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — All right. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Does the hon. member from Arm River apologize? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, after listening to the hon. member that is the only word that I can think of that 

fits him. 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, that is not an apology and is not a withdrawal. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Sit down, sit down! The Speaker is running this House, not you. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — He‘s been trying to run it all afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

Mr. Danielson: — We have the same rights as you have. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Get at it and swallow it; come on now, or I‘ll ram it down your throat. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will the hon. Premier kindly desist? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I take that statement back. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I will ask the member for Arm River to kindly contain himself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — If I said anything that was personally offensive to the hon. member, tonight 

. . .  



 
March 17, 1955 

 

74 

Mr. Speaker: — I would have asked you to withdraw it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — And I would have withdrawn it, or if they had taken objection, I certainly 

would have withdrawn anything that was personally objectionable to them. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — You said we weren‘t fit to sit in this House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — But it is possible, Mr. Speaker, to . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — The only ones he hasn‘t insulted are . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . do what the hon. member did, this afternoon, and what the hon. member 

for Saltcoats did, yesterday, to raise so much of this and that and the other of suspicion and fear and 

distrust. It all can be dealt with; but if I spend my time dealing with it, I will not be doing the job that I 

am hired for and supposed to do, which is to look after the development of resources in Saskatchewan. 

As far as their talk is concerned, I am quite willing to leave it to one of the best courts in the province of 

Saskatchewan, the court of public opinion. They have decided on it two or three times already, and 

undoubtedly they will decide on it again. 

 

I was just dealing with the great modern puzzles: what is the platform of the Liberal party? The hon. 

Leader of the Opposition (Mr. McDonald) when he was talking, today, said that we in the C.C.F. aren‘t 

democratic in the way we develop our platform, because we have these panels at our convention and 

there is a Minister in the panel and he just writes the resolutions. Well, he just doesn‘t know, and my 

hon. friend from Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) was never at one of our conventions that I saw either. That 

would be a very happy day when he was there — none have need of salvation like the sinner. I would 

like to point out that there were almost 100 resolutions passed at the Liberal convention, which was less 

than two days in duration and most of the time was spent in arguing not about who they were going to 

have for leader, but how they were going to pick him. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Were you there, Charlie? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Was I there? I listened to the radio; I was very interested, and I read the 

press. I am sure my hon. friends wouldn‘t be misreported or would say that the radio stations told lies 

about their convention. I am sure they wouldn‘t say that. The ‗Leader-Post‘ even published that part of 

it. They possibly couldn‘t have more, out of that two days, at the very most I would say, than about four 

hours left for resolutions, and I don‘t think they had that much. And if they had four hours, that was 

about three minutes per resolution, actually a little less than three minutes. These are the democratic 

resolutions of the Liberal party. The hon. member from Saltcoats doesn‘t know what they are. He is 

contrary to the resolutions passed at Saskatoon, and so it is a puzzle; I am not fooling; it is a puzzle what 

the programme of the Liberal party is. 

 

In regard to Crown Corporations — back in the good old days, a few years ago, Mr. Maher, the former 

member for The Battlefords, said ―throw them out the window‖ . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — You did. 



 
March 17, 1955 

75 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You did, all right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — What now? Gradually? I think probably they are just going to do it 

gradually, now. 

 

In this article by E.H. Davis (who used to be a publicity director for the Liberal Association), in the 

‗Canadian Underwriter‘, he says  

 

―Accordingly, the way things look now is that if and when the Liberals return to power in 

Saskatchewan, private insurance will have the going in the province made easier by the dropping of the 

compulsory features.‖ 

 

Now that is the part that is in the resolution. Then he goes on to say  

 

―But the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office would remain in business for the time being, at 

least, as an added competitive measure for the protection of the public.‖ 

 

There is a lot more there I would like to read, too, but it is wasting too much time. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Would you table that please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, I have 50 of these. 

 

I am puzzled as to what is the programme of the Liberal party because different speakers got up, and it 

depends who they are talking for. One wants roads for the dairymen, the other wants roads for the 

mining people going to Uranium City, and over here one chap wants to do away with any improvements 

on the Wheat Board, and the other people passed a resolution in favour of it. It has always been a puzzle. 

In fact, on this question of assistance to municipalities, it is a puzzle, too; and again, with my apologies 

to the editor of the North Battleford ‗News Optimist‘, I again have to go back a little bit — to 1943, and 

Mr. Speaker, it is April 1st. What a fitting date! And the resolution in the Legislature at that time was the 

proposed motion of Mr. Burton (the gentleman sitting on my left), seconded by Mr. Johnston. This 

motion included a copy of the resolution of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 

requesting an adjustment of seed grain and supply debt. It asked for 50 per cent of the newer debts, and 

cancellation of all direct relief and winter maintenance up to the end of 1940, and all seed and seeding 

supplies up to 1937, and 1938 seed to be settled on a fifty-fifty basis. That is what they asked for. 

 

Well, My hon. friend from Cannington, I think was in the Municipal Association at that time. It is a pity 

he got mixed up with the Liberal party . . .  

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — Do you want me to come over there, ‗Brock‘? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . because he goes to the Association meetings, passes this resolution — 

and I wouldn‘t be surprised if he voted for that resolution. And when it comes here to this Legislature, 

then my hon. friend from Arm River gets up in this House and votes against that kind of an adjustment. 

You can find it in the Journals, on the records; one Liberal voted with the C.C.F. Opposition and that 

was Mr. Hyde, from Morse. Every other Liberal 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

76 

in the House, including the member for Arm River, voted against the adjustment in the seed grain debt, 

and so I cannot believe they are too serious about the welfare of the municipalities. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I believe you are talking about what happened in the ‗thirties. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to deal with something here, too, because I am 

truthfully sorry that my hon. friends are not going to support this budget. I see the member for 

Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) is not in his seat, so we will pass that one up; but here is Cannington. The 

market road expenditure in the constituency of Cannington, for the four years, 1940-43 inclusive, and 

that constituency at that time was represented by the Premier of the province — a favoured seat . . .  

 

Mr. McCarthy: — No, it wasn‘t. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, that is what you have been telling us. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — No, no, it never was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — They got an average amount, in the whole constituency, for market roads, 

of $2,213 a year for those four years. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Different from Rosetown and Weyburn. 

Mr. Cameron: — He was Premier in those days. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — In the same constituency, the average for the following five years was not 

$2,213 — no, . . .  

 

Mr. McCarthy: — What five years are you talking about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The next five years, 1945 to 1948, inclusive. Then it was $8,290, almost 

four times as much. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — You‘re wrong, or you‘re not telling the truth. 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member . . .  

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I say that that statement is wrong. Take it from Public Accounts . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, this statement is correct, and produced by the people who 

keep the Public Accounts. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Well, I don‘t care who it is produced by, you cannot arrive at that figure out of your 

own Public Accounts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That is the story in that constituency. I am not surprised that it is hard for 

my hon. friend to take . . .  

 

Mr. McCarthy: — That is wrong, you are absolutely wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Now, let us go to Rosthern constituency, and we will let 



 
March 17, 1955 

77 

 

the hon. member for Cannington cool off. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — The Minister . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The Minister is making a statement and he reiterates that statement. He will not 

accept your correction, and we have got to accept it. Sometime you might be able to reply. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — When will that be, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — It will be a long, long time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, in the Rosthern constituency, for the four years 1940-43 

inclusive, the average amount paid by the Government for market road expenditures was $1,271 or just 

over $1,200, and I might mention that that was the constituency of the senior cabinet Minister in 1940-

43; in the five years 1944-48, the average was $3,839, or three times as much. Let us keep these things 

in their proper relative positions. 

 

Mr. Carr (Rosthern): — Would the Minister answer a question? What was it in the next four years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I haven‘t got the next four years here for Rosthern constituency . . .  

 

Mr. Loptson: — Conveniently. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . but I will get it for you, and I bet you it will be good. Now let us go to 

Arm River . . .  

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Would you answer a question for me? I just wanted you to give me those figures 

that you quoted, in the years and slowly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I‘ll send you a note over. They will be in the transcript anyway. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You will get them in the transcript. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Arm River constituency, in the first four years, 1940-43, the average for the 

constituency was $1,603; in the next five years, 1944-48, the average was $6,317, and I have the 

following five years after that — 1949-53 . . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Give me the figures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — My hon. friends should have stenographers here if they want to take this 

down verbatim. They can get these figures out of the transcript, or I will send them a note afterwards, 

but I am not going to waste my time now. 

 

The following five years in Arm River, 1949-53, the average per year was $8,920 — or 5½ times as 

much . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — What about the Public Revenue fund? It was their own money. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 



 
March 17, 1955 

 

78 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . as my hon. friend had in his constituency from a Liberal government. It 

really grieves me to think that these gentlemen are going to vote against this budget. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, somebody said — I think it was the hon. member for Saltcoats after he talked about 

the pioneers. He said it was just too bad that these great pioneers who struggled so hard should have 

thrust upon them this kind of an experimental government after their struggles. I just want to make a 

comment or two on that. Why did it happen? It was certainly the choice of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan . . .  

 

Mr. Loptson: — It has retarded this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — . . . There is no question about that. It happened because the former government had 

become absolutely useless, and because they paid attention to the things that my two friends over there 

have been paying attention to for the last day or two, instead of getting on with the business and getting 

on with the work. I don‘t think there was anyone made a much greater contribution to the downfall of 

the Liberal government in Saskatchewan, and the election of a C.C.F. government, than my two friends 

sitting together over there. I would suggest to the Leader of the Opposition that he had better take a look 

at this situation. As long as he keeps that kind of people, who are willing to make the kind of speeches 

they have been making here for the last two or three days, there is just no danger that a C.C.F. 

government will be defeated, because the people will not trust people who tell that kind of stories. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You let us worry about that, ‗Brock‘. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The hon. member for Arm River was challenged plenty, this afternoon, to 

make any charges he wanted with regard to corruption. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — They were right there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I made my remarks about this piece of paper, and I am not going to go back 

over them again. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You never mentioned them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — He is afraid, absolutely afraid to make any charge of corruption and take 

any responsibility for it. 

 

But I don‘t know, maybe they do make a contribution to society. Maybe the horrible example which 

they set helps to keep a lot of people on the right track. 

 

I have only a minute or two for the future, Mr. Speaker, but I am going to spend most of the next year 

working on that future, and probably most of the next five or six years (you never know) working on 

that future, so I can be excused tonight for looking into the past for a short while. But I do say that we 

can look forward, in Saskatchewan, to many years of development of resources, of improvements of our 

facilities in the province, as long as we have a government which is truly of the people and for the 

people and by the people and under the control of the people, and that is what we have in this province 

today. 

 

One thing I want to say in passing is this. I would like to see 



 
March 17, 1955 

79 

 

the Atomic Energy Control Board of Canada arrange for the construction of an atomic energy power 

plant in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, get at it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — We realize that uranium is a strategic mineral. We realize that most of it 

will have to be taken out of our province, but certainly we would feel a lot better if some of it was used 

here in our province. I would think it would be a good thing for every member in this House to get 

behind the idea of an atomic energy power plant in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is one other thing that came to my notice just today, which I want to bring to 

the attention of the House and it is this. I got hold of a press release which states that the ―Construction 

of the natural gas pipeline from Alberta east won‘t be starting for another year, at least.‖ One part of it 

says  

 

―The proposal fell through because of insistence of the government . . . (that is the Government at 

Ottawa) . . . that a federal agency get the controlling interest in the company in return for financial 

aid.‖ 

 

I want to compliment the Federal Government on taking that stand. When that Trans-Canada pipeline 

goes through it will be one of the greatest public utilities in the Dominion of Canada, and is one of the 

subjects that is very fit and proper for public ownership. Any time the Dominion Government wants to 

undertake the building and developing of that line, I will certainly give them my fullest co-operation, 

and I am sure they will get it from this Government. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, in spite of all the interruptions that we have had today, I am finishing right on 

time. I think it must have been the green note — the Shamrock, and the day. And needless to say, I shall 

support the motion. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 00 o‘clock p.m. 


