



















































Hansard: February 09, 1956


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session – Twelfth Legislature 
 

Thursday, February 9, 1956 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Administrator, dated the Sixth day of 

January, 1956, for the meeting of the Fourth Session of the Twelfth Legislative Assembly of the 

Province of Saskatchewan, and the Assembly having met: 

 

Mr. Speaker informed the Assembly that he had received a communication from the Private Secretary to 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor stating that His Honour would open the Session at three o’clock 

p.m. today, Thursday, the Ninth day of February, 1956. 

 

3 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber and, having taken his seat upon the Throne, 

was pleased to open the Session with the following Speech: 

 

MR. SPEAKER, MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY; 

 

IT IS MY PRIVILEGE to welcome you to the fourth Session of the Twelfth Legislature of the Province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Golden Jubilee Year is now part of our history. The success of the widespread plans 

undertaken by the people of the province to observe our fiftieth anniversary stands out as a notable 

achievement in community endeavour. These celebrations have given us an appreciation of the past, an 

awareness of the present, and renewed confidence in the future. During Jubilee Year we were honoured 

by the visits of His Excellency the Governor General and the Right Honourable the Prime Minister of 

Canada. 

 

While flood conditions greatly reduced the acreage sown to wheat, a dry summer and favourable harvest 

weather produced a bountiful grain crop of high quality. Transportation difficulties and a decline in 

wheat exports in two successive years have resulted in one of the largest wheat surpluses in our history. 

In consequence, farmers have been unable to deliver their usual quotas and large quantities of grain are 

stored on farms. 

 

In accord with a unanimous resolution of this Assembly, the Government of Saskatchewan strongly 

urged the Government of Canada to authorize cash advances through the Wheat Board on farm-stored 

grain. My government regrets that the benefits of this proposal were not made available to our farmers, 

and will continue to urge implementation of this proposal as a permanent feature of Wheat Board 

marketing. 

 

Declining farm income and accumulating surpluses of agricultural products are now a matter of grave 

provincial and national concern. My government is keenly disappointed that the Government of Canada 

has not seen fit to call a conference, as repeatedly requested by this Legislature, to provide effective, 

long term marketing policies which will provide assured markets and guarantee to our farmers their fair 

share of the national income. You will be asked to appoint a Select Special Committee of this 

Legislature to inquire into 



 

February 9, 1956 
 

 
2 

 

and advise the government on matters relating to the serious marketing problems confronting 

Saskatchewan Agriculture. Terms of references for this Committee will be submitted for your approval. 

 

Last spring emergency drainage relief was required over a widely extended area due to the worst flood 

conditions in Saskatchewan’s history. My government immediately embarked on an emergency 

programme involving an expenditure of over $1,600,000 to drain many thousands of acres of the worst 

flooded farm land. The Federal Government has agreed to share the cost of repairing damaged buildings, 

but it is regrettable that this assistance was of an extremely limited nature and did not provide 

compensation for damage to farm lands or municipal public works such as was made available to other 

areas of Canada suffering similar flood damage. You will be asked to provide for a continuation of the 

drainage, reclamation and flood control programmes and to approve estimates to cover the cost of the 

emergency work undertaken during the past year. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan last year offered to pay a share of the cost of the construction of the 

South Saskatchewan River Dam, as proposed by the Government of Canada. Since the Prime Minister 

has announced that the Federal Government has no intention of proceeding with this project at the 

present time, no provision is being made at this Session for Saskatchewan’s participation in this project. 

 

During the past year the government joined with farm and business organizations in laying before the 

Royal Commission on Canada’s Economic Prospects forecasts of the economic potential of our 

province. The government also made representations to the Royal Commission on Coasting Trade. 

 

During the past year the government has made representations to the Board of Transport Commissioners 

on equalization of freight rates and on domestic grain rates in an effort to protect the interests of 

Saskatchewan consumers and wheat producers. 

 

Six of the reports of the Royal Commission on Agriculture and Rural Life were received. The work of 

this Commission will be concluded this year and the balance of its reports made available. Careful 

attention will be given to its recommendations in consultation with local governing bodies. 

 

In October several of my Ministers attended a federal-provincial conference in Ottawa where financial 

and other relations between the federal and provincial governments were discussed. Consideration is 

being given to a federal government proposal regarding fiscal arrangements arising therefrom. 

 

Floods and excessive rainfall during the late spring seriously damaged roads throughout the greater part 

of the province. Additional financial assistance was granted to municipalities to help in the repair of 

their roads and bridges. The greater portion of the 1955 highway construction programme was 

completed despite difficulties encountered during the early part of the season. In November 

representatives of my government attended a federal-provincial conference to discuss ways and means 

of completing the Trans-Canada Highway. You will be asked to approve an accelerated programme of 

highway construction. 

 

A plan for a grid of inter-municipal and main market roads has been completed and is now being 

presented to the municipalities for their approval or revision. You will be asked to vote sufficient funds 

to commence construction of this $50,000,000 municipal road system. 



 

February 9, 1956 
 

 
3 

 

The government is pleased to report that the operation of The Automobile Accident Insurance Act has 

resulted in a large surplus being built up so that reductions for the second year in succession, averaging 

twenty-five per cent, will be effective on April 1st. These reductions will result in a saving of 

$1,300,000 for Saskatchewan motorists this year. 

 

The mining and petroleum industries in our province experienced a record breaking year. Considerable 

increases in mineral production were achieved. Increases were noted in the number of mining claims and 

leases in good standing. The expansion of the Eldorado mine and the bringing into production of the 

Gunnar mine have firmly established Saskatchewan’s lead in uranium production. 

 

There has been much activity in staking claims and in exploration on showings of copper and magnetite 

in central Saskatchewan. Underground work preliminary to production is being done in one mine in the 

Lac la Ronge area, two in the area adjacent to Creighton and seven near Uranium City. 

 

During the year good progress was made toward the production of potash. In addition, three million 

acres are under intensive potash exploration. 

 

More than sixteen hundred oil wells produced almost twelve million barrels of crude petroleum, an 

increase of more than one hundred per cent over the previous year. More than double the volume of 

natural gas over the preceding year was produced from one hundred and thirty gas wells. The continued 

development of our natural gas resources has made possible the extension of gas service to the City of 

Prince Albert and other communities. Plans are under way for the further extension of this service to 

additional towns and cities. 

 

During the past year the Forest Inventory was completed on the area south of the Fifty-fifth Parallel of 

Latitude. Negotiations are proceeding for the establishment of substantial new forest industries which 

will further increase our forest utilization. The production of fur continues to occupy a place of 

importance in the economy of the northern part of our province. Last year a record was established in 

the number of beaver and muskrat caught. 

 

Good progress was made in the construction of forest and northern development access roads, fireguards 

and airfields. The extension of roads in the Beauval and Reindeer lake areas will make possible the 

further development of resources in the north. 

 

It is anticipated that the objective of supplying electric power to forty thousand farms and all towns and 

villages in our province will be reached this year. Rapid extension of the farm electrification programme 

will be continued. Extensive development of additional generating facilities is in progress to meet the 

growing demand for electric power. The healthy growth of this important utility has made possible a 

fifth successive reduction in residential and farm power rates. 

 

It is gratifying to note that the province’s industrial minerals are being actively utilized. Two 

light-weight aggregate plants were built and went into production in 1955. A cement plant, a sewer pipe 

plant and a wire 



 

February 9, 1956 
 

 
4 

 

and cable plant are expected to be in production during this year. The establishment of a steel pipe plant 

in Saskatchewan is a significant milestone in our industrial development. The establishment of 

secondary industries last year and those which have been announced for this year will contribute in large 

measure to the diversification of our economy. This trend is indicated by the fact that, last year, a record 

number of companies were incorporated to conduct business in our province. While the majority of 

these are companies engaged in the exploration and development of mineral resources, there was a 

significant increase in the number of companies being incorporated for manufacturing purposes. 

 

The extensive school building programme of recent years will be continued. Reduction in the number of 

study supervisors and an improvement in the level of certification of teachers has been noted. It is 

gratifying that there are over one thousand students enrolled in our teacher training institutions. You will 

be asked to authorize an increase in grants to schools in order to help meet rising educational costs. 

 

You will be asked to approve amendments to The Larger School Units Act which will change the 

method of electing unit trustees from the present system to one of direct election by the ratepayers. 

 

The Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan continues its successful operation and remains a model for 

other jurisdictions to emulate. The original plan to provide 7.5 hospital beds per thousand population has 

almost been achieved. It seems apparent that the volume of hospital care has reached its peak level. 

Since 1950 the volume of care provided has remained constant, with little evidence of abuse or lack of 

service. 

 

The University Hospital is now completed and open for service. The staff which has been appointed to 

the medical school and the University Hospital has demonstrated a high level of competence in teaching 

research and medical care. The people of Saskatchewan are now provided with a medical centre which 

is the equal of any in Canada. 

 

The Saskatchewan Training School at Moose Jaw was occupied during the past year. Within the new 

facilities a much more advanced programme of training for retarded persons is being provided. 

 

A programme of modernization at the mental hospitals is being undertaken which complements the 

emphasis being placed on more active patient care. The supply of trained staff, many of them products 

of provincial training programmes, has steadily improved and is currently at its highest level. The length 

of stay of patients in the mental hospitals has been reduced, and the number of persons housed in these 

institutions is gradually declining as a result of the use of new drugs and the newest techniques of 

psychiatric treatment. 

 

The immunization of almost thirty-two thousand children with Salk poliomyelitis vaccine last year 

proceeded smoothly, and it is proposed to make protection available at no personal cost to all persons up 

to the age of thirty-four years as vaccine becomes available. Since the incidence of poliomyelitis has 

been low during the past season, the physical restoration programme has emphasized the rehabilitating 

of a large number of persons crippled in the past. This programme will continue and will form the 

nucleus of a broad programme for the physical restoration of disabled persons. 



 

February 9, 1956 
 

 
5 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan was pleased to learn that the Government of Canada has agreed to 

take the first step toward a nation-wide health insurance programme by offering to share with the 

province the costs of hospitalization and diagnostic services. It is disappointing, however, to find that it 

is unlikely that any province will receive federal assistance during the next fiscal year. My government 

will proceed to finalize plans for the provision of diagnostic services in Saskatchewan and will be ready 

to engage in the programme as proposed by the Government of Canada. My government will continue to 

press for a comprehensive system of health insurance covering all health services. 

 

Nursing home accommodation for the chronically ill is being rapidly augmented. It is gratifying to note 

the large number of communities and charitable organizations which are availing themselves of the 

Provincial Government’s offer to assist in the construction and operation of homes for aged citizens. 

 

Plans are being prepared for the construction of a new Women’s Gaol to replace the present inadequate 

facilities. 

 

My government is pleased to report continued expansion of the apprenticeship and tradesmen’s 

qualification programmes which have provided additional tradesmen. To meet the growing demand for 

skilled workmen due to the increased industrialization of the province, plans are under way for the 

establishment of a Provincial Technical Institute. 

 

During this year Saskatchewan Government Telephones will undertake the Provincial Museum of 

Natural History. More than one hundred and fifty thousand visits have been made to this institution 

since it was opened, last May, by His Excellency the Governor General. The facilities of this centre are 

being made available to the rural areas through organized visits of school children and through the 

preparation and distribution of portable exhibits to various schools in outlying districts. 

 

You will be asked to approve legislation necessary to establish a local government for Uranium City and 

the surrounding area. 

 

Amendments to The Provincial Lands Act, The Water Rights Act, The Land Utilization Act, and The 

Conservation and Development Areas Act will be presented for your consideration. 

 

Legislation will be introduced to facilitate recognition of changes in trade union organization which will 

arise from the merger of the Canadian Congress of Labour and the Trades and Labour Congress of 

Canada. 

 

The rapid expansion of the credit union movement in our province makes it necessary that The Credit 

Union Act be revised. Proposed amendments to The Co-operative Associations Act and The 

Co-operative Guarantee Act will be placed before you. 

 

My government takes pride in the fact that the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights was the first Canadian 

legislation to outlaw racial and religious discrimination. It is noteworthy that certain provisions of this 

legislation have been adopted by the Parliament of Canada and by three other provinces. Legislation will 

be introduced incorporating certain provisions of the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights into separate statutes: 

The Fair Accommodation 



 

February 9, 1956 
 

 
6 

 

Practices Act and The Fair Employment Practices Act. 

 

Legislation will be introduced to provide a greater measure of control over companies offering savings 

certificates to the public. 

 

The Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together with the estimates for the year beginning April 1, 

1956 will be submitted. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session with full confidence that you will favourably discharge 

your duties and responsibilities. May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and guide the 

Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor then retired from the Chamber. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 3:30 o’clock p.m. 

 


