



















































Hansard: March 27, 1956


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Twelfth Legislature 

 

34th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 27, 1956 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

No. 1 Highway 

 

Mr. R. H. Wooff (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I 

would just like to draw the attention of the House to a clipping from the ‘Moose Jaw Times’ of Friday, 

March 23rd, dealing with the reconstruction and building of No. 1 Highway. It was my privilege to drive 

over a long stretch of No. 1 Highway at the weekend, and I consider it as a credit to the Minister of 

Highways (Hon. Mr. J. T. Douglas), his engineers, road-builders and the province. 

 

Interest Rate on Government Loans 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are 

proceeded with, I would like to refer to a statement which was made by the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. 

Mr. Fines) in the House on March 24, when he referred to some of my remarks during the budget debate 

in a radio address a day or two following. He criticised some of the things I had to say at that time. 

 

Since that time I have been able to get a copy of the ‘Leader-Post’ with the statement of the Provincial 

Treasurer in it, and I want to read it to the members of the Legislature, to confirm that what I said both 

in the House and on the radio is a statement of fact, and I will quote from an article that was produced 

by the Provincial Treasurer, the Hon. Mr. Fines. He said this: 

 

"Only this month we were able to borrow $10 million at a lower rate of interest than any other 

province, or even the Dominion has done since 1950." 

 

There is no more nor less to the statement than that. There is no qualification as to the length of the 

loans; there is no qualification as to whether the money was borrowed in Canada, the United States or 

Great Britain, and for that reason, I take in my statements from the Bank of Montreal report for 1955, 

and have marked the loans which I refer to in this booklet, which I will deliver to the Provincial 

Treasurer. I note there is one loan for a 20-year period and I will be very pleased to draw that to his 

attention as well. 

 

When he was speaking in the House on the 24th of March, he said if I were able to prove this, he would 

be very pleased to apologize to the House, and I would certainly accept his apologies. 

  



 

March 27, 1956 

 

2 

 

Hon. C. M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, may I point out again that the official 

statement I gave in writing to the press on the day the loan was made, was the first day of April, 

published in the paper on the second. I had no idea it was coming up, consequently I did not bring it. 

This article was one which came out some 24 days later. I realize that the hon. gentleman has say on 

this. However, I would say that certainly the first official statement dealing with the debt covered the 

situation as I outlined it the other day, and as they put on the records of the House, what I did say in the 

official statement. 

 

Secondly, may I say that anybody who knows anything about finance knows that when you are talking 

about lower interest rates, you take it on a comparable basis. You do not compare one-year notes with 

18-year bonds. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — There is a 20-year one in here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, may I say to my hon. friend that there is not, with the exception of one 

in the United States — the province of Quebec — a 20-year bond with the province of Quebec, but 

again, that has nothing to do with bonds issued in the Dominion of Canada. The statement which I made 

originally on the first day of April, the statement that was handed to the press of this province and which 

they published on the 2nd day of April, still stands. 

 

Therefore, I have nothing to apologize to my hon. friend for. We shall settle the matter in the country. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Is that your statement? I would like to ask a question. Did you prepare the statement 

that you have . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — This is one of my statements . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Second Reading 

 

Bill No. 67 — An Act to Amend The Larger School Units Act. 

 

Hon. W. S. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, under this Act is our intention to place 

before the Legislature legislation which will change the method of election of unit trustees from the 

present delegate system to one of direct vote of resident ratepayers. The present method was first set out 

in legislation in the School Divisions Act of 1940 and has been used since the organization of the first 

units in 1944. 

 

For the information of members of the House I will read parts of the Act of 1940: (Sections 10 and 11) 

  



 

March 27, 1956 

 

3 

 

The School Divisions Act, 1940 

 

Section 10. Subsection (2). 
 

In each year after the year in which a school division is established, the secretary of each school 

district in a subdivision in which an election of a member of the divisional board is necessary shall in 

the month of September call a meeting of the trustees for the purpose of electing a delegate to attend 

the subdivisional meeting. 

 

Section 11. Subsection (2). 
 

In each year after the year in which a school division is established and in which the election of a 

member of the divisional board is necessary in a subdivision, a meeting of the delegates of the 

subdivision shall be held for that purpose on a date not earlier than the fifteenth day of October and 

not later than the first Tuesday in December and at such time and place as may be fixed by the 

divisional board. 

 

The delegate system was in my opinion a desirable procedure during the process of transition from local 

districts to larger units. Today, 56 out of 60 areas in the province are organized as units. Fifty-one have 

completed their trial period of 5½ years. 

 

These units include 4,795 districts. As at June 30, 1955, 5,096 classrooms operated in 3,074 of the 

districts. In the remaining 1,721 no schools were in operation and conveyance programmes in effect 

except where there were no children. The centralization of school population through the use of school 

buses has developed steadily and solidly and will without doubt continue. 

 

With these developments there is a growing feeling in the province that the delegate system leaves the 

ratepayer separated by too many steps from his unit board member. The ratepayer must first elect a local 

board member — one of three or five. The local board members in turn choose one or more delegates 

who then, together with other delegates, select a sub-unit trustee. When a conveyance arrangement is in 

effect the local board is less directly in contact with the actual school operation. This may mean a 

greater tendency towards non-election of local boards, election by a small number of ratepayers or self-

perpetuation of existing local boards. None of these is desirable if avoidable, and it is argued that the 

direct election will better avoid such difficulties. Direct election does make it possible for the resident 

ratepayer to participate more intimately in the selection of the sub-unit trustee. 

 

The suggested amendment should not be construed as reflecting any feeling on the part of the 

Government — most certainly not on my part, that present trustees have been derelict in the 

performance of their duties. I have said before, and wish to repeat that the people of Saskatchewan have 

been fortunate in the quality of men — and some women – who have been willing to shoulder the 

responsibilities of unit trustees. They have had vision, vigour and courage. They have developed an 

experiment in 

  



 

March 27, 1956 

 

4 

 

school administration into a lasting and accepted form of local education government. They have 

produced many new ideas and pioneered the development of those ideas. They will undoubtedly 

continue to do so. 

 

But changing circumstances do require changing measures. It should be mentioned that in those town 

districts constituting in themselves a sub unit we propose there to keep the delegate system. There is 

certain to be a school in operation in such a district. In rural districts only one member of the board 

participating with delegates from other boards has selected the sub-unit trustee. In the towns constituting 

a sub unit all the board members and only the members of that board select the sub-unit trustee. Hence 

the difference in proposed procedures. 

 

This change raises the question of the statutes of local boards. There will be some who argue that the 

change reduces the responsibility and the authority of local boards. Whether or not it does depends, I 

suggest, on one's view of the function of the local boards — if you like, of the philosophy of the unit. I 

have never believed that responsibility is necessarily a function of the right to make the final decisions. 

Nor do I believe that meaningful authority is necessarily defined by the right to commit a certain act 

unless that act in itself has considerable implication. A man building a simple piece of furniture 

requiring simple materials and elementary tools, has rather complete responsibility for the outcome and 

authority within the limits of the project. The same man working with others on a more comprehensive 

project requiring varied materials and complex tools may well have much more responsibility and in 

fact, more is less direct – authority. 

 

The value of local boards lies not so much in the direct authority as it does in using them to assist in 

analyzing the problems of education in the area and in planning the solutions of these problems. So 

used, they can assume much more responsibility than when in complete charge, limited only by 

circumstances, of the local school. So used, their authority — spelled out in terms of the effect it has on 

the educational programme — can likewise be increased. The need for this kind of use, plus the need for 

supervision of local schools and bus arrangements, plus the possibilities of central boards in conveying 

areas, provides considerable scope for the members of local boards. It also provides responsibility and 

authority within a system of democratic, responsible local government. 

 

I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, second reading of Bill No. 67. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m. 
 


