



















































Hansard: March 20, 1956


 

 
1 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session - Twelfth Legislature 

29th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 20, 1956 

 

The House met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

Cash Advances on Farm-Stored Grain 
 

The Assembly resumed, from Tuesday, March 6, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. 

Walker (Gravelbourg): 

 

“That this Assembly, recognizing that the Federal Government guaranteed bank loan scheme is 

inadequate to meet the serious financial crisis now confronting the western grain farmer and the entire 

prairie economy, deplores the failure of the Federal Government to provide a prepayment on the initial 

price of grain in the form of a cash advance on farm-stored grain.” 

 

Mr. G. H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in the debate on this 

resolution, which has been on the Order Paper now for about six weeks or more, many things that had 

not happened at the time this resolution was introduced have happened since, and it seems rather a 

peculiar thing to discuss matters at the present time which have been decided in which have been in 

operation for five months. 

 

The essence of this resolution is the advancing to the wheat farmers in the prairie provinces of cash by 

certain agencies. These advances to the farmers, Mr. Speaker, have been in effect since the 15th of 

October and they have been made use of in varying degrees by the producers of these prairie provinces. 

 

It might be well to go back and see what really took place and what was done by the organized farmers 

of the prairie provinces - the various farm organizations, I should say, because there is more than one 

organization in the prairie provinces. There are several of them, and sometimes their views do not 

always coincide as to what is best for the farmers. There are differences of opinion which are not always 

universal even among farm unions or farm organizations. 

 

I was at an meeting called in the city of Saskatoon for two days; I think September 28th (if my memory 

is correct) was the first day of the meeting. I happened to be in Saskatoon that day and I made it my 

business to sit in on that meeting from about 2:00 o'clock in the afternoon until about 5.00 o'clock. I 

think, if I gauged it correctly judging by the press reports and various other information that emanated 

from that particular meeting, that was the most important part of the two-day meeting, because at that 

time the question that this resolution raises was the topic of discussion. I think the organization 

responsible for calling this 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

2 
 

meeting, Mr. Speaker, was the Federation of Agriculture in the three western provinces. I was very 

interested in the discussion and in the opinions expressed in regard to the topic that this resolution deals 

with, namely, advances to the wheat growers on their grain. 

 

There were only two voices in that whole meeting that were raised, or expressed the conviction or made 

the plea that the proper way to deal with this problem was to have the Wheat Board get up an agency to 

distribute these advances, and they were the Farmers Union of the province of Saskatchewan and the 

Saskatchewan Government as represented by the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. I might say that the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Hon. Mr. McIntosh) did not express any 

opinion on that particular topic while I was there, but his colleague, the Minister of Agriculture (Hon. 

Mr. Nollet) was very vocal along that line. 

 

But when we came down to some of the other fellows who were at that meeting - men whom I think 

represent agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan more than any others and far more than the 

Saskatchewan Government does, and far, far more, also, when it comes down to the business activities 

of farm communities of the province, than even the Farmers Union does; and I am referring to 

organizations such as the Wheat Board and the various other organizations. The Trustees Association 

was represented there, if I remember correctly. There was a representative at that meeting from the Rural 

Municipal Association. There was a representative also from the Board of Trade of the various urban 

municipalities in the province, and if I am correct (and I think I am) there was one delegation that 

represented the Board of Trade of the city of Edmonton, Alberta. When this thing came up for 

discussion, there were very frank expressions made by all these men who took the different attitudes and 

took different views in regard to the proper method to be followed. 

 

I could not help but notice someone there who is very well known to myself, one of the first men I met 

when I came inside the door of that meeting place, which was in the Bessborough Hotel in Saskatoon, 

namely, a man who used to sit in this House for four years as a member for the constituency of 

Qu’Appelle-Wolseley, and he has since taken a very active part in farm organizations; he has been a 

Director of the Wheat Pool and he is still in the co-operative movement in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I have always considered Mr. Warden Burgess to be one of the very intelligent and 

outstanding members of this House. We didn't always agree - in many things we disagreed; but he didn't 

mince anything about such matters. He gave the reason why his opinion was along the lines that this 

loan, or advance (as you wish), there is no difference between the two, Mr. Speaker. In one way, if you 

use the Wheat Board you will get an advance on your grain; if you go to the bank you also get an 

advance against your grain, because that is the security for your loan, and the quota book or the permit 

book (whichever you like to call it) is the instrument used in both cases to recompense the party that has 

advanced the money to the farmer. You can split hairs all you like, but it is the same thing, exactly. Mr. 

Burgess was very clear on this matter, and he said that in his opinion, first of all there must be interest 

on this thing, because this loan should only be for the individual who needed it. He said it is not a thing 

that should be distributed to someone who doesn't need the advance, it is only for the individuals who 

need it. He said, if there is no interest on this advance, everybody could go in and get this money. And 

he drew an illustration in that respect, and 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

3 
 

it was very sensible - what would prevent someone like myself, or someone else, from going in and 

getting $1,500 and turning around and buying savings bonds at about 3½ per cent interest. "I could do 

that," he said, "because I could get the money without interest. Why shouldn't I recoup myself if I could 

use that money without interest and get the benefit that I could very well get from a transaction of that 

kind?" 

 

That was one thing he said, and he also said this: I want to read exactly the words he used when he 

spoke of this topic - I will get it a little later. 

 

Mr. Wesson, President of the Wheat Pool, also was very frank and outspoken in this regard, and, he 

pointed out, also, in full agreement with Mr. Burgess, and Mr. Brownlee, the President of the United 

Grain Growers (and this might surprise some of the members on the other side of the House) but even 

with Mr. Jake Schultz, from Manitoba. There was just one difference of opinion between Jake Schultz 

and Mr. Wesson, Mr. Brownlee and the other person whom I mentioned, and that was that Mr. Schultz 

insisted that there should be no interest on that money. Otherwise, as far as the money being handled by 

the bank, or the advances being handled by the bank, he was of the same opinion at that meeting as the 

other gentlemen whom I have mentioned. 

 

That was one of the things I wanted to say at this time, because there is no one in this House who has 

spoken on this. When my seatmate, the hon. member from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) spoke, he didn't get 

far enough into the matter to say anything about this thing, because there has been an attempt made (it 

has even been made, today, by the party opposite) to leave the impression in the country and in the 

minds of the people that it was the Dominion Government who blankly refused to do what you are 

asking them to do now. 

 

A few days after this, a meeting was held in Saskatoon. This was an inter-provincial meeting held to 

pick the delegation that went to Ottawa, and we know what happened when they got to Ottawa. Even 

Jake Schultz said this, about the result of the Ottawa meeting; 

 

"Jake Schultz of the Inter-provincial Farm Union Council said in Winnipeg the Federal Government’s 

policy was the result of the inaction of the Federation of Agriculture, the prairie Wheat Pools and the 

United Grain Growers. He said that bank loans were what the organization had asked for." 

 

Yes, that is what Mr. Schultz said, and he was in the delegation that waited on the Government at 

Ottawa, and he was one of the key men who was taking part in the meeting at Saskatoon. He was also 

representing his province in the inter-provincial meeting, where the delegates were selected to go to 

Ottawa. 

 

That was what they decided on among themselves, and Mr. Parker of Manitoba said they regretted 

Ottawa had not seen fit to make loans available at the rate which would apply if the Wheat Board had 

borrowed the money - this would amount to about 3¾ per cent. That was all the complaint that 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

4 
 

Mr. Parker had. He did not ask for advances for the Wheat Board. The only thing he complained of was 

the difference between 3¾ per cent interest in the 5 per cent which has been charged on these loans 

today. 

 

So we have to here the western farm organizations - and, by the way, maybe some of my friends 

opposite can come forward and show me where the Farmers Union, represented by Mr. Hansen, and the 

Saskatchewan Government represented, I think, by the Minister of Agriculture, stood out in that 

delegation at Ottawa and made any definite demand that this advance should be made through the Wheat 

Board. I haven't seen anything to that effect, Mr. Speaker, but it may have happened; and if it did I will 

be glad to have them show me where that was done. I haven't anything in my collection here, which I 

have been trying to pick up during the last few weeks and the last two or three months, in order to have 

something to help me make up my mind in regard to the result of this particular request to Ottawa. 

 

If this is true, finally, can anyone truthfully say that the Government of Canada acted contrary to the 

wishes of the western farmer? They did no such thing. There was something else crept in here, and it 

creeps into everything that we, as farmers, try to do, and that is the political aspect by a party in this 

province which is trying on this score to arouse dissatisfaction, which is trying to use every possible clue 

and every possible difficulty that comes up in our economic life in this province for one thing, namely, 

for political purposes. 

 

Mr. Marler, from Alberta, put the thing very nicely, Mr. Speaker, when he said that this wheat problem 

had been "dramatized" for political purposes. 

 

I want to draw your attention to another thing that happened a few days ago, when the Rural Municipal 

Association of the province of Saskatchewan came before your House Committee here sitting in Room 

267, on the very front page there is a clear-cut statement from that organization that the wheat problem 

and the marketing problem in this province had been used as a “political football." 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — What did their convention say? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I don't think you know what their convention said. I asked somebody who was at the 

convention, and they weren't very clear themselves. 

 

Now that is the situation. And what is the reason? Well, this political party in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, find themselves without an issue for the coming election. They find 

themselves without a smoke-screen. . . 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — That's right. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — . . . that they can use as a fog to hide some of the records of this administration. For 

that reason they have searched heaven and earth to try to get something which they could magnify and 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

5 
 

dramatize for the purpose of trying to divert the attention of the people of the province from their own 

record. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Set fire to that. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And anything that hinders or makes life more difficult for the producers of this 

province is grist for their mill, because they just blame everything on the Federal Government; and, of 

course, if they can discredit and put a lot of blame on the Federal Government, they have hopes that 

some of that might react on the Liberal party in the province of Saskatchewan. That is their hope. They 

have done that, and they are still trying. 

 

This resolution is just for one purpose, and it is to try to justify the action of the Saskatchewan C.C.F. 

members in the House of Commons during this last session. Here we have a resolution which is 

negative, absolutely negative. There isn't a thing in that resolution, today, that is substantive - not one. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Are you going to vote for it? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — They come out with this five months after this plan has been in operation - it has 

been in actual operation since the 15th of October; and here they are passing a resolution in this House 

for the purpose of trying to whitewash or justify the action of their Federal compatriots in the House of 

Commons during this last session. They set up a filibuster in Ottawa which lasted about 14 days. There 

were seven votes taken, and at the end of this battle, while they had some support from the Social Credit 

and the Conservatives, when the vote was taken, all these latter voted for the Bill which meant extension 

of credit to the farmers of western Canada, but the 18 C.C.F. members all voted against it, every one of 

them. As it stands now, they have the great distinction of being the only group in public life in the 

Dominion of Canada who have come up and stood up and said, "We don't want the farmers to get any 

money from the banks." That is what they said. Well you know, sometimes it takes the farmers a little 

time for something to sink in; but it has sunk in now. I know a little bit about rural life. I am a farmer 

myself, and I know that while there is not a tremendous number of farmers who have to go to the bank 

and take a advantage of this Dominion legislation, many farmers have been able to get money from the 

banks. There are thousands and thousands of farmers who went to the banks to get a loan long before the 

Dominion legislation took effect, or even before the 15th of October. I know that. I asked the bank 

manager in my town how it was going, and he said: "You would be surprised if you knew the amount of 

loans that I have been extending here in the last two or three months, ever since harvest time." And there 

is nobody here that has any record whatever of those in their community or district who have been 

compelled to go without the necessary financing, and they do not need to. 

 

Now let's argue the point. The banks in this country know there are certain cases (even the Government 

has found that out, no matter what the government is) where they have to draw the line and be a little 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

6 
 

more cautious and see that the interests even of the Government and the banks are taken into 

consideration. That is one of the reasons why this motion has come before this House - not for the 

intention of doing anything, Mr. Speaker, which would be of any benefit to the people of the province, 

or to the wheat producers of the province; but simply to try to justify this stand which has proved 

unpardonable, from the public point of view and from the welfare of the people of the province, which 

has been taken by the C.C.F. party not only in this province, but in the House of Commons at Ottawa. 

 

Let me read you the resolution; 

 

"That this Assembly, recognizing that the Federal Government guaranteed bank loan scheme is 

inadequate to meet the serious financial crisis now confronting the western grain farmer and the entire 

prairie economy, deplores the failure of the Federal Government to provide a prepayment on the initial 

price of grain in the form of a cash advance on farm-stored grain." 

 

It doesn't say anything about the Wheat Board. We passed a resolution something similar to this, last 

year - not exactly, but something along the same lines. There wasn't anything said about the Wheat 

Board there. I have checked back on the records of this House and at no time has there been a special 

request to the Wheat Board, so far as that is concerned. 

 

I was very interested in the Premier's attitude on this matter and I have here, from Swift Current, 

October 31, 1955, where he said, speaking in regard to this: 

 

"The Wheat Board should be empowered so that at any time it cannot take delivery of grain through 

its agents, it can go to a farm and measure the wheat in the granaries, seal the granary and give the 

farmer and interim certificate for about 75 per cent of initial payment, then bring the wheat in and 

collect the other 25 per cent; even on an 8-bushel quota this would help." 

 

I have no complaint about the last statement, but I just wonder if any person who knows anything about 

business - how would you, Mr. Speaker, if you had all the resources of the Dominion of Canada, and 

were responsible for them, if you are a bank manager; how would you like to turn loose 2,000 men in 

the province of Saskatchewan alone with a cheque book among these farmers? How would you like to 

do that? Send them out looking at grain on the road, looking at grain in the fence corner, looking at grain 

out in the field where there is no roof on the bins at all, and some of it probably mixed up with old wheat 

which has been laying there for several years? There is wheat in my district which has been there since 

1953, mixed in with the 1955 wheat - not with the 1954 wheat because that was rusted and it was not 

mixed with good grain; but that is the situation. How would you like to turn loose 2,000 elevator agents 

- and there are at least that many in the province of Saskatchewan? I forget really how many elevators 

we have, but there are 1,100 shipping points – 1,107 I believe is the correct figure. In my town there are 

seven elevators and there are very few towns that I see without at least two elevators - from there up to 

seven, and sometimes eight - 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

7 
 

Mr. Kramer (The Battlefords): — How many windmills? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — At Cabri I think there are eight or nine elevators. That is what this thing means - 

allow the elevator agents to go out to the farms. 

 

There is another aspect to this thing, and I mentioned it one day when I was speaking to one of the Pool 

officials. I said to him, "There is one thing about this you might explain to me, if you can. You have 

been complaining year after year, and with some reason, that you had not been able to get the number of 

bushels of wheat into your elevator which the membership you have says should to to that elevator, or 

which should be put into Pool elevators." Now that is one complaint that the Pool has consistently had. I 

think it is correct. Only when you get every elevator full of wheat, Mr. Speaker, that is a rule that cannot 

be enforced, and we admit that. But how would you like to turn around now to the Pool, who have about 

1,100 elevators in the province of Saskatchewan, and against all the other elevator companies, turn loose 

2,000 agents with a cheque book, let them go out and give the farmers a cheque - and there is where the 

farmer has to take his wheat, because he has to have that permit book, or quota book, whichever you 

like. 

 

That is one aspect of the thing which I think might be very embarrassing to the farmers’ organization 

which is one of the biggest grain-handling organizations we have in Canada, or I suppose in any country 

for that matter. 

 

I am not going to take the time of the House speaking about this thing for very much longer, I want to 

point out to you that these men in Ottawa who have consistently tried to justify themselves and who, of 

course, have been trying to come to the aid of their distressed colleagues in Saskatchewan so far as the 

political picture is concerned, have not been able to accomplish anything that has been worth one iota to 

anybody by their actions, but they have been able to hold back, retard and advertise the situation in the 

province of Saskatchewan and all over western Canada in regard to this shortage of marketing facilities. 

That is one thing we should not forget, because, after all, it doesn't make any difference; it is only 

human nature. When you advertise your troubles to the world, particularly when you have a commodity 

to sell, that is not going to enhance your price, and it is not pointed be conducive to any hasty action on 

the part of our purchasers or customers to rush in and buy wheat. 

 

There was a question asked in the Committee here, a few days ago, directed to Mr. Phelps, who has a 

wide experience in farm organizations and has been a farmer himself, and has had the honour of being a 

Minister of this Government. The question was asked of him: when anybody got up and advocated a 

give-away programme, and ship it out and give the wheat away, and all that sort of thing, if, in his 

opinion, that was conducive insofar as the price of wheat was concerned to harming our situation. Mr. 

Phelps did not hesitate one minute; he said, "most certainly; that goes over the wires to the Old Country 

almost before it is known here." And that is the situation, in spite of anything that has been said to the 

contrary by those who have practiced that kind of advertising. 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

8 
 

Mr. Speaker, I said that this resolution is negative. It is negative. There isn't a solitary thing in that 

resolution of any constructive nature. It is only condemnation of another government. It is condemnation 

for doing something which has been in operation for five months. The legislation has been on the statute 

books now for, I think, about three weeks; that is very immaterial, but it has been there for some time 

now. 

 

It has been said, I think by the mover of the resolution (and I agree with him) that there are places in the 

province of Saskatchewan where there is a shortage of facilities to which the farmers can go. That means 

that the banks are far away from their community or from the district where they do their business, and 

there should be other provisions made where they could have better access, or more convenient access, 

to these facilities so they could conduct their business in regard to financing, which I think they are fully 

entitled to. 

 

I am going to move an amendment to this resolution, and my amendment is this, Mr. Speaker, seconded 

by Mr. Loptson: 

 

"That all the words after the word ‘the’ in the second line be deleted and the following substituted 

therefor: 

 

"immediate financial needs of prairie farmers, urges that credit unions, and where credit unions and 

banks are not conveniently located, that elevator companies be allowed to make loans or advances to 

farmers on the security of farm-stored grain on the same terms and under the same guarantees against 

loss as are provided for the banks." 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Clerk has just pointed out to me that the second are, Mr. Loptson, is out of order 

because he has already moved an amendment before, so in the first place we will have to have a 

different seconder. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, it is seconded by Mr. McCarthy. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I will allow the amendment, moved by Mr. Danielson, seconded by Mr. McCarthy. 

The debate is now on the proposed amendment. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I have a very bad cold and will, therefore, not impose any undue 

suffering on the House for any great length of time. I would like to say just a few words about the 

speech to which the House has just listened, and to the amendment which has been moved. 

 

The member for Arm River, in dealing with this Resolution, has followed the very old practice of 

attacking your opponents when you are not able to answer the arguments of your opponents. He 

suggested that the sole purpose of this Resolution, moved by the member for Gravelbourg (Mr. E. H. 

Walker) is to justify the actions of the C.C.F. members in Ottawa since Parliament met. As a matter of 

fact, Mr. Speaker, this Resolution 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

9 
 

does not just deal with the stand which some of the members of Parliament have taken in the few weeks 

that have elapsed since the Parliament of Canada convened. This is a position which the members on 

this side of the House and the C.C.F. members of Parliament have been taking for over 12 years. It is a 

consistent policy we have advocated in season and out of season irrespective of the fact that my hon. 

friend argues that bank loans have been operated since the 15th of October, and, therefore, it is a fait 

accompli, and we might just as well accept it. 

 

When we take this position we are not merely thinking of the situation as it obtained last fall. We are 

thinking of the situation as it will obtain next fall as well, and as it may obtain again and again in the 

years that lie ahead. We have always taken the position that the Wheat Board should have this power in 

any given year when they can see that they are not going to be able to take delivery of the farmers’ 

grain. Remember that, after all, this is the sole agency with power to purchase wheat and certain grains. 

In any year when they cannot accept grain they should have the authority, through their agents or 

through some other agency if they want to set it up, to pay the farmer a cash advance on the wheat stored 

on his farm. This is not to justify something that has happened in the last two months. It is a consistent 

position we have taken through the years, and as a matter of fact, in this Legislature. I think some of the 

members opposite have voted in favour of a resolution along these lines. 

 

It is a favourite trick whenever you cannot answer an argument to make an attack on the proponents of 

that argument. Mr. Howe tried that. Speaking in the House of Commons, he said: 

 

"Many honourable members may think that the inspiration for that suggestion (cash advances) came 

from the farmers. I can assure you there has been nothing of the kind. It came from the cities. 

 

"Who are the supporters of cash advances? The supporters are the enemies of marketing through the 

Wheat Board." 

 

Mr. Speaker, just how ridiculous can anyone get! Mr. Howe was still supporting the Winnipeg Grain 

Exchange when he was a member of the Government. He allowed the Winnipeg Grain Exchange to 

operate. An Order in Council set aside the Wheat Board where it remained inoperative for several years. 

Members of our group were fighting for a Wheat Board. And Mr. Howe suggests that those who 

advocate cash advances are the enemies of marketing through the Wheat Board! Let me just review who 

have asked for cash advances handled through the Wheat Board. Well, they were the Manitoba Pool in 

convention assembled, the Saskatchewan Pool in convention assembled, the Alberta Pool in convention 

assembled, the Manitoba Farmers Union, Saskatchewan Farmers Union, and the Alberta Farmers Union. 

My friend ought to quote Mr. Schultz. Instead, he tries to pick out an odd individual. We have been very 

careful to avoid the resolutions passed by these people. Mr. Schultz is closely associated with the 

Manitoba Farmers Union. This was their Resolution, passed at their meeting in Winnipeg on the 5th, 6th 

and 7th of December: 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

10 
 

"Be it resolved that this fifth annual convention of the Manitoba Farmers Union disapproves of the 

present system of bank loans to farmers on farm-stored grain." 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — After the. . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — The resolution continues: 

 

"Be it further resolved that we request the Federal Government to make immediate provision for cash 

advances to farmers on farm-stored grain on the following basis: 

 

(a) that these advances shall be for the full initial payment; 
 

(b) that these advances shall be paid on behalf of one-half of the deliverable grain; 
 

(c) that all administration and interest charges are to be borne by the Federal Government; 
 

(d) that these advances shall be repayable on the basis of one-half of the value of each delivery made 
by the farmer; and 

 

(e) that these advances be made through the facilities of the Canadian Wheat Board." 
 

You could hardly classify the Farmers Unions and the Wheat Pools and the three provincial 

governments as enemies of marketing through the Wheat Board. 

 

Here is the ‘Leader-Post’ of March 15th. A Canadian press report from Winnipeg states: 

 

"The Manitoba Government, Tuesday, went on record as favouring cash advances on farm-stored 

grain through the Canadian Wheat Board, at the same interest rates the Board now pays on 

borrowing." 

 

I have the Manitoba Votes and Proceedings containing the amendments which Mr. Robertson (who, I 

believe, is the Minister of Agriculture) moved to the motion of Mr. Roblin (who is the Leader of the 

Opposition). Mr. Robertson places the Manitoba Government in this Resolution, just as he did in a 

Provincial Affairs broadcast last fall, squarely on the side of cash advances handled through the Wheat 

Board. 

 

My hon. friend made mention of the delegation which went to Ottawa on which the other two prairie 

Governments, the three Wheat Pools, the three Farmers Unions, the Federation of Agriculture, the 

United Grain Growers were represented. Page 5 of their presentation stated: 

 

"While the long-term agricultural problem also received consideration (they are talking of the 

Saskatoon meeting), the immediate problem of cash shortage 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

11 
 

held the spotlight of the Conference and resulted in the following Resolution being passed: 

 

" ‘Be it resolved that the organizations participating in the Conference urge the Government of Canada 

to make immediate provision for advances to farmers on grain in store on the farms; and further 

 

"‘that these advances should be up to one-half the value of the normal delivery expected, and should 

be repayable on the basis of one-half of the value of each delivery made by the farmer’." 

 

That was the stand of the three prairie Governments, the Wheat Pools, three Farmers Unions. I would 

say that that group represents the public point of view of Canada from the Head of the Lakes to the 

Rocky Mountains. In the face of that almost unanimous expression of opinion in support of cash 

advances, Mr. Howe says: 

 

"The supporters of cash advances are the enemies of marketing through the Wheat Board." 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan is in very good company with the other two prairie Governments, 

with the Pools and with the Farmers Unions. 

 

When my friend, the member for Arm River, seeks to make out that there is some ulterior motive, or that 

we are introducing and supporting this Resolution because of some action in Ottawa, I say to him that 

this has been the consistent policy we have followed over a period of more than 12 years. It will 

continue to be our policy until we can get some Federal government to recognize that the farmer is 

entitled to some return for his labour, until such time as the Wheat Board is able to accept delivery of his 

wheat. 

 

The member for Arm River said: "Can you imagine turning 2,000 elevator agents loose with cheque 

books. . ." "What a chaotic situation it would be to have 2,000 elevator agents turned loose with cheque 

books." In the first place we have pointed out in these resolutions, all along, that these cash advances 

should be on properly stored grain in a bin. Therefore, all this talk about it lying under the snow or in the 

corner of a field is entirely irrelevant. We have always said cash advances should be made on properly 

stored grain. And who is in a better position to make these cash advances than the elevator agents? They 

are in a far better position to know whether it is well stored, and they are in a position to know what 

grade it is. The Government of the United States has been following a policy like this for over 20 years. 

When the gentleman across the way tried to portray this as being a chaotic plan that would have elevator 

agents running around the country with cheque books, I want to point out that in the United States since 

1934. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — Tell them the whole story. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

12 
 

Premier Douglas: — . . . the Commodity Credit Corporation has been making cash advances to those 

who want them. It has also bought grain outright on the farms, and sealed the bins, and told the farmer 

later when they wanted delivery. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — See what a mess they have now. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The member for Arm River wondered what the effect would be on the 

Saskatchewan Pool, if there were cash advances. I want to say that there is no elevator company on the 

prairies that would benefit more from cash advances than the Pool. Here is a typical example of the 

situation as it obtained last fall, and could quite easily obtain next fall. A farmer who is a member of the 

Pool and has grain on his farm, finds that his elevator is plugged. He can take his grain if he wants to, to 

one of the line elevators that have some room. But he doesn't want to, because he has always taken it to 

the Pool. So he puts off the delivering of his grain just as long as he can. Finally when he gets to the 

place where he has either to see his family in want or surrender his principles about passing by the Pool 

elevator and take his grain to a line elevator, you know what is likely to happen. He finally takes his 

grain down to the line elevator, because they have got room and the Pool elevator hasn't. 

 

See the other side of the picture. If this farmer finds that there isn't room in the Pool elevator, he can say 

to the agent, "I have got so many thousands of bushels of grain on my farm. Will you come out and 

measure it and test it and see if it is properly stored, and give me a cash certificate up to 75 per cent (or 

whatever it is point to be) up to a certain quota?" Then he gets his cash certificate. He has the money 

with which to look after his family and pay his operating expenses. Later on, when there is room in the 

Pool elevator, he will be able to deliver his grain. It will be entered in his Permit Book that he has 

already received a cash advance from the Wheat Board pay through the Pool. Therefore, he will be able 

to deliver his grain to the Pool when the Pool has room. 

 

What is being done at the present time is that we are forcing many Pool members to deliver their grain to 

line elevator companies, because they just can't stand the economic pressure of not having sufficient 

money to see their way through this period of surplus. 

 

The member for Arm River has never been slow to impute motives. He suggested that the sole reason 

for raising this question was because we wanted to make it an election issue. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Sure thing. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Like the foot-and-mouth disease. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Well, we have wasted an awful lot of years when there wasn't any election in the 

offing. I want to tell my hon. friends, and I know it will make them very happy, that Mr. Gardiner has 

now invited us to make it an election issue. This is Hansard, Thursday, February 23, page 1480. On the 

page before, Mr. Gardiner with chiding the member for Melfort-Humboldt because he was down in 

Ottawa making speeches when he should have been at the On-to-the-Bay dinner. He said: 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

13 
 

"The hon. member refused to come home to discuss the On-to-the-Bay movement, and was wasting 

his time down in Parliament making speeches on cash advances." 

 

I thought that was what he was elected to do. But, anyway this is what he goes on to say. I picked it up 

so my friend would not think I was taking it out of context. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Is that the issue for next election? 

 

Premier Douglas: — My hon. friend will get the issue, and I will see that he gets the issue! I will make 

a personal job of seeing that the issue is put before his people. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You have been saying that for 12 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Speaking again to the member for Melfort-Humboldt, Mr. Gardiner said: 

 

"I am going to say this to him, however, that if they will run the election on this issue" (of cash 

advances) "and no other, we will lick the pants off them." 

 

That is Mr. Gardiner's invitation. If we will fight the election on this issue and no other, they will "lick 

the pants off us." Of course, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. McDonald) will have some difficulty, 

because he has got one foot in the pants on cash advances and the other one on bank loans, so he is 

going to have some difficulty in this contest. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — We’ll win on either one and you know it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — There is the person who is making an election issue. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — He is speaking for the Dominion. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Gardiner? Oh, no, no, no! If my friend wants to go back, I will read that to 

him. He said: 

 

"That reminds me of the fact that he threw out a challenge a while ago." 

 

Mr. Gardiner is speaking, on page 1480. He said: 

 

"There is going to be an election in Saskatchewan in June." (Mr. Gardiner apparently knows about 

that). "I have always found it a very good bit of advice to say you had better wait until the election is 

over and you can probably prophecy more accurately at that time. I am going to say this to him, 

however, that if they will run the election on this issue and on no other we will lick the pants off 

them." 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

14 
 

So Mr. Gardiner has chosen the battleground, and my hon. friends can now get their ammunition ready 

to support the fight on the grounds which Mr. Gardiner has selected. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — We knew that long before you did. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Now, Mr. Speaker, may I say a word about this amendment. This amendment 

proposes to strike out the words after the word "the" in the second line, and to substitute therefor: 

 

"immediate financial needs of prairie farmers, urges that credit unions, and where credit unions and 

banks are not conveniently located, that elevator companies be allowed to make loans or advances to 

farmers on the security of farm-stored grain on the same terms and under the same guarantees against 

loss as are provided for the banks." 

 

Mr. Speaker, if ever I saw proposal that was designed to create chaos and confusion this is it. Some of 

the people are going to go to the banks, some are going to go to the elevator companies. If it is all right 

for a third of the farmers to go to the elevator companies instead of the banks, why isn't it all right for 

all of the farmers to go to the elevator companies? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They can't, the C.C.F. roads won't allow them to. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — I want to tell the member for Saltcoats that he has never in his life listened himself 

into trouble. Right now he is talking himself into it, that is if he realizes it. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I have never got into trouble. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — If the hon. gentlemen will get some of their manners restored, Mr. Speaker, I will 

be glad to go on. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Look who is talking about manners! 

 

Premier Douglas: — I point out, Mr. Speaker, the complete inconsistency of on the one hand, saying it 

would be harmful and it would be administratively impossible to use elevator agents all over the 

province to handle cash advances through the Wheat Board, while on the other hand, move an 

amendment saying that where a farmer cannot get to the bank, the elevator agents should handle cash 

advances. 

 

Let us examine the difference. In a town where there is a bank the farmers are going to have to go to the 

bank. But the bank managers have no facilities for going out in the country and checking grain. Unless 

this man has some fairly good security there is a good chance that he is going to be turned down, as 

hundreds have been turned down. But 50 miles 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

15 
 

away where there isn't a bank, a farmer will go to a grain elevator agent. He will get a cash advance on 

the grain stored on his farm, not on the basis of this economic security or his bank standing at all but as a 

right, because he has got grain on the farm. Why this distinction? Why this difference? If we are going 

to treat the second man on the basis of cash advances given to him through the elevator agent, why not 

treat the first man the same way? 

 

My friends here have endeavoured to wiggle out of a very awkward situation by suggesting neither bank 

loans on the one hand nor cash advances on the other, but rather a sort of ‘dog's breakfast’ which will 

get some of the loans handled by the banks and some advances handled by the Wheat Board. At least my 

friends have come half way. I am glad of that. They were all for bank loans a little while ago. Now they 

are going to allow some of the farmers to have cash advances through the elevator agents. I asked them 

now to come the other half of the way and vote for the Motion. 

 

The question being put on the proposed amendment (Mr. Danielson), it was negative on recorded 

division by 36 votes against 10. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The debate is now on the main motion. 

 

Mr. A. C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, may I say a word or two on the main motion. I 

find this a rather ridiculous situation that we are in here in this particular matter. I will tell you why. It is 

because this resolution as I recall was placed on the Order Paper within two or three days after the 

House assembled. This resolution was on the Order Paper deploring the action of Ottawa in not doing a 

particular thing, and yet we set up an Agricultural Committee to investigate the whole field of markets 

and the marketing of farm grain, and the crisis we are facing, and to make recommendations as to what 

we can do in the interest of the farmers, and yet at the same time we had a resolution introduced in the 

House, knowing that this Committee was going to be set up, condemning the action taken by Ottawa, 

putting ourselves on record. 

 

I suggest the action that was taken prejudged the case before the Agricultural Committee even sat on it. 

This is the situation that we find ourselves in, and I ask you, Mr. Speaker, what in the world is the 

purpose of the Agricultural Committee and their sittings, that is supposed to report to the Legislature and 

bring in its findings and its recommendations in regard to the financial crisis the farmers are facing in 

the province of Saskatchewan today, when we have a resolution now that will prejudge the decision of 

this Committee and say we deplore the action of Ottawa, because they didn't give us cash advances, 

before the Committee has brought in its recommendations as to whether or not it favours cash advances, 

or whether or not they think that cash advances are in the best interest, rather than some other method 

you might propose to alleviate the situation. 

 

I say this resolution, in my opinion, was brought in prior to the meeting of this Committee, and its one 

purpose was to put themselves on record. And the Premier made the statement: 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

16 
 

"We have been propounding this for 12 years. We have not changed our position"; 

 

and yet here is a Resolution that says: 

 

"that this Assembly recognizing the Federal Government guaranteed bank loan scheme is inadequate 

to meet the serious financial crisis now confronting the western grain farmer and the entire prairie 

economy, deplores the failure of the Federal Government. . ." 

 

I think this is the crux of the situation: "deplores the failure of the Federal Government." That is what 

they have been doing for 12 years, because there has been no mention of bank loans for the past 12 

years; there has been no financial crisis regarding the marketing of wheat for the past 12 years, so how 

can he justify that he is in support of a programme that they initiated 12 years ago (and I agree that he is) 

in that that programme has been deploring everything that Ottawa has done and that is increasing with 

the philosophy of the C.C.F. in this province. I say, Mr. Speaker, that this Resolution was introduced 

into the House knowing that we were going to have an Agriculture Committee meeting on these things, 

to prejudge the decision which the Agriculture Committee would make, and I think that we are wrong in 

passing this Resolution, or in taking a vote on it until such time as the findings of the Agriculture 

Committee have been brought into the House and discussed. Then we should be guided by the 

suggestions and the recommendations made by this Committee of the House, which was set up for that 

purpose; and then pass what we might think is a resolution, urging Ottawa, or placing the position of the 

province behind the recommendations of the Agriculture Committee in what they in their considered 

opinion, after reviewing all of the Briefs that have been submitted by the various organizations, after 

taking into consideration the suggestions made and offered by the Royal Commission which has been 

sitting for four years, then bring in a recommendation or resolution into the House. The people of 

Saskatchewan are becoming sick and tired of every day listening to nothing but "cash advances" and 

"cash advances." I didn't know this was coming up, or I would have brought a letter to read. I had a letter 

from a lady just the other day, from the northern part of the province, who I thought put it very well, 

when she said: 

 

"I am sick and tired of hearing of cash advances and bank loans." 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Did I understand the hon. member to say he didn't know it was coming up? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — No, just today. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It has been on the Order Paper. You're a little late. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I didn't know it was coming up at this particular time of day. She said this - I haven't 

got the letter, but I am going to tell you what she said: 

 

"We haven't got any wheat in our area of the province because we were rusted out, we have been 

flooded out, we haven't got any wheat." 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

17 
 

She goes on to say: 

 

"They talk about cash advances. I will tell you something else. Last year my husband and I could not 

pay our hospitalization, but it wasn't very long before we were notified that we must - or else. 

 

"Our roads are blocked in this particular area, and those people who have a few bushels of wheat in 

their granaries and there is room in the elevators cannot get them out." 

 

So I say that the people are becoming sick and tired of this talk deploring something because we know 

this Legislature hasn't any authority to correct it if we do think it is wrong. It is something which has 

been passed, something which is operating, something which the farmers have taken advantage of; and 

to keep on harping on something that is passed and agreed to and is being carried on, I think is just 

reaching the stage of utter ridiculousness. I think we are wrong, as I said at the beginning, to introduce 

such a resolution when we have set up an Agricultural Committee to investigate it, and to try to take a 

vote on this amendment today, when we are expecting the report of the Agricultural Committee a few 

days from now. 

 

It shows how ridiculous we can be, and there is only one conclusion. It was introduced for political 

propaganda for an election issue. 

 

Mr. W. J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, I think that a member of the Legislature, 

whether he is on this side of the House or on the other side of the House, has some responsibility to the 

people in his district and the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

When the hon. members opposite suggest that we cannot do anything about this shortage of cash which 

farmers must have, I cannot agree. If we look at the situation of the farmers today, compared to the 

farmers of 30 or 40 years ago, we must recognize that there is a vast difference in farming operations, a 

vast difference in the way of life. In the early days when we first settled on the farms and the 

homesteads, we were more than self sufficient. Cash did not mean too much to us. We had our garden 

produce, a few animals around the place; we picked wild fruits, and in many cases people made their 

own clothing from the wool they produced and so forth. Today the situation is entirely different, Mr. 

Speaker. Today, the farmer depends upon cash to get those things that he requires to make a living, for 

clothing and for food. Today he does not produce as much of these things on the farm, but buys most of 

it, and he cannot buy it unless he has cash. 

 

In this Resolution we say that we recognize that bank loans have not been adequate, and I submit, Mr. 

Speaker, that it is so in the province of Saskatchewan and in the west today. Loans have not been 

adequate because, in the first place, they are not sufficient to pay the expenses that must be paid to 

operate a farm, let alone to provide a living. So I think it is the duty of the members of this House to 

speak up and tell the Federal Government what the situation is. It is not sufficient that 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

18 
 

only farm organizations and other organizations in our province speak up. We must speak with one 

voice here, and that is the purpose of this Resolution. 

 

I pointed out, Mr. Speaker, that there is a need for cash. I know that is so in the area up north. 

Notwithstanding what a certain correspondent may write to an hon. member opposite, the facts are that 

farmers not only have wheat, but many of them have coarse grains, and they cannot sell either, and as 

they cannot get any cash for the grains, a cash advance is actually the only answer. There are, of course, 

other questions involved - the price that should be paid, which is not contained in this Resolution. That 

is another question which the Governments must deal with. 

 

The second part of the Resolution says: "that the cash advances should be made for grain on the farm"; 

and, as the Premier mentioned a while ago, no one is asking for cash advances on grain that is not stored 

properly, whether it is wheat, barley, or whatever it may be; but cash advances only on grain that has 

been properly stored. 

 

I would like to make a few comparisons. I think the time has come in our age and civilization that we 

must take a different approach to these problems of farmers. I think that the same approach must be 

taken by the senior government that has been taken towards various corporations and companies. They 

are not allowed to suffer as farmers suffer. Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, a mine, say up in northern 

Saskatchewan, producing copper, or zinc, or uranium, and stockpiling its ore and not paying their men 

the wages they are entitled to? Is the farmer the only one who is supposed to produce and stockpile and 

wait until there is a market? There is the whole crux of the situation. A farmer is not only a producer, he 

is also working man, and he must be paid his wages, otherwise he cannot survive. He must be paid his 

wages the same as a miner who works for a mining company is paid wages, and I would like to point out 

that when these mining companies have any difficulties the Federal Government is the only Government 

which can save these companies from bankruptcy and come to their rescue so that they may pay their 

labouring men for producing goods and services. That is all that the farmers ask for - cash, so that they 

can continue to work and produce and make a living. When the members opposite say that this is outside 

of their jurisdiction, and when they suggest that other organizations must speak and not us, I cannot 

agree with such arguments because in my opinion it is the responsibility of members of this House, 

notwithstanding what their political affiliations may be, to tell those who are responsible what the 

situation is, and to suggest to such authorities what should be done, and so I shall support the Motion. 

 

Mr. R. Walker (Hanley): — I do not want to lengthen this debate, but there are a few remarks I feel I 

ought to make by reason of something which was said by my hon. friend from Maple Creek (Mr. 

Cameron). The hon. member tries to leave the impression that this House is concerned only with party 

politics and not with the plight of the farmers. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — He never spoke a truer word. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

19 
 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Let me say that the members of this House are confronted with the task of 

spending for an $87 million programme. They are confronted with the task of raising that sum of 

Supply, and it certainly concerns, in my opinion, all members of this House to see to it that the tax base 

of this province is stable and solvent. Certainly, when we are confronted with shrinking revenues from 

the education and hospital tax and other sources, we must be concerned with the basis for our taxation. 

 

The hon. members of the Opposition have drawn to the attention of this House repeatedly the fact that 

some school districts and municipalities are having increasing difficulty in collecting their tax revenue, 

and I have no doubt that that is true. The figures substantiate that argument, and I have taken the trouble, 

Mr. Speaker, to inquire of municipal men as to the reason for that situation, and without exception, from 

Liberals and Conservatives and C.C.F. municipal men together, they all agree the reason for the 

difficulty is because of the unusual cash shortage on the farms in Saskatchewan, last fall. There isn't any 

doubt about it, that is the reason for the difficulty. That problem cannot fail to concern this Legislature. 

If it is concerned about its legal responsibilities, this Legislature has to be concerned with that problem. I 

am sure that we would be remiss in our duties to our constituents, to the people whom we represent, if 

we did not take a sincere and honest interest in that most vital problem concerning them. 

 

The matter has been raised, of course, in the House of Commons. I think it is within the knowledge of 

all hon. members, that opposition parties in the House of Commons have raised considerable debate on 

the matter, and I think probably it is within the knowledge of all members of the Liberal party and the 

Liberal members without exception opposed this proposal for cash advances through the Wheat Board 

and through the elevator companies. As a matter of fact, most hon. members know that Liberal members 

of the House of Commons who come from Saskatchewan, particularly the one who represents my area 

in the House of Commons (Mr. Tucker), after going on record in Saskatchewan as being in favour of 

cash advances, went down to Ottawa and voted against that proposal. He gave as his explanation that it 

was a party matter, that as a Liberal he had to oppose this proposal because it came from the C.C.F. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — That is your interpretation. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — As a matter of fact, he sought to explain the thing on the basis of politics. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if this proposal cannot be made in the House of Commons without the mover being 

accused of being tainted with politics, and if it cannot be made here without it being alleged that it is 

based on politics, where on earth can it be proposed! I suppose in the Senate. As a matter of fact, Mr. 

Speaker, we are not going to be deterred by these people who try to cow us and frighten us out of our 

proper responsibilities and duties. Members of the C.C.F. at Ottawa were confronted with the very same 

kind of diatribe as we got this afternoon from the member from Maple Creek. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — We have lots of it now. 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

20 
 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — I suggest that the fact that this Legislature takes up this problem, recognises 

that this is a serious problem, ought to make it abundantly plain to the Federal Government that this is 

not just a proposal of C.C.F. members of Parliament at Ottawa. This is a matter which concerns the 

people of Saskatchewan. The fact that it comes from a Provincial Legislature, I submit, will carry even 

more weight in the eyes of the Government of Canada than the fact that it comes from a political party in 

the House of Commons, and, of course, in order to make it carry the maximum weight, it ought to be 

concurred in unanimously in this House. Certainly the argument Mr. Tucker that it was a vote of 

confidence against the Federal Government cannot be employed here. Surely the hon. members opposite 

can vote for this Resolution without defeating the Government at Ottawa. Mr. Tucker always said that 

he mustn't vote for it because it would defeat the Government, and he prefers Liberalism to this 

particular measure; but surely that argument isn’t available to hon. members opposite. They can vote for 

it and it can pass here unanimously without defeating the Government of Canada. It will not defeat the 

Government of Canada, but it will draw to their attention this matter of grave and pressing importance to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

It is certainly not open, either, to members of the Liberal party to say that this is a Federal matter about 

which we should have no concern. As a matter of fact, at the time the thing was raised in Saskatchewan 

last fall, it was raised by my hon. friend, the Leader of the Opposition, who took a flight to Ottawa with 

a "secret" formula. He was concerned about it because of the pressure that was brought to bear upon him 

by his own followers who do not really believe that it was none of his business. They sent him to Ottawa 

to make it his business, and he cannot get up in this House, or none of his cohorts can get up in this 

House, and now say that this is not a matter of concern to provincial political parties. He made it his 

business. He made it an issue. As a matter of fact, he went out in this province and said that this proposal 

would be no more effective than a "stirrup pump in a forest fire." I suggest that he was making this a 

political issue for provincial political parties, and if it is fair game for the Liberal party to represent this 

bona fide demand of people in Saskatchewan, then certainly it is fair and proper that we on this side of 

the House ought to be concerned with it, too, and ought not to be accused of making it a political issue. 

They made it an issue. They accepted it as making up a political issue. Now in order to try to squeeze 

themselves out of some responsibility when the vote comes before this House, they try to draw out that 

same old red herring that they have been dragging around for years, by saying that this is not a 

provincial issue. It is a provincial issue. It was admitted by them to be a provincial issue, when the 

Liberal Leader spoke on it and went out of his way to make representations upon it. 

 

It is a provincial issue because it concerns the solvency of the Provincial Treasury. It is a provincial 

issue because the people we represent are vitally concerned with this problem. Since they are concerned 

with this problem, I am also concerned with it because I am concerned that this provincial economy 

should be prosperous. Not person in Saskatchewan can afford to be independent of this problem. No 

person in Saskatchewan can afford to turn his back on this problem. It concerns not just the C.C.F. and 

Liberal parties, it concerns the farmers, it concerns business people, professional people, people in all 

walks of life. As a representative of those people and, I hope, a good representative, I am going to speak 

and vote on their behalf on this motion this afternoon. 



 

March 20, 1956 

21 
 

Mr. J. W. Horsman (Wilkie): — I had no intention of speaking on this Resolution, that is if you can 

call it a Resolution. I see nothing in it that asks anyone for anything. That is my thought on it. 

 

I think if you will read it over carefully you will find that the first part of the Resolution dealing with 

bank loans states that "bank loans on farm-stored grain are inadequate," and then it goes on to deplore 

the failure of the Federal Government for not instituting a prepayment on the initial price of wheat in the 

form of cash advances; but nowhere in this Resolution does it ask the Federal Government to give cash 

advances on farm-stored grain. The only thing it does is "deplore the failure of the Federal Government" 

for not doing that. I see nothing in this Resolution that I cannot vote against. If it came right out and 

asked for cash advances, or ask the Legislature here to use their influence with the Federal Government 

to get cash advances for the farmers of the west, I could vote for it; I cannot vote for a Resolution that 

does nothing but deplore the fact that the Federal Government has not done certain things. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I can agree with much of the argument 

that was presented by my seatmate, the hon. member of the Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron), in the fact that 

we do have a Committee sitting, or which has been sitting during this Session of the Legislature, to deal 

with agricultural prices and marketing, and I think that we would be very foolish to consider either this 

motion we have in front of us at the moment, or Motion No. 2 to be moved by Mr. Dewhurst at this 

time. 

 

The report of our Agricultural Committee has been presented to our members, and I understand that 

tomorrow we will be meeting to discuss this report. Once the report has passed the Committee then it 

will be discussed in this House, and I for one would like the opportunity of studying the report, getting 

the feeling of all the members on the Committee and the feeling of the Legislature after the report is 

brought into the Legislative Assembly itself, and for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I am going to ask 

permission to adjourn this debate. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I do not think we on this side of the House want to agree to an 

adjournment. This has been on the Order Paper since almost the first week that the House met. We have 

already been criticised today for leaving the matter until after it was dealt with in Ottawa. We had no 

choice because there were special orders that always took precedence on private members’ day. I would 

agree to my hon. friend's proposal of leaving it until after the Committee reported if they had not on two 

occasions moved amendments to emasculate this Resolution, and at that time there was no suggestion of 

postponing it. 

 

It seems to us that, having failed to emasculate the Resolution by two amendments, they now want to 

delay the matter coming before the consideration of the House, and I do not think we want to agree to an 

adjournment. I leave it entirely, of course, to the members on our side. 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

22 
 

Mr. Speaker: — That is a matter for the House to decide. I might draw to your attention there are 11 

members who have already spoken on this, and as the Premier says there has been two adjournments. I 

will then ask for your consent to adjourn. 

 

(Leave to adjourn refused) 

 

I am afraid the debate will have to go on. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, there are several things that I want to say in regard to this Motion, but 

before I say anything, I want to refer to a few letters that I have received from different parts of the 

province of Saskatchewan concerning the condition of farmers throughout our province. The first letter I 

want to read to you is from a young farmer, and I think with your permission, Mr. Speaker, I will read 

the complete letter: 

 

“I think you should, as the C.C.F. have been, take a definite stand regarding cash advances on 

farm-stored grain, and put yourself and the Provincial Liberal party against such a policy. 

 

"An analysis of the Saskatchewan farmer’s problem would make apparent that the slow up in grain 

marketing was not wholly responsible for the present financial condition, but rather the low farm 

production prices, plus rising farm costs. I have discussed this with several friends and all agree that 

Wheat Board advances with the consequent financing costs and losses, would further reduce our 

income, and even destroy the Board." 

 

And it goes on. He gives several reasons for making this statement in his letter. 

 

I want to read from another letter. I have many of them here, but I am only going to read from the two 

this afternoon. This letter begins: 

 

"It is very nice of you to think of the people around here. You were wondering about the conditions 

around this part. Well, they are pretty grim. There was very little crop threshed around here on account 

of the flood. For instance, I had 150 acres in crop, and most of it being under water, I only threshed 

1,000 bushels, and I farm 3-quarter sections of land, and I got some people in my division who never 

threshed a bushel on account of the flood, and this far is the situation looks this spring it will be worse 

than ever, as there are three or four feet of snow over this entire community." 

 

And he goes on to say that: 

 

"It isn't cash advances that are needed in this particular area of the province, but what these people 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

23 
 

need is some help for those farmers who are in dire circumstances because they have no grain on their 

farms." 

 

I only brought those two letters to your attention because there was some mention of what the feeling 

was of people in different parts of the province. 

 

When, the member for Gravelbourg (Mr. E. Walker) was introducing this motion into the Legislature, he 

referred to a trip that I made to Ottawa, last fall, and the hon. member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) referred 

to that trip again this afternoon, and, as a matter of fact, he said that I was set to Ottawa. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have never been sent to Ottawa. When I decide to go to Ottawa I will go on my 

own goodwill and my own free time. But the reason I went to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, was not with any 

secret plan in mind. I went to Ottawa as an individual and a farmer realising the situation of the farmers 

in the province of Saskatchewan last October and November, and I realised that there was a definite 

shortage of cash as far as farmers were concerned. I was not too concerned what method the Canadian 

Wheat Board or the Federal Government adopted in making money available to the farmers of western 

Canada, but I was very concerned that they should do something, and do it as quickly as possible, to get 

money into the hands of our farmers. 

 

I have been criticized because it was supposed to be some sort of secret plan. It was not my intention to 

go to Ottawa to get a lot of publicity. My intention was to go down there to do whatever I could as an 

individual to bring relief to the farmers of western Canada. 

 

I have mentioned on several occasions that I do not believe that bank loans or cash advances are the 

answer to our problem, and I repeat that here this afternoon. This problem is far greater than the one act 

of either paying cash advances or bank loans can rectify. I have said that bank loans or cash advances 

are about as good as a stirrup pump at a forest fire, and I repeat it here this afternoon, and I speak as a 

practical farmer in this province. I have always advocated that we ought to have more public storage 

here in western Canada, and I advocate that again this afternoon. 

 

Some people speaking earlier in this debate have said, and I want to quote. It was the hon. member for 

Pelly (Mr. Feusi), when he said that: 

 

"No one would object if we held all our wheat, if we had cash advances, if we held all our wheat on 

the farms." 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have never heard such a ridiculous statement. You and I both know and realise as 

practical farmers that when you. . . 

 

Mr. Feusi:-Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I would like to ask the hon. member to return that 

statement to his own mind, because I did not make such a statement as that. 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

24 
 

Mr. McDonald: — Well, I may have the wrong member, Mr. Speaker, but it was made by one of the 

members on the Government side of the House. I think I know the member now, but I am not going to 

name him in case I'm wrong. But, at least, some member on the Government side of the House, speaking 

earlier this debate, made that statement, and I want to repeat again that any practical farmer knows that 

that is not the answer to our problem. We know that when we produce grain we produce it to sell, and if 

we are going to continue to store grain on our farms from one year to another, pretty soon, rather than 

having our grain properly stored as the Premier has said, we are going to have it all out in the open. The 

farmers of this province produce a crop and have most of it in their farm storage bins by about the first 

of November. Farmers across this province want the opportunity to have those bins emptied by the 

following July 31, and no system of cash advances will make that possible - that is, cash advances by 

themselves. 

 

If we are going to implement a programme of cash advances, then, in my humble opinion, we must have 

a programme to increase good farm storage. I doubt very much if that is the proper answer to this 

problem. My personal opinion is that we should see that the grain-handling companies construct more 

public storage here on the prairies. 

 

During this last fall we found that for some time there was space available in our terminal elevators, but 

we were unable to get the grain from western Canada into the terminal elevators. Now we find that we 

have a good deal of space available here in the province of Saskatchewan in our country elevator 

system. As a matter of fact, about 45,000,000 bushels of space. Our farmers are unable at this time to 

take advantage of that space due to the fact that the roads in the province are blocked at the moment on 

account of snow, and I believe that we are going to have more trouble in regard to filling this 45,000,000 

bushels of space, because no sooner will the roads become unblocked as far as snow is concerned, but 

they will be blocked with mud. 

 

I want to refer to some of the things said so far in this debate. When the mover introduced the motion in 

the House, he referred to a statement that I am reported to have made back on November 9, 1955, when 

he said that I had made the statement that - just a minute, I want to read part of it to you; that I had made 

the statement that: 

 

"Delegates to the Wheat Pool convention were opposed to cash advances." 

 

And there was an article in the Regina ‘Leader-Post’ of November 9, 1955, headed, "Pool Takes Issue 

With McDonald"; and I note about the second paragraph they state: 

 

"It is obvious that Mr. McDonald was either misquoted or misinformed." 

 

Now, I am not one of these people who run to the press every second day and say that I have been 

misquoted, but I think it is obvious from the attitude of the delegates at the Wheat Pool convention that 

they were in favour of cash advances. What I said at that time, and what I want 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

25 
 

to repeat here today is that "the officials of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool were not in favour of cash 

advances." And I want to substantiate that statement. 

 

Why did the officials of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool not seen fit to put this matter on the agenda to be 

discussed at the annual Wheat Pool convention? I think it is fairly obvious, because the officials of the 

Wheat Pool were opposed to cash advances. 

 

Premier Douglas: — They did put on the agenda. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It was put on the agenda, yes, after the delegates met in convention, and it was at the 

request of the delegates that it was placed on the agenda at that meeting. 

 

I want to refer now to what the President of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool had to say about cash 

advances - and I have so many of them is here that it will take some time to read them into the record; 

but first of all I want to refer to what Mr. Wesson had to say on September 28, 1955, and I quote: 

 

"Bank loans up to $1,000 based on grain to be delivered to elevators and guaranteed against loss by 

the Federal Government was suggested by President J. H. Wesson of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, as 

a means to alleviate the emergency financial problem of western farmers." 

 

Now that was prior to the Wheat Pool meeting, and I suggest to you this is the reason that this cash 

advances matter was not on the agenda when the Wheat Pool first met. Mr. Wesson went on to say: 

 

"The Federal Government should be asked to pass an Act similar to the one of 1951, which provided 

emergency financial assistance to farmers in difficulties. That year the crop was snowed under and 

farmers could not harvest. The farmers are in the same difficulty this year for another reason. They 

could not deliver grain, and faced the immediate problem of obtaining cash to carry on." 

 

Mr. Wesson said: 

 

"The Wheat Pool did not agree with the suggestion of interest-free loans to farmers, but it should not 

be exorbitant. The banks would grant some loans now, but were choosy of their creditors, and the 5 

per cent interest was too high. 

 

"The Government should pass legislation, and there should be an agreement between the Bank of 

Canada and the Chartered Banks whereby the loans to farmers be on a 2 per cent or 2½ per cent 

interest basis." 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley) - Where did we hear that before? 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

26 
 

Mr. McDonald: Mr. Wesson's statement continued: 

 

"The loans would only be made on the basis of the grain the farmer would probably deliver and 

entered in his quote book. The Federal Government should take the loss, if any. The 1951 Act 

provided for an expenditure of up to $20 million for this purpose, but only $660,000 was loaned." 

 

Mr. Wesson pointed out that: 

 

"The risk of loss would be much less today where the current crop was well housed; the 1951 grain 

was under the snow when the loans were made." 

 

So you can see from that, Mr. Speaker, that the President of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool was opposed 

to cash advances, and definitely recommended bank loans. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — He is now. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — After the C.C.F. got among the delegates. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Then again on September 29th, the day following the quotation that I just read to 

you, Mr. Wesson had this to say, as reported in the Regina ‘Leader-Post’: 

 

"J. H. Wesson, President of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, warned that any request of the Federal 

Government would have to be reasonable to grain approval from eastern members who were not too 

concerned with wheat problems. In effect, this resolution asked for subsidization, and with Canada 

exporting 80 per cent of her wheat products, such a programme could cost the Treasury from $150 

million to $200 million annually." 

 

I want to go on to something that he said a little later in his remarks on the same day: 

 

"In another effort to give the farmer a large return for his labour, the Canadian Government was urged 

to assume the carrying charges on all grain in store at the end of the crop year. It was pointed out that 

the western farmers were fulfilling one of the objectives of the United Nations maintaining a food 

bank for the people of the world, but the cost of maintaining it should be borne by all Canadians and 

not solely by prairie farmers. 

 

"A five-pronged resolution was passed and was aimed at a more positive programme for disposing of 

Canadian grain without price cutting: 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

27 
 

“(1) that Canada was urged to extend credit were necessary to facilitate grain sales and reliable 

foreign currencies be also taken in payment when necessary; 

 

“(2) that barter trade be used when necessary, providing the barter goods or raw materials did not 

lower living standards of Canadian workers through unfair competition; 

 

“(3) that Canadians participate in famine relief programmes where needed; 

 

“(4) that Wheat Board sales personnel be increased an aggressive sales promotion programme be 

carried on; 

 

“(5) that an intensified programme of scientific research be carried on to find other possible uses for 

Canadian wheat." 

 

Speaking earlier in the debate, the hon. member for Elrose (Mr. M. J. Willis) said that "just as soon as 

the Federal Government are prepared to stand aside and let the province take over, we will do a better 

job." 

 

Well now, Mr. Speaker, I ask: do the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan want to maintain the 

Canadian Wheat Board, or do they want a Board of this Government set up to handle wheat as far as the 

province of Saskatchewan is concerned? According to the hon. member for Elrose that is what he wants. 

According to his own statement, he doesn't believe in the Canadian Wheat Board. He says that we 

should have a provincial board to market wheat for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, a point of privilege. I did not say that in this House. I said, "when 

the Federal Government wants to stand aside and the people elected a C.C.F. government at Ottawa, we 

would make a better job of it down there." 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That is not what the hon. member said. What the hon. members said was this, and I 

repeat: "Just as soon as the Federal Government are prepared to stand aside and let the province take 

over, we will do a much better job." 

 

Premier Douglas: — May I ask my hon. friend what he is quoting from? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It is taken off the record of the Legislature, in my own handwriting. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I think my hon. friend should check the Hansard again, it isn’t my recollection 

that he said that. 

 

Mr. McDonald:- Now, I just wonder what that would mean to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. I think we can all think back a few years, and we will remember when the Federal 

Government paid considerable 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

28 
 

sums of money into the Canadian Wheat Board and made it possible for payments to be made here in 

western Canada. 

 

The new programme of paying interest and storage charges on everything over 178 million bushels this 

year will mean an expenditure of $32 million. A good portion of that will come to the farmers of the 

province of Saskatchewan. I wonder how many farmers or how many members of the Government 

sitting opposite realize what that programme will mean to the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan! 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — They pay plenty too. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That $32 million means that every family in the Dominion of Canada will pay into 

this plan approximately $2.00; that every farmer in the province of Saskatchewan will receive 

approximately $125 a year under that programme, . . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — That is just this year. . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . if our surpluses continue to stay where they are at the present moment. 

 

I want also to refer to what other farm leaders have said in regard to cash advances. I want to refer again 

to an article out of the ‘Leader-Post’ of September 29, 1955, and here we have, speaking of Mr. Ben 

Plumer, Mr. Warden Burgess, Mr. Brownlee and again. Mr. Wesson. This is taken from the 

‘Leader-Post’" and I quote: 

 

"One delegate said it would be getting an advance for grain not delivered in the same way that the 

initial payments was an advance without interest on grain delivered, and held by the Canadian Wheat 

Board until sold. 

 

"However, Ben Plumer of the Alberta Wheat Pool said farmers did pay interest on initial payments for 

grain, since the Wheat Board had to borrow money from the banks at interest which was repaid when 

the grain was sold. These interest payments were charged against the farmers by the Wheat Board. 

 

"Warden Burgess, Saskatchewan Wheat Pool director said interest paid on loans would give some big 

farmers a chance to make easy money. Under the system proposed by Mr. Shultz he said a farmer now 

in difficulty could apply for interest-free loans and then put the money advanced into government 

bonds which pay 3½ per cent interest. Many farmers would seize such an opportunity to make money. 

 

"For this reason, J. E. Brownlee, President of the United Growers, said there would be a fixed 

maximum for these loans or advances. Only those in need of emergency assistance should get it. 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

29 
 

"J. H. Wesson, President of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool made this suggestion, Tuesday, when he 

proposed re-enactment of the 1951 legislation - in other words advocating bank loans." 

 

Now that was their attitude on paying storage on farm-stored grain? The conference rejected a motion 

calling for farm storage payments; instead it voted that the resolution be referred back to the various 

organizations concerned for the consideration. What was Mr. Wesson's thinking on this suggestion? 

 

"Mr. Wesson also opposed the move on grounds that such a plan would make the large farmers the 

beneficiaries." 

 

In the province of Saskatchewan we have been told just recently that we still have approximately 34,000 

farms in this province that are uneconomic units. If this programme were adopted, we are doing the very 

thing that we ought not to be doing, because we are making those farms more uneconomical than ever, 

and we ought to be adopting a programme that will help the small farmer in this province. There are 

literally thousands of farmers in this province who have no wheat to take a cash advance on. Now we are 

asking these people to underwrite or to subsidize the wheat miner in the province of Saskatchewan. 

There are farmers in this province who have from 90,000 to 250,000 bushels of wheat in store on their 

farms, some of it is in good storage and some of it is in open bins. As far as I am concerned, I do not 

want to have to pay part of the interest charges for the money that any big farmer can borrow on that 

wheat, and I do not want the farmers who reside in my constituency to have to pay part of the interest 

charged on the wheat miners in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The people whom we ought to be taking care of, Mr. Speaker, are those people who are in financial 

difficulty because they have no grain. Who is doing anything about it? This so-called 

friends-of-the-farmer Government in this province ought to be doing something about it, rather than 

sitting in this Legislature and other Government places howling about cash advances. Certainly those 

farmers who have grain ought to have some relief and some way of receiving money for the grain they 

have in storage; but I do not believe that cash advances is the answer to that problem. In my personal 

opinion the answer to the problem is this: to increase public storage here on the prairies so that the 

farmer can have the opportunity of delivering that grain during the crop year in which it was grown. 

 

I know as a practical farmer - and sometimes I wonder if there are any over there when you hear them 

talk; but when a farmer puts the grain in his granaries by November (as a rule we have all our grain 

stored by the 1st of November) we like to be able to deliver part of that grain over the complete season; 

in other words, from the 1st of November to July 31st; but by July 31st we would like to be rid of all of 

that grain and receive our advance payment or initial payment. If we had a programme like that 

instituted here in the province of Saskatchewan and in western Canada, we would not need cash 

advances, we would not have grain 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

30 
 

lying all over the prairies here in western Canada, and a lot of it is lying out in the snow and the water. 

 

Some people are trying to tell us that there is no need for increase in the public storage of western 

Canada. I believe that there is a need, and I say that if those people who have been in the grain handling 

business for years in western Canada fail to provide the necessary storage, and if Ottawa failed to 

provide it, then it is up to us as a Provincial Legislature to provide it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we have $5,500,000 to put into a cement industry here in the city of Regina, surely to 

goodness we have got another $5,500,000 to put into public storage for agricultural products here in the 

province of Saskatchewan! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Who are you kidding? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Now, as far as the bank loans are concerned, I am in complete agreement with all 

those who said that 5 per cent interest is too high. I think it is too high. When Mr. Wesson, speaking on 

cash advances, suggested that it should not be over 3 per cent, I agree with him. If the Canadian Wheat 

Board are able to borrow money from the Bank of Canada at around 3 per cent when they buy our grain, 

then why are they not able to supply money for bank loans are cash advances or whatever way you want 

to distribute it, at an equal percentage rate? I think we ought to be able to get this money at around 3 per 

cent interest, and I note here also that the different farm organizations of western Canada have asked for 

bank loans at 3 per cent. 

 

I would like to quote a great deal from the question in regard to bank loans and cash advances policies 

that have been adopted by other agricultural nations, but I do not think that is necessary at this time. But, 

Mr. Speaker, there is just one other thing that I want to bring to your attention. The Canadian Wheat 

Board annual report for 1954-55 gives us the names of the advisory committee of the Canadian Wheat 

Board. Now the Premier has just told us that all the farm organizations were clamoring for cash 

advances. . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Isn't that true? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Just let me finish. Now we have the heads of our farm organizations who are the 

advisory board of the Canadian Wheat Board. Who are they? We have Mr. J. H. Brownlee from 

Winnipeg, Manitoba. We have Mr. C. P. Hansen from Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, who is the President of 

the Saskatchewan Farmers Union. We have Mr. R. C. Marler from Edmonton, Alberta. We have W. J. 

Parker of the Wheat Pool from Winnipeg, Manitoba. We have Ben Plumer from the Calgary Wheat Pool 

of Alberta, and J. H. Wesson, President of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. That is the advisory 

committee to the Canadian Wheat Board. Have they ever asked for cash advances? Have they? 

 

Some Govt. Member: — Don't be silly. 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

31 
 

Mr. McDonald: — Isn’t it the duty of an advisory committee to tell the Canadian Wheat Board what 

they want? 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Within the law. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Isn't it? Have they? I am asking you. 

 

Premier Douglas: — My hon. friend knows their material purpose; we have no way of knowing, neither 

have you. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — They can advise them within the powers set out in the Act. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Because of the fact that the advisory committee to the Canadian Wheat Board is 

made up in its entirety by the leaders of western farm organizations, I want to move an amendment to 

this resolution that we have before us. I would like to move, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 

Carr): 

 

"That all the words after the word ‘Assembly’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

"approves the policy of marketing grain through the Canadian Wheat Board, and goes on record as 

supporting cash advances on farm-stored grain if and when this policy change is requested by the 

Canadian Wheat Board." 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — They are an administrative body. How silly can you get! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — This is a ticklish amendment. The debate is now on the amendment. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I will only detain the House a few moments to comment on this 

amendment. I think it is the most amazing amendment that I have ever heard in twenty years of listening 

to motions and amendments being proposed in public places. Let us read it: 

 

"That all the words after the word ‘Assembly’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

"approves the policy of marketing grain through the Canadian Wheat Board," (We have no quarrel 

with that.) "and goes on record as supporting cash advances on farm-stored grain," (There certainly 

could be no objection to that. If my hon. friend had stopped there one could probably have voted for it, 

especially if he had said "through the Wheat Board." But he said:) 

 

"if and when this policy change is requested by the Canadian Wheat Board." 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

32 
 

Mr. Speaker, that is the most preposterous proposal I have ever heard. Here is a public man who favours 

something that is good for the farmers. He is in favour of cash advances. But the farmers cannot have it, 

even if the Government wants it or even if Parliament wants it. They cannot have it unless it is requested 

by the Canadian Wheat Board! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Nobody said any such thing. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Well, my hon. friend can surely read English language. Whoever drafted it for 

him should have explained it to him. It says: "If and when" - that is simple enough - "if and when this 

policy change is requested by the Canadian Wheat Board." In other words, we can get cash advances on 

farm-stored grain "if and when this policy change is requested"; and "when this policy change is 

requested by the Canadian Wheat Board." 

 

Where is the supremacy of Parliament about which Mr. Mackenzie King used to speak? Where is the 

power of the elected representatives of the people? The representatives of the people may say they want 

cash advances on farm-stored grain, but until a group of people appointed by the Federal Government - 

virtually civil servants - employees of the state, give their approval you cannot have cash advances on 

farm-stored grain, even though Parliament wants it, the Legislatures want it, the farmers want it, and 

farm organizations want it. 

 

Mr. Watson (Saltcoats): — What about the Producers’ Committee? 

 

Premier Douglas: — My friend talks about the Committee. That is the biggest joke in this country. The 

Producers’ Committee is an advisory committee only given power to make recommendations to the 

Wheat Board within the limitations of the statutes. They have no power to make recommendations on 

policy matters. Not only that. The Wheat Board doesn't need to do any more than snap its fingers at 

them when they do make recommendations. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Would you like to. . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — My friend can just keep quiet. If he wants to make a speech, let him get on his 

feet, instead of sitting there interrupting everybody, when he has nothing to contribute to the debate 

except to sit and burp. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Now he's mad! 

 

Premier Douglas: — I will tell my hon. friend now why he has moved this amendment, Mr. Speaker. It 

looks queer and preposterous at first, but there is a very good reason why this amendment has been 

moved. Remember, he is saying that we are to get cash advances on farm-stored grain only if and when 

this policy is requested by the Canadian Wheat Board. Where did Mr. Howe say in the House of 

Commons? My hon. friend knows what the Wheat Board would recommend! Mr. Howe said, at page 

127 of Hansard: 

 

"I can tell the House that if the Government instructed the Wheat Board to lend money on farm-stored 

grain 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

33 
 

and assume the responsibility for the lending of that money and its subsequent collection, the four 

members of the Wheat Board would be out of office within a matter of days." 

 

This was the boss! Mr. Howe said in effect: "I cannot give you cash advances. The members may want 

it, the farm organizations may want it, but three provincial governments and three provincial legislatures 

may ask for it, but I cannot give it to you. Because, if I did, the four members of the Wheat Board would 

be out of office within a matter of days." Then the Leader of the Opposition comes in here, knowing that 

Mr. Howe has put the Wheat Board on record as being against cash advances and he says, in effect: "I 

will agree to cash advances providing the Wheat Board agrees, because I know already they are not 

going to agree." 

 

If ever there was an attempt on one hand to be in favour of cash advances but on the other hand to attach 

a proviso that it be recommended by a body who are already on record as being against it, here it is! 

Why don't my friends come out honestly and say they are in favour of cash advances on farm-stored 

grain as they do in the first part of the resolution? Never mind saying, "if the Wheat Board approves"; or 

if somebody else approves. If the supreme Parliament approves, that is all that should be necessary. If 

the members of this Legislature are supporting it, and the members of the other Legislatures support it, 

that should be enough. 

 

Mr. Watson: — Don't pound the desk too hard! 

 

Premier Douglas: — If we came into this House and told this House that we were prepared to do 

something providing a group of civil servants on a Board approved, my friends would laugh us out of 

court. And we would deserve to be laughed out of court. These gentlemen come in here and tell us that 

the farmers want cash advances and that they are in favour of cash advances on farm-stored grain. But 

they want to ‘gimmick’ it. And the gimmick is, "provided the Wheat Board will approve." They know 

perfectly well, of course, that the Wheat Board is not going to approve and that they have already 

threatened Mr. Howe with their resignations. 

 

I want to say that this supine attitude of allowing a group of civil servants or government appointees to 

tell a government what it shall do is the very negation of parliamentary government and of democracy. 

Any government with any sense of dignity, or any sense of responsibility, would let this decision be 

made by the supreme court of Parliament and not allow it to be made by a group of people whom they 

have hired to do what they are told and not to tell the Government what they should do. 

 

I cannot speak for my colleagues, but I, for one, shall vote against this amendment, as I do not propose 

to have any policies advanced by any legislature or any parliament subject to a veto by a group of hired 

officials. 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

34 
 

Mr. Cameron: — I want to point out to the House in regard to this amendment, the effort that we in the 

Opposition have been putting forward to make something constructive out of this destructive resolution. 

 

It says that we "deplore the Federal Government." That is the sum total and substance of that resolution, 

and nothing else. Then in an attempt to make it into constructive resolution, something that the House 

may come to some agreement on, we introduced an amendment that was ruled out of order. I want to 

review that amendment. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Well, you can’t. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — That amendment was ruled out of order - that was the first step. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Which one? There was no amendment ruled out of order. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Yes, the first one was ruled out of order, when we brought in an amendment to the 

effect that the credit unions, where it was not convenient to get to the banks, could be utilized and that 

elevator companies be allowed to make loans or advances to farmers on farm-stored grain; to include the 

three organizations to bring a wider range to the farmers. That was ruled out of order. 

 

Then, from that, we proceeded to the amendment, this afternoon. . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. This House is far too busy to discuss or 

argue about resolutions which have already been voted upon or ruled out of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! No, that wasn't the grounds at all, and anyway I think that has already been 

decided upon. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — He can’t read them now. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! You had better confine yourself to the amendment. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Then I would say this - the second amendment which we just voted on. . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Order! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Now this amendment which we have here, which we are speaking on now, is the 

third attempt by the Opposition to bring in some basis of an amendment where we could have some 

constructive resolution on this matter. Three attempts have been made to bring it into something which 

would give us a basis of discussion and get a resolution on. . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Who do you think is going to believe that? 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

35 
 

Mr. Cameron:- . . .and three attempts have been turned down. We have one resolution that says "we 

deplore the Federal Government"; and nothing, no matter what could be suggested, will change the 

thinking or the motive behind the resolution to condemn the Federal Government. No matter what 

amendments are brought in, there is no basis of mutual understanding or discussion - "this is what we 

want, and this is what we are determined we are going to have in this House." That is the purpose of it. 

No matter what effort has been made to get something into this, to turn it into a constructive resolution, 

we have been defeated on three attempts, and the people of the province will know the purpose behind 

it, the effort that we have put forth to bring into this resolution something that would be constructive. 

 

We have, at the request of the western provinces, people on the Advisory Board to the Canadian Wheat 

Board, who are farmers, representing farm organizations. We fought for that in the west for years. We 

thought we didn't have representation enough in the Advisory Committee to the Canadian Wheat Board. 

We have that, today; and surely we could go so far that if these leaders of three western farm 

organizations should feel, or see fit, to recommend those cash advances, surely if they are on the 

Advisory Committee to the Canadian Wheat Board, if they are convinced in their minds that cash 

advances is the right and only and proper solution to the situation. . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Parliament are the only. . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — . . .then surely they are within their rights in recommending that such action be taken. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Parliament is the only one. . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — And I think that if they should recommend such a consideration we would be within 

our rights in considering it. So we have come all the way down the line to try to get something 

constructive into this resolution; but the purpose is merely "we stand square for to condemn Ottawa and 

nothing else; and no matter what you submit we will not consider." That is the purpose behind the 

resolution; that is the purpose of defeating all the amendments. 

 

I want to say here that if the Premier objects to using the Canadian Wheat Board, which he calls a staff 

of civil servants, then let us put it - perhaps it was mis-worded; let us change the resolution then to read 

"the Advisory Committee to the Canadian Wheat Board." They are not civil servants; they are an 

Advisory Committee. If the Advisory Committee to the Canadian Wheat Board recommends cash 

advances, then that should have a tremendous weight with every member in this Legislature, because 

they know the thinking of the farm people; they are at the head of these farm organizations, and I would 

like to amend that to add the words: 

 

"the Advisory Committee to the Canadian Wheat Board" 

 

I think that was the intention of the Leader of the Opposition. I can see the implications of the Canadian 

Wheat Board; I think the Premier was within his rights in pointing out that this is a constituted Board set 

up by Ottawa. 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

36 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! You can’t amend a resolution like that, by just saying you want to use 

some other words. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He can move a sub-amendment. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — We are moving a sub-amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You didn't say that you were moving a sub-amendment. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I am pointing out, Mr. Speaker, that I think we should move an amendment to this, 

putting in the Advisory Committee to the Wheat Board, and I was about to say that I think that was the 

thinking of the Leader of the Opposition, because he had mentioned the prominent key men in farm 

organizations and that if they, as the Advisory Committee, with full knowledge of the situation, of the 

farm problem and farm desires should see fit to recommend that cash advances be paid, then I think, 

with all due consideration, that would have a tremendous weight with the people and we would be 

prepared to go along with that. 

 

I think in fairness to the amendment, what we are attempting to do is get a basis of discussion, 

something that we could go with, something that would be in the interests of the farmers, something of a 

constructive nature, to make some constructive recommendation. 

 

I would therefore move this amendment to the amendment, seconded by the member for Wilkie (Mr. 

Horsman): 

 

"That the words ‘Advisory Committee to the’ be inserted before the words ‘Canadian Wheat Board’ 

where they last occur." 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The debate is now on the amendment to the amendment. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words about the sub-amendment. This 

illustrates, I think, to what lengths the Liberal party is prepared to go in order to escape responsibility for 

what it does. 

 

The objection was taken that the Canadian Wheat Board is simply a group of employees of the Federal 

Government, and it was argued, quite rightly and properly, that one should not expect them to come and 

recommend policy to the Parliament of Canada. Now it is suggested that the recommendation has got to 

come from a place twice removed - from the Advisory Committee, and I suppose the member for Maple 

Creek visualises the Advisory Committee making a recommendation to the Canadian Wheat Board, and 

then he visualises the Canadian Wheat Board passing on this recommendation, which they would not 

make themselves. The reason he has proposed the amendment to the amendment is that he knows they 

wouldn’t make themselves. As a matter of fact, if they couldn’t make it themselves, how can they be 

expected to pass it on from the Advisory Committee? The truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that there 

is only one place that this recommendation needs to be made to - and that is to the Government and 

Parliament of Canada, and to expect a group of advisers to the Wheat Board to make a recommendation 

to the Parliament of Canada is just utterly silly.  



 

March 20, 1956 

37 
 

As a matter of fact, if the hon. member would take the trouble to read the Wheat Board Act and see what 

powers this Advisory Committee really have, he will find that they have the power to advise (informally, 

without any binding effect) the Wheat Board in matters of policy. But this does not come within the 

field of policy of the Canadian Wheat Board. This requires an amendment to the Wheat Board Act, 

which can only be passed by the Parliament of Canada. Therefore, the Advisory Committee has no 

jurisdiction whatever to entertain or recommend or discuss changes in that legislation. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — They sure will be pleased to know that. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Well, as a matter of fact, if my hon. friend doesn't know that, he certainly 

isn't aware of any of the fundamental principles of law or of the constitution. 

 

That would be like suggesting to some group of civil servants that they recommend an amendment to the 

Act which gives them their existence. Certainly no group of civil servants can be expected to make 

recommendations on that. To ask the Advisory Committee to the Wheat Board to make this 

recommendation you must have in mind who they are to make it to. 

 

Now, who are they to make it to? They cannot make it to the Wheat Board, because they have no legal 

right to take this matter into consideration. Who must they make it to? This Committee must get off in a 

hotel room somewhere by itself, unknown to the Wheat Board because the Wheat Board is opposed to 

this proposal, and make arrangements privately to meet with some members of Parliament to try to get 

the Act amended. Now that, to my notion, is the height of absurdity. If the Parliament of Canada wants 

to make this amendment, they will make it. If we have any recommendation to make we should make it 

to the Parliament of Canada. The people of Canada are the people who ought to have the rights and 

privilege of making that recommendation, and nobody else. 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder whether this is an attempt to 

confuse the people of this province in regard to the issue before this House, today, or whether it is just 

another exhibition of the confused state of the minds of the members opposite. 

 

Certainly, when one looks at this whole matter and the way the situation has been handled throughout 

the entire year, there has been nothing but confusion reigning throughout the entire season; and this, in 

my opinion, Mr. Speaker, simply confuses the issue a great deal more than it has been confused. 

 

I would like to point out some of the actions that have been taken place that lead me to believe that some 

of the action taken by the Federal Government and the people opposite is a deliberate attempt to 

confuse. I remember quite well, last August, when we were getting ready to harvest our crop, we were 

told that there would be ample wheat moved to take care of the wishes of the farmers of western 

Canada; and then after we had commenced to harvest our crop and we were ready to move some of this 

wheat to market, we 

  



 

March 20, 1956 

38 
 

were told that there was no space available. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I am afraid the hon. member is out of order. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Yes, we are debating the amendment to the amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. J. T. Douglas: — All right then, I would just say that anything that has been offered in this 

amendment to the amendment is simply another attempt to confuse the issue and to allow the people 

opposite to get out of a very embarrassing situation. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — I understand the House is to adjourn at 5:15, and in that case I would like 

to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:15 o'clock p.m. 


