



















































Hansard: March 23, 1956


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Twelfth Legislature 

 

32nd Day 

 

Friday, March 23, 1956 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

Re Press Report 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are 

proceeded with I would like to make reference to a serious mis-impression created by an editorial in the 

‘Leader-Post’ and a subsequent cartoon. The editorial is headed: “Humiliating Secession Talk” and 

reads: 

 

“Mr. W. M. Johnson, C.C.F. member of Parliament for Kindersley, and Agriculture Minister Nollet of 

the Saskatchewan C.C.F. Government, certainly are not to be commended for resurrecting the old 

bogey of secession of the west from the rest of Canada.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I never resurrected any bogey whatever. I never made any reference to any knowledge of 

secession talk, other than mention of it being made in the Legislature here when I said, when I was 

speaking, “Some of the hon. members opposite said there is a secession talk in the west”; and I am going 

to say, Mr. Speaker, that unless our national government very soon provides a comprehensive marketing 

policy for this country, they are going to have more of that kind of talk, and it is indeed disturbing to 

anyone. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, regarding condoning this kind of talk — my position has always 

been that I would never condone secession talk, and regret if anyone talks of secession. I have always 

expressed the opinion that we should have the kind of equality of opportunity that would unite this 

country more firmly together, by finding a solution to our economic problems. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I want to correct any mis-impression created in the minds of the general public 

by this particular editorial, and I hope the ‘Leader-Post’ will correct the impression that they have left, 

rather, the mis-impression that they have left. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I have no desire to rule as “Rex Toby Nollet” in Saskatchewan or anywhere 

else. I will always remain a member of the proletariat. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:35 o’clock p.m. 

 

 


