



















































Hansard: March 09, 1956


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session – Twelfth Legislature 

22nd Day 

 

Friday, March 9, 1956 

 

The House met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

TV PROGRAMME 

 

Hon. J. H. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural & Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry the 

Committee interfered with our little show at the Museum, last evening. It was very impressive, and our 

Indian friends were there in all their glory. 

 

The TV cameras were there, and at least the hon. member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Dunfield) and myself 

will want to look at this, and probably some other members. It is going to be on CKCK-TV tonight at 

6:30, and apparently it is going to be on again on Sunday, on the programme called 'Topic'. I thought the 

hon. members would like to know. 

 

PROGRESS AT UNITY 

 

Mr. J. W. Horseman (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I 

would like to draw attention of the members to something that will interest everyone. It concerns the 

town of Unity, and is a sort of a red-letter day for that little town, and, believe me, it is one of the best 

small towns in the province. Today, they are opening the new 'Selkirk' hotel. It was built by a group of 

men who were born and brought up in that community; they have other interests in other parts of the 

country. I would just like to tell you, if you ever come up there you will get the most modern and 

up-to-date accommodation that you will find in any hotel in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with my very limited knowledge of places such as this - I do drop into the beverage rooms 

occasionally; but I can tell you that this is the finest beverage room and bar that I have seen anywhere in 

this province. 

 

There was also another business place which opened in our town, today, and that is Leeson’s Store. It 

was built by a young man who was born and brought up in that town, too. Half of the premises of the 

bottom storey will be taken up by the Canadian Bank of Commerce, and the balance will be his ladies 

store. I just thought I would mention this progress in the House. 

 

POWER SERVICE TO GLASLYN 

 

Mr. A. H. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I 

would like to get some information from the Minister in charge of Power, if I could have his 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

2 

attention, concerning the town of Glaslyn. I have just had a phone call informing me that some power 

poles had been delivered to the town some time during last fall or the early part of the winter, and I 

understand the town or the village had paid their money into the Power Corporation to have the facilities 

of the Corporation extended to that town, and now I understand the poles are being moved out of the 

town of Glaslyn. I was wondering if the Minister could give us any information as to whether they were 

going ahead with the distribution of power in that town, or why the poles were being removed at this 

time. 

 

Hon. J. A. Darling (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the question of the Leader 

of the Opposition, I might say that I don't know why the poles are being removed, but service to Glaslyn 

and on further up to Meadow Lake is on our programme for this year. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed, from Thursday, March 8, 1956, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): That Mr. Speaker do now leave the chair (The Assembly to go 

into Committee of Supply). 

 

Hon. C. C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, not being a farmer or representing a rural 

constituency, I will leave such matters as wheat advances, farm-stored grain, parity prices and so forth, 

to those better qualified to deal with them. However, I wish to say here that I feel that, for the moment, I 

represent Labour, including all wage-earners of the province, and we sympathize with a farmer in his 

plight of not being able to dispose of a splendid last year's crop, with the resultant shortage of cash in his 

hands. Wage-earners are entitled by law in this province to be paid every week. In legal phraseology 

here is what Section 4, Clause 1 of The Workmen's Wage Act says: 

 

"The entire amount of the wages of every such workman shall be paid him in Canadian currency or in 

the notes of a chartered bank doing business in Canada or by accepted cheque, as provided in Section 

2, at the end of every seven days if his employment does not sooner cease or at the time it ceases if the 

employment is for a period of less than seven days." 

 

That is the end of this Section. Payment at the end of every seven days is, of course, not insisted upon; 

but the section of the Act is there if it is required. Most employers pay twice a month; some pay once a 

month. Thousands of wage-earners receive barely enough money to meet their bills from one pay-day to 

another, but it is some security to be able to do that. 

 

In comparison, the farmer, with no cash coming in month after month is in and unenviable position, and 

Labour is right behind him in his fight to get his just due with some form of regularity. 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 
 

3 

In a budget expenditure of $87,147,000 the amount of $765,000 assigned to the Department of Labour 

seems quite modest. But I suggest, Mr. Speaker, it is to be used directly, or indirectly, to maintain or 

improve the hours, wages, and working conditions of many thousands of people in this province. 

 

It is only a few short years back, Mr. Speaker, I recall sitting in this House that agriculture was the chief 

industry in Saskatchewan and that more than 65 per cent of the citizens lived on farms. Agriculture still 

predominates, but there has been a gradual change, and now it is estimated that the situation between 

urban and rural is about equal - that 50 per cent of our people are on farms, the other 50 per cent lived in 

the towns, villages and cities. Thousands, particularly the young people, have gone into the towns and 

cities and become part of the labour force of the province in one way or another, whether it be in a 

clerical capacity, office help, skilled workers or unskilled workers. All will benefit in some way through 

the legislation we have had on the statutes of this province for the past ten or twelve years. 

 

I know it must be difficult for young people, 18 or 20 years of age, to realize what has happened in this 

province over the past ten years insofar as our legislation is concerned, because they were just starting to 

school when this Government assumed office. They will know nothing of the long hours, low wages and 

poor working conditions their parents and grandparents had to contend with, and quite possibly, take the 

vast improvements now in effect as a matter of course, and are unaware as to where the responsibility 

lies for these improvements. 

 

It will be quite in order, at this point, Mr. Speaker, to make a few comparisons with what is done 

elsewhere in Canada. Let us first take our Holidays With Pay Act, passed in late 1944, which provides 

two weeks’ holidays with pay each year, or proportionate amount for part of a year. No other province 

provides more than one week, excepting Manitoba, which provides the one week for the first five years 

and two weeks after five years’ service. We provide extra pay for time worked on the eight statutory 

holidays, Christmas, New Year's, Good Friday, Labour Day, Dominion Day and so forth, and no 

reduction in weekly or monthly pay can be made if these days are not worked. No other province has 

this provision on the statutes. 

 

The Workermen's Compensation Act has been greatly improved since 1944, and all provinces west of 

the Maritimes have gradually brought their Act up to equal hours. It can be truthfully said that injured 

workmen or families of workmen killed in industry in all parts of Canada can thank the Saskatchewan 

Government for leading the way in giving them a better break. 

 

We come to hours of work. We have a 44-hour week in the eight cities and nine larger towns, and 48 

hours over the balance of the province. The only other province which beats ours is British Columbia, 

which has a 44-hour week over its entire province. We are ahead of the other eight. 

 

The minimum wage of $26 a week in the eight cities and nine larger towns, though not as high as in the 

United States, is the highest in Canada. The amounts mentioned do not indicate affluence, but do 

maintain a floor upon which the wage rate for employment with more responsibilities can be based. 

Much more could be said and detail given, but time does not permit. 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

4 

the February issue of ‘Maclean's Magazine’ contains an article entitled “How Long Will Clifford 

Williams Stay in Jail” – (no relation, Mr. Speaker). Coming from a broken home in Montreal, and 

getting into bad company, he, along with several other youths were involved in nine charges of robbery, 

which netted them a little over $1,000. Not condoning the offense for a moment (they all should have 

been punished), but Williams received the almost unheard-of sentence for a first offender of 28 years in 

the penitentiary. By comparison, also in Montreal, a hardened criminal, with fourteen previous 

convictions, was given three years when caught following a drug store holdup at gun point. Hundreds of 

similar comparisons could be made. This youth, 20 years of age, uncertain, bewildered, not knowing 

anything of court procedure, with no money to hire a lawyer to defend him, pleaded guilty and was 

immediately sentenced to 28 years, five of which he has now served. I consider this to be a blot on the 

judiciary of the Province of Quebec. Prominent citizens, including Rabbi Fender, Mr. George H. Corbett 

and Mrs. Esther Hale, a daughter of T. B. MacCauley, president of Sun Life Insurance Company, have 

made every effort over the past two or three to have his sentence reduced, but have been frustrated at 

every turn. To quote Mrs. Hale, she says: 

 

“Nobody seems willing to touch the Williams case. Some are indifferent, some are busy and some are 

afraid to have anything to do with convicts, criminals and penitentiaries.” 

 

Even the Minister of Justice, the Hon. Stewart Garson, has been appealed to, but has passed the buck to 

the Solicitor-General, who, in turn, has passed it on to the Director of Remission Service. It is difficult, 

Mr. Speaker, to understand the callous indifference of those men in higher places, who could, if they so 

wished, cut the red-tape and musty precedent and correct this glaring example of injustice. The shadow 

of Judge Jeffries of the 16th Century seems still to hang over us in this modern so-called advanced age 

when we think that nothing like the Clifford Williams case could happen here. 

 

Over the past 10 or 12 years I find, Mr. Speaker, a much better feeling on the part of employers towards 

their employees. I am very pleased to be able to say that. Most heads of firms no longer consider their 

help as just another commodity but as men and women with home responsibilities, and the realization 

that these people need enough income to maintain a decent standard of living. In short, there is a much 

kindlier and generous feeling on the part of the employers, and with the prosperity of the past decade has 

come a willingness to pass on more of the profits to salaried persons. This, too, is of great benefit to the 

economy of the country, because the more money that gets into circulation, the more is spent in other 

ways to the ultimate benefit of all. 

 

I cannot help but feel, Mr. Speaker, that the actions of the Government, the largest employer in the 

province, have had a great deal to do with bringing this desirable situation about. Civil servants and 

employees of Crown Corporations, whether inside or outside the scope of the various collective 

bargaining agreements, have good hours, good working conditions and good salaries, comparing the 

favourable with those in other provinces. The lowest starting rate for a Grade 1 clerk is $148 a month in 

the civil service, which is quite good when compared to salaries paid ten or even as recently as five 

years ago. Other employers have followed suit, and, together with a minimum 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 
 

5 

wage of $112 a month, it has made the lot of the young man or woman starting out in life much easier. 

 

Of course the Canadian Manufacturers’ Association officially requested us to keep down increases or 

other benefits to the wage-earner, although, at the same time, many of their members have the reputation 

in this Department of being good employers. One example comes to mind — the Cook brothers, North 

West Iron Works of Regina. The employees are well treated and think a great deal of their managers 

who both hold office in the Canadian Manufacturers’ Association. 

 

In 1944, our genial Attorney-General fathered a Civil Rights Bill of which he has been justly proud over 

the years. During this Session he has, let us say, grandfathered an Act to prevent discrimination in regard 

to employment and in regard to membership in trade unions by reason of race, religion, religious creed, 

colour, ethnic or national origin. While it might not be feasible to pass legislation making it an offense, 

it would be a splendid thing if the principle of age not be used in discriminating against middle-aged or 

older persons. It has been said that a person 10 years older than another person is considered by him to 

be old. That is, a youth of 20 considers a man of 30 to be old; the latter considers a man of 40 to be old 

and so on up the line and so we get to the 50’s and the 60’s - people in those brackets are often 

discriminated against on account of age. 

 

This is a shortsighted principle, Mr. Speaker, because it is a fact that many people are in their prime of 

life at this time and can do a good job for their employers in a great percentage of cases. Thousands of 

middle-aged persons were born right in this province and have every right to employment here. Older 

persons, who did a certain amount of pioneering, also have every right to employment, and, if able to do 

the work, should not be discriminated against. Let us realize that some of the reluctance to hire 

middle-aged or older people is due to various reasons, one of them being pension schemes, but this 

would not be too difficult to overcome. There is a tendency to treat persons statistically, and the human 

factor is sometimes lost sight of. 

 

To turn now to strikes, Mr. Speaker, the past year has been remarkably free from work stoppages, there 

having been only three involving 65 employees, with a total of 2,329 man-days lost. The 30 employees 

of Mid-West Chemicals Ltd. went out on October 21st over a wage dispute, and are still out. The Union 

terms it a “lock-out” and the management calls it a “strike”; but whoever is right does not alter the fact 

that it has been bad for all concerned. The employees have lost their wages, management have lost their 

profit, the Government has lost its royalty payments, and the railway has lost its traffic. The Department 

has been in on the situation while negotiations were still going on away back in October, and since the 

work stoppage has convened or attended 27 meetings with or between the two parties. It is probably the 

most difficult situation we have had for the past 12 years, both parties taking an adamant stand and 

refusing to compromise to any extent. Our officers have again convened meetings between the two 

parties, sitting daily since last Wednesday. Progress has been slow, but in the final analysis this strike 

will be settled by both parties bargaining in good faith, and telegrams from well-meaning unionists to 

members of the Legislature claiming lack of interest on the part of the Government or recommending 

that the plant to be taken over by the Government, are of little or no assistance. 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

6 

Over a year ago the American Federation of Labour and the Congress of Industrial Organization at a 

meeting held in Miami, Florida, agreed on a merger. It has logically followed that the Canadian 

counterparts, the Trades and Labour Congress of Canada and the Canadian Congress of Labour, would 

also amalgamate. A brief history of these groups would, I am sure, Mr. Speaker, be of interest to the 

members in this House. 

 

The American Federation of Labour, usually referred to by its initials the A. F. of L., was founded in the 

late 1880’s by Samuel Gompers who held office until his death in 1927, when he was replaced by 

William Green. In 1938 John L. Lewis took the United Mine Workers out of the A. F. of L. and, with 

eight other unions, formed the Congress of Industrial Organization (C. I. O.) which included such large 

unions as the steelworkers, auto workers, electrical workers and so forth. The A. F. of L. had been 

founded upon an organization of craft unions were employees all did the same type of work, such as 

plumbers, carpenters, printers and many others. The C. I. O. organized on a plant basis and included all 

groups of employees, watchmen, skilled workers, helpers, office staff and so forth - all of those who 

were employed by the same employer. It should be noted here that a number of railway unions did not 

affiliate with either group. These two organizations have carried on, maintaining their autonomy for the 

past 17 years, and it should be of great advantage to labour now that their differences are being resolved. 

George Meany of the A. F. of L., who originally came from the plumbers’ union, is president, and 

Walter Reuther, who is 13 years Meany’s junior, will be Vice-President. The T. & L. C. and C. C. L. in 

Canada have followed suit, and a new organization called “The Canadian Labour Congress” will have 

Claude Jodoin of the Trades and Labour Congress as President. 

 

It will be remembered, I think, by most of us in this House that Mr. Jodoin was elected President at the 

1954 convention held in Regina, succeeding Mr. Bengough. Final amalgamation arrangements will be 

made at a joint convention being held in Toronto next month. The joining together of these two great 

congresses is a forward step for labour in Canada and will end the occasional raiding tactics, together 

with jurisdictional disputes, which sometimes resulted in serious work stoppages to the detriment of all 

concerned, including the general public. 

 

On behalf of his Government, Mr. Speaker, I wish the new setup every success for the future. 

 

The Wages and Hours Branch is perhaps the most important in the Department inasmuch as it 

administers the legislation which directly affects the wage-earners, usually those in the lower income 

brackets. Many employees visit or write to the Branch during the year with complaints as to 

underpayment, long hours of work, non-payment for holidays and so forth. In the most recent period for 

which figures are available - from April 1, 1955, to the end of December in the same year – 8,500 

inspections were made and approximately $50,000 was collected for 1,270 persons. While we do not 

prosecute through the courts until every other means of collection have failed, it was found necessary to 

take 26 cases to court during this period. Most employers try to live up to the law, but occasionally we 

find one who will evade payment under one pretext or another. It is the repeater, or habitual offender, 

that we have to watch. 

 

We turn now, Mr. Speaker, to the Theatres Branch. We have the amount of $39,000 in our estimates for 

this Branch, which pays its own way by 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 
 

7 

bringing in $30,000 in license fees, etc., and $84,000 in censor’s fees. Pictures rejected in their entirety 

by the Film Censor numbered nine, eight of which were later approved after deletions of scenes 

inconsistent with the provisions of The Theatres Act. Eliminations were made in 12 other pictures. Nine 

pictures were reviewed by Appeal Boards, and all but one were passed. 

 

Sophistication seems to wield considerable influence in the entertainment field, and some people seem 

to be of the opinion that censorship is not only unnecessary but undesirable, and that anything, 

regardless of content, should be allowed. Some motion pictures use the filthiest of words and 

expressions, with nothing to do with the theme or story, but it appears to be considered ultra-smart to put 

them into the dialogue. Censors who cut out or reject these pictures are immediately subjected to strong 

protest from the film owners, who then use every means at their command to have the decisions 

reversed, and with some success. The usual procedure is to apply for a Board of Appeal consisting of 

five or, sometimes, seven persons, which often pass such pictures with a few cuts. If, however, the 

Board agrees with the censor and also rejects the picture, every effort is made to have it again reviewed 

as a reconstructed picture, which merely means that the more objectionable parts have been removed. 

 

Provincial censors are played off against each other by representatives of these film companies, who 

lament the amount of money they will lose, and claim that censors of other provinces have passed the 

same picture, that most of the States have passed it and so forth; they endeavour to see that it is passed in 

all other places. 

 

I am beginning to think that eight or 10 censor Boards in Canada are too many, and that the same work 

could be done by two Boards, consisting of outstanding, fair and honourable persons who would stand 

for no nonsense on the part of the film owners and not be subject to political pressure. It is doubtful if 

Quebec would ever enter into such a scheme. Their laws are quite strict; children under 16 are not 

allowed in picture shows at all, following a fire 35 or 40 years ago in which 127 children lost their lives. 

They will not permit pictures containing a reference to divorce to be shown in that province. But, 

leaving Quebec out, a censor board for the other eastern provinces, on which each province could be 

represented, and one for the west, centrally located (perhaps in Regina or Edmonton) should be enough. 

Provincial governments would lose some revenue and the film companies might complain that their 

pictures would then need to be transported greater distances, but that would not be too serious. I 

understand that the Minister in charge of The Theatres Act in Manitoba has somewhat similar views. 

 

I was quite interested, Mr. Speaker, to read an article in the Herbert ‘Herald’ a few weeks ago, in which 

the Editor complained of the broadcast of a lewd play, written several hundred years ago. He expressed 

his views very well and was much more convincing than the reply he got from an official of the CBC. 

Our young people should have some protection from this kind of play, produced under the guise of ‘art’ 

or ‘culture’; and I commend the Editor for his views, and for expressing them publicly. I may say, Mr. 

Speaker, I don't know the Editor; do not even know his name; never met him; but here is what he said, 

and the Moose Jaw ‘Times’ reprinted it in their issue of December 29, 1955. I will hurry through it: 

 

”Back long before the time when any of our readers were born, William Congreve wrote a play called 

‘Love for Love’ which was presented in 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

8 

English theatres. Those who cared to see the bawdy bedroom farce which glibly referred to 

whore-masters and bedroom intrigue paid their money and took seats in the theatre. 

 

“Last Wednesday night we were amazed to find our living room flooded with this tripe which 

emanated from our radio, courtesy of the people of Canada, through their Corporation which, if this 

sort of thing continues, will come to be known as the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation 

 

“This, mind you, in the name of ‘Culture’. Wednesday night for some obscure reason is supposed to 

be culture night. If ‘Love for Love’ be culture, then so is Minsky’s burlesque. Clever yes; but cultured, 

not for a minute. Unless, of course, a very old play is, like old wine, supposed to be good no matter 

how bad it is. 

 

“We noted with interest that no less than sixteen actors were required to bring this tripe to the ears of 

Canadian men, women and children; for children hardly would be in bed at 9:15 p.m. In other words, 

it would cost the Canadian people several hundred dollars to have this slush bucket dumped in their 

homes. How long are they going to stand for it? How long until they tell their member of Parliament 

that they no longer intend to put up with this sort of thing? How long until they make the CBC realize 

that radio invades the sanctity of the home - as private broadcasters realized from the earliest days of 

radio. How many more dry, dead bones of dirty old drama are they going to dig up and shake around 

on your parlour broadloom? 

 

“This we know for sure: If a weekly paper published the story of ‘Love for Love’ in the language as 

presented by the CBC, we would have many requests from people who wished their subscriptions 

cancelled and their money refunded.” 

 

I will go on, now, to the Elevators and Hoist Branch - the Steamboilers’ Branch, it is usually called; and 

I will make a brief reference here, for the information of farmers, in connection with something new in 

the line of fertilizers. It is called anhydrous ammonia, which is quite similar, as a liquid and gas, to 

propane. It was brought into the province last spring, and applied to the soil as a liquid fertilizer. In some 

cases results were very encouraging, and it is expected that a considerably larger acreage 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 
 

9 

will be treated in this manner next spring. Anhydrous ammonia, for this purpose, is contained in a 

pressure vessel designed for 200 pounds pressure, and is subject to rigid requirements of the Branch, as 

it is very toxic and dangerous because of this pressure. New regulations, based on international 

standards and last year’s experience, will be issued shortly to further facilitate the use of this new 

commodity. I would just mention to the farmers who may be using it in another few weeks that it is 

highly dangerous. 

 

The Elevator and Hoist Branch has an excellent record over the past five years. At about 122 fatal 

elevator accidents in Canada during this period, only one occurred in Saskatchewan. This was in an 

institution where the officials had been repeatedly ordered to install safety gates. The order was ignored 

until after the accident which resulted in the widow securing a claim of approximately $15,000 through 

the courts. This is a good example of the results of a non-co-operation with the Safety Branch of this 

Department, and citizens are urged to follow the recommendations of inspectors and eliminate hazards, 

not only in elevators, but wherever they are found. These men are not unreasonable, but are interested in 

the general safety and welfare of employees and the public. 

 

Elevator inspections are made every six months and old elevators are required to be brought up to code 

standards, where possible; and where this is not possible: to be replaced with new installations. 

 

The office of the Fire Commissioner (taking that Branch next), is operated by a one per cent tax on all 

fire premiums paid in the province, and requires approximately $100,000 for the coming fiscal year. We 

find that the citizens of our province are becoming more fire-conscious each year, due no doubt to the 

activities of this Branch. At the same time there is room for improvement, as indicated by the figure of 

$3,125,000 fire loss in the calendar year of 1955. Twenty-four persons, including 12 children, lost their 

lives in fires, which record, while in comparison with some provinces is quite good, can and must be 

improved. Fires do not happen; they start, in all cases, in some way that can be prevented, and all that is 

necessary to eliminate them is the co-operation of the people of this province by taking precautions and 

using plain common sense. Smoking, again, is the main cause, which never needs to start a fire if 

smokers are careful. 

 

An amount of $18,890 appears in our budget under Civil Defence, which Branch is actually under the 

Department of Social Welfare, but as far as fire is concerned, is operated by the Fire Commissioner and 

his staff. No Provincial Government’s revenues are included, as half the cost is borne by the Federal 

Government and half by the Office of the Fire Commissioner, which, as previously indicated, operates 

on a one per cent tax of the fire insurance premiums. The Federal Government, through the Civil 

Defence Committee, has provided us with three tracks which have been used extensively for training 

purposes. During the winter months they are left at strategic points in the province in order to be 

available, if required, in an emergency. One is located at Bengough, one at Melfort and the other has 

been loaned to the city of North Battleford, after they had some of their fire-fighting equipment 

damaged a few weeks ago. 

 

Our fire inspectors have given 222 ten-minute lectures to Saskatchewan school children, numbering 

approximately 15,000. Fire prevention 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

10 

films were shown to these children and also to approximately 19,000 adults. Instructors conducted 

three-day training schools in 19 towns and villages and gave training to 500 volunteer firemen. At the 

present time two types of three-day courses at schools are being offered, and a total of 1,460 

Saskatchewan citizens have been given instructions. We feel that, as a result of these courses, many 

lives have been saved and hundreds of thousands of property damage averted by the fact that these men 

now have a good working knowledge of fire prevention and fighting fires. 

 

I have a list here of winners, Mr. Speaker, of the 1955 ‘Fire Prevention Poster Competition’ sponsored 

by the office of the Fire Commissioner. I will just take a minute to read off those who won: 

 

Public school – 1st Prize, Chris Hersymik, North Battleford, Grade VIII 

   2nd Prize, Benny Kelly, Connaught School, Regina, Grade VIII 

   3rd Prize, Elizabeth Denischuk, Chauser School, Wroxton, Grade VIII 

 

High school – 1st Prize, Ron Kohlruss, Balfour-Tech., Regina, Grade XII 

   2nd Prize, Arlene Yonte, Langenburg, Grade XI 

   3rd Prize, Leona Friesen, Bedford Road Collegiate, Saskatoon, Grade XII; 

 

There were three posters which were considered to be worth honourable mention – Voda Swedberg, 

Holdfast; Edward Keating, Weyburn; and Algie Brusinnas, Weyburn. 

 

I want to say a few words now on Apprenticeship, Mr. Speaker. We want our tradesmen to become 

skilled in their various occupations, and modern apprenticeship is a scheme sponsored by the Provincial 

and Federal Governments to assist industry in training and improving tradesmen in trades where it is 

considered desirable for the safety and welfare of the public. To date, the following trades have been 

designated as being in need of assistance: motor vehicle repair, pipefitting, plumbing, body repair, sheet 

metal, electrical arc welding, gas welding, carpentry, electrical, brick-laying, barbering and beauty 

culture. In order to promote apprenticeship the Department of Labour employs nine trade instructors, 

who spend about six months instructing and six-months supervising and examining indentured 

apprenticeships. 

 

Although training is, at present, supervised by the Department of Education, Labour is responsible for 

the training, syllabus and all costs in connection with the programme. All training is done in Saskatoon 

in buildings formally occupied by the Air Force, which are not satisfactory; except for the trades of auto 

body repair and welding, which is carried on in the Moose Jaw Technical School. 

 

I suppose our friends from the trucking industry will be wondering what I might have to say this year. 

Actually, Mr. Speaker, I did not plan on referring to them at all until the February issue of ‘Motor 

Carrier’, published in Vancouver, was brought to my attention. Apparently statements made by several 

members in this House, including myself, a year 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 
 

11 

a year ago, had some of them worried; and in an article under the heading ‘Roadmen Support S. M. T. 

A.’s Drive for Higher Ceilings’, they take us to task. I had almost forgotten the matter referred to, but 

since their spokesman wishes to keep the issue alive I am quite willing to refer to again. 

 

Here is what the member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. Kohaly) had to say, a year ago. It referred to a Bill 

which was before the House and had to do with allowing 1,000 pounds extra for mud, snow, ice or 

whatever it might be that would gather on the bottom of the trucks. Here is the quotation that they have 

brought out again: 

 

“The big trucks in interprovincial transport are usually the ones you are after. They come into 

Saskatchewan from states and provinces with higher load limits than ours, said Robert Kohaly, 

Progressive-Conservative from Souris-Estevan.” 

 

The next quotation: 

 

“What this is doing is increasing the load limit from 40,000 to 41,000 pounds. Our highways are 

suffering enough without increasing the weight they have to bear. If the truckers are worried about 

running over-weight due to ice or mud sticking to their vehicles, they can solve their problems by only 

loading 39,000 pounds, complained A. L. S. Brown, C.C.F. member for Bengough, in hitting at 

proposed provisions allowing 1,000 pounds tolerance, over the 40,000 pound single axle limit.” 

 

This was, I think, later, allowed. Here is the next quotation: 

 

“I have seen evidence of our roads deteriorating due to the passage of trucks loaded like boxcars 

travelling at 40 miles an hour. I challenge anyone to stand on one of our blacktop highways while one 

of these big trucks rolls by. You can feel the truck shaking the road to pieces, claimed C.C.F.’er 

Robert Walker, of Hanley. 

 

“If we allow the truckers a 1,000-pound tolerance on their load limit, this year, it will only be a 

question of another year until they are back seeking more concessions. Such an industry should be 

able to afford the purchase of their own right-of-way across the country, building their own roads and 

operating on so much per mile basis for each vehicle, thought Labour Minister Williams, C.C.F. 

M.L.A. for Regina.” 

 

The last remarks were mine. But my suggestion, Mr. Speaker, if ever carried out (and I don't suppose it 

ever will be) would be a wonderful thing for the motoring public; but it seems particularly to have 

incensed the writer of the 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

12 

article, who has become almost incoherent in his reply. Statements made by me during the last Session 

seemed to have touched off quite a few letters to the press - the Premier and myself. My primary reason 

in a referring to the trucks at all, was to call attention to the large number of accidents in which they 

were involved during 1953. While I haven't the figures for 1954 (I did not intend using them), I am 

going to repeat the figures for 1953, which were probably approximately the same. For that year, out of 

116 persons killed on the highway, 29 were in accidents involving commercial vehicles. Of 2,293 

non-fatal accidents, 339 involved commercial trucks. Out of 7,850 accidents where there was property 

damage, 1,727 involved trucks. 

 

Following a particularly unreasonable letter to the ‘Star-Phoenix’ entitled ‘No Trucks with Trucks’, and 

an editorial in the same paper, I felt obligated to reply and did so, and it appeared in the ‘Star-Phoenix’ 

of March 26th, last year. This is what I said at that time: 

 

“I would agree that most of the drivers are professionals and are courteous to the extent that they will 

often stop and assist a motorist in difficulty, or allow traffic to pass without hindrance.” 

 

The day following the article, this article appeared in the ‘Leader Post’: 

 

“Two die in car tanker collision near Wymark. Three others were injured. It is dangerous enough to 

have these behemoths travel the highway, meeting other traffic, both travelling 50 miles an hour with 

only a few inches of clearance. The loss of life is my main concern, followed by property damage and 

the beating our highways take from the heavy trucks.” 

 

I rather expected criticism from someone connected with the industry, but can see no good reason for the 

Saskatoon ‘Star-Phoenix’ getting its editorial snoot into the matter. The person who wrote ‘No Trucks 

with Trucks’ is only expressing his own opinion, which is no more liable to be correct than the views 

held by others. 

 

In neither the editorial nor the article by the Association was there the slightest expression of regret for 

fatalities or the high accident rate involving commercial vehicles. It would look better if they got 

together and did something to the eliminate, or at least bring to a minimum, the accidents in which they 

are involved - something along the lines of seeing that the drivers have a proper rest before they start 

out. In this connection I have a clipping here, and this is what it says: 

 

“Laws which forbid transport drivers to operate long hours in Ontario make ‘bennies’, ‘goof balls’, 

‘co-pilots’ and pills used to keep truckers awake unnecessary, Traffic Inspector Robert Kerr said, 

today.” 

 

I haven't time to go into that anymore, Mr. Speaker, but I might say that I have nothing against the 

truckers personally; in fact I have 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 
 

13 

found them to be a pretty good bunch of fellows. Drivers usually are of a good type and cannot prevent 

many of the accidents in which they are involved. However, I am concerned with the inconvenience and 

danger to the public by the fact that so many large trucks are on the highways. There are 142 per cent 

more on the highways now than there were ten years ago. I am also concerned with the number of fatal 

accidents and the damage to our roads. 

 

I have some information here with regard to the Electrical Inspection Branch, which I am afraid I am not 

going to be able to go into; but I am just going to finish with this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

During the past holiday season (Christmas and New Year's) there were, as is usual, a large number of 

fatal accidents, especially in the eastern provinces. It became so bad that the Attorney General of 

Ontario called for a conference to investigate what he called ‘a cancer’ which had grown up in the 

nation’s driving. I suggest we do not have to look very far for the ‘cancer’ which can be described in one 

word - speed. There is no need to build cars that will travel 100 miles an hour. Police, ambulances, some 

doctors, might be accepted, but the general public need not be in such a hurry as to require these terrific 

speeds. Automobile companies are largely to blame by competing with each other in getting out faster 

and more powerful cars, and as long as they are made a certain percentage of our drivers will use this 

quite unnecessary excessive speed to the danger of themselves and everybody else. However, we have 

thousands upon thousands of cars on the road now capable of these speeds; and I suggest a way to clip 

the wings of the fellow who drives dangerously or recklessly is to put a 60-mile governor on his car for 

the first offense, followed perhaps by a warning; and then cut him down to 50 miles an hour for the 

second offense; 40 for a third. By that time he will have realized that the authorities mean business, and 

would probably develop into a pretty sensible driver. I feel that future generations will think back on this 

as a foolhardy generation insofar as highway traffic is concerned. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate you on having now served almost 12 years in your office, 

which has exacted a good deal of tact, good judgment and impartiality; and on behalf of the Department 

of Labour and myself, I wish you many more years of happy and active life. We will miss you in this 

Chamber. 

 

I will support the budget. 

 

Hon. J. W. Burton (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, before dealing with the budget and how it 

affects the various branches of the Department of the Provincial Secretary, there are several observations 

I should like to make. First, I would like to join my colleague, the Hon. Minister of Labour (Hon. Mr. 

Williams), who has just taken his seat, in congratulating you on having filled the position of Speaker of 

this Legislature for a longer period of time than any previous Speaker. But above, that, throughout those 

12 years you have presided with fairness, honour and dignity. In addition, permit me to say that I have 

had the pleasure of knowing, and working with you for many years before you assumed your present 

office, and in that time I have found that, while you are a man of deep and sincere convictions, your 

belief in democracy is so deep-rooted that you have always taken the stand that the other side has a right 

to be heard. Indeed, it may well be said of you, 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

14 

that while you may not believe a word of what the other person may want to say, you will fight to the 

death for him to have the right to say it. 

 

It was with regret that I learned that you had refused to let your name stand again in the constituency 

you have so ably represented during the past 18 years, but your desire to make way for a younger person 

must be appreciated. However, when the time comes for you to vacate your Chair for the last time, be it 

either this year, or next, I am sure that all fair-minded people in all parts of the province will join with us 

when we say, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant’. 

 

I also wish to congratulate my colleague, the Hon. Minister of Labour, for the able manner in which he 

has discharged his duties for the past 12 years as the first full-fledged Minister of Labour in 

Saskatchewan. Through him, I also want to congratulate the two labour congresses, and wish them well 

in the forthcoming merger of their organization. As a farmer, and representing a constituency which is 

predominantly rural, I want to thank all labour people who have supported the farmers in our demands 

for a system of parity prices, or some such method of obtaining our fair share of the national income, 

and in that connection, Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from the morning edition of the ‘Leader Post’ 

of February 20. It is headed, ‘Labour Heads Back Argo Union’s Bid for Cash’, (Ottawa, C. P.): 

 

“Ottawa (C. P.) Prairie Farm Unions, driving hard for cash advances on farm-held grain now have 

powerful allies. Spokesman for some one million organized workers. 

 

“The heads of the two national labour bodies, the Trades and Labour Congress and the Canadian 

Congress of Labour said Saturday they agreed with farm unions, that the need for such payments 

should be recognized. 

 

“T.L.C. chief Claude Jodoin, and the C.C.L. head, A. R. Mosher, whose organizations are soon to 

amalgamate, agreed also that farmers should get fair and equitable parity prices on all farm products.” 

 

This is most encouraging. It is a good omen for the future, and it also proves that we, in the C.C.F. were 

right, when we contended from the very beginning that the basic problems of both farmer and labour 

were the same. But let me warn both the labour and farm people but the battle is not yet won, because 

there are still elements in our country, who, for their own selfish, political ends, are still trying to drive a 

wedge between farmer and labour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my congratulations to the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines) for having brought down 

his twelfth consecutive balanced budget. No doubt the Opposition will try their utmost to discredit this 

accomplishment, but their antics of the past several months make me think of them as a group of 

‘trigger-happy’ big game hunters who plan out, and then start shooting, Bang! Bang! Bang!, at every 

little movement in the bush. Let me remind our hon. friends opposite that if they continue that 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 
 

15 

practice, the casualties within their own ranks will be greater and certainly more dangerous to them than 

to the moose they hope to bag. 

 

I'm sure that the people of Saskatchewan will appreciate the fact that, in spite of the severe rust 

epidemic, and inclement harvest weather during 1954, and the inability of the farmers to market their 

1955 crop, our Provincial Government did not find it necessary to curtail services to the people. In fact, 

we extended them last year, and as the budget shows, again this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not weary you by reviewing the calamity which befell the farmers of this province 

during 1954 crop season; and then the unprecedented precipitation, last winter and early spring. The 

hon. members opposite would not appreciate it, because none are so blind as those who do not want to 

see; so I will return to the previous spring. Permit me to say that Mother Nature changed her mood. The 

sun dispelled the rain clouds, and many farmers were able to seed most of their cultivated acreage, 

although they were so late, had we had normal growing weather from then on, most of this grain would 

not have had the chance to mature. 

 

In the 50-odd years that I have been closely connected with farming, I have never seen a crop grow to 

maturity in such a short time; and for the most part we also had ideal harvest weather. This resulted in us 

being able to harvest a good crop of high-quality grain for which we are most thankful to Divine 

Providence. It would have, indeed, been a calamity heaped upon calamity had we been forced to pile 

another crop of out-of-condition grain on top of the previous year's crop. 

 

The big problem since then has been to get a pay cheque into the farmers’ hands. However, a resolution 

on the Order Paper at the present time prevents me from discussing that issue any further at present. 

 

Permit me to say again that, when the unprecedented amount of water wreaked havoc with the municipal 

roads over the greater part of this province, this Government, in spite of the fact that we had budgeted 

for what was considered to be the maximum amount possible, and was distributed among the various 

departments according to the estimates submitted to this House a year ago, immediately found another 

$1,600,000 for an emergency drainage programme, and, on top of that, an additional one million to aid 

the municipalities. With very few exceptions, Mr. Speaker, the rural municipal people appreciated that 

help in their time of need, although hon. members opposite have tried their best to belittle that help. But 

let me tell them that, had their friends in Ottawa done half as much for the people of Saskatchewan as 

they did for other people in other parts of Canada under similar circumstances, our million dollars would 

have gone much further. 

 

That we were able to meet that emergency to the tune of an extra $2,600,000 is in no small part due to 

the efforts of this Government in encouraging a more diversified economy. As was pointed out by the 

Provincial Treasurer in his budget address, additional revenue resulting from new and expanding 

industry and development, made it possible for us to meet the additional requirements immediately, with 

courage and without hesitation - so unlike the delay and inaction on the part of the Federal Government, 

who waited until late last fall before they finally agreed to help in a small way, in repairing dwellings 

damaged by the flood; but nothing for the municipalities or for the farmers. 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

16 

Mr. Speaker, the Department of the Provincial Secretary tells a very interesting story in the expansion of 

business and industry in our province. I am happy to report that, last year, we had the highest number of 

joint stock companies incorporated in the history of the province. During the same period, last year, we 

had the second-highest number of out-of-province companies registered to do business in Saskatchewan. 

The hon. members opposite have endeavoured to place Saskatchewan in an unfavourable light by 

comparing Manitoba and Alberta against Saskatchewan, and, as usual, they only tell part of the story, 

carefully over-looking their own shortcomings when they had a chance to do something about it. 

 

The fact is that the situation has greatly improved since this Government took office, and, therefore, I 

should like to remind all hon. members just what the situation was in the last ten years of the Liberal 

administration of this province, and compare it to the adjoining provinces of Manitoba and Alberta. 

There were only 618 new companies incorporated in this province during the last ten years of Liberal 

rule, plus 247 out-of-province companies registered, making a total of 865 for that entire period 

compared to Alberta’s 1,880 incorporated, plus 1,398 out-of-province companies, making a total for 

Alberta of 3,278; and Manitoba, with 1,453 incorporations. However, I am sorry I was unable to find 

Manitoba's records for out-of-province registration for that period. 

 

Let us now take a look at the next ten-year period under C.C.F. administration, and we find that 2,422 

companies were incorporated, plus 1,293 out-of-province companies, making a total for Saskatchewan 

of 3,715, as against Alberta’s 8,254 incorporations, plus 1,767 out-of-province registrations, or a total of 

10,021; and Manitoba with 1,928. The increase of companies registered to do business in Saskatchewan 

during this past ten-year period was 2,850, or an increase of 329 per cent. Alberta had an increase of 

6,742 during the last ten-year period over the previous ten years, or an increase of 206 per cent. 

Manitoba's increase was 133 per cent. 

 

I should like to remind the hon. members that, during the last ten-years of Liberal administration, only 

247 out-of-province companies chose to come to Saskatchewan - an average of less than 25 companies 

per annum, while, during the first 10 years of C.C.F. administration, 914 companies came here to do 

business in this province - an average of over 90 per annum. And, I must add that in 1955, 210 

out-of-province companies were registered to do business here compared to 17 just 12 years ago. In 

1955, we granted incorporation to 367 new companies in Saskatchewan, compared to the Liberals 29 in 

1943. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what a lot of people (including myself) would like to know is, who missed the boat? No 

doubt the hon. members opposite will try to excuse their miserable failure by referring to the depression 

years; again conveniently overlooking the fact that the latter half of this term of office was during the 

time when other parts of Canada were enjoying an industrial boom, and the so-called war-time 

prosperity. When the Federal Liberal Government, in conjunction with the war effort, with spending 

hundreds of millions of dollars in helping to establish new industries, we had here in Saskatchewan a 

Liberal Government that was so sound asleep that they couldn't catch a raft, let alone a boat! 

 

Ever since the C.C.F. took office, the remnants of that once 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 
 

17 

great Liberal Party can think of nothing else but to try and sell our own province of Saskatchewan short, 

in an attempt to prove to the people that they were right when they said the C.C.F. was frightening 

business away from the province, conveniently overlooking the fact that in one year alone, after these 

big companies had begun to realize that the Liberals were only shouting ‘Wolf! Wolf!’ for their own 

political advantage, out-of-province companies began to really come in, and in one year out-of-province 

companies coming into Saskatchewan had an authorized capital of $1, 197,821,000, which is over 20 

times as much as any of the Liberals could show in their term of office. 

 

Last Wednesday we listened for an hour and twenty-five minutes to the financial critic of Her Majesty's 

Loyal Opposition. That his case was weak was emphasized by the fact that he considered it necessary to 

shout and exaggerate. But the hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) who has been so busy 

looking under the bed for a bogey man, overlooked doing one of the very necessary and important duties 

of a critic, that of placing on the record in the form of an amendment, just what the Opposition has to 

offer. Failing to have done that, one can only assume that the Opposition prefers not to make any official 

commitment, no doubt feeling that they would then be freer to promise all things to all men, depending 

upon the circumstances and the localities they happen to be in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, have you ever known of an Opposition that failed to move an amendment to the 

Address-in-Reply? And then again failing to move an amendment to the budget address when the 

financial critic had the floor? One indeed must wonder. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — I had never heard that one before! 

 

Hon. Mr. Burton: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to deal with the various branches of the 

Department of Provincial Secretary, just for a few moments. First, The Saskatchewan Insurance Act 

provides for the licensing of insurance companies and their agents. This is the duty of the 

Superintendent of Insurance, and given him the power to exercise the necessary control for the 

protection of the general public. I am pleased to say that, speaking generally, the insurance industry in 

this province is in a very healthy position. This line of business, like many others, has shown a steady 

increase. For example, in 1945 the net premiums written for all classes of insurance amounted to 

$14,646,000, whereas for 1954, this amount had arisen to $40,588,000, an increase of approximately 

250 per cent from 1945 to 1954. 

 

Every year our Superintendent of Insurance attends the annual conference of superintendents of 

insurance from all parts of Canada. There they discuss the various problems which arise from time to 

time, and I am happy to report that considerable progress has been made towards uniformity of 

insurance administration Acts in all provinces of Canada. 

 

The new Securities Act has been in operation for approximately a year and a half, and while it has not 

solved all the problems concerning the sale of securities, it has facilitated the administration of that 

complex business. May I repeat what I have often said before: If people who own property in the form 

of mineral rights would only use the same caution and good judgment when disposing of them as they 

do with their other property, they could save themselves a lot of money as well as us a lot of trouble. I 

cannot 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

18 

understand why anyone should listen to the glib talk of a stranger, and sell his mineral rights, or sign a 

lease, without first making sure that the agreement is as represented to him by the agent. There are many 

reliable firms and securities salesmen doing business in Saskatchewan. We have no desire to hinder their 

activities, but, as frequently happens, a few dishonest and unscrupulous persons can and do often bring a 

whole profession into disrepute. 

 

I would appeal to all people who are called upon by salesmen, be they book agents, hawkers, peddlers, 

or security salesmen, not to do business with a stranger until they have satisfied themselves on a number 

of points: 

 

(1) To obtain his or her address. 
 

(2) Be sure the person is in possession of a proper license. 
 

(3) Do not accept the sales talk without first checking with some responsible person whom you know. 
 

(4) Do not allow yourself to be rushed into signing any document or contract until you are satisfied 
that it contains the provisions under which it is being sold to you. 

 

(5) Don't pay cash to stranger. It is much better to make payment by cheque to the firm the stranger 
professes to represent. 

 

If an agent cannot, or will not, produce the proper license, please let my office know at once, giving the 

person’s name and address, and letting us know what he is trying to sell. A great deal of unnecessary 

and frustrating work is caused by people who fail to follow this simple procedure. Many people wait for 

weeks or months, and then, when they find they have fallen for the slick talk of a stranger, they expect 

us to do something about it. In many cases, they are not sure how the name is spelled; seldom do they 

have any address, nor have they checked to see whether or not he had a license. 

 

We are more pleased than it is possible for me to tell you, to be of assistance to people when they give 

us half a chance by supplying the necessary information in time; but it should be clearly understood that 

we cannot, and do not, give opinions as to whether this security or that security is a good buy, nor 

should we be expected to do detailed work that the people themselves, or their solicitors, should do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, the Parks Branch operates the resort areas and facilities in our provincial 

parks. The wet weather early in 1955 had a detrimental effect on our operations at the beginning of the 

season, but as soon as the warm, dry weather arrived, our accommodation and facilities were taxed to 

the very limit, especially on holidays and week-ends. We do not charge admission fees or register the 

visitors to our parks, and, therefore, I am not in a position to give you the total number of people who 

came to these Saskatchewan playgrounds during the past year; but I am of the opinion that the time has 

arrived when the expense of registering our visitors may be warranted. 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 
 

19 

May I suggest to all hon. members and, through them, to our people in Saskatchewan, that it would be 

very desirable for all of us to know Saskatchewan better, and I can think of no better way to start than to 

visit our own Saskatchewan provincial parks. But may I warn you that, if they intend to stay for more 

than a day, they should get their reservations in early because our accommodations are limited, once the 

rush season commences. 

 

At Cypress Hills we have 37 cabins, giving us 41 units, 15 of which are fully modern. There are also 16 

rooms available for additional accommodation - a dining room, lunch counter, kitchen and lounge, store, 

hall, swimming pool, golf course and club-house, trailer camp and facilities, a play ground and 

equipment. At Kenosee, in the Moose Mountain Provincial Park, there is a chalet with 12 rooms, 25 

cabins with a total of 30 units, four of which are fully modern; dining room, kitchen and lounge, store 

and lunch counter, golf course and club-house; trailer camp and facilities, ball park, and play ground and 

beach facilities. At Madge Lake, in the Duck Mountain Provincial Park, there are 26 cabins with 37 

units, four of which are fully modern; 16 additional rooms; lounge, dining room, lunch counter, kitchen, 

store, golf course and club-house; ball park, boat house, trailer camp and facilities. 

 

At Greenwater Lake, there is a hotel with seven rooms, dining room, lunch counter and kitchen; 13 

cabins; store, hall, bath houses, ball park, boat house, playgrounds and beach equipment. At Katepwa we 

provide picnic grounds, kitchen, picnic tables, playgrounds and beach equipment. At Good Spirit, we 

provide similar accommodation, plus ball grounds. I may add that at neither of these two parks do we 

have a nickel's worth of revenue, but we do accommodate thousands of people every pleasant week-end. 

 

Valley Centre at Fort Qu’Appelle is open year-‘round, and is used mainly by groups for conferences and 

seminars. We can accommodate up to 72 people at one time in the dormitory, and, in the other building, 

there is a lecture room, lounge, kitchen and dining room. There is a golf course and club-house, and 

other playground equipment. 

 

Hon. members will be interested in knowing that the chalet and other facilities in the Little Manitou 

provincial park near Watrous has been leased to the Council for Crippled Children and Adults for a 

camp and restoration centre. This will mean that the Parks Branch will not be operating the facilities in 

that park; but the beach area will still be available to the general public, and those who have cottage sites 

leased within the park will not be interfered with. The officials of the Council for Crippled Children and 

Adults carried on an extensive survey in various parts of the province in search for a suitable place, and 

they came to the conclusion that Little Manitous was the most desirable choice. After due consideration, 

when this became known to us in the Parks Branch, we volunteered to withdraw from that park in order 

that this organization could negotiate with the Department of Natural Resources for lease. I am sure the 

Council for Crippled Children and Adults will make good use of the facilities, and that it will also be 

beneficial to those unfortunate people whom they are trying to help. 

 

I come now to the Bureau of Publications. As I mentioned in a Public Accounts Committee recently, Mr. 

Galan Craik, our Commissioner, resigned from that position when he purchased a weekly newspaper in 

the Vancouver area. Mr. W. Roy Bell has been appointed as Acting Commissioner, and I'm happy to 

report that the various divisions of the Bureau are rendering a valuable service 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

20 

to the different departments. Consideration is being given to the re-organization of the entire work 

performed by the Bureau, in order to give better and increased service. 

 

I come now to the Tourist Branch. Our Tourist Branch had another very busy year. Over 17,000 

inquiries were answered, and in each case these answers were accompanied by literature. Motion picture 

films have been used quite extensively to advertise some of our tourist attractions. For example, ‘Fishing 

the Last Frontier’ was shown 1,956 times in the U.S.A., with a reported combined audience of close to 

100,000 persons. In addition to this, it was telecast 49 times over U.S. stations, but we have been unable 

to obtain any estimate of the number of people who saw this film through this medium. 

 

Then ‘Happy Hunting Grounds’ was shown over 4,000 times to audiences in the U.S.A., with over 

260,000 in attendance. ‘Keewatinook’ has been shown 104 times in that country, with a reported 

audience of 7,800. These films are also included in a National Film Board series of programmes in all 

provinces of Canada. Our Tourist Bureau supplied the Canadian Government Travel Bureau with 20 

prints of ‘Fishing the Last Frontier’, and they were so well pleased with it, that they purchased an 

additional 35 prints. Along with these, there are 34 copies of ‘Happy Fishing Ground’ and 12 of 

‘Keewatinook’ in circulation by the Canadian Government Travel Bureau. 

 

Every year since I have been responsible for the Tourist Bureau, I have attended the annual 

Federal-Provincial tourist conference at Ottawa. The first year I brought up what, in my opinion, were 

two important items. The first was that there was no separate booklet advertising the Prince Albert 

National Park. As result of this, every time we had any inquiry regarding tourist attractions, and we 

wanted to include the National Park, we had to send along a large book which was expensive to mail, 

along with other literature we were sending out. When I raised this point, I received the support of the 

Manitoba Minister in this regard, but we were told that it would be too expensive to supply separate 

books or pamphlets. However, at the next conference I raised the question again, at which time it was 

more favourably received, and since then there have been separate pamphlets issued each for the 

national parks in Saskatchewan and Manitoba. I might add, too, this was done at very little, if any, extra 

cost. 

 

The second item took a little longer. I questioned the advisability of the Federal Travel Bureau spending 

the greater part of their advertising allotment in the United States, pointing out the desirability of our 

Canadian people being encouraged to become better acquainted with other parts of Canada. Verbally 

speaking, I was jumped on from all sides. The opponents to such a move used all kinds of excuses, such 

as: ‘We don't want to insult our American friends’, and so on, and so forth. However, I am happy to 

report that at our conference last fall, it was agreed that more emphasis should be placed on advising our 

people here in Canada of the tourist attractions within the borders of our own country, and the slogan 

‘Know Canada Better’ was adopted. Earlier in the fall, I also attended a conference held in Quebec 

under the auspices of the Canadian Tourist Association. This association is composed of private 

individuals who operate hotels, tourist camps, etc. Every provincial government with the exception of 

Manitoba was represented, besides various transportation companies and a number of others who are 

interested in tourists. 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 
 

21 

I may add that here in Saskatchewan, our Tourist Bureau has given every encouragement to private 

camp operators, motel owners and others who are catering to the tourist trade, to organize themselves for 

their own mutual benefit, and then pool their ideas so as to be able to render better service to the 

travelling public. I am hopeful that, in the not too distant future, they will be strong enough to send their 

own delegates to the conference of the Canadian Tourist Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in referring to tourists, permit me to give you what I think is a proper definition of a 

tourist. In my opinion, this is it: “any person who travels for pleasure”. You'll agree that that covers a 

wide field, and I contend, properly so. Throughout the years, an erroneous impression has been created 

that the only tourist who needs to be given attention is an American citizen who is attracted to 

Saskatchewan by our wonderful hunting opportunities, or who is lured to the far north for our renowned 

fishing grounds. 

 

On the other hand, some people consider a tourist to be a person who has a couple of fishing poles 

sticking out of the back window of his car, and heading for any one of the thousands of lakes we have 

here in this province. But permit me to repeat that anyone who travels for pleasure is a tourist, and I 

appeal to everyone, and especially those who cater to the travelling public, to improve their service, 

improve their premises, and make ‘Service with Courtesy’ their watch-word. 

 

Another matter which needs clarification is that, up until a few years ago, the Federal Bureau of 

Statistics was able, through the reports of the Immigration and Customs officials stationed at or near the 

American border, to give us a fairly accurate estimate of the actual numbers of vehicles and visitors who 

came to Saskatchewan from across the international boundary. However, that situation no longer exists, 

because many American visitors come to Saskatchewan through ports of entry in Manitoba or Alberta. 

In fact, in the last few years there has been a tremendous increase in American cars coming to 

Saskatchewan through Manitoba, and to be able to supply anywhere near a correct answer as to the 

number of visitors coming into Saskatchewan, including those from the United States, we would have to 

have a staff stationed at each point where highway crosses the Saskatchewan-Manitoba boundary, and 

likewise, on the Alberta side. 

 

There are at least nine or 10 such highways crossing on each of our eastern and western boundaries, to 

say nothing of the many municipal road crossings. It would be a tremendous increase in expense, and 

would require at least 60 or more persons on the pay-roll of the Tourist Bureau to be able to check the 

traffic crossing our provincial boundaries, in order to report the number of persons and vehicles that 

could be classified as tourists. 

 

I am satisfied that if we could get that kind of money from the Provincial Treasurer, our Tourist Branch 

could make better use of it, and which would bring us, and the tourists greater value for our money. 

Even if we did spend that kind of money for that purpose, we still would not have a complete picture, 

because many people coming to Saskatchewan travelling for pleasure, come by other means of 

transportation. 

 

I might mention that while attending the conferences which I referred to before, I approached the 

transportation companies to see if they 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

22 

could give me some sort of an estimate as to the number of people they brought to Saskatchewan during 

1955. Both the C.N.R. and the C.P.R. said that it would be impossible to do so. Trans-Canada Airlines, 

however, were able to supply me with a very comprehensive report as to the number of people making 

use of their services for points in Saskatchewan, and I may add that their figures showed a tremendous 

increase of passengers coming to Saskatchewan, over that of 1954. But they could not give me a 

break-down of those who were travelling for business or pleasure. Consequently, it would be necessary 

for us to check all trains and aircraft bringing people into Saskatchewan, in order to find out whether or 

not they were tourists. Mr. Speaker, the whole idea that our tourist branch should endeavour to obtain all 

this information is too absurd to be given serious consideration; but, on the other hand, partial 

information would not give a true picture. I regret to say that such partial information has been used in 

this House and outside of it, and I can have no other idea but that it is done by a few people for the 

special purpose of grinding their own special little axe. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, we have been told that other provinces know the answers, but look at the province 

of Ontario. They are in a favourable position, and the reason is that with very few exceptions, their 

tourists all come from across the international boundary, and the Federal Bureau of Statistics can give a 

very accurate record, while the figures for our province are not. 

 

On the other hand, much has been said about Manitoba, and how they do it. Here I would like to quote 

from a book entitled ‘Manitoba Road Guide and Tour Book, 1955’. It is officially approved by the 

Manitoba Motor League, and on Page 33 here is what they say: 

 

“The Unknown Province - Manitoba, the unknown province. The province in Canada is less known to 

travellers than Manitoba. No other province in Canada is so misrepresented to the travelling public as 

Manitoba. No province in Canada is so misunderstood by its own people.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, and then we are told ‘look at what Manitoba does’! Owing to the publicity work of our 

own Saskatchewan Tourist Bureau during the past several years, such a charge cannot, with justification, 

be laid against Saskatchewan. 

 

In conclusion, during the past year, with the co-operation of the Department of Highways, we opened 

tourist information centres at Moosomin, Estevan and Swift Current. These we staffed with temporary 

help for the vacation period. There is no doubt that, this being the first venture of ours along that line, 

we did make some mistakes; but in spite of the criticisms we have received from a few sources, these 

information centres have met with considerable success, and we hope to be able to improve our services 

at these places. 

 

Early next spring we hope to open a similar information centre at Lloydminster, and it may interest you 

to note that the Alberta Tourist Bureau has made some inquiries as to the possibility of their sharing the 

cost of staffing that centre at Lloydminster, and has expressed the hope that they might be able to 

construct an information centre near the Alberta border, where No. 1 highway crosses that boundary. In 

the event of them being able to 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 
 

23 

do that, they would be willing to reciprocate courtesy we are prepared to extend to them at 

Lloydminster. 

 

You will realize, Mr. Speaker, that it is still all in the exploratory stage, but I want to assure you, and all 

hon. members, that we are endeavouring to make use of every opportunity to increase and facilitate the 

dispensing of information to the travelling public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I contend that our hon. Provincial Treasurer brought down a very splendid budget, and I 

shall be pleased to support it. 

 

Mr. H. C. Dunfield (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, as I listened to the brilliant address of the hon. 

Provincial Treasurer it recalled to mind a little incident that occurred here in Regina, in 1912. That was 

the year in which Regina enjoyed (and later suffered for) one of its greatest real estate booms. On a 

Sunday afternoon I stood in front of a real estate office on South Railway avenue, looking at a beautiful 

picture in a window, a huge canvas about 12-feet long and four-feet high, on which was depicted a 

wonderful city. After looking it over very carefully I saw a few places I could recognize. There was 

Wascana Creek away in the background, and the Legislative Buildings, just being erected; but buildings 

that I knew to be shacks were portrayed as beautiful dwellings, and some of the squat one and two-story 

buildings downtown were depicted as eight and ten storey structures. At the bottom of this picture was 

written the “City of Regina”. As I stood looking at this picture an Indian came and stood by my side and 

he, too, examined it long and carefully. I think probably he had been born in the vicinity and raised here. 

He looked at it long and carefully, and finally he turned to me, and pointing at the picture he said, “What 

country that?”And I said, “That is the city of Regina.” And with a startled expression, he said, “Ugh.” 

 

Well, need I say more about the hon. Provincial Treasurer's address, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, was it two days later the cyclone hit? 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — I am sorry that the hon. Minister of Telephones (Hon. Mr. Kuziak) is not in his seat 

because, for the next few minutes, I had wished to answer some of his statements of yesterday; but since 

I have them here I shall use them anyway, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last year, we celebrated in Saskatchewan our 50th Anniversary as a province, and throughout the year, 

on many occasions and at various places, I had the pleasure of listening either personally or by radio to 

the Premier, his Cabinet ministers, hon. members on your right and many other public speakers, who 

paid rich and deserved tribute to those early pioneers, who had laid so well the foundations of our 

present agricultural economy. But I noted that, while doing so, almost with universal accord they 

refrained from mentioning specific achievements of our early settlers. Never for an instant did they 

mention that this beautiful building in which we are today, was built more than 40 years ago; and I am 

not speaking from hearsay, for in 1912 I worked on this building. I put on a large part of the copper on 

the dome. Incidentally, the first time I came in here as a member I happened to mention that, and one of 

them said, “You are just the man we want to see; there is a leak in it.” 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

24 

Nor did the speakers make mention of the University that had been built, the court house, provincial 

hospitals, nor of the whole administrative set-up of this province that had been in effect long before a 

C.C.F. party had ever been heard of. Nor did they mention that 23 million acres of land had been 

brought under cultivation; that the population of this province had reached almost its maximum numbers 

before 1944; that all the towns, villages, cities and trading posts we have today were in existence. These 

things were not mentioned, Mr. Speaker. And in the face of such things, this morning, I picked up the 

‘Leader Post’ and the first thing I saw was “Kuziak says province had 45-year industrial leg. The first 45 

years in the history of this province was wholly on the agricultural development of this province. It is 

only this last few years that we have begun to think of industrialization to balance our great agricultural 

production.” 

 

When a responsible Minister of the Crown would make such a statement as that, Mr. Speaker, I had such 

a sense of frustration that it brought to mind those lines written by Gertrude Stein, in which she said: 

 

“Behold the happy moron, 

He doesn't give a damn; 

I wish I were a moron: 

My God! Perhaps I am.” 

 

I noted too, Mr. Speaker, that nothing was said of the continuing pioneers who have never ceased in 

their efforts to push the agricultural and business frontiers of this province ever northward. During the 

last 30 years or more, considerably more, it has been my privilege to be a part of, and to take part in, one 

of the last great agricultural developments in northern Saskatchewan in the constituency of Meadow 

Lake. It was my good fortune to see thousands of acres of land cleared and brought under cultivation, 

the see new farmsteads arise, to see schools, churches, hospitals grow from their first small buildings to 

almost institutional status, and to see more than that, Mr. Speaker; to see not only physical growth, but a 

far greater and more important growth in the spiritual and cultural life of the people of that community. 

 

It has been, too, an exceptional opportunity to observe pioneering development under two distinct and 

widely-separated political ideologies - that of free enterprise under Liberal and Conservative 

governments, and that of Socialism under this present C.C.F. administration. And with your permission, 

Mr. Speaker, I would like, this afternoon, to spend a little time, as I think I am entitled to, to make some 

comparisons between these two types of administration. 

 

The first 30 years of the life of this province witnessed an unparalleled agricultural expansion that can 

never be duplicated, and may never be equalled in value, regardless of what gas, oil and industrial 

developments may take place in the future. This rapid agricultural expansion was due, largely, to one 

predominant factor - the right of a citizen of Saskatchewan to obtain title to Crown lands of this 

province. You will realize, Mr. Speaker, that every lot in every village, hamlet, town and city, that every 

farmstead in this province was, at one time, part of the Crown lands of this province to which somebody 

had obtained title by purchase, through grant, or under homestead rights. Ownership of land, throughout 

the ages, has been one of the greatest desires of mankind, be it a single building lot 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 
 

25 

or a farmstead, and, until this Government came to power, it had been the inherent right of every citizen 

of Saskatchewan to obtain title to Crown land in this province. The right of ownership, or title to land, is 

the very cornerstone of our agricultural economy; an economy, that, in Saskatchewan has produced an 

agricultural society second to none in the world; a society whose traditions were deeply rooted in 

freedoms - freedom to live our own lives, freedom to conduct our own affairs, and above all, Mr. 

Speaker, freedom from Government regimentation and compulsion. 

 

We who were born in Canada are at times all prone to take too lightly these freedoms, but for many of 

our friends who came here from distant lands where those freedoms had been lost, it is one of their most 

cherished possessions. 

 

It was this desire to own land and to live their own lives that drew the early settlers in the parklands of 

northern Saskatchewan. They went there of their own free will and accord and on their own resources. 

Although the cost of establishing farmsteads in the wooded lands was much greater than that of 

establishing farms on the prairies, it had many compensations. Most of the early settlers in the parklands 

obtained good land with sufficient open areas for their immediate needs in production of grain. And 

under Liberal and Conservative governments, who understood the greater cost of establishing 

farmsteads in wooded areas, we had with them a gentleman's agreement by which we were entitled to 

use all of the abundant natural resources to help become established. Logs for building purposes, posts 

and rails for fences and stock corrals were free, as was firewood. Fish, wild foul and game were to be 

had for the taking. Wild fruit was in abundance - the finest of raspberries, strawberries and blueberries 

and so on; and gardens yielded well for those who took the trouble to work them. Some homesteaders 

met their entire cash needs from the products of their traplines. Other homesteaders fished in the winter 

months on a commercial basis. They supplied their own and local needs, and they found an eager and 

ready market among prairie farmers for the balance of their products at the lowest possible cost, direct 

from the producer to the consumer. Other homesteaders set up sawmills. They supplied work and wages 

for their neighbours, they fulfilled the local needs and they, too, found an eager market among prairie 

farmers for their surplus products, and, again, at the lowest possible cost to the consumer, direct from 

the producer to the consumer. 

 

During the early and normal flow of settlers into the parklands, the economy of northern Saskatchewan 

was sound, progress was steady, but slow until a prolonged drought struck the southern Saskatchewan 

which, coupled with world-wide depression, produced a northern migration of such magnitude that it 

was beyond the capacity of the parklands to support. During that time it was estimated that more than 

one-third of the entire population of Saskatchewan moved into the five northern ridings, as they were 

then. Out of this great northern migration, much of which came from cities, towns and rural 

municipalities which wished to get rid of their own responsibilities and pass them off on to the 

provincial government, arose social and economic problems that have not yet been resolved and will not 

be in this or the next generation. But the early settlers, who, by their own efforts and with the 

understanding co-operation of the governments of the day, had become quite well established, were able 

to understand the difficulties of the ‘thirties, and many of them have prospered. 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

26 

The greatest single factor in the rapid expansion of grain growing in the parklands was the passing of the 

Federal Farm Loans Act, one of the greatest pieces of legislation that has ever been offered the farmers 

of western Canada, at least in the northern part. Under this Act, farmers borrowed large sums of money 

for clearing and breaking land. Previous to the passing of that Act hundreds of acres had been cleared 

very slowly and laboriously by hand, and broken equally slowly by horse power, but after the passing of 

that great legislation, thousands upon thousands of acres were quickly cleared and brought under 

cultivation. Loans in that area ran into the millions of dollars. One of the bankers informed that, up until 

about two years ago, loans were running at a rate of almost $2 million a year and were repaid in a very 

satisfactory manner, because in the best of the good land there, even though it cost $45 to $50 an acre to 

clear and bring under cultivation, many times it was repaid out of the first crop, and certainly out of the 

first two crops. 

 

In 1943 I compiled one of many briefs for various organizations. This one was for the Meadow Lake 

Board of Trade, and although I haven't that brief with me, Mr. Speaker, many of the figures will forever 

be etched on my memory, because that was the peak year in the history of that part of northern 

Saskatchewan. In 1943 we've shipped out of Saskatchewan, out of Meadow Lake, 512 carloads of 

livestock, 1,442 carloads of grains of all kinds. Since then it has nearly doubled. Two years ago our 

production was more than half a million bushels of grain in the area tributary to Meadow Lake. 

 

One hundred carloads of northern lake fish were exported from Meadow Lake. Mr. Speaker, I hope you 

will keep that figure in mind, because I wish to refer to it again later. Just as a sideline, there was more 

than 100,000 pounds of blueberries exported from Meadow Lake, and the production of poultry, eggs 

and butter and various farm products reached their peak in 1943. Then in 1944, Mr. Speaker, the C.C.F. 

Government came to power in this province, and Socialism fell like a blight across the north country. 

 

Some Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Government compulsion and regimentation began. The right to obtain title to Crown 

lands in this province ceased. Compulsory fish and fur marketing boards were set up. Forest products 

were monopolized by the Government of Saskatchewan. Private lumbering ceased, and the free flow of 

natural products from the north to the south for producer to consumer, came to an end. These were some 

of the wages of Socialism in northern Saskatchewan. The Government in the following year went into 

the fish business. They built and equipped a large fishing plant in Meadow Lake, and as usual they knew 

nothing about the business. They knew nothing about fishing, and do you know whom they got for their 

first manager there, Mr. Speaker? Right in line with many of the other managerships they appointed, 

later on, in their industries, they picked a man out of one of the elevators who did not know a jackfish 

from a lake trout. Now I have nothing to say against that gentleman; I have known him a long time and 

he is a fine chap himself. He was offered a better job than he had and he took it; and strange to say - 

well, I will deal with that later. 

 

Where we had reached a peak shipment of 100 carloads of fish in 1943, from the time this Government 

took over, it went down and down and down. 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 
 

27 

As soon as they had established this plant and started operating they required a large staff, an office staff 

of some six or seven, and in that first year they handled some 60 carloads of fish. The previous year a 

private enterpriser had handled 100 carloads of fish; his office staff was composed of one person - 

himself. He had a notebook in one pocket and a cheque book in the other, and an old battered typewriter. 

He handled 100 carloads of fish without any difficulty at all. But under Government operation the 

fishing business declined each year, until finally the fish filleting plant closed and Meadow Lake and the 

area suffered a very severe economic loss. In 1943, the price of fish in Meadow Lake was 23 cents a 

pound for whitefish, cleaned, boxed and iced, delivered in Meadow Lake, and that was the highest price, 

I think, that was ever paid there. And for some years previous the prices had been good, under private 

enterprise. Everybody in the fish business was making money - not only the fishermen and the buyer, 

the truckers and the garage men, repairmen and the merchants, everybody was doing well in the fish 

business up until 1943. But after the Government took over it fell, both in volume and in price. The next 

year the price dropped to an initial payment of 10 cents, and a final payment of two or three cents, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

About that time, too, the C.C.F. party and Government had promised the people of Saskatchewan that 

they would greatly increase the public and social services. These services, unquestionably, where needed 

and desired; but, Mr. Speaker, in 1944 or previously, the people of Saskatchewan hadn't a chance in the 

world of supporting the social services we have today. But the Government said to them, when the 

people of Saskatchewan were at their lowest point of resistance, after suffering terrible difficulties: 

“These social services will cost you practically nothing; very little will your taxes be raised, because we 

intend to establish Crown Corporations to process our natural resources from which will come the 

profits which will pay, in a large part, the added social services.” 

 

It was a lovely picture and the people of Saskatchewan fell for it. What happened? We have heard the 

story so often of various industries being set up. That we lost a million or two million dollars is neither 

here nor there in the life of this province; the vital thing is the thinking behind the establishing of these 

industries, for here we had the woollen mill, boot and shoe factory, leather tanneries, businesses that 

anybody with an ounce of business brains would not have touched with a ten-foot pole. Had there been a 

chance in the world of them making a profit there was plenty of money available for such use. That is 

the kind of thinking behind much of the industrial development that has taken place under their 

government management, and that is a serious thing, Mr. Speaker. We have lost lots of money, but that 

is the least of all the considerations. It is the type of thinking that is important. These industries have 

their brief, excited day of socialistic experiment, and went bankrupt. We on this side said they should 

have been thrown out of the window - that was wholly unnecessary. They blew up in their faces, or sank 

of their own weight in socialist theory. 

 

But there remained one great natural resource, the forests of our province, and, Mr. Speaker, I say 

advisedly, one great natural resource remained in 1944, and that is all there was, one great natural 

resource. The Government tried to make money out of the fishermen, they tried to make money out of 

the trappers, they tried to make money out of secondary industries, and they all resulted in disaster. But 

we did have one great resource - the forests 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

28 

of our province, and, I say, only one resource. My hon. friends across from us like to twit us on this side 

and say “What did the Liberals do about gas and oil development, in 1944?” 

 

I am quite frank in saying that the Liberal Government didn't have the faintest idea of the potentialities 

that lay under our prairies in gas and oil, and I will go further and say that the hon. gentleman across the 

road knew even less about it. You are not kidding anybody about what has been done since, about our 

potentialities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You don't know yet. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — But as I say, we did have one great natural resource, and while I would be the first to 

admit the ability of the hon. Minister of Natural Resources (Hon. Mr. Brockelbank), I disagree with him 

wholeheartedly from the sole of my shoes to the lack of hair on the top of my head; I disagree with him 

as to his sense of values, both human and material, in everything that is connected with the Timber 

Board, and time will show that I am right. 

 

So, going back to 1944, we had left one great resource in this province - the timber, the forest resources 

of Saskatchewan. Immediately a Timber Board was set up and these resources were monopolized. The 

granting of private timber berths ceased immediately. One of the first things the Government did was to 

confiscate the privately-owned box factory in Prince Albert, a box factory that was being managed quite 

well and making a little profit for the owner. The Government confiscated it. They paid him well for it, 

there's no question about that; but they took away that man's way of life as they have done over and over 

again throughout the country. They have destroyed the individual's way of life on hundreds of occasions. 

Human values are of no consideration whatever to Socialist Government. They confiscated this box 

factory and put it into operation. What happened, Mr. Speaker? Right away the profits that had been 

made suddenly disappeared, and they went down and down and down, and the losses became so great 

that they had to bury it in other wood enterprise. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Here that, ‘Brock’? 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Then they built a wonderful mill. It was a wonderful mill. Mr. Speaker, I say it was, 

because I think it is not in very good shape today. However, they built a wonderful mill, a high 

utilization mill, but that mill should have been at Candle Lake or at The Pas, or better still, it should 

have been in British Columbia, because it was capable of doing a tremendous amount of work. After this 

$500,000 mill - or it might be nearer $1 million, I don't know, but certainly over $500,000 anyway; but 

after the mill was built, lo and behold!, there wasn't enough timber within reasonable hauling distance of 

it to keep it operating at more than a fraction of its capacity. So it, too, has been a very costly experiment 

to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — They buried it in the Timber Board! 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — I want to tell you a little bit about the little box factories. There were a number of 

such factories in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That was their chosen way of life. Others wished to go 

work in 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 
 

29 

the bush. That was their chosen way of life. These box factories had to close up. Some of our best 

woodsmen and some of our best box factory operators went to our sister provinces to continue their 

chosen way of life, but those who could not do so lost all they had, and again the loss in human values 

was great. 

 

Today, we still have two or three small factories operating in Saskatchewan, because they have to 

scrounge around and get timber off private lands or get it from Indian reserves. They are denied the right 

to enter the forests of our province to get their raw materials at its source. A strange thing occurred, last 

year, when I asked in this House, if this Government, in their negotiations with the Anglo Canadian Pulp 

Company, had offered or agreed to give them a long-term timber berth, and the answer was “Yes”. Of 

course it had to be “Yes”. But it is very surprising, Mr. Speaker, that we have two kind of laws in 

Saskatchewan, one for the great corporations, and an entirely different law for the little citizen who is 

struggling along, trying to make his own living without asking favours from anybody. The private 

citizen is denied the right to get from our provincial forests the raw material required for his business. 

 

The hon. Minister, when I have at different times brought to light certain conditions that we in the North 

think are not very good in Timber Board management and told him that we know of people who had lost 

heavily in logging operations, he always says: “I have a long list of prospective contractors who are 

willing to take contracts under the Timber Board.” I was going to say that I was glad he had such a list, 

Mr. Speaker. I take that back, because I know what will happen to many of them; but I do say to the hon. 

Minister that he needs a long list of prospective contractors. He needs great reserves to take the place of 

the financial casualties who have had contracts, who are now holding contracts, and who will hold 

contracts with the Timber Board in the future, unless their arrangements are changed very materially. 

 

And again, the hon. Minister of Resources scornfully pointed to the action of past Liberal Governments 

in connection with the handling of our forest products, and said, “Under a Liberal administrations the 

Government only received $1.50 or even $1.00 for timber dues”. That was quite true. I remember when 

I only paid $1.50 per 1,000 b.m. myself in timber dues. But when I paid $1.50 per thousand for timber, 

the farmers of the prairies south of us were buying that lumber from us for $15 a thousand: $1.50 per 

thousand dues and $15 for the retail price, which is 10 per cent. Today the Government gets $6 per 

thousand dues, and what do they sell the lumber for? They buy on a closed market, and sell it on the free 

enterprise markets from $80 to $120 a thousand board feet. Taking $90 a thousand as an average price, 

your timber dues are only around six per cent of the retail price. Let me tell you this, Mr. Speaker, the 

hon. Minister of Resources dare not raise the timber dues, for every time he raised the timber dues $1.00 

he reduces the net profit of the Government $1.00 per thousand feet, because he said in this House just a 

short while ago that this Government had made a net profit of $4 from timber resources of this province, 

made a net profit of $4 plus, and add to that the $6 in dues, and that the Government of Saskatchewan 

derived a total revenue of $10 a thousand from resources. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Forest resources. 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

30 

Mr. Dunfield: — Mr. Speaker, let me tell you what they do in Manitoba. I phoned to Winnipeg 

yesterday to find out that in Manitoba they do not set a definite price on timber dues. One person might 

say to them, “I want this piece of timber” and the Government would say: “In other words this interests 

you and who else? Somebody else might have a better market than you have. Somebody else might 

utilize the timber to better advantage than you could, so we'll put it up for auction”; and in every case the 

timber in Manitoba, whether it be a small or large lot, is put up for auction. Last year I knew that they 

got as high as $16 a thousand on some bids on timber dues alone. So yesterday to correct that, I phoned 

Winnipeg, and spoke to a man there who has two timber berths there. He said he had never paid over 

$12, but he said, “One of my friends here has just obtained a timber berth, and he had to pay $18 per 

thousand on the open market”. The lowest price they had bid was $7 per thousand, and I can well 

imagine that would be for a little bit of timber isolated somewhere that would be quite expensive to get 

into and get out of. These things are all taken into consideration, and the timber dues must vary. But add 

your $7 low to your $18 high bid, and you have an average price of $12.50 per thousand for stumpage, 

which is more than the profit and timber dues combined at this Government gets. 

 

The Government of Manitoba maintains the dignity of its citizens, allows them to develop their personal 

initiative, and allows them for use of the forests of Manitoba while protecting the interests of future 

generations, for they have just as good a system as we have in Saskatchewan on lumbering on a 

sustained production basis. 

 

And again, I have heard that the Liberal Government in the past damned up and down by spokesmen for 

this Government. Why, to hear them you would think the Liberals were deliberately trying to destroy the 

forests of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Didn't they? 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — What's that? You don't know anything about it. In 1918, Mr. Speaker, there was a fire 

swept from the North Saskatchewan River through to Lake Athabasca such as has never been seen in 

this province before or since. No human agency could stop that fire, and, incidentally, let me tell you 

this, Mr. Speaker. Because of that same fire, the Big River Lumber Company, since the fire ran through 

their timber berth - a fire does not necessarily bring down trees, it can just kill them; but that big lumber 

company brought every man available from Manitoba and from Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British 

Columbia, to save every stick of lumber possible, and they carried out that same winter, as much as four 

years’ ordinary logging operations. 

 

What happens under this Government? In 1948 there was a forest fire near Green Lake that killed a lot 

of standing timber. Was it logged off quickly? Did they make a gigantic effort to save it? Nothing was 

done about it at all. It stood there until, eventually, it was taken out as pulpwood, at a fraction of the 

value of timber. They talk about free enterprise methods! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Socialism! 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 
 

31 

Mr. Dunfield: — Again, Mr. Speaker, so often I have heard speakers in this Government get up and 

say, “Oh, the way those Liberals destroyed the forest resources of our province”. Why, to your them 

speak, you would think there wasn't enough timber left in the north country in 1944 to feed the stoves in 

this province for one winter, to say nothing of timber! And then, Mr. Speaker, just eight years later, out 

comes a report: “Oh, we have millions of cubic feet of timber of all sizes. We have enough timber in the 

north to keep four pulp mills going”. In eight years, Mr. Speaker, - remember, eight years! If you realize 

that it takes 80 years to produce merchantable timber in this province, wasn't that a miraculous 

achievement? It's just so good, Mr. Speaker, that I question it. I hope that at least part of that growth isn't 

due to any particular powerful brand of C.C.F. political fertilizer, because I think that's what it is! 

 

I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, from the northwestern part of the Meadow Lake constituency, we go just 

across the line into Alberta, and from a private producer there, under free enterprise, we buy the finest 

white spruce lumber at $50, $55, or $60 a thousand, according to the types of lumber you wish, whether 

it is planed on all sides, or shelving, or whatever it is. But for the same lumber in Meadow Lake, we pay 

$80 per thousand feet and up for it, and that producer is not playing for marbles. He is quite happy to 

sell us all the timber we want to take. He is making a very nice profit, and has a very nice set-up. That is 

private enterprise! 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have heard quite a lot about pulp mills. I am going to say something about them, 

because it is a matter of vital importance to the people of Saskatchewan. We have pulp mills in our sister 

provinces, but we have no pulp mills. I think the people of this province want to know why we have no 

pulp mills; why we haven't had them before this. Back in the early days of this regime (as I recall), 

negotiations were underway for a pulp mill, but they fell through. Last year we received almost daily 

bulletins - we were getting worked up to a fever pitch about a possible pulp mill here, and then it fell 

through. I think the people of this province should know the truth about this matter, Mr. Speaker. Were 

the reasons physical, financial, or is it because of the political climate to which this province is subjected 

by a Socialist government? 

 

When the people asked the Premier, he said “freight rates”. I don't think the people of Saskatchewan are 

going to take that for an answer, Mr. Speaker. And when the members on this side of the House ask that 

the correspondence between the Government and the Anglo Canadian Paper Company be tabled so that 

we could get the truth, we were flatly denied that right - the right of the people of Saskatchewan to know 

why we lost a great timber industry right here in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. The 

House was not denied that right. An Order for Return was passed in regard to the correspondence. It was 

just yesterday I announced it was under preparation and would be tabled in the not too distant future, so 

the hon. member is completely wrong. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Mr. Speaker, it may have been passed in a changed form, but when the members on 

this side asked for all that correspondence, it was flatly refused on the ground that it would not be in the 

interests of 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

32 

the people of this province. And how many times have we heard that answer in Crown Corporations? 

We ask for information, and are blandly told it is not in the interest of the corporation. But it would be in 

the interests of the people of Saskatchewan to know, Mr. Speaker. I would suggest to you that the people 

of Saskatchewan lost that great industry solely due to the political climate in this province, and because 

of interference by the Timber Board. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You're wrong again. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — The hon. member from Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) is on record as saying that if 

private industry doesn't set up pulp mills in Saskatchewan, the Government will! Mr. Speaker, that will 

be the day! That will be the day of financial suicide for the taxpayers of this province, if this 

Government ever tries to operate a pulp mill in the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Well, you said we should. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Pardon me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Your leader said we should spend at least $72 million on a pulp mill. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I said no such thing! You've been dreaming again, “Toby”. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Governments can and should operate certain industries in the public interest; but no 

government, Liberal, C.C.F. or any other can ever hope to compete profitably with private enterprise on 

an open market and under highly competitive conditions. It is impossible. The very methods by which 

this Government does business precludes any chance of them making a profit on the open market and 

under keen competition, because, under such conditions, industries can only survive through maximum 

efficiency in operation and maximum service to their customers. From the evidence we have had, this 

Government doesn't even know the A.B.C.'s of such principles of business. 

 

Private industry must make a profit if it is going to stay in business; and if it is going to expand those 

services, it must make a profit. On the other hand, government business doesn't have to make a profit, 

for if they suffer great losses, what happens? The poor old taxpayers dig it up. And if they wish to 

expand their services, what happens? They go ahead, expand their services and mortgage our future for 

the next 30 years without even asking the taxpayers about it. That's the way government business is 

done, and the way it will always be done. You and I can't change it. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Increase the rates. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — The hon. member from Pelly (Mr. Feusi) also is on record, as are many others on your 

right, Mr. Speaker, in damning profits to free enterprise. It is a terrible thing if any person should make a 

profit, particularly out of the resources of this province. How often we have heard that. But do you 

know, Mr. Speaker, such talk and such theories can be carried too far, even to the detriment of the 

C.C.F. party, as was amply demonstrated in British Columbia a few years ago. Some seven or eight 

years ago I spent the months of March and April in Vancouver. It happened to be in an election year. 

Spring comes earlier there, you know and the campaign was on, very actively so. While I was there a 

great pulp and lumber company issued their 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 
 

33 

annual statement for operations of the previous year. In it was shown that they had made $8½ million 

net profits out of the resources of the province. What a terrible thing! Immediately a cry went up from 

the C.C.F. spokesmen all over the province, a terrible cry of anguish: $8½ million taken from the natural 

resources that belonged to all the people of British Columbia! $8½ million of exorbitant profits taken 

out of the hides of the wage-slaves of this company - all the accepted phrases, you know. 

 

This went on for about a week, and then, Mr. Speaker, the pulp company issued another statement 

saying that since these complaints had come to their attention, they thought the public were entitled to a 

fuller explanation. They went on to show that the $8½ million was the net profits from $212 million 

worth of sales; just barely over 4 per cent. They said, “We really do not think this is an exorbitant 

profit”. They went on to show what had been done with the rest of the money from total sales. Millions 

were paid into the Federal Government in income tax that helps to pay for family allowances, old-age 

pensions, and many of the other social services that the Federal Government offers the people of 

Canada. Nearly $20 million was paid to the Government of British Columbia in timber dues, taxes, and 

in many other forms. There were some $130 million paid to citizens of British Columbia in wages and 

salaries, and the balance of the money other than the profit of $8½ million was distributed in various 

ways in B.C. that helped to buoy up its economy.”But”, said the Company, “let us look at what we did 

with the $8½ million of profits. We took the entire profits for last year's operations, borrowed another 

$5½ million from the banks, and we are now building a brand new $14 million pulp mill at Nanaimo 

that will create 1,000 new jobs for British Columbia citizens at a minimum wage of $1.00 per hour” - 

that was 7 years ago; and they said, “isn't that a good thing to do with profits?” 

 

When the people of British Columbia, many of their own employees, C.C.F.’ers and so on, realized just 

how viciously they had been misled, and when they realized what a vicious attempt this was to create 

class hatred and hatred between the employer and employee, they turned against the C.C.F. party, and 

what appeared to be an almost certain C.C.F. victory at the polls was turned into a smashing defeat, and 

never did party deserve better than what the C.C.F. party got in B.C. 

 

Mr. A. Feusi (Pelly): — Are you talking about the Liberals? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say in closing, that Socialist theory and Socialist practice 

might be the answer for an old, worn-out country that had exhausted its resources, both natural and 

human; when they have reached an economic level at which they had to take in each other's washing to 

make a living. Socialism may be the answer then; but for a young and vigorous country such as Canada, 

particularly for this great province of Saskatchewan with potential assets beyond the dream of man, 

Socialism is not the answer for us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We need again in this province a recurrence of the same pioneer spirit that carved Saskatchewan out of 

the wilderness - not a bunch of “gimmies”; we want people who will get up and do things. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Like municipalities. 

  



 

March 9, 1956 

 

 

34 

Mr. Dunfield: — I want to say that the Liberal party stands four-square for free enterprise. There's no 

question about it. The Liberal party stands four-square for free enterprise, and for a political climate that 

will invite and ensure private capital to come here and risk the great sums of money that are necessary to 

develop primary industries that will process our natural resources, for it is only from primary industries 

and processing our natural resources, that new wealth can be produced; new wealth to create new jobs, 

new homes, new families; new wealth to create greater opportunities for our young people; new wealth 

to spread in a more equitable manner our tax burden, and new wealth that will assure greater comforts 

and greater security for our aged people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I certainly do not support the motion. 

 

Hon. J. H. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, I hope to have something positive in 

promises, and worth-while to present this House on Monday next. Therefore, I beg leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:30 o'clock p.m. 


