



















































Hansard: March 14, 1956


 

 

1 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session - Twelfth Legislature 

25th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 14, 1956 

 

The House met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed from Tuesday, March 13, 1956, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of the 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): that Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair. (The Assembly to go 

into Committee of Supply). 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned the debate last night, I 

had meant to deal with the operations of my Department over the last five years, and I pointed out at that 

time that there had been considerable reorganization within the Department during that period, and I 

want to, just for a moment, briefly outline some of the functions particularly of the newer branches of 

the Department. 

 

One of the newer branches is that of the Design, which takes care of much of the planning work, and I 

should remind this Assembly that the building of highways today is a great deal different story than it 

was even 10 years ago. There is a great deal of extra work must go into the planning and designing of a 

road today that was not the case 10 or even five years ago. This is particularly true of the roads which 

are to be blacktopped where great deal of attention must be given to the type of soil that is used and also 

to the material that is used. I find that the Design branch have been of great help to us, not only in the 

planning of the system, but also in correlating the work of the various branches in regard to the planning 

of the roads. They are also responsible for the traffic counts that have been taken. I believe all members 

received a map a short time ago showing the traffic count that had been taken in the province during the 

past year. You will note from that map that practically the whole province was covered. This was done 

by dividing the province into zones, and within those zones we had what we call a number of short 

counts taken. That is where the traffic counter is left on the road for four days at a time. Then within 

those zones we have a number of major sections where long-range counts are taken. We have special 

machines for this, and these machines not only record the counts taken every day, but record the count 

taken every hour of the day, which puts us in a position where we get a very true and full picture of the 

traffic moving over various routes. 

 

In addition to that we have on a number of more important roads taken a destination count, that is, we 

stopped the cars and find out where they are going and where they are coming from; the number of 

passengers and the reason 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

2 

 

for their trip. By getting a count of this kind we are also in a much better position to know the type of 

traffic which road is called upon to bear. So the work that is being done today is much more thorough 

than was ever done in this province before. 

 

On the matter of bridges, I am glad to report that during the past five years we have made again very 

rapid strides in meeting the bridge problem. This has been done largely by getting more up-to-date 

equipment for the bridge crews. I find that in the year ending March 31, 1955 we constructed 164 

bridges. You will note when I come to this past year's work we again increased that number. The policy 

which we adopted in 1952 where we co-operated with the rural municipalities in assisting them in the 

construction of bridges from 20 to 100 feet in length and assuming full responsibility for those over 100 

feet has been most successful. I can now report that we are on a fair way to meeting the very pressing 

bridge problem that was left on our doorstep by the Liberal administration in 1944. 

 

Another branch that has been created within the last five years is the Materials and Research Branch. 

This has been made possible again because of the recruitment programme which we carried on, and we 

have been able to secure the necessary engineers to do the work required in this branch. Again this 

branch is very necessary in this day when we have commenced a programme of extensive blacktop work 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

As I pointed out a moment ago, when you are building a grade that is required to be blacktopped a soil 

test must be taken regularly, and we have quite a number of crews, I think it is 22 field mobile units that 

travel from job to job, and do the necessary field work both as to soil and the testing of materials. 

 

This branch has also done very considerable work in the testing of conditions along the Carrot River. 

Questions were asked a very short time ago by the member for that area, and I am glad to inform him 

that as a result of the work that has been carried on by the Materials Branch, we now have a lot of 

information which we hope will enable us to solve the difficulty that has arisen in that area. Some 

experimental work has carried on in one site this year and only time will tell whether it has been 

successful or not. 

 

This Branch also looks after the gravel research in the province, and I am glad to report because of the 

work carried on by this Branch we now have information regarding more gravel deposits in 

Saskatchewan than we had three or four years ago, but that does not mean we are out of difficulty as far 

as gravel is concerned. We still have areas in this province where gravel is in very short supply. There 

are areas where there is no doubt we will be forced to haul by rail or long truck hauls for all time to 

come. But, because of the work carried on by this Department, with more up-to-date equipment, and 

with the use of resistivity machines, we have been able, as I said a moment ago, to locate gravel deposits 

which, because of heavy over-burden, was unknown of a few years back. This Branch has also been of 

great assistance to us in developing pavement designs. As you know we have had very little experience 

in pavement work in Saskatchewan. True we have had very good co-operation from 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

3 

 

our neighbours to the south, and we have made a practice of having representatives of our Department 

visit various States, particularly in the northwestern part of the United States, and get from those States a 

lot of valuable information. But we have problems here to which they do not have the answer; in fact 

they have problems themselves for which they haven't the answer. This Branch has done a great job in 

assisting us in the development of pavement designs that is meeting very well the requirements of this 

province. 

 

Then there is another problem which we have every year, and which is becoming more acute, 

particularly during the last few exceptionally wet years with long drawn out springs. On one hand we 

have the travelling public putting pressure on me to keep the bans on the highways for a longer period 

than we do. On the other hand I have the trucking organizations, who certainly suffer because of these 

bans, asking that they be removed. One of the difficulties, of course, that we are facing in this respect is 

the fact that a gravelled road will be dried up and fit for traffic before the blacktop road will be ready. 

And the difficulty is, the blacktop road may not show any signs of distress. The Materials and Research 

Branch, by using what is known as the Benkleman deflection beam, are able to go out and make tests of 

these roads to determine whether or not the deflection of our blacktop roads warrants the hauling of 

heavy loads, and by so doing we are able to decide with some degree of authority as to whether or not 

heavier loads should be allowed over these roads. 

 

I want to remind this Assembly that last spring, I think it was on in June before the last bans were 

removed from our highways, and one of the difficulties faced by the trucking people is that in the 

southern part of the province we may have the bans removed entirely. Then, at that very time the bans 

may be only being placed on the roads such La Ronge, or up in the Meadow Lake area, and I do realize 

that it creates a difficulty for those people. Nevertheless we have a responsibility to the taxpayers of this 

province, and we do our utmost to see that no undue hardship is suffered, at the same time serving the 

people to the best of our ability. 

 

The other Branch I would like to mention briefly is the Maintenance Branch. Again, because of our 

ability to add to and replace much of the old, outmoded equipment, we are in a much better position 

today to do a job of maintenance than was done before. And as we are able to add to the maintenance 

equipment in the province, we will be able to add a lot of refinement to the maintenance which we are 

now giving. We are often criticized for some of the maintenance work which we do, but I want this 

House to remember that we work on a much smaller Budget than other provinces with the great deal less 

mileage than we have in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the things which we have stepped up very materially is the amount of regravelling which we are 

doing to our gravel roads. During the last three years I find that we have regravelled, by the Maintenance 

Branch, 47 per cent of our entire gravel road system in the province. We have also, through our 

Maintenance Branch, carried on a considerable amount of experimental work in the use of oil, and I 

believe that we have been very successful, at least in some of these experiments. One such project south 

of Biggar is proving very 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

4 

 

We have another one between Shaunavon and Eastend, which at the moment looks to be very 

successful, and I am hoping that it may be the answer to some of the dust problems which we have in 

this province, but in order to do so, it will mean that the Budget of the Department will have to increase, 

because it runs about $2,000 a mile to apply this oil treatment, if it is to be at all successful. 

 

The experience we have gained during the last three or four years owing to the exceptional flood 

conditions and to the heavy precipitation which this province has experienced in certain areas has 

enabled us to give improved service. We have gained considerable experience in the case of blacktop 

and also in the care of even our gravelled roads, but I want to point out to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 

that under conditions such as we have had these past few years, there are times when it is impossible to 

do a job of maintenance on a gravel highway. 

 

We have also been able, in co-operation with the other three western provinces, to adopt what is known 

as the uniform manual of traffic signs, and that is now in use in the four western provinces. We in 

Saskatchewan have now completed the signing our highways on this basis, and we are now busy in a 

programme of reflectorization of all of our highway signs in Saskatchewan. 

 

The area, of course, in which we have made our greatest advance in the field of maintenance is in our 

snow removal programme, and this has been made possible because of the design of highways which we 

are using in our new construction. Yesterday at 10:00 o'clock, Mr. Speaker, I find that after quite a long 

protracted period of storms and constant blowing we had 6,500 miles of the highway system open. I 

want to say that during the present winter, under Liberal administration, we would have seen the 

highway system entirely forgotten after the storm on 12th of December, and they would have been left 

until the sun took the snow away in the spring. This is what happened in years prior to 1944. In fact, not 

a single year when the Liberals were in office did they attempt to keep open 6,500 miles such as we 

opened in about three days. 

 

The other Branch that I want to briefly mention is the Operations Branch, and because of the extensive 

amount of equipment which the Department now owns we have placed of this equipment under one 

branch head, and by so doing we are getting much better use of the equipment. We are better informed 

as to the needs of the various branches of the Government, and as a result I might also say, Mr. Speaker, 

that so far as our construction crews are concerned we are setting the pattern, both in design and 

efficiency for the work that is being done on the highways of this province. 

 

Another branch which was created when we reorganized the department was a branch that would bring 

together the various municipal assistance programmes carried on by the Department of Highways. That 

branch was made responsible for taking care of the grants to municipalities, looking after bridge work, 

and they also were assigned the task of preparing the grid road. I want to tell the hon. member for 

Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) that this was not done by the Royal Commission on Agriculture and Rural 

Life. I want to say that the Commission on Agriculture and Rural Life had nothing whatsoever to do 

with planning the system of grid roads. This was done by the Department of Highways, and when our 

work was completed the recommendations were turned in to the 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

5 

 

Municipal Advisory Commission. For his information I might tell him, also, that when this work was 

done it was not done by backroom boys. A lot of the work was done in the field. Fortunately, when we 

were asked to take care of this work, I had returned to the Department a young man who had served as a 

District Engineer in Yorkton for a number of years. He had taken post-graduate work at the University 

of Texas, and had just returned, and we were fortunate in being able to assign this work to him. I want to 

say, Mr. Speaker, but he did an excellent job. I had the opportunity to be with him on a number of 

occasions when we met not one municipality, but a number of them. I remember the first occasion when 

we met six rural municipalities. I had been asked to attend their meeting to discuss this proposed grid 

road, and I took Mr. Rowe with me, and I was amazed when he placed his maps on the walls to find that 

in the six municipalities there was only one slight suggested change made by those municipalities, which 

of course shows that the statement made by the hon. member for Cannington was not correct. It shows 

that we were co-operating with the municipalities in the development of this system of roads. 

 

There was another occasion when we met 10 municipalities. We met one afternoon and continued on 

into the evening when they separated into panels, and we had a general discussion on municipal road 

problems, and out of those 10 municipalities, there was not one single change ask for in the system 

which was worked out by Mr. Rowe. Now that is understandable, because in our Department we have a 

vast amount of material gathered over the last 12 years, working with the municipalities and thus 

securing a very good idea of where their main market roads are situated. 

 

In addition to this when this work was assigned to Mr. Rowe, I asked him to take into consideration not 

only the population density of the areas, but the traffic count, the location of our health centres, the 

location of educational centres, community pastures, and community enterprises of one kind and 

another. When Mr. Rowe completed this work it was on a very scientific basis. Where the occasion 

required he did not hesitate to go into the country and travel over these roads and get a first-hand 

knowledge from observation; and there were times, if it was required, when he consulted with municipal 

offices in those various areas. When his work was completed he turned this over to the Municipal 

Advisory Commission. I would like to again remind the hon. member for Cannington that these are 

pretty practical people. The Chairman of that Commission, as he should know, Dean Cronkite, has been 

interested in municipal work for many years. Another member of the Commission was Mr. Fisher who 

was a Reeve for many years and was President of the SARM for a number of years, and a third member 

of the Commission is Mr. McGillivray, who I believe at the moment is an active member of the 

municipality, and was for a number of years the President of the Trustees Association. They are pretty 

practical people if I know anything of what practical people are. 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — How about the guys that drew the maps? 

 

Hon. Mr. J. T. Douglas: — Now the other Branch that I want to mention briefly is a Construction 

Branch, and I just want to point out that since April, 1951, this Branch has constructed 643.8 miles of 

new pavement and constructed 2,459 miles of grade and treated 147 miles with crude oil. Speaking of 

the Construction Branch, there is another thing that I want to mention in this Assembly, and it is 

important when you realize the Budget that we work on 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

6 

 

in comparison with our sister provinces of Manitoba and Alberta. I find that in the period from 1945 to 

December 31st, the last years for which we have comparative figures, Saskatchewan had an increase of 

1,006 miles of pavement during that period; Manitoba had an increase of 467 miles; and Alberta had an 

increase of 947 miles of pavement. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that is a record that cannot be matched by 

any other province in Canada, particularly when you take into consideration the small amount of money 

we have to work with in comparison say with our sister province of Alberta. 

 

And now if I might say a word or two about last year’s -that in 1955, construction programme. To give 

you some idea of the extent of that programme I would point out that we had 336 major projects under 

way last summer. This does not take into consideration this small maintenance jobs that were made 

necessary last year because of the extreme weather conditions which existed in spring and early summer. 

I might point out that it was mid-July before the contractors of this province really were able to get 

under way with their base course work, and I should point out to this Assembly that it is most essential 

that we give very great care to the construction of base course, because after all that is what decides 

whether or not you are going to have a successful blacktop job. I know it has been provoking to the 

travelling public of this province to come to a place where possibly the crew has shut down. It is 

difficult for them to know why, and the reason is that soil conditions are such that you cannot get proper 

compactness, and last summer was a very difficult one. Very often about the time the soil was ready for 

work we would have another rain, and there would be another holdup. But do you know that during that 

period, on the section of Trans-Canada west of Swift Current, I believe we set an all-time record for this 

province. On that section, we were able to complete 92.31 miles of road during last summer's 

construction season. In fact we had over 84 miles of continuous stretch base course and blacktop that 

was laid during the past summer, and I know that was not equalled by any other province in western 

Canada, either this year, and I doubt if it was equalled in previous years. 

 

One of the difficulties, of course, that we encounter as we undertake to construct these roads is to strike 

a proper balance as to the type of road which I have just been discussing, that is roads of high quality, 

blacktop roads and roads that will give accommodation to the balance of the province. You could very 

easily get to the point where you could be spending most of your money on blacktop roads and 

neglecting those other roads that lead into other parts of the province where the traffic doesn't warrant 

blacktopping and then. This is one of the things that we must be very careful of. 

 

Yesterday I pointed out that when we took office in 1944 there was every indication that the traffic in 

this province would increase very rapidly. Now we find that the motor vehicle traffic in Saskatchewan 

has doubled, more than doubled during the last 10 years, and the amount of weight carried by that traffic 

is a great deal in excess of that, so that we have a very particular problem in regard to the increase of 

traffic which our highways have had to carry since this Government has taken office. I might point out 

that the percentage of trucks to cars in this province is 62 per cent. I question if that is equalled in any 

other province in Canada. 

 

I mentioned a moment ago the difficulties which we have in the spring, and that difficulty, of course, 

carries on into the summer months, and 



 

March 14, 1956 

7 

 

I also mentioned that there was a quantity of information in regard to the traffic needs, some of which 

we have here and some of which we tried to get from the United States and were not able to do so, 

because even there they did not have information that was up-to-date. 

 

I have mentioned before in this House the Maryland road test, and I am not going to deal with it today. 

That Maryland road test brought us certain information. Then a few years ago there was commenced in 

the State of Idaho another test often referred to as the Washo test. It was sponsored by the Western 

Association of State Highway Officials, from which it derives its name, and it was conducted under the 

supervision of the Highway Research Board of the United States National Council. It was a very 

thorough test, the most thorough that has ever been made, and that test has brought out very useful 

information to us. That test showed that to carry the ordinary traffic 1,800 single axle load, which we 

allow in this province, an asphalt road should have at least 18 inches of base where you have a 4-inch 

asphalt mats, and where the asphalt mat is reduced, and our limit here is usually three inches, then you 

must have a greater base of granular material than the 18 inches which I have mentioned. 

 

To build that type of road in Saskatchewan would cost you from $60,000 to $100,000 a mile, depending 

on the soil conditions and the location in hauling your gravel. When I tell you that, Mr. Speaker, you can 

realize that we cannot build too many miles of that kind of road and at the same time service the other 

roads which are in need of rebuilding in this province, as well as giving to the municipalities the 

assistance which they are asking in the construction and gravelling of their roads. 

 

It also brings up, Mr. Speaker, very clearly the need for more Federal aid in the building of roads in this 

province and in the rest of the Dominion than we are now getting. I have dealt with this in this House 

before, and I am not going to take the time to go over it again today. Of course, there is another reason, 

as we build more of these high-class roads there will be more and more interprovincial traffic crossing 

the highways of Saskatchewan. In fact right today Saskatchewan has become a corridor province for 

much of the traffic that is coming to this province from outside of Saskatchewan, and passing through to 

another one. In many cases they are assuming no responsibility or very little responsibility for the 

upkeep of the roads. Many of these large trucks can carry sufficient fuel to almost across Saskatchewan, 

and it means that they are not buying very much fuel in this province. 

 

But to come back to that test, I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the test consisted of single axle 

trucks with weights of 18,000 and 22,400 and tandem-axle trucks of 32,000 and 40,000 pounds. These 

tests continued from November 1952 to May 1954 and show very clearly, as I pointed out a moment 

ago, that with the exceptions of the Trans-Canada highway, a short section of No. 6 highway from 

Regina up to the junction of No. 11, and from the section which we have rebuilt between Corrine and 

Weyburn, we have no blacktop roads in Saskatchewan that are capable of carrying this type of load. 

That accounts for a great deal of the trouble which we find ourselves in with regard to blacktop roads, 

and the experience which we are having in Saskatchewan is not uncommon to other provinces in 

Canada. But this, Mr. Speaker, is the first time that we have had accurate information in regard to the 

effect of load weights on asphalt roads. Now this was a pretty thorough test, but even 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

8 

 

this test leaves quite a number of questions unanswered, and there is being arranged for today at Ottawa, 

Illinois, another test that will be more complete and more thorough even than the one at Malad, and I am 

glad to inform this Assembly that this province will be kept informed of the results of that test through 

our associates, the Canadian Good Road Association, which will have a man on the job full-time, giving 

information to us. 

 

Now I would like to make a comparison of the work accomplished with our two sister provinces. It 

seems to be the habit in this House during this Session to make these comparisons, but I would like to 

point out also that the Budget for Manitoba in 1955 with $19 million; for Saskatchewan, $22,350,000 

and for Alberta, $52,500,000. Manitoba has a highway system about one-third the size of ours. Alberta 

was, up until last year, not much different. I understand that last year they brought their highway system 

up to close to 5,000 miles. But here is what was accomplished: In grading, Manitoba graded 256 miles, 

Saskatchewan, 424 miles and Alberta, 304 miles. Manitoba, in gravelling and base course had a total of 

488 miles, Saskatchewan for gravelling had 1,538 miles and Alberta, 317. In base course we had 119 

miles; Alberta was ahead of us there with 288. For asphalt Manitoba had 122 miles, and I believe 2½ 

miles of this was cement; in Saskatchewan, we had 200 miles, Alberta, 324 miles. I have no figures as to 

the oil treatment in those other two provinces, but we had 74 miles, and we had 224 miles of seal-coat. 

 

One of the more outstanding jobs to be completed last summer was the completion of the base course 

and bituminous surface from Swift Current to the Alberta border, which I have just mentioned. The 

virtual completion to Trans-Canada standards of the grade between Moose Jaw and Swift Current, there 

is only a short section of between three and four miles that has not been completely finished. 

Completion of the highway-railroad grade separations at Aikens and Kincorth and the completion of the 

180-foot reinforced concrete bridge over the Swift Current creek. Completion of No. 39 Highway from 

Estevan to Weyburn, and graded to Trans-Canada standard. Completion from Weyburn to Corinne of all 

the base course, with only eight miles left of bituminous surfacing. Completion to grade of No. 11 from 

Saskatoon to Junction No. 5, and the completion of grading from Battleford to Highgate. Oil treatment 

from Maymont to Denholm, and Bresaylor to Maidstone, and this brings to completion a dust-free road 

from Saskatoon to the Alberta border. Paving from Prince Albert to Saskatoon also made very good 

progress last year. 

 

Notable among the maintenance jobs, of course, was the completion of 1,200 miles of regravelling under 

the Maintenance Branch. We also completed field investigation and preliminary work of 12,000 miles of 

greater roads. Complete the traffic centres which I have just mentioned, and the preliminary survey of 

320 miles of provincial highway and reconnaissance survey of 725 miles. We also built, during that 

time, 187 bridges and repaired 39. In addition to these, too low level crossings were constructed, and six 

culverts were installed to replace obsolete bridges. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, throughout the time that I have been in this House I have never indulged in 

personalities, either here or in the country. I am sorry today, however, to have to depart from that 

procedure, and I am forced to do so, because last summer when we were experiencing some of the worst 

road 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

9 

 

conditions that this province has ever experienced, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. McDonald) made 

some rather scurrilous, uncalled for, unfair remarks regarding the staff of my Department, and a group 

of people who are not able to get up and defend themselves, and I am sorry that the Leader of the 

Opposition is not here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): — He is getting ready for a convention! 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas: — I have a number of clippings here and I am going to read from one, and the 

statement was made in a number of places in the province: 

 

“The highway staff were utterly useless and incompetent, and if he were the Premier of this province, 

he would fire half of that staff.” 

 

I want to say that no more unjust statement could have been made regarding a group of men who, 

working under very severe conditions, did their utmost to serve this province. I notice, however, that by 

the time this flooding condition was cleaned up and they got the road back into shape, he commenced to 

desist from making those statements. I imagine he found that he was doing himself more harm than 

good. I have just outlined to you a pretty extensive campaign of work carried on by this department, and 

I want to assure you that it would not have been possible to carry out that work with a staff that was 

useless or incompetent. 

 

I pointed out last night, Mr. Speaker, that we have been forced to recruit much of our staff from young 

men who have graduated from University without highway training, and I want to point out again that it 

is all the more credit to them that they have been able in this short time to reach a state of efficiency to 

carry out the programme of work which I have just mentioned. It is not an easy task, I can assure you, 

and I know they would be the first to admit that at times they have made some mistakes. I know we have 

made some mistakes, but again I want to point out that there have been no serious mistakes made in this 

Department, and I want to again say that I despise a public official taking advantage of people who 

cannot defend themselves by making statements of this kind. The other day when I had the opportunity 

to sit in the Conference of our Construction Engineers, and those men rose in their place to answer their 

own call, I could not but feel ashamed to think that someone who sat in this House in a responsible 

position would lower himself by making such unfair and malicious statements. Using McCarthy (and I 

am not referring to the member for Cannington) tactics to slur and malign a group of men who are doing 

their utmost to serve this province. Now, I have just this to say, that the Leader of the Opposition has 

shown by his remarks, shown by his actions since he has been Leader, that he is among the least capable 

of judging the men of my Department. 

 

Now I would like to say a word or two about assistance to rural municipalities. I hate to belabour this, 

Mr. Speaker, it has been before this House a great deal, but as my Department was responsible for the 

assistance to municipalities, I feel that I cannot pass up answering some of the statements that were 

made in this House, and I want to say that before we took office in 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

10 

 

1944, assistance to municipalities by the Liberals was pretty meagre and pretty spotty to say the least, 

and again I have the records here; I am not going to take the time today to read them, but I want to point 

out the record of this Government since we took office, and I want to point out that we did adopt a very 

definite policy so far as assistance to the rural municipalities was concerned. The first policy we adopted 

when we first took office was to state that any municipality that asked for a grant would receive at least 

$500. I know that was not much of the policy, but by 1946 we have developed what is known as 

equalization grants, and that grant system stayed in operation until 1953, when we turned back to the 

municipalities the entire field of land taxation, and when that was done it did create and inbalance as far 

as assistance given back to municipalities was concerned. But I want to point out that we increased 

grants to municipalities by 674 per cent over that given by the Liberals the last year they were in office. 

We increased bridge assistance by 463 per cent; we spend $16 million on roads that were not part of the 

highway system. We provided free engineering service to the municipalities during that time, and as I 

stated a moment ago, we formulated a plan for municipal road grids at the request of the Association of 

Rural Municipalities. In 1953 we turned back to the rural municipalities the entire field of land taxation, 

at an annual cost now of $2 million. 

 

Again I want to set the member for Cannington straight. Yesterday he said that the Provincial Treasurer 

(Hon. Mr. Fines) and I had used a different figures. That is correct. But he failed to realize that we were 

talking about two different periods. Provincial Treasurer was referring to the year 1953, and the figure 

given by the member for Cannington was $1,800,000. Well if those were the figures given by the 

Provincial Treasurer, he was very conservative, because the 1953 the return of Public Revenue Tax cost 

this province $1,862,780. What I was referring to the Public Revenue Tax I was referring to 1955, and 

on the basis of the 1955 assessment, again I was conservative. I said $2 million, actually it was 

$2,003,931. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — It wasn't even levied in that year. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas: — That is what we would have got if we had still collected it, and that is what I 

was talking about. I don't expect the member for Cannington to understand that. 

 

Now while I am dealing with the member for Cannington, he made a few other statements that I think 

should be set straight. First of all, when he was speaking in the House the other evening, he made the 

statement that: 

 

“We had promised the municipalities to pay them a flat grant of $500 in excess of the equalization 

grant.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say at no time did we ever make such a promise. What we said was this, that in 

cases where the equalization grants did not equal $500, we would make $500 with a minimum. That is 

what we said. We never said that we would pay this in addition to the equalization grants. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Get Brock's letter from ‘47 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

11 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas: — Another statement which he made the other day is not correct. He said that 

certain sections of the provincial highway system had been incorporated in this grid. That statement is 

not correct. Not a single foot of the provincial highway system has been incorporated in the grid. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I am glad to hear you say that. 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas: — He referred to two sections of road, and I want to say that neither of those 

sections was today, nor was at any time, ever included in the provincial highway system. I did answer 

his question regarding the Royal Commission taking part in this grid. I believe that covers most of the 

statements made by the member for Cannington. 

 

And now I want to say a word or two about two statements made by the member for Maple Creek (Mr. 

Cameron). He was criticizing this province, of course, for the lack of industrial development. He was 

pretty well answered by the member for Canora (Hon. Mr. Kuziak), when the member for Canora asked 

him “just what the Liberals had done during their 35 years in office”, and of course, the answer is nil. 

Even during the war years when you had a Liberal Government in power in Ottawa and a Liberal 

Government in Saskatchewan, nothing was done to bring out industrialization, and I want to point out 

that there was one field in which they could have very easily helped, and that is in the field of the co-

operatives. During the years the Liberals were in office in this province, they did not give one cent of 

Government business to the co-operative organizations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak (Minister of Telephones): — They sabotaged them. 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas: — In the ‘thirties that would have been a hold to those co-operatives who were 

striving for existence. Well, I want to point out that in the years 1944-55 the Department of Highways 

alone spent $403,730.36 with the co-operatives in this province, and the Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company spent $137,198.87, a total of over half a million dollars from this one branch and one Crown 

Corporation alone. I didn't have time to get the figures for the entire province, but that gives you some 

idea of the assistance which we are giving the co-operatives, which the Liberals failed to do. 

 

The member for Maple Creek also worried about the failure of this province to keep our young people in 

Saskatchewan. Well, again, I am just going to refer to my own department. In 1944, when we took 

office, there was only one engineer in the entire department that was a graduate of the University of 

Saskatchewan. Previous to that time a graduate of engineering from this province was almost forced to 

leave Saskatchewan, if he wanted to find employment in his chosen profession. Today, go over a list of 

our employees and what do you find? The great majority of our engineers are graduates of the 

University of Saskatchewan, and not many of them from other provinces. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Not making a very good job of it. 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

12 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas: — Yes, they are making an excellent job of it. Possibly the standards that the hon. 

member for Saltcoats new in his days is not the type of work. . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — You don't have to send out a Royal Commission to look for the roads! 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I must get along. I know you want to hear something about 

the programme which we are offering for this year, but before I give that programme, I want to first 

draw the attention of this House to the fact that in 1952, we went to the country with a programme that 

within the five years commencing 1953, we would spend a total of $75 million on highways and 

municipal roads in this province. I am glad to inform this Assembly that the Budget that is before us 

makes provision for the completion of that promise within the four-year period, not five. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — C.C.F. must have money! 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas: — But as I go forward with the programme, you will see that the programme which 

we are announcing for this year is by far the largest and by far the most progressive one that has ever 

been undertaken in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But before I do that, I would like for a moment or two to deal with the Conference which was held in 

Ottawa last November, when the nine provinces participating in the construction of the Trans-Canada 

highway match with the Federal Government to discuss with them the possibilities of completing this by 

the year 1960. By that time it had become quite evident that very few of any of the provinces would be 

able to complete their portion of the Trans-Canada within the terms of the Agreement, which was 

December, 1956. When we met at that Conference, the Federal Government made a proposition to us. 

One, that they were prepared to extend the life of this Agreement to March, 1960. Secondly, they were 

prepared to pay 90 per cent on 10 per cent of the mileage within each province, providing that the 

province would allow the Federal Government to decide on the location of this 10 per cent of the 

mileage, and they said they were going to give priority to the construction of roads in the areas that were 

not now served by blacktop roads. Well, so far as the province of Saskatchewan is concerned, there was 

not much choice. The 10 per cent of this province is approximately 41 miles, and we only have 42 miles 

of this section between Regina and Moose Jaw that has not been completed, or has not been worked on, 

so that there is not much choice as far as Saskatchewan is concerned. 

 

One of the other stipulations made by the Federal Government was that the province, in order to benefit 

from this offer, must be prepared not only to expend the 10 per cent during this year, but they must also 

continue to expend an average equal to the expenditures of 1954 and 1955 to benefit from this offer. 

Now in this province, when the 10 per cent is built, we would not have enough remaining to warrant the 

expending of that amount, so that we have the assurance of the Federal government (and I have the first 

draft of the agreement on my desk at the moment) that they are making provision in cases of 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

13 

 

our kind that we would not be called upon to make that expenditure. 

 

There is one other stipulation that I should mention, and that was at the end of the present agreement, 

which will be December, 1956, Ottawa will discontinue to pay the provinces for any prior work they did 

on the Trans-Canada highway, and that in our case this section between Regina and Moose Jaw is the 

section on which we have in the past made our greatest expenditures, and the section on which we could 

hope to collect the greatest amount from the Federal Government because of prior work, it is necessary 

that we complete that section of the road during the present year, and at the moment we are making 

provision for that in this year's programme. Not only that, but we have been negotiating with the Federal 

Government as to the section of that road upon which they will pay the 90 per cent. 

 

I noticed an article in the ‘Leader Post’ the other day when they were dealing with this road grid, and 

trying to draw a red herring across the trail, they stated that the municipal people were not asking any 

more from the province, when they asked for 75 per cent, than the province were getting from the 

Federal Government in the Trans-Canada. I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that while I was 

delighted to have the Federal Government assumed 90 per cent of this 10 per cent of the roads, that only 

means that they are paying about 4½ per cent on the overall highway picture, and as they never 

undertook to pay 50 per cent of the full cost of the road, this extra 4½ per cent still does not bring them 

up to the full 50 per cent of the cost of the Trans-Canada. It will be impossible to say just how much that 

will be until we have had the opportunity of getting in all the costs, but while it looks like a very 

generous gesture on their part, it does not amount to a great deal of money when you extend it over the 

full length of the highway. I had intended to refer to this statement just a little further, but I will leave it 

for just now. 

 

Now I will go to the programme for the coming year: 

 

No. 1 Highway: 
From Manitoba border to Moosomin, seal coat; McLean to Regina, complete the seal coat; the bypass at 

Regina, complete the grading and place traffic gravel; and also complete the bridge over the Wascana 

Creek; Regina to Moose Jaw, grading, base course and bituminous surfacing; Moose Jaw to 4½ miles 

east of Parkbeg place traffic gravel, base course, and bituminous surfacing; from 4½ miles east of 

Parkbeg to Val Jean, seal; Val Jean to Ernfold, to Fauna Siding, seal coat; Fauna Siding to Swift 

Current, complete base course and bituminous surface, also seal coat; Swift Current to Webb, seal coat; 

near Alberta border, complete bridge over Box Elder Creek. 

 

No. 2 Highway: 
Ardill to Con’s Service Station, bituminous surface; Tuxford to Chamberlain, base course and blacktop; 

(I hope the people from Moose Jaw will not that because apparently the Federal member from there was 

a bit 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

14 

 

worried that we were not going to do anything for Moose Jaw). I should point out that the heaviest 

expenditure being made on the highway system in Saskatchewan will be made in the vicinity of Moose 

Jaw during the present year. South of Penzance to No 15 highway, grade and gravel. This will complete 

regrading of No. 2 highway from the International border right through to the Prince Albert National 

park, leaving only that small section from the 3rd meridian on the park border to the north end of 

Montreal Lake, that has not been rebuilt since this Government took office. From south junction of No. 

5 highway to two miles north of Bremen Corner, base course and bituminous surface; from two miles 

north of Bremen Corner to Wekaw, complete bituminous surfacing. 

 

No. 3 Highway: 
Hudson Bay to Bannock, complete grading and gravelling; Tisdale to No. 6 highway, oil treatment; 

Kinistino to east of Birch Hills, grading and gravelling; east of Birch Hills to Hagen corner, complete 

the grading and gravelling; Cowan River bridge to Green Lake, grade and gravel; from Meadow Lake to 

No. 26 highway, grade and gravel. This work, when completed, will give a completely surfaced road 

from east of Hudson Bay right through to Pierceland, near the Alberta border. 

 

No. 4 Highway: 
From No. 43 highway to Swift Current, grade and gravel, from Saskatchewan Landing Bridge to Elrose, 

oil treatment; between the bridges over the North Saskatchewan river at Battleford, base course and 

bituminous surfacing; from No 26 highway to Cochin, oil treatment. 

 

No. 5 Highway: 
From No. 57 highway to Veregin, complete grading and gravelling; Tiny to Buchanan, complete grading 

and gravelling; from No. 2 highway to Hopkins Corner, base course and bituminous surface; Radisson 

to Maymont, oil treatment; Bresaylor to Maidstone, complete oil treatment. 

 

No. 6 Highway: 
From south of Ceylon to No. 39 Highway, oil treatment; Regina to junction of No. 6 and No. 11 seal 

coat; Dafoe north, grade and gravel. 

 

No. 7 Highway: 
Brock to Kindersley, oil treatment. 

 

No. 9 Highway: 
Carlyle to No. 16 highway, oil treatment; Canora to Assiniboine river, grade and gravel. 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

15 

 

No. 10 Highway: 
Fort Qu’Appelle to Balcarres, base course and blacktop; Balcarres to Duff, complete grade revisions; 

Tonkin to Wroxton, complete grade and gravelling; Wroxton to Manitoba border, grade and gravel. 

 

No. 11 Highway: 

Saskatoon to junction with No. 5 highway, oil treatment. 

 

No. 13 Highway: 
Redvers to Manor, complete grading and gravelling; Assiniboia to Melaval, grade and gravel. 

 

No. 14 Highway: 
Theodore to Insinger, complete grading and gravelling; Lanigan to Plunkett, complete gravelling; Biggar 

to Junction of No. 51 highway, grade and gravel; Unity west, grade and gravel. 

 

No. 15 Highway: 
From No. 9 highway to Melville, complete grading and gravelling; Punnichy to junction No. 35 

highway, grade and gravel; from No. 2 highway to Kenaston, complete grading and gravelling; 

Kenaston to three miles west of No. 19 highway, complete grading and gravelling; from three miles west 

of No. 19 highway to Outlook, grade and gravel. 

 

No. 16 Highway: 

Maryfield to Wawota, complete grading and gravelling; Wawota to No. 9 highway, grade and gravel; 

Kennedy to Kipling, grade and gravel; Montmartre to Kendal, reconnaissance and survey. 

 

No. 17 Highway: 
Lloydminster south, oil treatment. 

 

No. 19 Highway: 
Strongfield to No. 15 highway, grade and gravel. 

 

No. 20 Highway: 
Duval to Nokomis, completion of grading and gravelling. 

 

No. 21 Highway: 
Maple Creek to Trans-Canada highway, oil treatment; Fox Valley north, grade and gravel. 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

16 

 

No. 22 Highway: 
From No. 47 highway to Lemberg, grade and gravel. 

 

No. 26 Highway: 
From No. 4 highway to Meota, grade and gravel. 

 

No. 29 Highway: 
Battleford south, grade and gravel. 

 

No. 31 Highway: 
Herschel to south of Plenty, grade and gravel. 

 

No. 33 Highway: 
Stoughton to Fillmore, grade and gravel. 

 

No. 35 Highway: 
Archerwill to Sylvania, complete grading and gravelling. 

 

No. 37 Highway: 
Shaunavon south, grade and gravel. 

 

No. 39 Highway: 
Halbrite to Weyburn, complete gravelling and place base course and bituminous surface; Weyburn to 

McTaggart, complete bituminous surface. 

 

No. 40 Highway: 
Leask to Blaine Lake, complete gravelling. 

 

No. 44 Highway: 
West of Eyre to Alsask, grade and gravel. (I might say this completes No. 44 highway) 

 

No. 51 Highway: 
From junction No. 14 highway to Springwater, grade and gravel. 

 

No. 55 Highway: 
Weirdale to Junction No. 2 highway, grade and gravel; Belbutte to Cater, complete grading and 

gravelling; Cater to junction No. 4 highway, grade and gravel. (This, by the way, will complete the 

reconstruction of this road right from Prince Albert to Turtleford.) 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

17 

 

Greenwater Lake south, complete grading and gravelling; from No. 5 highway to No. 2 highway via 

Bruno, gravel. Hudson Bay to Erwood, grade and gravel. 

 

In addition to this we will have a very extensive regravelling programme in the maintenance department, 

I cannot give you the details because that will be determined largely by the spring conditions which will 

exist this year, and of course, there is another large bridge programme in the offing, also the details of 

which must be held until we have more information from the rural municipalities. 

 

In the few minutes that I have left, I just want to say one word about the Crown Corporation which I 

administer, and that is the Saskatchewan Transportation Company. I am glad to inform you that this 

organization has kept advance of the other transportation companies throughout this province. 

 

We have led the way in a number of features. We were the first to institute an express service with our 

buses, something that, as you know, is becoming very popular in this province. When we commenced 

the operation of this company, we purchased the best buses available. As time went on, and they needed 

replacement again we led the field in Canada in the institution of the use of diesel buses in this province, 

and I want to say that the policy which we have followed in the past years, I assure you will continue. 

We will continue to give you the very best in bus service and this winter it is becoming particularly 

popular, as people are finding it is much safer and a great deal easier to use the splendid facilities offered 

by this company, rather than risk driving their own cars. 

 

Now there is much I would like to say regarding this company, but I see that my air time is up, and 

needless to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I am going to support this, the best Budget, that has ever been brought 

down by our Provincial Treasurer. 

 

Mr. Harry Gibbs (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to concur with what a lot of other speakers 

have said in this debate with regard to paying tribute to you, a Speaker of this Assembly. I think it has 

been a fine experience to work with you, and in fact, everybody in this House. 

 

Now this may be my ‘swan song’. I was just notified, a few minutes ago, that I could go on the air this 

afternoon, so I can assure my hon. friends in the Opposition that I haven't got a prepared speech, and I 

do not intend to read from one. Everything that I say, today, will be off-the-cuff. I also want to 

congratulate the Provincial Treasurer; I think this is the twelfth budget I have seen him bring down. I 

find no fault with it, and as I said in other years, and I say again, is this province is going to expand and 

develop we have got to spend money, and if we can get services from the spending of that money, then I 

think that the people of our province, not only now, but in the future, are going to be very, very glad, 

indeed, of the comfort they are going to get out of those services, by these expenditures. 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

18 

 

I want to say a few words about my own constituency - Swift Current - because when I first took office, 

when the landslide came in 1944, I have seen some great changes in this province. I have seen changes, 

Mr. Speaker, that I never thought could ever have taken place in the short time since the C.C.F. 

Government has been in power. It has been something remarkable, because it took me back to the days 

and the time when I have seen - even when I left Moose Jaw, in 1928 - when I was driving to Swift 

Current, I was bogged down in Parkbeg for three days. There was no semblance of a road; there was no 

semblance whatsoever of a road. I left my car at Parkbeg, and I had to go for it the following spring, 

because the roads were so terrible. 

 

I want to congratulate each and every Minister of the Government on the fine work they have done and 

the things that they have accomplished and brought to fruition in this short period of time. We have just 

heard the Hon. Minister of Highways (Hon. J. T. Douglas) speaking, and I think it was a treat for 

everybody in this House to listen to him and hear what is going to be done in this fiscal year as far as 

highways are concerned. After he read off what he is going to do with the highways, I think, in one year, 

that that is as much as some of the other governments that were in power in this province have done in 

three or four or five years, or probably longer than that. It is gratifying to note that these things are going 

to be done. 

 

I am not saying we are perfect; I do not think there is any individual or any organization perfect, but 

things have to be done. Sometimes we are criticized and it is only right that we should be criticized, but 

we have to give credit where it is due, and when we do these things, if it takes over a small period of 

time we cannot expect anything else, as long as they are done - as long as the promises are fulfilled. It 

takes me back to 1944, when our campaign platform, at that time, contained, I believe, nine or ten 

planks, and I believe, without any exception, all those planks have been fulfilled today, and we are 

expanding further, so that it is a very, very good sign, indeed. 

 

When I came into this House, in 1944, you all know that the big thing of the day, especially as far as the 

constituency of Swift Current was concerned, was getting a bridge over the Saskatchewan Landing. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The ‘Harry Gibbs’ bridge. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, that I have to think this Government and the Ministers 

concerned, and everybody that supported that move, because, after about 35 or 40 years of saying there 

would be a bridge over the Saskatchewan Landing, we got it. We got that branch and it was a fine 

bridge. But over and above that, after that great tragedy a year or so after the bridge was built, when it 

went up in the spring, everybody was - well, I don't know, I think the sorrow up in that country with 

something dismal; we didn't know what was going to happen; we wondered whether we would have to 

wait another 35 or 40 years for a bridge; and lo’ and behold, Mr. Speaker - and I say this to the 

admiration of this Government - that bridge was started immediately, as soon as they could get to work, 

and before another year's time had passed, we were driving over another bridge similar to the one that 

had gone out. It cost them a great 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

19 

 

deal of money. So that bridge, Mr. Speaker, has cost more than twice what it should have done, because 

we have had the two bridges. I cannot conceive, in my life, of seeing the Opposition, either Liberal or 

Conservative governments, doing that thing that the C.C.F. did for that bridge up there. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — We would have built it right in the first place. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — It is a great credit to this Government for doing that, and I can tell you that I was 

thankful and I am sure all the people in my constituency were thankful, and probably all the people of 

the province were thankful, too, because that bridge has opened the way up to the north and brought a 

great deal of business to Swift Current and surrounding towns, all the way up to Saskatoon and Meadow 

Lake, and it has been a wonderful thing and I am sure I am going to give this Government great credit 

for doing that kind of work. 

 

In Swift Current, too, we have our schools and we have our hospital. I have to thank and congratulate 

the various Ministers – the Minister of Education (Hon. Mr. Lloyd), the Minister of Health (Hon. Mr. 

Bentley), and in fact, all the Ministers for what they have done. I have seen Swift Current change in the 

past twelve years with great rapidity. I have seen buildings go up there, hospitals built, schools built, a 

composite school built - something out of this world to what we had prior to this Government taking 

office. You only have to see these things to admire them and to know - if you were not there prior to 

them being built - what is there, today. 

 

I'm glad to say that we have got our No. 1 Highway running through Swift Current constituency, 

blacktopped and finished today, thanks to the Highway Minister again. Today we are driving on good 

roads. We are driving from one province to another on good roads, as far as No. 1 highway concerned. 

You cannot expect to drive on the good roads when they are under construction - any darned fool knows 

that - but they will try to criticize that. It is just like when you are building a house, you cannot expect to 

live in a wonderful mansion, if you start to live in the basement and the rest of the house has to be 

finished. You have to have time. Any reasonable man, woman or child in this province knows that 

anything under construction has got to be finished before it is the perfect job. 

 

I am saying that this Government has set out a programme and that programme is being very, very 

carefully attended to. It is being carried out, and I believe that the Minister of Highways will be just as 

proud and just as glad when the things they have started to do, especially as far as No. 1 highway is 

concerned, when that job is complete, then probably he will be a very, very happy man indeed; and there 

will be a lot of undue criticism taken off his shoulders. 

 

I might say also that Swift Current is going ahead; we are coming in under the Social Welfare 

programme of building a home for the aged citizens, and a nursing home - things that are badly needed, 

and I am very grateful, indeed, that this project is going on; it probably will be finished sometime next 

year - I hope it is this year, but it may not be finished until next year. 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

20 

 

And these are the sort of things that are going on. Back there, earlier this year, I happened to hear the 

Minister of the Power Corporation (Hon. Mr. Darling) talking yesterday, of the wonderful power plant 

they have built in Swift Current and the estimated extension that is going to take place in Swift Current 

in regard to the plant. That is, as the Minister said, yesterday a wonderful plant, Mr. Speaker. I was there 

at the official opening, and it is one of the finest power plants I have been in, in the opinion of Canada, 

as far as that is concerned, for the size of it. 

 

And we have the gas. Do you know that we have the gas on our doorstep, in Swift Current, and it didn't 

take the Power Corporation very long, indeed, to see - the necessity was there; we have the facilities; the 

pipelines were brought into Swift Current, and even the Diesel engines in the power plant are running on 

gas power. And this spring the service will start to go out to the citizens of Swift Current, and I can 

assure you that it will be very, very much enjoyed when we get it in, because I can see, on the over-all 

picture, although we start talking about rates and one thing and another, trying to confuse the issue, the 

idea is this: that after we have got these things in, when they have become self-liquidating (which they 

will be in time) and when we get in a sound position when we can start talking about cutting down the 

rates and levelling out processes, as far as money-saving to the users is concerned. But let us get these 

things. We beef if we don't get them, and I hear lots of our friends beefing because we do get them, 

because they cost money. We cannot get them for nothing, and I think any sensible man, woman or child 

knows we cannot get these things for nothing. 

 

As far as the oil is concerned, and that was a great day, Mr. Speaker, for each and every one in this 

province, when we brought in the Fosterton field two years ago at Swift Current. I think everybody that 

was watching then knew that there was an era coming in that we had never experienced before in this 

province. We knew, too, that under previous regimes of government in this province, that there were 

these natural resources and powers laying idle in the ground; but very, very little, in fact, if anything, 

was done about it. Now, because it is being done our opposition friends, and those who would want to 

form a government in the future, start saying, “Why don't you do some more?” “Why don't you do it a 

little quicker?” My goodness, after the thousands of oilfields we have brought in and oil wells, and the 

gas, in such a short time, I think they should be ashamed to even mention it, because this is absolutely 

making a new Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan people - things we never dreamed about ten or fifteen 

years ago. We never dreamed about them. And like I say, I have seen a lot of changes; I have seen a lot 

of changes since I was a child. I often wondered whether we ever were going to change our political 

ideas; but we have; and as a socialist - and I am glad to say, Mr. Speaker, that I came into this House and 

into this Government as a socialist - and I think I shall be very, very glad, indeed, to go out as a socialist; 

because I remember the time when we talked about emancipation. We can see it now - probably 

emancipation is not the word for it, but it is as far as I am concerned; because I have seen, and you have 

seen, the terrible tribulations that the people of this province have to put up with in years gone by, and 

we never thought, in those days probably, that there would ever be a solution to it. But there is a 

solution, and I think this Government has shown, by bringing in legislation, especially labour legislation, 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

21 

 

that it has at long last given the working people of our province that chance they have always been 

looking for; that chance they have been working for all their lives, and it is only right that they should 

have a decent standard of living just like the parasites of this country that lives on their millions. 

 

It is only right that they should have it, and I am glad to see that labour has taken that stand and that we 

are unifying our living conditions, we are unifying our wage conditions, so that each and every one of us 

has a better standard of living; and I am sure that is the way life should be - to get the best out of life 

while we are on this earth; we are not here that long, anyway, and we might as well get the best of it 

while we are here. We are a long time dead. 

 

Sure, our opposition people talk - they might be dead, too, but they won't lie down. I don't think you 

could say that about us; I think we have created an atmosphere, and I believe that the people of this 

province know that we are on the right track. We can keep on, and I conscientiously believe that that is 

the purpose of this Government - to go along progressive lines as they have always done. 

 

Before I go off the air, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the people from the four corners of this 

province who, throughout the twelve years I have been sitting here, have sent me letters of 

congratulations and so forth, while I have been a member for the constituency of Swift Current. I might 

say, Mr. Speaker, that probably - I don't know, I might be sticking my neck out now, but I have even had 

letters from the United States remarking about this Legislature, and how they get the word down there in 

Montana, and a lady who wrote to me said it was just like sitting right here in the Legislature; and of 

course she congratulated me on a lot of my stands, and one of those stands was, and is today, peace. I 

have been an advocate for peace I think as long as I have been alive. I think, today, if we could only 

carry on without the shadow of war, or the thoughts of war and conflict and bloodshed, then we wouldn't 

have very much to worry about; but on the horizon there is still that doubt as to whether anything is 

going to break out again in this world. For those of you who have seen warfare, has been in it and have 

seen the devastation and the slaughter and butchery that goes along with war, I am sure you wouldn't 

want to see it here in Canada, or you wouldn't want to see it here in this province. 

 

In this province, Mr. Speaker, I believe we have probably the greatest amount of uranium which goes 

into nuclear weapons and so on as possibly there is in the world. I would like to see that uranium 

protected; I would like to see it handled right; and I would like to see it, if at all possible, never used to 

go into machines for distraction of mankind and property. I would rather see it go into production of 

usefulness in peace for the people of Canada and for the people of the world. 

 

We here in Saskatchewan have got that uranium; it is a wonderful thing; there is no doubt about it that, 

as years go on, with our mineral resources, our natural resources of this province, with the proper way 

we are going on today, that in years to come this will be one of the utopia provinces 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

22 

 

of the world. I hope it is, Mr. Speaker, because that has been one of my lifelong ambitions - to fight for 

socialism and all that it means. I know that I am criticized, and the socialists throughout Canada and the 

world are criticized for being socialists. There is nothing wrong with a socialist, Mr. Speaker. It is only 

the propaganda that goes behind it. I have never tried to harm any person in my life, only defensively, 

and I will do that as long as I can stand. But to condemn a socialist for the theory and philosophy they 

have, I think is altogether wrong. The people of this world and of this province should do more thinking 

and more reading about this philosophy, then probably they would know what they are talking about. 

 

We were condemned, but every progressive movement in the world has been condemned, Mr. Speaker, 

even religion; and when we came in with our labour ambitions and set up our independent labour parties 

in the old country and unionized people, we were condemned to then. We were condemned because we 

were going against the status quo of those times. The C.C.F. Government is condemned by opposition 

and people who are ignorant of the philosophy of the C.C.F., they are being condemned along the same 

lines. Anything progressive has always been condemned. They always want to keep us submerged. They 

always did want to keep us down so that we could be trampled with the iron heel, but seeing the light of 

day, and they are not prepared to be trampled underground by the iron heel. And they are not prepared to 

be trampled underground by ignorant people. We are going ahead and we shall go ahead as long as we 

are progressive-minded. I wouldn't want to work with any people that were bogged down and stultified 

in a narrow channel. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — You are in the C.C.F. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — I say that we have room from expansion everywhere, working conditions, politics and 

everything else; there is room for expansion and there is no use standing in that little narrow channel and 

being squeezed in there like an old tomato. You have got to get out, and you have to think of the future, 

not of today, but of the future. As long as we can do that I can see no danger whatsoever of us being a 

backward people. 

 

We talked of the grassroots - sure we know the grassroots; and we talk about education; every man, 

woman and child in this province is educated - some say they are not, but I say they are. A person has 

only to take the book of his own life to be educated anywhere in this world; when he can see what has 

taken place from when he or she was a boy or girl, from within the time of reason, then turn that book 

over of his own life up to maturity, and he can see that he is educated on his own life, because, Mr. 

Speaker, the average person in this province and in this Canada of ours, and the world, in fact, - we were 

never born with a golden spoon in our mouths; we have always had struggle and strive for existence, 

right from the time we were born until we go to the grave. And with the conditions this Government has 

brought in, as far as labour is concerned, it has eliminated a lot of those things that we had to worry 

about - a lot of those things. It takes me back, Mr. Speaker, to the time I was a boy when I saw in the 

textile industry and the mines and the shipyard, where lads were working, and girls, too, at 12 years of 

age; there were women and men going down 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

23 

 

in the pits to work, and coming out with a paltry wage of a few shillings a week to try and live and exist 

on. Their schooling was cut off at a very, very tender age. Mr. Speaker, I say this -I have seen some of 

the finest specimens of humanity, men and women, come out of those sort of conditions that we have in 

the world today. Call them the ‘salt of the earth’ if you like, Mr. Speaker, because my mind here, today, 

in this province of ours, we have facilities for sending boys and girls to University or to institutions of 

higher education that they wouldn't have otherwise. When I was a kid in the old country you never saw a 

working man's lad or girl going to the university; no, they couldn't afford to send him; you had to win a 

free scholarship or a bursary. If you talked about going to Eton or Harrow or any of those places, if you 

had had your hands contaminated by manual work, you were ineligible to go to those colleges. Ineligible 

to go – can you imagine that? 

 

Look how far we have come, Mr. Speaker. Today I can get up in my seat here and speak of these things. 

I know the things that have gone on in the past; I know how they tried to crucify the co-operative 

movement in the old country, the labour movement, and everything that went with it. I couldn't have 

spoken 60 or 70 years ago but I am speaking in this House, today. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — It wasn't socialism that brought it about. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — Well it is here at last, and it is paying off, paying off with people throughout the world 

who have had the guts to get up and say so. That is why it is paying off. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — The Liberals brought it about. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — The people were sick and tired of being drowned out. . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — It was here long before the C.C.F. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — We are coming into our own, and I am glad of it. I never forget, a few years ago, Mr. 

Speaker, when our Liberal friends of the Opposition used to look very, well, feverishly, I might say, to 

see if the Labour Government was going to be returned to power. They were glad and they clapped their 

hands when they found that Labour was turned out and the Conservatives elected. I don't forget these 

things. But you don't need to worry, they are coming back. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Never. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — They are coming back as sure as I stand here. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They’ll never get back. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — We will see labour in the front once again - in power in the old country. 

 

Premier Douglas: — They’ll sign the International Wheat Agreement, too. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — Yes. And these are the sorts of things, Mr. Speaker, that I have lived for, that I have seen, 

today, taking place in our province; and I can only hope that the young people of our province will bear 

in mind and 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

24 

 

take note of what is taking place. Do not take everything you see in the press for granted; you have to 

delve deeply. You have to study the conditions; you have to study philosophy, sociology, and everything 

that goes with it, in order to give us the system we are working for, the comfort and happiness that we 

all desire, and that we should all have, and if you will do that I don't think - the young people especially 

- if they will do the things I have just quoted I think we are going to have a better world in which to live. 

I think we are going to have a better province to live in, as long as you return a progressive government 

to administrate the duties of the province. That is what we want and I believe that we are going to have 

it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have said about enough, and as I say, I want to thank everybody in this House; they 

are all my friends in this House; they are all my friends in this House, both across the way and on the 

Government side. I have had some very, very good friends and good talks with the Opposition members. 

They are not at all bad, you know; it is only talking. Really, down in their hearts, they have some heart 

down there, and I have always found them very good. I have got along with them all. I can say that 

conscientiously and honestly and outside of politics - well, we don't talk politics very much. But when 

you meet men, as Bobby Burns said: “A mons a mon for a’ that.” And that is right too; and I am glad, 

because that is the way it should be. I do want to say this - in a way I am sorry that I am not coming 

back again. I have enjoyed every minute of the twelve years I have been down here, with both my 

colleagues and the Opposition members, you like to yap and talk; but it has been a great experience, and 

I am sure you, Mr. Speaker, know a whole lot more about it than I, but it has been a great experience; 

and I am thankful that I have had the opportunity in the free world and in a democracy to do my bit and 

try and do my best for the people I represent. I couldn't do anything more; I have tried to look at it from 

an angle of humanity - for humanity's sake, and that is the angle I shall always look at as long as I live, 

and I sincerely hope that this Government can carry on and bring to fruition the ideas and the legislation 

they have already got mapped out and give us something bigger and better in the years to come. If we do 

that I don't think we have anything to fear; and, as I said, Mr. Speaker, that is my swan song, and I wish 

to thank each and every one whom I have come in contact with in the last twelve years, whom I have 

worked with, and I wish you all good luck, happiness and success throughout your lives. 

 

Mr. F. A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I should like at this time to take part, for a brief while, 

in this debate. At the outset I wish to add my remarks to those that have been made by others before me 

in congratulating you, Mr. Speaker, on your term of office is Speaker of this Assembly, and upon having 

the record of serving in that position longer than any other person in this province. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines) on the humanitarian budget 

he has once again brought down. It is truly another budget deeply impressed with ‘humanity first’; and I 

hope, as time goes on, that we can have bigger and better budgets. I know that most of us shall be here 

next year, whether there is an election this year or not, to help the Provincial Treasurer, the Hon. Mr. 

Fines, when he again brings down his next budget. 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

25 

 

Now I say that this is a humanitarian budget, Mr. Speaker. When you go through the Estimates you will 

notice that the money which will be spent for the municipal road assistance authority - that is, for direct 

grants, and to start the municipal market road grid, it is an excess of $2,300,000. In education we will be 

spending more than $17 million; for Public Health, over $23 million; for Social Welfare, over $10 

million, or a total of almost $54 million; or, in other words, approximately 64 per cent of this budget 

goes for those three main services - education, health and social welfare. I have always maintained, Mr. 

Speaker, that if we can take boys and girls when they are born in this province, and given them the 

health facilities that they may have healthy bodies, give them the educational facilities that they may 

have a chance to be trained along the lines of the career which they desire, have social welfare to be able 

to look after them if misfortune befalls them, then I believe that any government is doing one of the 

main fundamental things which government is required to do, and that is to look after humanity first. 

And as I have just said, 64 per cent, approximately, of this budget goes for that purpose. 

 

In addition to that there is over $9 million out of this budget that goes for the retirement of debt, to put 

into sinking funds and to pay interest on debt which was created by former governments, so when you 

deduct those from the total of the $87 million budget you will find that we only have a little over $24 

million of revenue budget for the balance of the departments. So you will realize that these Departments 

who have to divide the $24 million are doing a wonderful, magnificent job with the amount of money 

they have at their disposal. That doesn't include capital cost for Power, Telephones and those 

enterprises. 

 

But you will see, Mr. Speaker, when you compare our budget with the last budget of the former 

government, they had only, in dollars and cents, slightly better than a third of this budget - about a $30 

million budget, but when we break that budget down on its purchasing power - the dollar today is only 

worth 50 cents of what it was then - and when you deduct from our present budget the $63 million odd 

that I have mentioned, Mr. Speaker, leaving a balance of $24 million, take that on its 50-cent value, then 

it is only leaving us $12 million in purchasing power compared to what the former government had. So I 

think the Government is to be congratulated, and specifically the Provincial Treasurer, on being able to 

bring down a budget which once again will be a balanced budget. 

 

I could spend considerable time in answering the criticism which has been made by the Opposition; I am 

sorry there aren't more of them in their seats, because I intend to deal with some of the statements which 

have been made. 

 

These last twelve years we have, directly and indirectly, given assistance to the municipalities in the 

neighbourhood of $100 million. 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — Oh! Oh! 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — I would expect to get an ‘oh oh’ of disgust from the member from Cannington. When 

you consider, Mr. Speaker, that we cancelled seed and feed relief debts dating back as far as 1917 up to, 

and including 1937, 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

26 

 

and half of the 1938 seed grain debt, a total of some $72 million. That $72 million would have had to be 

paid by the municipalities of this province if it hadn't been for a humanitarian government. Former 

governments had no intentions of doing those things. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Oh, rot! 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — It is all right for the hon. members to say ‘oh rot’, but the official records of this 

House, Mr. Speaker, show that the only time they cancelled anything was when they cancelled the taxes 

of the municipalities in order to save the big land companies and mortgage companies of the southern 

part of this province. They never assumed their responsibilities to relieve the municipalities; in fact, they 

created more burdens for the municipalities. When they cancelled those taxes then the municipalities 

had to start and levy all over again for back commitments. 

 

But when you consider the $72 million we cancelled in seed and feed obligations, plus the additional 

assistance we have given in municipal grants and relieving the municipalities of their responsibilities in 

social aid and other fields, you will find the sum total of $100 million, if not more. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — You don't know what you're talking about. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — In addition to that, as has been stated on numerous occasions, we cancelled the 

Public Revenue Tax which was imposed by a Liberal government back in 1917 and remained on the 

statute books; they took the money and spent it, but we cancelled it. In addition, as the Minister of 

Highways (Hon. Mr. Douglas) has pointed out, two are still continuing to give grants. 

 

Last year the Department of Highways spent, from their vote, on roads in this province other than on the 

provincial highways, over $2 million. That includes assistance to municipalities for market roads, 

bridges and so on. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — What is the other item? 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — Market roads, bridges, ferries, and secondary highways; roads other than those on 

the highway system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the member for Cannington, along with the members for Saltcoats and Arm River and some of the 

others, has been woeful and says the municipalities have received no assistance from this Government. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I didn't say that; I said they hadn't done much. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — He said they have received very little assistance - less assistance than they received 

from the Liberal government. I believe that is your statement – “less than they received from the Liberal 

government.” 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — No, I never said that. Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege what I said was “it wasn't 

sufficient.” 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

27 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will agree that maybe it is not sufficient, but if it isn't sufficient 

now, I would like the member to tell us what terminology I could use to describe what they did, prior to 

1944. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Well, come on over here and I will tell you. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — I cannot find terminology to describe it. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Come over here and I'll give you the words. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — I have here the municipalities in which the hon. gentlemen, the member for 

Cannington, for Arm River and Saltcoats, the municipalities in which they have been officials in their 

own constituencies. I find that in Cannington the municipality in which the hon. member for Cannington 

has been a former councillor and reeve – R.M. 95 - that in the last ten years, under a Liberal 

government, there were six years out of those ten, that that municipality did not get one cent of grant. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — That is quite right. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — But in the last ten years, under a C.C.F. Government, that same municipality 

received a grant every year. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — That is quite right. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — In the last ten years of Liberal rule in this province, R.M. 95 received $3,386 in 

grants from the Liberal government. That same municipality, from this Government, has received over 

$17,700 - six times as much, and yet it is inadequate. Well what is one-sixth of inadequate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We can go to Saltcoats and the same story applies there. The R.M. 213 – for five years out of the last ten 

under Liberal government, they received no grants; but in the last ten years, under this Government, they 

received a grant every year. Under the last ten years of the Liberal rule, R.M. 213 received $2,452; the 

same municipality received from this Government over $13,000. 

 

Now I will go to Arm River – R.M. 252. In the last ten years under a Liberal government, R.M. 252 

received grants three years out of the ten; for seven years they received no grant; but under the C.C.F. 

they received a grant every year. The difference is $1,100 from the Liberals, and over $9,400 from this 

Government. And they still say it is inadequate! 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Sure it is. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — Now, Mr. Speaker, what is the record for their constituencies as a whole? 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Now, we'll get somewhere! 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

28 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — The record shows that in Arm River, in the last ten years under the Liberals, the Arm 

River constituency received, for market road grants, $16,400 (round figures); from the C.C.F. 

Government, since they took office, that same constituency, for market road grants, has received slightly 

over $81,000. That is $16,400 as against $81,000; and that is when we are discriminating against 

opposition seats! We have only given them five times as much as what they had before, but still it is 

inadequate, and we are discriminating! 

 

Now we come to Cannington. In Cannington, under the ten years of the Liberals, they received $35,500. 

That was the seat of the former Premier of this province; and I find that in the year 1935-36, out of that 

$35,500, that over $19,700 was paid in that one year to that constituency; so for the other nine years 

there was only $14,000 to make the total of $35,500. But that same constituency, today, Mr. Speaker, 

under a C.C.F. Government, has received in excess of $89,000 – 2½ times as much. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — You’re wrong on your figures. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — My figures are not wrong, Mr. Speaker. They are taken from the Public Accounts of 

this province; they are official figures, and if the hon. member for Cannington would check with Public 

Accounts before he made a lot of statements in this House he would either know the information he uses 

wasn't adequate, or he would give a different type of information that he did. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Yours are wrong! Mr. Speaker, with the hon. member permit a question? 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — As long as it is along this line, sure. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Yes, well you can tell me how much went into Cannington last year - last year in the 

Public Accounts, how much road grants went into the constituency of Cannington 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — In the year 1954-55? 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — An amount of $2,516.00. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — It went to two municipalities out of 16. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — It was still Cannington constituency. Now, we can take Saltcoats. Saltcoats in the 

mid-thirties was not known as Saltcoats municipality at that time. It was known as Pheasant Hill. But we 

take that portion of Pheasant Hill which is now Saltcoats and bring it in to what was the Saltcoats 

constituency in 1938, and we find that in the last 10 years under the Liberals, Saltcoats received $32,500 

in grants. From the C.C.F. Government, since we took office, they have received over $92,400 in grants 

- three times as much in round figures, Mr. Speaker. And then they will stand in their places in this 

House and say that this Government is doing nothing or discriminating against the Opposition 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

29 

 

seats! 

 

When the member for Cannington was speaking, he was referring to the flood relief programme which 

the Department of Agriculture carried on last year, and he said, “Oh, we did not get any. All the boys up 

north got all that.” The boys up north did not get all that. We have lots of problems up there. What we 

did get up north was a lot of promises from the P.F.R.A. which were never carried out - that is one thing 

we did get up in the north. 

 

Mr. Wahl: — And the P.F.A.A. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I could give you the same statistics on my own constituency. The 

grants we had in the last ten years under the Liberals and what we have had now and the result is the 

same thing. For years up there we had nothing; consistently now we have had something every year. 

And so, I could go on, Mr. Speaker, from one to another. 

 

The member for Rosthern (Mr. Carr), has made statements on numerous occasions that this Government 

is not doing what they should do to help the people of this province the same as his colleagues have 

done. I know that the member for Rosthern happens to be the municipal secretary for the municipality of 

Warman. So, I wondered just what the social assistance that municipality got, because he seems to like 

to talk on social assistance. I checked with the figures and I find that municipality of Warman received 

$64,900 in social aid last year. That is for one municipality - almost $65,000. It is true that all of that 

money was not paid by this Government. Some of that is paid on a 50-50 basis with the municipality, 

some of it is on 100 per cent provincial responsibility, and then there are a number of those in there 

which received assistance like the Old-Age assistance group, which is provincial and federal, and so on. 

But the amount of social aid which was paid into that municipality last year was approximately $65,000 

and that did not include, Mr. Speaker, the amount that this Government paid out on behalf of the Old-

Age security group or the Mothers’ Allowance group and their dependents for blue cards for health 

benefits and so on, all the benefits that go with the blue card. I think the member for Rosthern should be 

the last one to rise in this House in his place or anyplace else and condemn this Government for what 

they are trying to do to help humanity - for we say ‘humanity first’ is our slogan - when he is the 

secretary of that municipality and knows what goes on in that municipality, if he would but release the 

figures to us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) on the work 

which he carried out last year in this province on relieving the flood damage in this province. I know 

that he was limited very much in the amount of funds at his disposal. I know, also, that he was limited 

by the amount of equipment that he had at his disposal. But, by and large, the Department of Agriculture 

did a very good job in the drainage problems which they undertook last summer and which they carried 

out. I know that in Estimates there is an additional vote this year to continue with that work, and I am 

sure that a lot of the farmers of this province will be gratified to know that areas which were not 

completed last year will be continued this year. I have one particular problem in my own constituency 

where the P.F.R.A. was in 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

30 

 

there last year, promising all the time that they were going to drain it - but it was never drained. But the 

provincial Department of Agriculture are going to be in there this summer and drain that lake which 

affects a considerable amount of land surrounding it. 

 

I would like to also give credit to the Government in general and the Minister of Municipal Affairs 

(Hon. Mr. McIntosh) in particular, for the assistance they were able to give last year to the 

municipalities for the flooded road problems they had. I am one of the first to admit, Mr. Speaker, that 

the assistance did not meet the problem. The million dollars which the Department of Municipal Affairs 

allocated to the various municipalities, I realize, did not begin to meet the problem.The million dollars 

which the Department of Municipal Affars allocated to the various municipalities, I realize, did not 

begin to meet the problem.  But it has been pointed out in this House on numerous occasions that we had 

every reason, a just reason, Mr. Speaker, to expect that we would get the same treatment in this province 

here at B.C. got in the Fraser Valley flood, or what Manitoba got in the Red River Valley flood. Had that 

assistance been forthcoming, we should have had an additional $3 million on a 25 per cent basis, as the 

other provinces got - we would have had another additional $3 million for road repair, an additional $3 

million for flood control. I do not know why it is that every time we mention or criticize Ottawa they 

say, “Oh, but you are always crying to Ottawa and wants them to pay for what you do.” But, every time 

we mention how we are trying to help the municipalities, they say, “But, whose money is it; who paid 

it?” Naturally, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of Canada pay all government tax money, whether it be 

municipal, school, provincial or federal, but the taxpayers of Saskatchewan who pay the money into the 

Provincial Government are also the same taxpayers who pay money to the Federal Government, and we 

have every right, as Federal taxpayers of this province to expect that the Federal Government should 

assume some responsibility for Saskatchewan, because we are one of the ten provinces of this great 

nation of ours, and we have every right to believe that they should assume some responsibility to 

Saskatchewan. But the Liberal party are always quite happy to cry that we are trying to get assistance 

from Ottawa and not doing it ourselves. They would like to see us absolutely bankrupt here, just as 

bankrupt financially as they are mentally, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Four years ago in this House, the first session after the 1952 election, when speaking in one of the 

debates, I mentioned that the one town or village in my constituency in which I did not receive a 

majority vote was the town of Wishart. At that time I invited the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) 

to come and hold a meeting in Wishart, and I would give him all the co-operation I could in order to 

arrange a hall for him. However, the member for Arm River has not accepted that invitation to come to 

Wishart. But, whether an election is held this year or not, Mr. Speaker, I once again would like to extend 

to the member for Arm River, the invitation to come and hold a meeting in Wishart. I am sure he will 

get a good reception. I cannot promise him just what type of reception, but he will get a good reception, 

and I am sure that if he would come there, or send the member for Cannington on his behalf, I am sure 

that after the next election I will be able to report that I had the majority in Wishart. 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

31 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — How about coming down and helping me? 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — I would be glad to, I would be very glad to. I may be there too, yet. 

 

Now, there are a lot of other points which I would like to discuss, Mr. Speaker, but I have promised to 

make time available for other speakers who want to follow me here this afternoon. But, I would like to 

say before closing that I believe that the grid road system which has been announced by this 

Government is one of the greatest benefits accruing to municipalities in any province in Canada. There 

has been no provincial government in Canada that has ever offered to undertake and assume 

responsibilities for municipalities as this Government has done. I pointed out to you, Mr. Speaker, 

though we have in the past 12 years assumed over approximately $100 million of municipal assistance, 

we are now continuing to give the equalization grants to the municipalities on the basis of need. In 

addition to that we have undertaken to put up an average of $2½ million a year additional grants to build 

main market roads of the municipalities of this province. Over the next ten years, that in itself will 

amount to another $25 million of grants to municipalities for their market roads system. 

 

It is all right for the member for Cannington, or his colleagues, to weep crocodile tears and say that we 

are not doing enough for the municipalities. Regardless of how little we are doing, it is far in excess of 

what was ever done by him or his colleagues when they sat on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. They 

are not fooling the people of this province, either he, nor any of his colleagues; they are not fooling the 

people of this province at all. 

 

I received a letter this morning from one of my constituents. They had been out to take up a petition over 

the location of the market road grid and also to see if the people were in favour of a market road grid. 

They had over 160 signatures on that petition and every one of them said they were fully in favour of the 

market road grid system. They were all 100 per cent behind it and they wished to thank the Government 

for the assistance they are giving to the municipalities in helping to get a main market road system for 

this province. We must never let the hon. gentlemen opposite run away with the phony idea they have, 

that this market road grid system is actually part of the provincial highway system and therefore should 

be built by provincial highways. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — It sure is. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — It is all right for them to try and say that, Mr. Speaker, but they are kidding nobody 

but themselves. The people of this province, when they have the opportunity of going to the polls once 

again, will show my hon. friends opposite that that type of talk which they are promulgating is not going 

to help them. I am sure that next year at this time, whether there has been an election in the meantime or 

not, Mr. Speaker, once again I and my colleagues here will be back in our usual seats again to help the 

Provincial Treasurer bring down his 13th budget, another budget for humanity. I can assure you I shall 

support the motion. 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

32 

 

Mr. Robert Kohaly (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take part in the budget debate 

for the year 1956, and in congratulating the Provincial Treasurer, I wish to point out that I agree with the 

last paragraph of the first page of his budget address, wherein he says the annual budget may be likened 

to a mirror, judging whether the Government of the day, or those seeking to be the Government, are 

possessed of such qualities, and are equal to the challenges of the years ahead. 

 

As an Opposition member, I believe it is my duty and also my privilege, to not only support legislation 

which is brought before us, including the budget and appropriation of funds of the taxpayers of the 

province, but also to criticize those items which I believe are primarily good, and which I feel there 

should be something done by these representatives of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, to 

make those principles better. 

 

This afternoon, the Minister of Highways (Hon. J. T. Douglas) gave us an enlightening experience 

showing the effort which they have carried on during the last four or five years, and hope to carry on 

during the ensuing year, insofar as the Department of Highways is concerned. I believe all of us have 

heard on other occasions that it was the programme of this administration to spend some $75 million 

over the course of five years. The Minister pointed out that this programme of $75 million in five years 

had not only been carried out, but would be completed this year - in a period of four years. Well, that is 

fine, but I do not believe that the Minister of Highways, nor any other person in the administration, can 

take any great credit for the fact that they have carried out a $75 million programme in a period of four 

years, or five years as they intended, if they will merely look to the direct revenues which they have 

received from the highways. The province of Saskatchewan has anticipated receiving in the next year 

from gasoline tax and vehicle registrations, approximately $20 million. That is part of the $75 million 

expenditure of which he spoke. Last year the estimates, according to the Provincial Treasurer, was in the 

neighbourhood of $19 million. The Public Accounts for the two years earlier than that indicates that the 

province of Saskatchewan had received by way of revenue for the $75 million expenditure on roads, a 

total of about $80 million. 

 

It is not, therefore, difficult to complete a five-year programme in four years, if in fact you receive far 

more revenue than you actually spend in those same four years. He makes a great to-do about it, and 

says that we have a large mileage of highway; year after year he complains that weather conditions have 

been so bad that they cannot do that work which they wish to do. Mr. Speaker, we have had similar 

weather conditions in this country for as many years as there have been settlers here. We developed the 

highway system in the 1930s with far less revenue, direct or indirect, then the present Minister of 

Highways now has to build. 

 

We built and maintained those roads equal to the conditions of the day, and without any great amount of 

bragging about it. He comes here today and says that he has done a wonderful job, but the administration 

should be given great credit for the fact that they have finished a five-year programme in four years, and 

the fact that they will have spent $75 million in that period, and forgets to say that the direct users, 

gasoline and vehicle tax in those four 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

33 

 

years, according to the figures given by the province of Saskatchewan, amounted to $5 million more 

than the figure which they had spent. 

 

Hon. C. M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — That’s not true. 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — If it is not true, as the Provincial Treasurer says, then his figures are not true, for they 

came from his own records. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — That’s not true, either! 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — If the Provincial Treasurer had been in his seat when I first went over these figures, and 

time will not permit me to do so now, I've taken the figures for the years 1956, 1955, 1954 and 1953 - 

the first two from the Estimates that are now in our hands, and the 1953 and 1954 from the Public 

Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan. They total $79 million, without counting the hundreds of 

dollars. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, may I point out that $75 million figure covers only highway costs. 

We have made no allowance at all for debt charges against highway construction, which also has to be 

carried by the Provincial Government. 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — Well, I'm speaking in the same terms and in the same manner as the Minister of 

Highways spoke. He spoke of the $75 million programme completed in five years, and if he took into 

account as well, as the Premiere just pointed out now, the debt adjustment and the subsidy received from 

the Dominion Government - if that is to be included. . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — No, no – debt charges on money borrowed to build roads in days gone by. 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — The fact remains, without getting into a protracted argument at this hour, and my time 

is limited - you notice it is not radio, but it is still limited; I am prepared to say that the figures received 

from direct sources in the four years mentioned by the Minister in the province of Saskatchewan, 

approximate $80 million, and he speaks of a $75 million programme, albeit, not including the debt 

charges as mentioned by the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — May I ask if my hon. friend has included anything for the cost of collecting this $80 

million? 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — No, I have not; I have taken merely the figures, estimates and actual figures of revenue 

as presented in the Public Accounts, and in the Estimates. 

 

Now, I also want to draw attention at this time, and I am satisfied we will hear more of this before the 

year is out. In the southeast corner you find five highways, Mr. Speaker - all provincial highways; all of 

them of significance insofar as three of them lead to the United States and channel large quantities of 

vehicles into the province of Saskatchewan to the tourist and business trade. There are five highways 

there, and not one of those highways was mentioned this afternoon by the Minister of Highways - not 

one. Of 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

34 

 

the 400 miles in the southeast corner, not a mile was mentioned by the Department of Highways for the 

ensuing year. Those highways channel a great deal of revenue into this province. It is a well-known fact 

the revenue which the oil industry in the southeast corner is bringing into this province; it is a well-

known fact that the great portion of their equipment moves on those highways; it is well-known to the 

Minister that No. 18 Highway is now, and has been, and will be in a deplorable condition insofar as 

ordinary traffic, let alone when extraordinary traffic is concerned. 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — Don’t be silly. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — If there is anyone to be silly, it's the Minister of Highways, when he and his 

Department decided not to place any work on their programme for 1956 in the southeast corner of the 

province of Saskatchewan. Time will tell whether or not the people who pay the revenues in that area 

are satisfied with the highways which they have. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — You should be happy. You should take a look at the 

highway you have! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — You only need to take the map which the Minister of Highways kindly gave us, 

indicating the traffic counters in the province of Saskatchewan and see where the traffic is to be found. 

On this No. 18 Highway - you will find there are over 1,000 vehicles a day, on the average, travelling, as 

against the number of vehicles which you will find in your own area, if you will take the trouble of 

looking them up. There are only a very few places in the province of Saskatchewan which have a traffic 

count higher than the count on that portion of No. 18 highway, which they counted last year. Yet, it is 

not even mentioned by the Minister of Highways - no mention whatsoever of the programme for the 

ensuing year, with the exception of No. 39 highway - but, of course that was in the neighbourhood of 

Weyburn. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak (Minister of Telephones): — It goes to Estevan, too. 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — There’s none in the neighbourhood of Estevan; absolutely nothing. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — It’s already done. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — That’s the Premier’s constituency. 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — Now, I would like to mention the question of supplemental allowances. We are shortly 

going to be asked to vote large sums of money for the welfare of our aged people. I am entirely in favour 

of large sums being spent, and the more the better, if we are able to do so. I presume that the amount of 

money which is being allocated for this purpose is the best we can do in the New Year. I want to point 

out, however, that the Provincial Treasurer speaks of the farm squeeze, but there’s another squeeze too, 

and that squeeze is especially felt by the aged people of this province who have no other source of 

income, other than their pension and supplemental allowance. 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

35 

 

Now, I am not going to speak in favour of the programme of the Department of Social Welfare insofar 

as it concerns the supplemental allowances, for the next moment or so, but it does not mean that I am not 

in favour of that programme. I commend them for the steps which they have taken. It does not mean that 

I think Manitoba, Alberta or any other province is doing better. I don't. I am just suggesting that maybe 

we should do a little better. Maybe we should turn the mirror that the Provincial Treasurer spoke of in 

front of the old-age pensioners and see what their conditions look like. Our accounts show that there are 

only 32 people in the entire province of Saskatchewan who are receiving the $20 maximum. Just 32! 

Just 32 out of 17,000 people who are involved! 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Ha! Ha! Then he says. . . highest in the world! 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — Last year when we debated this matter, I supported it thoroughly and would support it 

again. We heard from the Minister of Social Welfare (Hon. Mr. Sturdy) what great advances were going 

to be made for supplemental allowances. Good - I'm all for it, and we hope that we will be able to pay 

them, but I didn't think that in voting for this maximum of $10 for each individual, that I was only caring 

for 32 people. Surely it was going to represent more than this! Surely the great need of the aged 

represented more than 32 people out of 17,000. And worse still, Mr. Speaker, there is only two per cent 

of the people of the province drawing means test – old-aged supplemental allowance; only two per cent 

who receive more than $10. The other 98 per cent of these most needy people have been left out, and 

received below $10. 

 

Now, I agree that we have certain commitments which will not allow us to give a great deal more to this 

particular group at this time. But I want to ask the Provincial Treasurer if he can see (especially in the 

evening) the faces in that mirror of these aged people - the two per cent and the 98 per cent, and see 

whether they have the cost-price squeeze on them or not. Are we doing all of those things which we 

thought we would do when we proposed this great plan of $10 maximum for each individual who is the 

most needy? 

 

I want to point out that the dollars and cents in your own pocket, Mr. Speaker, would be thin and far 

between, if we received the maximum of $10. That's $120 a year, and to do that must be added to $480 

pension, which makes $600. Fifty dollars a month in this province in this day and age is not exceptional 

for merely board and room, let alone anything else that these people might, and should be entitled to 

have. 

 

I have an old man who is a pioneer of this province, and who came to me on one occasion and told me 

he was very happy that we were putting in this extra scheme, and he wasn't a supporter of mine. He said, 

“You know what it will mean to me? If I get that extra $20 it will mean that I am going to be able to 

have two meals a day.” Not three, but two! I was in a great rush to get home for my dinner, but I stayed, 

because he was talking about two meals. He said, “I never had any dinner - I cannot afford to have a 

dinner. I have supper, and if I get my haircut during the month, sometimes I have to lose that supper.” 

Those are our old-age people that we are looking after so well in this province! 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

36 

 

I for one, when we turn the mirror on this group of people, am not too happy with what I see. 

 

Mr. Gibson (Morse): — May I ask the hon. member a question? 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — Certainly, it’s our time you will be losing. 

 

Mr. Gibson: — Does the hon. member know that we have spent on that group he is talking about, 

$2,284,000 for health purposes, last year? 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — I’ll accept the figures my hon. friend has given, but I still say there are only two per 

cent received more than $10 of the 17,000 and only 32 people out of the 17,000 who received the full 

amount. 

 

Now, I want to speak of disabled persons. They are another group who are unable to speak for 

themselves. The disabled persons programme for some reason or other has not been put into effect in the 

province of Saskatchewan as speedily as I, for one, would hope to see. We have people in my 

constituency who have written, who have attended conferences, who have been sent to the doctor and 

back again over a period of a year and a half, and they are no closer to getting that pension than they 

were then. I myself have written letters, and been advised of the possibility of collecting disabled 

persons’ pension is most remote. You have to be almost bedridden before you can possibly get it. If the 

fault should be somewhere outside of this administration, then I believe this administration should take a 

careful look in the mirror and see if the needs of these citizens of Saskatchewan ought not to be filled by 

this administration, at least to a greater extent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Subsidize Ottawa all the time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — In 1954-55 if we allocated, Mr. Speaker, $104,000 for these disabled persons, and our 

Public Accounts indicate that we spent of the province of Saskatchewan's money, $1,805 only for 

disabled persons - that is $1,805 out of an expenditure of our own estimate of $104,000. The next year 

we upped our estimate to $362,000. How much we spent I do not know, and in this year we upped our 

estimate to $480,000 and how much we are to spend, I do not know. But I do know that of $100,000 

only $1800 were spent, so it will do us no good nor will it do these disabled persons any good, to keep 

upping the estimate, but paying nothing. I think that if they were to look in the mirror in the mornings 

and in the evenings (that the Provincial Treasurer has provided for them), it would not believe them too 

happy, nor should it leave the Provincial Treasurer, nor the Minister of Social Welfare, who is 

responsible, in a happy position, either. 

 

I should also like to discuss for a moment public health in the province of Saskatchewan. In my opinion 

we have the finest health programme that you could find anywhere in the world. I am very happy to pay 

my share each year, whether it be direct or indirect. I am aware that I am paying it in an indirect manner, 

and I think there is nothing wrong in telling the people of this province that they are doing the same, 

they are paying it indirectly. I 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

37 

 

notice that we have in the supplementary estimate this year $1,400,000 extra to be paid for the 

maintenance of the hospitalization scheme over and above that which we allocated in the ordinary way. 

I'm glad to see that that sum of money is being spent for that purpose, and that our health scheme will 

continue to progress and perhaps to lead the world in a good, proper health scheme. 

 

However, I am not entirely satisfied with all the provisions of the health scheme in the province of 

Saskatchewan. It is certainly true that this national health plan will help us a great deal. I understand that 

we are to be blessed with about $11 million out of that scheme, if and when it goes into effect. We are 

not told, however, how we will use that $11 million. Will the $11 million, Mr. Speaker, be taken off the 

$40 a year a family pays - will it be taken off the consolidated fund portion, or will it be used for 

extended services? It is unfortunate that the national health scheme will not include all of the health 

services which we should have, and want, in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

However, the standpoint of the budget, I believe we are entitled to know what the plans of the 

Government are insofar as that $11 million are concerned which they receive from the taxpayers of the 

Dominion of Canada. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege, if the hon. member had been in the House 

for any of the speeches that the Minister of Public Health (Hon. Mr. Bentley) made, or I made, he would 

be perfectly well aware that within the coming fiscal year there will be no assistance from Ottawa 

whatsoever in regard to the hospital plan. That has already been said in the House three times. My hon. 

friend has not been here, unfortunately, but those are the facts. There is no hope whatsoever of any 

assistance from the Federal Government under the hospital plan within the coming fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — After this year, then. 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — Yes, I agree there is not to be any assistance in the ensuing year but that is the estimate 

of the amount which we will be receiving; in my opinion, we will be receiving it from the Dominion 

Government when the scheme is put into effect. 

 

Premier Douglas: — In 1958. 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — In 1958, ’59, ’60 – whatever you’ll have. 

 

Premier Douglas: — My friend and I are only members for this Legislature; we can hardly start to 

legislate for the next Legislature two years away. 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — I agree. My friend can speak for himself as to how long he will be here, and I for 

myself, and each of us must do what is necessary to carry out our hopes and our plans. I want to say 

only. . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — I’ll let the electorate speak for me! 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

38 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — I only want to say that, in my opinion, there is going to be about $11 million when this 

plan is put into effect. I say that from a budget standpoint I think we should be entitled to know whether 

or not the rates are going to be reduced, or whether it is going to come out of this excess we put in to the 

consolidated fund. That is the point that I am raising and I prefaced those remarks by saying the plan is 

good, but there were one or two things that I wanted to query and that is one of them, and whether or not 

the hon. members opposite rise in their places and say that this plan is not to bring in this amount of 

money this year, is of no consequence to me. 

 

I want to say also that we have an unfortunate plan of keeping some of the old people in hospitals at 

high cost. It is a well-known fact that hospital beds are extremely costly. The Ontario people, speaking 

to the Gordon Commission recently indicated that they could provide beds for the aged, who certainly 

needed care, in nursing homes at about half the cost that was necessary for a standard hospital bed. They 

also provided information which indicates that about half the beds ordinarily in use in hospital are being 

used by the chronically ill, and by the aged, and that these people could be better looked after in other 

places. I believe that the province of Saskatchewan should certainly consider making some arrangements 

for taking care of these chronically ill, and those who are aged in places less costly than our ordinary 

hospitals, and this programme, which is now in effect in the province, be speeded up substantially in the 

new year. Whether or not they do so will be entirely a question for the administration to decide; whether 

or not more nursing homes will be provided closer to their own homes; whether they will continue to 

build large units for these aged people at a great distance from their homes is a question which the 

administration must decide, but on which I am entitled to express an opinion. I believe there should be 

far more smaller nursing homes built in the province of Saskatchewan, close to the scene of where these 

people live, paid their taxes and grew old. Last year there were some seven private organizations 

receiving grants which totalled in the neighbourhood of $85,000 for such care and assistance. I believe 

that this programme is a good one; a good start, and should be continued, and should be worked in with 

the hospitalization scheme, first for the purpose of reducing the cost in the hospitals; and secondly, for 

making it a little more pleasant for these aged people - these people who are chronically ill, but for 

whom the medical profession can do very little. 

 

I believe that it also is an item which the Provincial Treasurer could look at in his mirror and possibly 

reduce the cost of our hospitalization plan somewhat by getting these people into more adequate quarters 

at a more proper and reasonable figure. Nevertheless, until such time as that space is available, we must 

continue to look after these people, regardless of the fact that we will have to vote an extra $1,400,000 

for last year's operation directly into the hospitalization programme. 

 

I spoke some time ago of a Development Fund for the province of Saskatchewan - repeated it in other 

years, and I have heard rumours that we are using some of our money for exactly that purpose. The 

Provincial Treasurer indicated that not one five-cent piece of bonus consideration from school lands had 

been spent in the consolidated fund. That is a good idea. Other portions 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

39 

 

of the bonus consideration are probably being used in the same manner; that is, to say made available for 

the development in the province of Saskatchewan. What I would like to know, as an Opposition 

member, is how much money has been put into that fund? I should like to know to what investments that 

money has been made available. I should like to know at what interest rate. I should like to know how 

and when, and in what method it will come back into the fund. Will it come back into the consolidated 

fund, or will it go into the special fund which he keeps, and if so, I should like to know when we can 

find out about those figures. I think, too, if such a programme is being formulated and carried out in this 

province, that is information we are entitled to have - not merely to say that not one five-cent piece has 

been spent in the manner in which the Provincial Treasurer refer to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — May I ask the hon. gentleman a question, Mr. Speaker? Has he ever asked for this 

information? 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — I haven't asked for this information yet, certainly not, but on three occasions I have 

spoken in this House about a Development Fund. I cannot remember an occasion when the hon. 

Provincial Treasurer has not interjected that they are carrying out such a principle on this occasion. I 

can't remember a single occasion when he has not interjected that we are carrying out that principle now, 

and I think that if that principle is being carried out, then we should find it somewhere. Probably if we 

looked around at this mirror we would find it. Unfortunately, it is not in his budget - not around the 

mirror, nowhere to be had, and I, as an Opposition member, should like to know how much, where it has 

gone, who it is available to, when does it come back, and where does it go? Those are large sums of 

money, Mr. Speaker, and I think we are entitled to have that information in the mirror, or in any other 

manner in which the Provincial Treasurer wishes to make it available. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Don’t you know how to get that information? 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — I want also to speak of the net royalty agreements which we have entered into in this 

province, and about which the Provincial Treasurer speaks, on Page 20. There he says in part: 

 

“The Government has introduced, for example, a net royalty lease on crown royalty reserves; a policy 

substantially different from that of outright sale of these available acreages.” 

 

Now, I suggest that the alternative to net royalty leases its cash bonus bids, and cash bonus bids are not, 

in my opinion, outright sales - definitely and unequivocally not outright sales; for they reserve in the 

ordinary course of events a royalty to the lessor. The lessor in this particular case is the province of 

Saskatchewan. They are not outright sales; they give you a substantial cash payment, and $3200 an acre 

is not too bad a cash payment. And they give you a royalty on the basis if five per cent to 15 per cent, 

depending upon production and other similar factors. 

 

That system is an accepted system. It has resulted in substantial sums of money being made available in 

the province of Alberta over quite a period 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

40 

 

of time. We enter into certain net royalty leases so-called. The Return which I asked for indicates that 

three out of 34 of such leases were held by the larger companies. These people did not, however, give 

the net royalty to the same extent that these smaller companies - 31 companies gave. They gave a much 

less share, because those are the people who are spending the $95 million in the province of 

Saskatchewan on exploration and discovery work this next year. They know how much oil there is; they 

know how much they can get out; they know how much they can get away to the various people 

involved. They know how much they can spend in getting that oil out, and they know that they cannot 

operate by giving away or delivering 86 per cent of that to someone else. It is not possible. 

 

But who does take these natural royalty leases? The smaller people - the smaller companies, as the 

Provincial Treasurer says, they have been turned over to smaller people, some with Canadian capital. It 

is possible for smaller, independent oil companies, financed in many cases by Canadian capital, to 

participate in the development of our resources. 

 

I do not know as yet (although we have asked for the information) how much money the province of 

Saskatchewan has so far received from these net royalty agreements. I venture to suggest that it is very 

small, and almost insignificant sum, compared to the cash royalty payments and royalty interest we have 

received from the major oil companies of this province. 

 

Again, in entering into these net royalty agreements, the province of Saskatchewan has in effect, entered 

into a partnership with these people, for if they do not produce the oil, if they carry out their agreement, 

if they have neither the funds nor the inclination to do so (as geological information might disclose) then 

they are going to pull out, and they would be wise to do so. What penalty is there for these people 

pulling out of the province and leaving a lease - if any? I am going to suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that 

Saskatchewan will have to go and develop the leases which are left by these companies. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Couldn’t they be leased to somebody else, if they go away? 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — They certainly could be leased to somebody else, with probably the same result. If only 

three out of 34 are of major consequence, then I am satisfied that the same percentage will result in re-

leasing those which were left. I am satisfied that these oil lands will not be developed by these people, 

for the simple reason that they haven't the finances to carry out the exploration, drilling and eventually 

marketing of the oil. Time only will tell. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Is my friend unaware of the fact that two-thirds of the oil produced in his area is 

being produced by small companies? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — I merely point this out, Mr. Speaker. We don't know what is going to happen, but I 

imagine that they will find in due course that the net royalty agreements are not to the benefit of the 

province of Saskatchewan, 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

41 

 

and I hope at that early date they will make the necessary changes and put the oil lands into the hands of 

the major exploration people, who have both the resources and the knowledge and the inclination to 

carry it out. 

 

The fact remains that when I asked the question of the Government this year as to the assets and 

liabilities of these companies with which the Government was entering into partnerships with - what 

were their assets and liabilities - the answer came back that they had no knowledge of their assets or 

liabilities at the time of the agreement, so that we were ill-advised, in my opinion, to enter in any 

agreement with any person, either as a government or as a partnership, or an individual, unless you 

know what the other man can contribute. The other man, unless we are aware of his assets and his 

liabilities, can contribute very little. This Government was unaware, according to their own answer, of 

the assets and liabilities of these companies with which they had entered into agreements. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege, since my colleague, the Minister of 

Natural Resources (Hon. Mr. Brockelbank) is not here, I cannot allow him to be misquoted. He said at 

the time that question was raised that we took no inventory of the assets or liabilities, but we did get 

assurance from the bank as to their financial status and their ability to carry out the commitments which 

they made. He gave a verbal assurance to my hon. friend on that very point. 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — The fact remains that the answer to the question that they had no knowledge of the 

assets and liabilities of the companies at the time they entered into the agreement. That was the answer. I 

haven't brought the Return with me. I am sure it is not necessary. It is on record in this House, but they 

had no knowledge, and that is what I am speaking of. I think if we are going to enter into agreements 

with our valuable oil lands, that we must get some knowledge of the assets and liabilities of the people 

that we are going to entrust them to. 

 

Now, I want to speak for a moment in connection with the Power Corporations and the Telephones. The 

Provincial Treasurer, on page 24 of the budget this year, indicates that the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation had advances at the year-end of $82,750,000. He says that the surplus for the year ending 

1955 for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation was $4,121,000. If you do a little dividing and 

multiplying, you will find that that represents approximately 5 per cent profit. Now I am willing to 

accept those figures, for I have no others with which to compare them, but the Power Corporation made 

$4,121,000 in the year ending 1955, according to the Provincial Treasurer's figures, as against an $82 

million capital expenditure. 

 

In ‘The Leader-Post’ of this morning, the Minister in charge of the Power Corporation is reported to 

have said in this House “the fact that the net income from all the operations of the Corporation is only 

1.8 per cent of the total investment shows very clearly that the operation of the utilities are being 

maintained for customers on the service-at-cost principle.” I do not know how you can possibly compare 

these two statements, the Provincial Treasurer 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

42 

 

in his budget showing five per cent profit, and the Minister standing in his place and saying 1.8 per cent. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Well, the one is gross and the other net. My hon. friend ought to know that! 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — I suppose, Mr. Speaker, then the Provincial Treasurer's figure must have been the gross, 

because the Minister in charge of the Power Corporation uses the term in the newspaper ‘net income’ - 

so the other must be gross, then, if the Premier is correct. And in order to disclose the gross profit, the 

Provincial Treasurer says ‘surplus for the year ended 1955’. I am satisfied that anyone reading that 

would feel that it was the profit left over after the plan had operated for the year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, might I ask the hon. gentleman if he read the heading. If he had read 

the heading – it says very clearly, in heavy black type ‘Before Interest’. 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — Certainly it says ‘Before Interest’. Very definitely ‘before interest’. I am satisfied that it 

does not include the interest in these figures of $4,121,000. The fact remains that the interest on $82 

million ought not to have been the difference between 1.8 per cent and 5 per cent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Why not? 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — If it is then I am satisfied that the figure is very, very high. It is taken on $82 million, 

which is exactly what the Provincial Treasurer has reported on Page 24. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Might I point out, to get this point cleared up, this is the amount of the advance at 

the year-end. Certainly we would not pay interest on a full $82 million throughout the entire year. 

During this particular year, probably $12 or $15 million was advanced, so that that might be the interest 

on say $65 to $70 million for the entire year, and on varying amounts between $70 and $82, million for 

various portions of the year. But during the year the total amount was $4,121,000 - that is before the 

interest. 

 

Mr. Kohaly: — I will accept the Minister's statement and calculation of the amount on which the 

interest has been calculated during the year. I have no way of knowing how much they had during that 

year. This is the year end, and he says the surplus is $4,121,000 before interest was calculated. The net is 

only 1.8 per cent. I am satisfied, Mr. Speaker, that the profit of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation is 

far closer to 5 per cent in the year which closed than it was to 1.8. The profit which the people of this 

province of Saskatchewan should be entitled to in respect to the Power Corporation should be very close 

to $4,121,000. The report of the Power Corporation has been placed on our desks, indicating a series of 

large sums of money found in 1955 in the assets of the Power Corporation, which were not there in 

1954. 

 

It is interesting to note that an item which was not shown in 1954 is now shown as investment at cost of 

$3,197,000. An item not shown in 1954, and now there as debt discount and expense, $1,894,000; 

sinking fund, 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

43 

 

Corporation’s equity and Government of Saskatchewan sinking funds, now in, but not in 1954 - 

represents $2,613,000 or a total of $7½ million, which is held in the assets of the Power Corporation 

which were not indicated in the year 1954. I have not drawn these figures. These figures have been 

drawn by the Power Corporation, presented to us, and it is easy for any member to open his book and 

see that these figures are missing entirely from the year 1954. Merely open the book to Page 33 and you 

see this $7½ million is not indicated in 1954, but is indicated in 1955. 

 

I want also to point out that the Provincial Treasurer shows a profit, again before interest, under 

Government Telephones of $3,700,000 on an expenditure which he says is $37,053,000. Again before 

interest, that is 10 per cent - a little better than 10 per cent on their investment. I believe that the rate 

increases which the people of Saskatchewan have now been paying for over a year are therefore too high 

for a monopoly on telephones, that the rates should be brought down so that in this cost-price squeeze 

which the Provincial Treasurer spoke of there would be at least one thing that the province of 

Saskatchewan would be doing to reduce the cost to the farmer and to the businessmen of this province. 

 

I am satisfied as well that the Government Telephones have, hidden away again, a rather substantial sum 

of money accumulated surpluses for capital and reserves for depreciation. There is a total there of about 

$4 million surplus; accumulated surplus for capital, $15 million; and reserve for depreciation $13.7 

million. Yet at the same time they are requiring a further loan of $9½ million. 

 

While I cannot disagree with everything that is in the budget speech, I certainly want to say that I can 

agree with a great portion of it. The amount of money which is being spent a substantial, all of it being 

paid by the people of this province; the people of this province are entitled to accept the good and 

complain about those portions of the expenditure which they do not feel is for their benefit. 

 

I believe that the province of Saskatchewan could do a great deal more for the people who are caught in 

the price squeeze which the Provincial Treasurer spoke of. I believe that the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, could do a great deal more for the mass unemployment of this province. I believe they 

could do a great deal more to provide for industry coming into the province, through the construction 

and maintenance of proper and reasonable highways. For that purpose, Mr. Speaker, I do not propose to 

support the budget this year. 

 

Mr. James Gibson (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I haven't very many minutes left by the look of the clock. 

I would just like to remark on a few of the things which the hon. member from Souris-Estevan (Mr. 

Kohaly) who has just taken his seat, spoke on. He was putting up a plea here for the old-age pensioners, 

saying they were not getting enough, and I agree with him, but I was just wondering if he wasn't 

whipping the wrong horse! After all, I think he should be whipping the Federal Government instead. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Sure, Ottawa! 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

44 

 

Mr. Gibson: — It was the Federal Government, Mr. Speaker, that removed price control, and this in 

itself is taking at least 50 cents out of every dollar the pensioner gets. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak (Minister of Telephones): — Price controls supported by the Conservatives! 

 

Mr. Gibson: — Another thing the hon. member spoke about was, he mentioned it was very easy to 

spend some $75 million on the highway system, when the users of that highway system were providing 

$80 million. I was wondering if he was suggesting that he should earmark each tax to be plowed back 

into the place from whence the tax comes, and if so, would he suggest that we take the liquor profits, 

and build larger and better beer parlours, or just how would he go about it? 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — You’re asking the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Gibson: — And too, he said the Legislature has a right to know just how we are going to spend this 

$11 million which we are supposed to get from the Federal Government on this recent health proposal. 

He said we should know whether or not we were going to reduce hospitalization rates, or whether we 

were going to increase services, or what we were going to do, and when it was pointed out to him that it 

was likely to be two or more years before we got that money, he said that didn't matter. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I say it does matter. How in the world would we know now what we could do with 

hospitalization rates two years from now; or how would we know what services we could put into effect 

two years from now? I think it is very important. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don't know where to start with this speech; I don't know whether to start it or not, 

but I guess probably I had better. I would like first to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer on the budget 

that he has just brought down, and also to congratulate him for his efficiency in the management of the 

financial affairs of this province over the last 12 years. It is little short of miraculous, Mr. Speaker, that 

when the financial position of this province could have changed from one with the lowest credit rating 

of all the provinces to a par with the richest. And it is all the more remarkable, Mr. Speaker, when we 

remember that during those 12 years we were providing social services on a scale never before 

experienced in this or any other province in Canada; and what is even more remarkable, Mr. Speaker, is 

that during this time of unprecedented expansion we were able to cancel $72 million of relief and seed 

grain debt, and reduce the dead-weight debt of this province at the average rate of over $8,900,000 a 

year. 

 

It is, Mr. Speaker, truly miraculous. Give us a few more years and we will wipe out the dead-weight 

debt of this province entirely. Need I say, Mr. Speaker, that this credit rating improvement is the result 

of the policies of this Government plus the efficient management of the financial affairs of this province 

by the Provincial Treasurer. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how long we will be able to maintain this 

favourable credit rating, if my friends opposite 

  



 

March 14, 1956 

45 

 

should by any chance, sitting on the right-hand side of Mr. Speaker. The hon. Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. McDonald) has been going around this province telling the people of Saskatchewan about the extra 

services that they will provide for Saskatchewan, if they were elected to office. I am not going to 

enumerate these services, Mr. Speaker, other than to say that a reasonable estimate of the cost of the 

promises he has made will amount to $100 million yearly. Now, I think he should, when making those 

promises, have told the people just where he was going to get this $100 million yearly. Does he know, 

for example that the total taxes estimated to be collected in this budget are $36,200,000? She's going to 

add to that more than two and three-quarter times as many taxes to the people of this province, unless he 

has some magic formula for getting this money, or unless he is going to pull it out of thin air, or possibly 

he is going to emulate the Social Credit Party, and going to print script, or is he going to borrow it. 

Either way, Mr. Speaker, would have an immediate unfavourable effect on our present credit rating, and 

that is why I wonder just how long our present rating would be retained if my hon. friend should sit on 

your right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My hon. friend has given us some intimation of how he is going to save a little money. He has said he is 

going to bring about greater economy in the administration of Government, and he is going to start by 

firing what he calls “a lot of unnecessary civil servants.” Well, here again, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that he 

has forgotten some very simple facts. If the Government is going to increase services, they will have to, 

at the same time, increase their personnel to administer those services. We have proof of that right here 

in this city, its ever-increasing staff of civil servants. I do not say that in criticism of the Federal 

Government, Mr. Speaker, because after all, the Federal Government, over the past 12 years, have 

provided some extra services - not nearly as much as they have promised in the last 30-some years, but 

they have provided some, and this has necessitated more office space, and more staff. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Might I draw to the hon. member’s attention that it is almost adjournment time. 

 

Mr. Gibson: — All right. And too, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Leader of the Opposition has served notice on 

the people of this province, and particularly on the civil servants, that if they are elected to power they 

are going to see to it that they will have complete control of the private lives of the civil servants, both in 

and out of office hours. Now, if they do this, Mr. Speaker, here again they will need more civil servants! 

How else can they set up a Gestapo? Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


