



















































Hansard: February 17, 1956


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session – Twelfth Legislature 

7th Day 

Friday, February 17, 1956 

The House met at 2.30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

MESSAGE OF REGRET 
 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure all of us regret that, yesterday afternoon, the 

wife of the member for Kerrobert-Kindersley, Mr. Wellbelove, our Deputy Speaker, was taken to the 

hospital seriously ill. 

 

I know that I am expressing the feelings of all the members of the House when I extend to him our 

sympathy at Mrs. Wellbelove’s illness, and express our deep and sincere hope for her very speedy 

recovery. 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

The House resumed, from Thursday, February 16, 1956, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion 

of Mr. Brown (Last Mountain) for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. H.C. Dunfield (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I regret very much that with the time of my 

disposal, I must dispense with the ordinary amenities due the previous speakers other than the mover 

and seconder of the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. Their speeches showed that a great 

deal of care, time and effort had been put into their compilation, and I wish to commend them very 

much for that effort. The context of their speeches was such, Mr. Speaker, that when they had finished, 

it brought to mind that young man who had arrived at a new boarding house, wishing to make an 

impression upon his landlady, and who said, at the evening meal: “My, that was good hash” – “How do 

you make such good hash?” The reply was: “I do not make hash; it accumulates.” 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan, in its overwhelming strength, has seen fit to accord the members of 

the Opposition 180 minutes of radio time out of a total of 720 minutes on the air – barely over a fraction 

of one-quarter of the time. This, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the fact that the 11 members sitting in 

Opposition represent almost a little better than 40 per cent of the electors of our province. This arbitrary 

division of the radio time is in itself a very effective form of closure imposed upon the members of the 

Opposition, and to make this closure more effective, the Government has also seen fit to so arrange the 

order of the speakers, that almost without exception members of the Opposition must take the first 35 or 

40 minutes of the debating period of the day. 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

2 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. That is not correct. I looked over the 

speaking arrangements for next week, and I see that on one day the Government member takes the first, 

and the next day the Opposition takes the first. If my friends do not find that satisfactory, it can easily be 

arranged between the Whips or the radio committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Maybe I should make a remark here, as Chairman of the committee. Your statements 

are not correct. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Mr. Speaker, I said almost without exception, and that arrangement the Premier has 

just mentioned occurs only once in the next two weeks. 

 

Some Govt. Member: — Poor baby! 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — That means that members on the Government side of the House, speaking on most 

occasions during the latter period of the air time, may carry on for the rest of the afternoon if they so 

wish, and thereby get their ideas to the public through the press. 

 

Some Govt. Member: — What press? 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Last Wednesday the Premier spoke very movingly of (among other things), the 

freedom of speech, but when it applies to members of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, it would appear that 

political expediency makes short shrift of this freedom of ours. This arrogant attitude of the Government 

is but a part, apparently a part of a long determined effort on the part of the Government to throttle open 

and free discussion of public questions in this Chamber, and in the committee rooms. Time after time, 

Mr. Speaker, we have asked questions regarding certain Crown Corporations, and the very bland answer 

has been: “It would not be in the interests of the public to disclose such information.” 

 

When people ask me, as they have, and no doubt they have asked every member of the Opposition, why 

do the members of the Opposition not take a more active part in the discussions of this House, my 

answer, Mr. Speaker, can only be: “Ask the Government that question.” But to read in Hansard and 

public press the volume of speeches that come out of the Federal House, one would think that there must 

be at least 100 C.C.F. members in the House of Commons. 

 

Mr. M.J. Willis (Elrose): — The others are not there. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Simply because, Mr. Speaker, there they allow members of the Opposition to speak at 

the ratio of one member for each member of the Government, because in the House of Commons the 

Federal Government in Ottawa is not the least bit disturbed about having their affairs discussed at 

length. 

 

Mr. E.H. Walker (Gravelbourg): — What about radio? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Now, Mr. Speaker, although I had prepared a speech for delivery in this debate, after 

listening to the attack in the Premier’s 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

3 

speech the other day, in which he made a most vicious, prolonged attack upon the Leader of the 

Opposition, I decided that my speech would sound much better if I gave it to a Sunday School class, or 

something of that order. So I had to change it at a minute’s notice, and I thought it only right that those 

of us on this side should have the opportunity of commenting, at least to some extent, on the Premier’s 

discussion the other day. 

 

Now, I want to say at the outset, Mr. Speaker, that there is nobody whom I enjoy listening to more than I 

do the Premier of Saskatchewan. When he is in a mellow and retrospective mood, his words are 

charming, kindly and full of optimism and wisdom; and when I hear the sound of his voice, my heart is 

filled with kindness towards all men – even the C.C.F.! My mind is filled with a spiritual good, but 

when the Leader of the Government rises in his place as the Premier of this province, determined to flay 

the hides off of the Opposition, and particularly that of the Opposition Leader, he is a very different 

person indeed. But even then I enjoy listening to him, because of his mastery of the English language, 

and his complete mastery of all the arts or oratory. 

 

When the other day, the Premier rose in his seat and after complimenting the previous speakers, and 

then complimenting the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, said – and after saying that, Mr. Speaker, I just 

quivered with expectancy. I know it’s a wonder some of the hon. members opposite didn’t say I shook 

like a jelly-fish. However, I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, that I am quite sure without the personality, 

the skill, and the oratory of the Premier of this province, that the C.C.F. Party would come apart at the 

seams, and notwithstanding the able administrators he has with him, would not be able to put it together 

again. 

 

It is rather strange, Mr. Speaker, that a number of people whom I met prior to the Premier’s speech with 

one accord told me just about what was going to be in that speech. They said it would be composed of 

two main themes; first, there would be a prolonged and vicious attack on the Leader of the Liberal Party 

in Saskatchewan – the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, with the full intention of destroying him in the 

public mind as quickly as that could be done. Those tactics have been very successful in the past, Mr. 

Speaker, but I can assure you their effectiveness has gone forever, as long as we have the present leader 

of our party. 

 

The second part of that speech, I was told, would be that the Premier would ride that trusty old horse, 

attack on the Federal Government. Strange to say, when his speech was reported in the press the next 

day, the headlines read: ‘Douglas Attacks McDonald and Hon. Friends’. And a quick analysis of that 

speech, Mr. Speaker, shows that almost three-quarters of the Premier’s speaking time was spent in a 

wicked attack on the Leader of the Opposition – an attack that I believe was filled with misstatements 

and false conclusions, about which I shall deal in a few moments. But what was most notable in the 

speech, Mr. Speaker, was the complete absence of any constructive suggestion on the part of the Premier 

about what this Government would do in the coming year to try to solve the difficulties and problems 

that face us today in Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to deal with a few of the points which the Premier made in his speech, and all the quotations 

I am going to use are from the same paper, the Regina ‘Leader-Post, of February 16th, so I need not 

mention 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

4 

that in each case. The first one I would like to touch upon, Mr. Speaker, is this – The Premier said: “And 

I am amazed at the statement made by the Leader of the Opposition who said that in 12 years this 

Government had done absolutely nothing to relieve the burden of the municipalities.” Now, you can take 

that in different ways, Mr. Speaker. If you are in debt today and you reduce that debt over a period of 

time, but you accumulate further debt and you wind up $2.00 in the hole over and above what you 

started with, you certainly haven’t done very much about it. 

 

I would like to say here, Mr. Speaker, this Government speaks so often about reducing the debt of this 

province. I remember the darkest days in the history of our province when because of 10 years of world-

wide economic depression, and eight years of drought, the economy of our province reached its lowest 

point. The men administering our affairs in those days in both Liberal and Conservative Governments, 

had to mortgage the future that they might in that day supply food and clothing to nearly one-half the 

population of Saskatchewan; that they could supply feed, seed and repairs for a great number of the 

farmers in this province, who, because of succeeding drought years, had eventually exhausted their cash 

resources; but for the good of this province, had not exhausted those greater resources of courage and 

strength that had brought them through these years of depression. 

 

Under those conditions the governments of the day did the only thing they could do; they borrowed 

enormous sums of money, and even had to back the great Wheat Pool of Saskatchewan which was on 

the verge of bankruptcy. The Anderson Government of that day endorsed the Pool liabilities for some 

$14 million so that the debt of this province rose alarmingly. But of that debt, though it had reached 

$214 million in 1944, this Government, when it tells about reducing the debt, never says a word of the 

nearly $44 million that was cancelled by the Federal Government; of the monies that have been repaid 

by the Wheat Pool, of the monies that have been repaid by the Saskatchewan Co-operatives, and by the 

millions of dollars in advance repaid by farmers on their seed loans, amounting to a total of over $70 

million. 

 

The Premier also mentions that among the crushing burdens was the $72 million seed grain and relief 

debts, many of which were paid, not by the Government, but by the farmers of this province. Mr. 

Douglas said: “The Liberals, Conservatives and the C.C.F. did something about it – the Liberals put 

them on, but we took them off.” And again he says this: “This Government removed the two-mill Public 

Revenue Tax.” I well remember that the Government did that; we can give them credit for it; it was only 

after four years of intense campaigning on the part of the Liberal Opposition, and in the last days of the 

Legislature they removed that tax. But the strange thing about it, Mr. Speaker, (and this is really a gem!) 

they returned to the municipalities that tax on one hand, and took it away from them with the other, 

which is quite common practice in the policies of this Government. 

 

May I read here, and this is a report of the Department of Highways and Transportation for the fiscal 

year ending 1954; in computing the amount of special grants that will be given to the municipalities, this 

is what was done, Mr. Speaker. It was found that the total tax levied in 1952 was approximately three 

and a half times the total amount of the equalized grants for this year, and the following formula was 

used to determine the 1953 market road grant: 1952 grant multiplied by 3½, less the public revenue for 

1952 equals the 1953 grant. 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

5 

Premier Douglas: — The sum total of the grant was the same. 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — No, it wasn’t. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — You know, Mr. Speaker, when I hear of how the Government has reduced these debts, 

I think of the town in which I lie, in which the tax rate is such today that we say we no longer own our 

property; we are merely buying it back every 12 years, and when the sewer and water is installed, as we 

hope it will be in the near future, and we’ll take a chance on the higher costs, we will be buying our 

property over 10 years. Taxation has reached the point where, as a short time ago my wife said: “My 

goodness, I wish you would straighten up; you’re getting an awful hump on your back.” I said: “My 

dear, that isn’t a hump on my back – that’s simply the load of taxation I’m carrying that makes me look 

that way.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Looks more like fat to me! 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Then again we find another extract from the speech, Mr. Speaker, which says: “When 

the C.C.F. took office in 1944, almost all the burden of social welfare rested on the municipalities. 

Today the province assumes almost 80 per cent of the cost of social aid and benefits.” Mr. Speaker, I 

wonder if the Premier thinks that we are so naïve that we fail to realize this province, were it not for the 

assistance received from Ottawa, is and has for years been bankrupt? Perhaps the money we derive from 

Ottawa is well deserved, to which we have a right, but on the revenues of this province our public affairs 

could not be sustained for six months of the year. During the year ending April 30th, 1954, according to 

the records of this Government, the Dominion of Canada paid to the Government and the people of this 

province over $70 million in cold cash. Over $20 million was paid to the people of this province 

directly, in old-age pensions paid by the Federal Government, and not by this Government, as is so often 

told by party workers of this Government. I actually had one elderly person tell me, or try to argue with 

me, that they obtained that pension from the provincial government. I said, “No, I think you’re 

mistaken.” “No”, they said, and showed me an envelope coming from Regina. Of course, it comes from 

Regina – a Federal office in Regina! 

 

In addition to that $20 million paid to those over 70 years of age, in that same year there was paid 

directly to the people of Saskatchewan over $20 million in family allowances, and some $3 million was 

paid to the province for distribution as they saw fit for various other social programmes. In addition to 

that there was paid to the Government of Saskatchewan a subsidy of $26,907,000, and the purpose of 

this subsidy was to assist the provinces in paying for health and social services which are provincial 

government responsibilities. And this Government says they took the load of social welfare off the backs 

of the municipalities. 

 

Again I quote from the Premier’s speech: “The Premier noted that Mr. McDonald had said he had 

promised in 1944 to take on the provinces’ constitutional responsibility for education.” Here is the 

answer the Premier gives to that: (for sheer brilliant evasiveness it is hard to beat). This is what the 

Premier said: “What is our constitutional responsibility for education? It is to provide grants and aid 

schools so that areas that ordinarily cannot afford proper educational facilities will be able to have them, 

so that all 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

6 

sections of our province get an equal opportunity for education.” That is the interpretation the Premier 

puts upon it today, Mr. Speaker, but that is not the promise he made to the people before he was elected 

to power. He made promises, as did many others, that never in the world have been fulfilled. Even if 

they partly fulfill them, or fulfill them to the utmost capacity of the province, we would not criticize. 

 

This is what the Premier actually said in 1943, February 16th: 

 

“The first thing which a C.C.F. Government would do would be to recognize education as the 

responsibility of the provincial government. There has been a tendency on the part of the 

provincial governments to pass the buck to the municipalities, and local school boards from 

obtaining educational facilities. The time has now come when we must recognize that Canada’s 

constitution places the responsibility for teaching squarely on the provincial governments, and it 

cannot be passed on to any other today.” 

 

That is quite a difference between the actual statements and the interpretation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again the Premier criticizes the Federal Government for not immediately putting up the money for the 

Saskatchewan Dam. Mr. Speaker, I do not know a great deal about the Saskatchewan Dam, nor what 

effect it will have upon the total economy of this province, living in the far part of the north. But I know 

perfectly well that if it is in the best interests of all the province, and this province intends to put up $85 

million towards the building of that dam, then I am for it. I have heard a number of people say: “Well, 

what good is it going to be to me?” Long ago, Mr. Speaker, I learned in business, and before that, in the 

early days of our community life, that I as an individual, and all others, that anything each of us could do 

to improve our neighbours’ situation automatically improved our own, and on that basis I would 

certainly support any effort, and all efforts towards the development of the Saskatchewan Dam. But the 

Premier says this: 

 

“If the Federal Government contributes to the Canso Causeway, with which I agree, it 

contributes toward the St. Lawrence Seaway, with which I agree, and now it offers to contribute 

$85 million towards construction of the unprofitable section of the natural gas pipeline through 

northern Ontario. But the Federal Government says it could not contribute $65 million for the 

Saskatchewan River Dam at the present time, or spread over several years.” 

 

Going back into our Canadian history, Mr. Speaker, in 1870 and 1871, the proposed province of British 

Columbia would only come into confederation on the assurance that there would be a transcontinental 

railway built to the west coast. There were, in our government at Ottawa, at that time, other men too of 

small vision, who said it was utterly impossible – the cost is too great. It was to pass through exactly the 

same area through which this proposed gas pipeline is going, and which will be the responsibility of the 

Federal Government. That area at that time was thought to be of very 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

7 

little value, and which has now proved to be a pot of gold, as did the western prairies. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, the gas line is in the interests of Canada as a whole, and I wonder if the Premier 

would oppose that simply because it is not in the interests of Saskatchewan. In considering the needs of 

the Dominion as a whole, every province is making demands on our Federal Government. I know 

perfectly well, and feel sure that the Prime Minister of Canada would like to deal with them all, but they 

must come in the order of their value to the Dominion as a whole. Living in Saskatchewan, I doubt very 

much whether the need for the dam in Saskatchewan is as great as the need for a gasline to Ontario. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Oh, that’s wonderful. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — . . . or is as great as the need for the St. Lawrence Waterway, or as great as the need 

for the Canso Causeway. 

 

Mr. Kramer (The Battlefords): — You’re getting yourself on record now. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Good, it’s nice to have said it; that’s what we wanted! 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — And of course we hear spokesmen in this Government (in this particular speech, the 

Premier did not bring it to our attention again – I expected he would), but we have heard so much 

criticism by the members of the Government regarding the Liberal stand on electrification – that a 

Liberal Government would bring the power to the farmers’ door without cost. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to bring to your attention the fact that the C.C.F. Party speakers here say that that is 

impossible. Apparently there is a division of opinion between the C.C.F. Party in Saskatchewan and the 

C.C.F. Party in Alberta, for I noticed an item in the ‘Leader-Post’ in June last year, reporting a speech of 

Elmer Roper given in Stettler, Alberta, several days before in which he said this, Mr. Speaker: 

 

“That if elected to power in Alberta, a C.C.F. government would extend electrification to every 

part of the province where feasible, without cost to the farmers.” 

 

Some Govt Member: — Good old Liberal policy! 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — I think the Socialist coating on Elmer is wearing very thin, and he would look quite 

well on this side of the House. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — He’d improve the looks all right. 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — Again I quote what the Premier said. The Premier also rapped Mr. McDonald for a 

speech he made to business clubs in Toronto, in which he said that investors hesitate to enter 

Saskatchewan while a C.C.F. Government is in power. Mr. Douglas said it was all right for Mr. 

McDonald to talk like that in Saskatchewan, where people could weigh his statements against the facts. 

You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that in 1954, speaking in the Throne Speech Debate in this House, I 

produced for your edification a copy of the ‘Toronto Star’, a paper distributed widely over the Dominion 

of Canada, in which there was an article written by paid writers of this Government 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

8 

outlining the miraculous accomplishments of the C.C.F. Government in relation to the Green Lake Metis 

settlement. There wasn’t a single truthful statement in that, Mr. Speaker, and yet that was sent all over 

the Dominion of Canada, and I felt compelled to point out some of the inaccuracies. That was all right 

for a C.C.F. spokesman to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It seems to me I recall in past elections in western Canada and as far east as Ontario, too, that men high 

in this Government took part in these elections in these other provinces. One of the things I well 

remember, and which can easily be authenticated is that they go to these provinces, particularly B.C. 

where the people of B.C. were paying $45 a year for hospitalization, and spokesmen for this 

Government pointed to them with the finger of scorn and said, “Why, in Saskatchewan we give the 

people complete hospitalization for $30, at that time. 

 

In the following session of 1953, Mr. Speaker, I rose in this House and pointed out that I, that year 

alone, had paid almost $100 for hospitalization. I didn’t object to it; I said if the Premier said we have to 

pay $100, I will say it is all right, because it is a good plan – an excellent plan, but in the last few years 

Public Accounts show that the total cost of hospitalization in this province was $19½ million, and that 

all the monies received through the Hospital Services Plan amounted to $6½ million – exactly one-third; 

that another $5½ million was obtained through the one per cent hospitalization tax, and the balance was 

obtained from the general funds of the province which you and I have paid into through countless new 

taxes, and increases of various other taxes, so that if the hospitalization costs $19½ million and the 

services plan only brought in one-third of it, hospitalization on the basis of per family, cost the people of 

Saskatchewan $120 a year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am only half through with what I would like to say, but my time is limited. I am going to 

jump over some of it and bring up a most important point. I read in the press the other day that the 

Premier said: “We have great need in Saskatchewan for private industries, with their many and 

accompanying secondary industries,” and never was a truer word spoken, Mr. Speaker. But private 

industries are based on primary products, and two of the most common products used in primary 

industry are forest products and gas, and some of the factors that determine whether or not primary 

industries will invest here the great sums of money necessary in fixed assets, is our political climate, and 

a political climate in which some of their raw products and principal raw resources, are under monopoly 

control of the Government, does not make for a climate politically satisfactory to the investment of large 

sums of money. 

 

I want to draw to your attention, Mr. Speaker, that we had in our province a primary industry – in fact, 

we used to have a number of primary industries, but they are now lost to our province because of the 

policies of this Government. I have here extracts from the Regina ‘Leader-Post’ of February 6th, 

entitled: ‘Lumber Town Walking Last Mile to Oblivion’. I shall read only a small part of it . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural Resources): — Who wrote it? 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — It is immaterial who wrote it – the context is true. I could write it myself – or you, you 

could write it too. 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

9 

“Within a month the big sawmill of The Pas Lumber Company, backbone of the community for 

the past 26 years, will be idle, and many of its 250 employees out of work, or uprooted from 

familiar surrounds. 

 

“The firm announced recently that it was moving its mill to Prince George, B.C., because no 

more private timber is available here. Negotiations with the Saskatchewan Government for 

timber erecting large remaining stands, broke down last spring, and the Company looked 

elsewhere for its timber.” 

 

And a little further down it says: 

 

“The company, a pioneer of 26 years, has cut approximately 315 million board feet in that time, 

as well as providing employment to an average working crew of 200,000.” 

 

Last year in this House I asked whether in the negotiations with the Anglo-Canadian Pulp Company, this 

Government had agreed to give them a long-term timber berth, and the answer was ‘Yes’, but they 

would not apparently accord such a privilege to this Company here. We have plywood mills, and box 

factories, private factories, who if they are to remain in existence, must have the opportunity of 

obtaining their materials at rock bottom prices right from the forest, but that is utterly impossible under 

the socialized system we have for our timber resources today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to close by saying this, that I believe in all governments there is a distinct and 

accepted field for Crown Corporations. As in the case of public utilities, or where there is need for 

public service for which there is neither capital (private), nor experience, but I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that when a government goes into direct competition with its own citizens, and by their actions destroys 

the citizens way of life, they have destroyed one of the greatest assets of a people – the private initiative 

of their citizens. That is what is happening today in the monopoly of the forest resources of our 

province. Many, many people have left our province who used to find employment in our forests. Just 

before I left Meadow Lake, one of the garage men said to me: “Well, I had a nice plum handed to me 

today. The Credit Corporation handed me four large units – trucking united that had been used up until 

that time in the hauling of lumber to be delivered to the Timber Board.” This for which (and I think he 

hauled for about 105 miles) he obtained $9.00 a thousand board feet. It was impossible to make ends 

meet. 

 

I don’t know when the true story of the Timber Board operations will be told, Mr. Speaker, but when it 

is told, I can assure you that it will be one of the most tragic stories, and one of the darkest blots in the 

history of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — Are we to take your word for it? 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — You need not take my word for it, you need only to ask the merchants in the northern 

part of Saskatchewan, the garage 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

10 

men and the repair men who have co-operated with these loggers in their unequalled fight to make ends 

meet under Timber Board contracts. You only need to ask to see their ledgers, Mr. Speaker, and there 

you will find in the debit column written in large, red letters a tragic story of beaten men and women . . . 

 

Mr. Kramer: — And farmers in there? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Dunfield: — . . . such as we have never known before in the history of our province. That is 

Socialism in the north, Mr. Speaker. I certainly cannot support the motion. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, the member who has just taken his seat 

(Mr. Dunfield) complained several times during the course of his remarks about having inadequate time 

during which to deliver his thoughts. I think it is only fair to point out, Mr. Speaker, that he adjourned 

this debate yesterday afternoon; there was nothing to have prevented him from going on and speaking 

for at least some considerable amount of time yesterday afternoon, off the air, just as I expect to do this 

afternoon, off the air. The debates in this Legislature are not directed just to the people who are listening 

but are directed to the material before us, namely, the Speech from the Throne and the record of the 

Government. 

 

He has complained, also, with regard to the division of time as between Government and Opposition 

speakers. This is a matter which was raised before and it was suggested at that time that it could be more 

properly discussed when the report of the radio committee was before the House. It is nevertheless true, 

Mr. Speaker, that the ratio of time works out to about three to one; actually, if one takes as a basic the 

membership in the House the Government could, on that basis, claim a much better proportion of time 

than even that. 

 

I am not going to spend too much time in dealing with the remarks of the member for Meadow Lake in 

his attempt to debate the remarks of the Premier just a few days ago. The people have had chance to hear 

both of them, and certainly the Premier’s arguments need no bolstering. 

 

It would be in order to mention one or two things, however, which he said. For example, he referred to 

the reduction in the seed grain debt. He inferred that this was not a relief because of the actions of the 

Government – that some of this had been paid by individual farmers. The figures that the Premier gave 

were not that, of course; they amounted to the account of the debt taken off the backs of the 

municipalities and farmers as the result of action by the Provincial Government. 

 

With regard to the removal of the Public Revenue Tax, he has evidently forgotten that the year before 

the Public Revenue Tax was removed it was diverted into the education fund and the whole amount of it 

added to education grants. 

 

Some Opposition Members: — Ha! Ha! Ha! Ha! 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

11 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — The hon. members are inclined to find that humorous. They have a faculty of 

laughing at facts which hasn’t served them in too good stead over the years. I repeat my statement – the 

year before the Public Revenue Tax was removed, an amount equal to the amount collected was added 

to educations grants and after the Public Revenue Tax was removed that amount still continued to be aid 

as additional grants towards education in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

He refers again to the money from Ottawa as a subsidy. Mr. Speaker, it has been pointed out on many 

occasions that this is not a subsidy from the Federal Government to the Provincial Government. This is a 

re-distribution of wealth for the greater part, wealth which originated in the province of Saskatchewan, 

but which was drained off into other provinces, into other parts of Canada, and taxed in those other parts 

and returned in part, and in part only, by this device. 

 

It was rather interesting to hear his defence, or attempt at defence of the Federal Government’s action in 

being willing to support the pipeline taking gas into Ontario, and at the same time not being willing to 

support a lesser expenditure to make available the benefits of the South Saskatchewan Dam in the 

province of Saskatchewan. He maintained that that was the preferable decision. In other words, Mr. 

Speaker, he said in fact this – that cheaper power for Ontario is more important than irrigation, cheaper 

power, diversification of industry to Saskatchewan. We can see again where the hon. members of the 

Opposition stand. 

 

He referred again to the report which he read last year in the ‘Toronto Star Weekly’. It is worthwhile to 

note that a statement published in the ‘Toronto Star’ was, according to him, quite untrue, because of the 

person who wrote it, but that a statement, again according to him, appearing in the ‘Leader-Post’ was 

true regardless of who wrote it. There was one point that the Premier made that he didn’t mention, and 

that was when the Premier spoke of the advertising carried on by the Liberal Party in Alberta telling the 

people there how much better off people in Saskatchewan were, and that he failed to mention. 

 

I want, to have something to say with regards to the words of the Leader of the Opposition when he 

spoke a few days ago in the House. One thing certainly was obvious as a result of his remarks. The price 

of wheat may be down, and the price of pork may be down, the price of beef may be down, but the price 

with the Liberal Party is willing to pay for votes is still going up. Just look at a few of the increases in 

this price offered in the address a few days ago. He at one point favoured, he said, extending the 

assistance of the Government for education, until such time as the province carried 100 per cent of the 

cost of education. The only party that I know of that has made a better offer than that, Mr. Speaker, is 

the Labour Progressive Party. I think they are proposing that the Federal Government should carry it all. 

 

He proposed that the province could well afford to carry the entire cost of the market road grid. He 

proposed that they could take electricity to all the farmers for nothing, and pay back, of course, to all 

farmers who had paid something for that connection. And following all that they would cut the cost of 

electricity in one-half. 

 

I think all one needs to say is that the people of Saskatchewan 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

12 

through the years have learned that when they are buying in this kind of market they look at both quality 

and quantity. They will recall the last suit that they purchased from the Liberal Party, which possibly 

they thought they were buying cheap at the time, and discovered that they really were buying cheap. 

They will remember that it was a bit cold and thin, and didn’t wear too well, and they will look at the 

present offer, and understand that the light shines through rather easily. 

 

With regard to the statement made by the Leader of the Opposition, and repeated by the hon. member 

for Meadow Lake, concerning the stand of this movement prior to 1944, the Premier made a statement at 

the time. I want to say again that no intelligent person ever interpreted, or should have interpreted the 

C.C.F. policy in 1944 as being one of the Government paying all the costs. Now, you will notice, Mr. 

Speaker, I said no intelligent person. I said that to explain the lack of intelligence across the way. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — He said it, but he didn’t mean it. You can’t squirm out of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Of this I am sure. I doubt very much if any candidate of the C.C.F. ever suggested 

that that was the policy of the C.C.F. Party. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Do you want to read it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — I’ve read it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — No you haven’t. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — I can read, not like the hon. Leader of the Opposition who stood up and told us 

stories about the pictures in his book, the other day, and forget about the writing in it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You’re not able to tell us . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — I want to add this, Mr. Speaker, that in spite of what the Leader of the Opposition 

said about the Liberal Party some day moving to the point where the provincial government would carry 

100 per cent of the costs of education, if that day should happen, it would be a sad day for education in 

the province of Saskatchewan. It would be most inadvisable for any government to ever carry all of the 

costs of education out of the revenues of the province as such. 

 

But regardless of what happened in 1944, the hon. members across the way forget that there have been 

elections since 1944; that in 1948 the people had the chance to vote, knowing our record, and re-elected 

us; that in 1952 they had the chance to vote, knowing our record, and re-elected us once again, with a 

bigger popular vote than ever. Those facts they somewhat forget. 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

13 

Since, however, the whole matter of what has or hasn’t happened since 1944, has been raised, it is 

desirable, I think, that I make some remarks about that “nothing” which has been done, according to the 

Leader of the Opposition. School grants have been increased since 1944 from approximately $2¾ 

million to an estimated over $11 million in the year just completed. We have added to that some 

assistance to the extent of $140,000 by way of free text books, purchased and distributed in elementary 

schools. The contribution to the University operating grant has increased from $550,000 to $1,700,000. 

Our support of teachers’ pensions has increased from roughly $120,000 to over $540,000. All in all, 

those increases alone amount to approximately $10 million - $10 million more than was being provided 

in 1944. Now, that must seem to all of us, Mr. Speaker, as a very considerable amount of nothing. When 

the Leader of the Opposition says that $10 million is nothing, that, of course, explains how he proposes 

to do all the things he has promised to do with so little money. 

 

Reverting to 1944 for a moment, we might have been pardoned, Mr. Speaker, for assuming that more of 

the job that was left to be done could be done, with less money than it has actually taken. We might have 

been pardoned that assumption, because the information on which we had to base our thinking, was 

information coming from the government of the day. Few of us at that time realized the extent of 

deterioration of school buildings, for example, in the province of Saskatchewan. Few of us realized that 

construction costs would in the ten-year period following double, and almost triple. Few of us realized 

the desire that there would be to pay for much of this programme out of current revenue. 

 

We might, for example, have based our estimates on a statement made by the Government of 

Saskatchewan just a few years before, to the Rowell-Sirois commission. On page 279 of that submission 

they said this about school buildings: 

 

“To provide normal education facilities for the work of Grades 1 to 12, would require in aid of 

repairs to school building $1,500,000.” 

 

That is the only statement in the submission of financial needs for public or high school buildings, no 

reference to new buildings needed, no reference to replacement of existing buildings, so we might have 

been pardoned for thinking that it was a relatively small job. They said in the same report that: 

 

“In addition, in aid of current teachers’ salaries, another $2 million would be needed.” 

 

Actually, over the period from 1944 to the present, school teachers’ salaries have been increased from 

$7 to over $20 million, an increase of $13 million, bringing us, I might say, Mr. Speaker, to the point 

where the average salary in Saskatchewan is fourth highest in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

As has been indicated, the percentage of support has increased from approximately 20 per cent to 

something in the neighbourhood of 27 per cent. May I suggest it is very important that we ask ourselves 

the question 20 per cent of what, 27 per cent of what? If we look at it one way, the 1944 grants would 

amount to only 8 per cent of the present expenditures on education. 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

14 

If grants had been maintained at the 1944 level, they would have taken up 8 per cent of costs. Or look at 

it the other way, if the 1954 grants had been applied to the 1944 costs, they would have amounted to 70 

per cent of the costs at that time. 

 

That gives you some indication of the increase in expenditures that there has been. Twenty per cent – 

one-fifth, Mr. Speaker, one-fifth of a pie, which was in reality only a tart, is a far different sort of 

contribution than over 26 per cent – over one-quarter of a pie that is a full sized pie. 

 

And it is not only in the total amount made available for education that we can claim progress, but 

particularly with regard to the method of distribution of the amount. I want to take some examples to 

indicate how we have improved the pattern of distribution of financial assistance from the government. I 

take first of all the Meadow Lake unit, which admittedly is a unit of low assessment, which has had it in 

a pioneering situation, and which has done a remarkable amount of work in the last 10 years in the field 

of education. 

 

In 1944 the school districts in what is now the unit there, spent some $92,000 in total. They received 

grants of about $40,000, or about 43 per cent at that time. In 1944, the districts in that area spent not 

$92,000, but five times as much - $460,000. They received grants, not counting grants for building 

purposes, of $300,000, about seven times as much, a support of some 65 per cent. When you add 

building grants to those figures you get this picture – building grants in 1944 about $3,700, about 145 

per cent of the total programme. In 1955, not $3,000 and some dollars, but about $80,000 making up 

more than 80 per cent of the cost of their building programme in that year. If you take all grants as the 

percentage of expenditures out of current revenue you find that the provincial government support has 

gone to 70 per cent from 43 per cent of a very small amount to 70 per cent of an amount five times as 

great. 

 

Look at it in another way – the total grants received expressed in terms of their value in mills. Grants 

received in 1944 in that area were worth 15 mills of taxation. Grants received in 1955 were worth 59 

mills of taxation. 

 

If one takes the Medstead unit, a similar picture can be obtained; 30 per cent in 1944; up to 67 per cent 

the estimate for 1955. Building grants, which will vary from year to year because of the programmes 

undertaken, have run around 60 per cent and 70 per cent. The value of the grant in terms of mills has 

gone from seven in 1944 to 45 in 1955. 

 

Let’s go to the other corner of the province, down to Maple Creek. The operational grants earned there 

in 1944 were roughly 30 per cent of the cost of operation. (At that time the average teacher’s salary was 

less than $1,000). In 1944 they increased to the point where they were 43 per cent of the operational 

expenditures. (Teacher’s salary at that time about $2,800). Capital grants since 1944 have varied 

considerably as they will have in all units, averaging possibly around 40 per cent. If you take the g rants 

expressed as mills, in 1944 they were worth 40 mills in the Maple Creek unit, in 1955 about 16 mills. 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

15 

I want to look at this improvement in distribution in this way, Mr. Speaker, these two units I have just 

referred to – Medstead and Maple Creek – in 1944 each received grants amounting to about 30 per cent 

of the operating costs, even though the assessment in the Maple Creek area was approximately twice the 

assessment in the Medstead area. Today, one receives approximately 40 per cent and the other close to 

70 per cent. 

 

I can bring out my point too, by referring to one of the more highly assessed units in which the picture is 

admittedly and deliberately quite different. Let us have a look at Milestone, a high assessed unit. The 

grants there in 1944 amounted to about 21 per cent of operating costs, and in 1955 to about 20 per cent 

of operating costs. There is quite a difference with regard to total grants paid. In 1944 they were 

$37,000; in 1944 about $72,000. There is a tremendous difference in building grants, which in 1944 

amounted to $127 and in 1944 to about $20,000. Expressed in terms of mills the 1944 grant was worth 

to them 1.9 mills, the 1944 grant about 4 mills. 

 

The same sort of examples can be drawn from the cities, and I refer to only one of the cities with a lower 

assessment per classroom, the city of Moose Jaw. Public School District No. 1 is in Moose Jaw, Mr. 

Speaker, and in 1944 the rate of grant for the rooms in public school district No. 1 was 90 cents a day 

(90 whole cents a day). In 1955 it was $4.50 a day. For academic high school rooms it was $3.50, it has 

been increased to $5.50. For the vocational rooms it was $3.50 and some of the vocational rooms, at 

least, will be receiving up to $7.25 per day. The city of Moose Jaw has, in addition, received building 

grants. 

 

I have given figures, Mr. Speaker, to indicate two things – a very considerable increase in regard to each 

area in the province, or in regard to the total of the prince in school grants; an increase of over $8 

million. I have given an indication, too, of the fact that the greatest amounts of this money went into the 

areas which had greatest need for them, a principle which was not recognized by the previous 

government. 

 

I want, now, having talked of that argument presented by the Leader of the Opposition, to turn also to 

his reference to taxation in Saskatchewan as compared to other provinces. May I say to begin with here, 

that we must recognize that Saskatchewan has a more expensive proposition in education than our 

neighbouring provinces. That is true because of the distribution of our population. If our distribution of 

pupils was similar in concentration or grouping to that of Alberta, we could use 1,000 fewer teachers 

than we do. If it was similar to that of Manitoba we could use 800 fewer teachers, and consequently 

fewer classrooms, and fewer school buses, and have fewer high school problems than we actually have. 

In short, we have the same kind of difference in problem here as compared to Manitoba, for example, as 

we have in the field of power. It is possible in Manitoba to serve their farm area covering about one-

third the area we have to cover in the province of Saskatchewan and that is, of course, a very substantial 

difference. 

 

I want to use figures with regard to the relative tax load in 1954 in rural municipalities and local 

improvement districts. These are figures drawn from assessments and requisitions given in the Annual 

Reports of the Department of Municipal Affairs in each of the provinces. 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

16 

In Manitoba average school tax rate – 24 mills; average total municipal levy including schools – 61 

mills. In Alberta average school tax rate – 30 mills; average total municipal levy – 55 mills. In 

Saskatchewan, average school tax rate – 23 mills; average total municipal levy – 50 mills. Let me 

recapitulate, in Saskatchewan 23 mills, in Manitoba 24 mills, and in Alberta 30 mills for school 

purposes. For total municipal purposes, including schools, in Saskatchewan – 50 mills; in Alberta, 55 

mills; and in the Liberal paradise of Manitoba – 61 mills. Reduce this to the average school tax per 

quarter-section and you get, of course, the same kind of pattern. In Manitoba for schools - $50, for all 

municipal purposes, including schools - $130. In Alberta for schools - $60, for all municipal purposes - 

$100. In Saskatchewan for schools - $40, for all municipal purposes - $86. Look at it again, Mr. 

Speaker, per quarter-section in Saskatchewan - $40; in Manitoba $50; in Alberta $60. Taking the total 

figure, including schools, in Saskatchewan $86; in Alberta $100; in Manitoba $130, per quarter-section. 

 

Let me look further at the position with regard to total municipal tax arrears in our rural municipalities 

and local improvement districts. To liquidate those tax arrears in Manitoba at the end of 1954 would 

require a tax levy of 25 mills, in Alberta a tax levy of 30 mills, in Saskatchewan a tax levy of 20 mills. 

We know there are problems with regard to tax collections in this province, but 20 mills in 

Saskatchewan, 25 mills in Manitoba, 30 mills in Alberta to liquidate those tax arrears shows again a 

more favourable position in this province as compared to our neighbouring provinces, which is not in 

accordance with the picture the Opposition try to paint. 

 

There was a suggestion from the Leader of the Opposition, that educational expenditures were not 

keeping pace with the Government revenues collected for educational purposes. Well, again, I want to 

refer to the last three years of the Liberal government. During those years, that is the fiscal years 1941-

44, the revenues from education tax, the school lands trust fund, and the school lands were $3,300,000 

more than the expenditures of the Department of Education. If you take the last three years an opposite 

picture is seen, because during the last three years, the expenditures by the Department of Education 

have been $4,300,000 more than the revenue from those sources to which I have referred. 

 

There is one other way in which we can indicate the increase in support of Saskatchewan, and that is in 

terms of a grant per pupil of average daily attendance. I might just say that in 1944 it was $20.17, in 

1955 it would be in the neighbourhood of $70,000, per pupil in average daily attendance. 

 

Having said all that, I can say as I have said before, that the Government is not satisfied with that 

situation. The best proof that it hasn’t been satisfied is, of course, in the figures that I have just given; 

the fact that $4.00 in school grants will be paid this year for every $1.00 paid when we came into office. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It doesn’t mean a thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — The fact is that in the Speech from the Throne there is mention of a further increase 

in school grants for the 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

17 

present year. 

 

Let us remember too, Mr. Speaker, that we could have paid more for school grants if we had decided to 

leave undone some things which we felt were important. Had we had our present tax structure and 

decided not to have a hospitalization programme, we could have added $10 million to school grants, we 

could then have been paying 50 per cent probably of the cost of education. But few people in 

Saskatchewan will deny the tremendous advantage to the people, to the economy, that has resulted from 

the development and the operation of that magnificent, and I make no apology for using a superlative, 

magnificent hospitalization programme which we enjoy in this province. 

 

One is impelled at this point to ask, to wonder at least, as to the policy of the Opposition. One gets some 

hint of it from reading press reports of speeches made by the Leader of that party, and to these I want to 

have some reference. September 27th, he is reported speaking at Fort Qu’Appelle to have said that “The 

Government”, (this is a very important statement, I think) “should pay the same percentage of the total 

cost of education to all municipalities.” The same percentage of the total cost of education to all 

municipalities. The same percentage to a unit like Milestone as to the unit in Meadow Lake, or the same 

percentage to Meadow Lake, as it would pay to Milestone. Equalization, according to that statement, has 

gone out of the window, in terms of the Liberal Party’s policy toward education. He says: 

 

“They should pay the same percentage of the total cost of education to all municipalities.” 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Who said I said that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Pardon? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Who said I said that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Well, the ‘Leader-Post’ said so, and your friend sitting behind you just pointed out 

that if it was in the ‘Leader-Post’, it must be true. 

 

He went on to say this, and I am sure in this that he was misquoted. I shall give it the benefit of the 

doubt. “That payments to the municipalities at present range from 4½ per cent to 26 per cent.” 

 

If there is any municipality getting 4½ per cent, I would be pleased to know of it, and I am sure at that 

point that the Leader of the Opposition was misquoted. He said, however, “the Provincial Government 

should pay at least 50 per cent,” and of course, again, “the same for all municipalities.” 

 

Well, moving on a few days to September 30th, speaking at Saskatoon, he quoted figures, it says here, 

“to show that the present Government was only paying 20 per cent of the cost of education,” (he has 

corrected that figure since, and I thank him for the correction,) and that “if a Liberal government were 

elected, it would pay 50 per cent.” But then on 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

18 

November 9th, he is also quoted in Saskatoon as saying that, “he could make no commitment about 

what share a Liberal government would pay for education costs.” No commitment, but on September 

27th,
 
it was 50 per cent; on November 9th, he could make no commitment, but as soon as an election 

date was announced, revenues would be estimated and a statement made. There are something in the 

neighbourhood of 30 days, I think, between the date of announcing the election and the election. In that 

period of time, they are going to estimate revenues and make a statement upon them. And then, of 

course, we have the addition to that, made just a few days ago in this House, that the policy would be to 

pay, eventually, up to 100 per cent. I think we are right in asking the question as to just what is the 

policy of the Liberal Party. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — It depends on the brand. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — There is another way in which policy of the Government has contributed toward 

equality of educational opportunities, one which has cost some money, and which is properly considered 

as a contribution toward general educational services. I have reference to very far-reaching 

improvements made with regard to Teachers’ Superannuation. To provide more equitable educational 

opportunities, it is important to consider the status of the teachers. The quality of education depends 

more on the teacher than on any other single factor. Possibilities of desirable superannuation are 

extremely important factors in attracting to and retaining the right kind of people in the teaching 

profession. 

 

I want to compare the teachers who have superannuated for age and service, and are reported as such in 

the reports of the Teachers’ Superannuation Commission 1943-44, and those in 1954-55. Those 

superannuating as reported in 1943-44, enjoyed an average salary for the last year in which they taught 

of $1,400 per year. Those reported in 1954-55, an annual average salary for the last year of $3,500 per 

year. The average pension granted in the former one was $480 per year, at first, and there was a meeting 

of the Legislature that year, Mr. Speaker, and there was an election coming up, so there was a little 

improvement in teachers’ superannuation. After the Legislature had finished at April 1st, it went up 

from $480 to $560 per year. Contrast that, even after the meeting of the Legislature, to those 

superannuating and covered in the last report. On the basis of a single life calculation, the average 

pension was $1,700. But the teachers have a right to make a choice of plans, if they want to cover their 

dependents, and get certain other changes, they may reduce the amount they get. They also have the 

right to add to it, until the get to age 70 and take less after. So on the actual plan selected, the average up 

to age 70 was about $1,750. 

 

So there you have it from $560 up to $1,700. Since reference is sometimes made again to other 

provinces, I asked that 20 teachers pensioning for age and service have their pensions calculated as if 

they had superannuated in Manitoba and Alberta. The average pension of these 20 teachers under the 

Saskatchewan Plan was $1,500 per year, under the Manitoba plan it would be $760 per year – about 

one-half. Under the Alberta plan, $1,400 per year. Teachers in Saskatchewan averaged $1,500, 

superannuated under the Manitoba superannuation plan they would have $760, under the Alberta plan 

they would have had $1,400. The range in Saskatchewan of pensions was from $1,040 to $2,080; in 

Manitoba from $530 to $1,120; and In Alberta from $360 to $2,470. It is true that some of those would 

have had higher pensions had they superannuated 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

19 

under Alberta, but also many of them would have had lower pensions, and the total actual average was 

less. 

 

It is important, I think, Mr. Speaker, that any comparison of school taxes or school grants by themselves 

do not give an accurate picture. By expenditures through municipalities, and through the provincial 

government, people provide themselves with a variety of services. Assistance by the government in one 

area of service frees the resources of individuals and municipalities for other purposes. Lack of 

assistance by the government in one area freezes some of their resources, which cannot then be used in 

other ways. Individuals and municipalities, having less need to spend as much for the care of indigents, 

for hospitalization, for cancer treatment, for public health, for mentally ill persons, for elderly persons, 

have more tax-paying ability, or more personal finances, to meet other needs. 

 

So I want to look at some comparisons in the field of health and social welfare, in order to round out the 

picture of just how well our people are doing. With regard to social welfare, in the province of Ontario, 

the municipalities there have to pay $4.13 per capita. In the province of Alberta they pay $1.59 per 

capita; in Manitoba $1.56, but in Saskatchewan for social welfare services, 78 cents per capita. The 

province of Alberta pays $9.77 per capita for social welfare programmes; the province of Saskatchewan 

$9.12; the province of Manitoba $5.55; and the province of Ontario $5.28. So compare again a citizen in 

Manitoba with his neighbour in Saskatchewan. The citizen in Manitoba is paying according to figures 

which I gave previously twice as much for social welfare services to his municipality as his 

Saskatchewan neighbour. He is paying more for education services; he is paying more for general 

municipal services, and he is still left with more individual, financial responsibility in order to get the 

same standard of service. 

 

Take the field of health. Municipalities in Alberta pay $8.16 per capita; in Saskatchewan, $7.31; in 

Ontario $5.87; in Manitoba $3.30. The province of Saskatchewan pays $32.59 per capita for health 

services; the province of Alberta $24.13; Ontario $12.89, and Manitoba $8.82. Here we put them all 

together and we find this: that municipalities and provincial governments combined spend according to 

these rates: in Saskatchewan $39.90 per capita; in Alberta $32.29; in Ontario $18.75 and in Manitoba 

$12.12, so that the Manitoba citizen, to get service in the field of health comparable to that which his 

neighbour in Saskatchewan has, will have to find another $37 out of his personal income. He must find 

more for social welfare; he must find more for health services; he must find more for general municipal 

services, and he must find more for educational services. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that if the 

members of the Opposition could perform all the marvellous things which they pretend to be able to do, 

the Premier of Manitoba and particularly my friend Wally Miller, Minister of Education, would be 

willing to pay them highly for their services. Particularly since, according to them in Manitoba, they 

have already achieved the ultimate in rural electrification, is highly industrialized, and has the best of 

governments – that is, according to them. 

 

Mr. Carr (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the hon. Minister would tell us what year those 

figures were quoted from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Yes, they are the estimates for the year 1955. 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

20 

 I want to say something too, about the relative rate of the tax levy for school purposes for the province 

of Saskatchewan. Taking school tax levy as a percentage of personal income per capita, in 1946 it took 

roughly two per cent of our personal income to pay our school taxes. In 1948, 1.9 per cent; in 1950 2.4 

per cent, and 1952 1.8 per cent, and in 1954 3.5 per cent. The percentage is up because the income in 

Saskatchewan that year dropped by about $500 per capita, partly because of poor crops, partly because 

of poor marketing conditions, and partly because of a drop in agricultural prices. 

 

The percentage in 1955, if (and this is a mighty big if), the farmers could sell a reasonable quota; if they 

could get cash advances on a reasonable quota; if, as has been said in this House before, they could 

collect their last years’ wages, would not be very high, and the percentage of per capita income, which 

would pay for those school taxes, would be still less if the farmers received a price which adequately 

compensated them for the cost of production. 

 

The members of the Opposition are sometimes critical of reference made to problems by members on 

this side of the House – the problems of marketing and price. They say these are Federal problems. Mr. 

Speaker, I think it would be better to say this: the solutions needed must come from the Federal 

Government, but the problems are the problems of the people of Saskatchewan. What is done about 

them, or what isn’t done about them, is going to be a very considerable determinant to what local 

governments and the Provincial Government can do about their responsibilities. Any provincial 

government, knowing the magnitude of the problems facing the people of this province, could not, with 

decency, be quiet about it. And any Opposition cannot, with decency and dignity, avoid the issue. It is 

Saskatchewan’s No. 1 economic and political question at all levels, and elected members of the 

Legislature have a responsibility to give leadership in clarifying the thinking out of this problem. 

 

The Liberal members try to persuade the people of Saskatchewan that if they could only get a few more 

school grants, or a few more miles of road, then our economic problems would be solved. They are 

guilty of misleading the people when they do this. 

 

On this matter of costs and taxes, just remember this, that land taxes, municipal and school make up 

something like six per cent of the total cost of operating and overhead costs of our Saskatchewan farms. 

That was in 1953. In 1941, they made up eight per cent – a bigger proportion than they do at the 

moment. Machine costs, on the other hand, make up 29 per cent (for 1953) – in 1941 some 23 per cent. 

On taxes as a whole, let us remember this, that approximately 70 per cent of our tax dollar goes to the 

Federal Government; the remaining 30 cents is divided between the municipalities and the provinces. So 

if the member from Meadow Lake (Mr. Dunfield) has a lump on his back because of taxes, at least 70 

per cent of it is a good, solid Liberal lump, and he ought to feel quite at home. 

 

Premier Douglas: — What’s above the hump, though? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — If taxes are the ruination, then let us look at the big tax collector who gets more 

than twice the amount of the municipalities and the provinces put together. 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

21 

I am sorry the Leader of the Opposition isn’t in his seat. He raised in this House the other day the 

situation of Regina College, and I shall remark on it now only because of the remarks that he made. I 

hadn’t thought of it before, Mr. Speaker, as a political problem. Raising it as he did, I am afraid he has 

made it a political problem. If he had raised it as a matter of policy, but there is quite a difference 

between a matter of policy and a matter of politics. 

 

This request, or suggestion, for an extension to the courses offered at Regina College came to the 

Government first some years ago. We referred it at that time to officers and officials of the University of 

Saskatchewan. We did so, because we were convinced that was the best source of advice with regard to 

the problem, and because we were convinced that under the law of the province, that was the proper 

thing to do. They in turn set up a joint committee of the Board of Governors and the Senate to study it; 

they met a delegation from the city of Regina. The joint committee reported to both the Senate and the 

Board of Governors. That report was accepted by both of those bodies. The Cabinet has subsequently 

met two delegations of Regina citizens to discuss it. 

 

I would like to say, with reference to the Senate and the Board of Governors, just a word about how they 

are made up. The Board of Governors has 14 members. Four of them are ex officio, three from Regina, 

one of them, the President of the University, coming from Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that if 

there is a person in this province, or in any Canadian province, who can be relied upon to look at this 

matter in an impartial and objective manner, and whose sole consideration will be one of advancing the 

educational interests of the youth of this province, that person is Dr. Thompson, President of the 

University. There are five appointed members to the Board, one come from Regina, one from 

Saskatoon, and three from outside those two cities. There are five elected members; two from Regina, 

three from Saskatoon. All in all there are then, five from Saskatoon and six from Regina, the other being 

from outside. I tell you that because I think it would be most unfortunate, as has been suggested from 

time to time, that this be considered a matter of city against city, and I trust we shall never look at it in 

that particular way. 

 

With regard to the Senate, may I say only this, it has on it such people as Mr. Arthur Bater of North 

Battleford now, formerly from Baljennie, Mrs. Harvey Bell, North Battleford, and Dr. Novak of 

Yorkton; and I’m not sure, but I think Mrs. Caldwell was on the Senate when the matter was discussed. 

The members of the Opposition will know that it will get fair treatment at the hands of that body. 

 

The request or the suggestion which has been made is not for an Arts and Science course, but for an Arts 

course. Well, let’s look at the enrolment at the University. In 1954-55 some 4,401 students enrolled, 677 

in the college of Arts and Science, making about 27 per cent of the enrolment. It is fair to assume, I 

suggest, that the wishes of the students who go from Regina to the university would be similar to the 

wishes of those from all of the province, so that a course in Arts and Science in Regina would serve out 

of every 100 students, only some 27. The others wishing Commerce, Engineering and all the other 

possible offerings would still have to go to Saskatoon. But that 27 per cent includes all five types of Arts 

and Science courses. You would have to, unless you had a lot of money and a lot of building space, 

exclude many of the science courses, you would exclude most of the theology 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

22 

courses; you would take out probably those who wish to take Home Economics, and you would 

certainly have to exclude a portion of those taking the four years’ Arts course – the Honours Course, as 

it is called. 

 

Therefore, the number served by Arts would not be 677, but something like less than that. In other 

words, out of 100 Regina students, the number drops to 11 who would be serviced. Even for these, a 

restricted offering. The College of Arts and Science offers over 300 full, or half-time, classes – not all of 

these in one year, but each of them available sometime during the course when a student is in 

attendance. Twenty-four classes are in chemistry alone; 30 in the general field of economics, political 

science and sociology; 27 in English. You couldn’t expect to duplicate that by one-half at Regina 

College, so you would have a restricted offering. 

 

It is true that Regina students suffer some disadvantage financially, if it is necessary for them to leave 

home in order to get to University. So, Mr. Speaker, do all the students who come from all over the rest 

of the province – the students from Meadow Lake, and from Davidson, from Moosomin and from 

Rosthern, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, and from all over – they too, suffer a disadvantage, and the 

extension of the Regina College would not do anything to assist those. As a matter of fact, these extra 

expenditures might indeed hinder their opportunities to some extent. So this would really help only a 

small fraction of Regina students wishing to go to University – only a small fraction. It would curtail the 

opportunities for some as compared to what they might get at Saskatoon. It could even have the effect of 

directing a number of students into channels which they really weren’t interested in, and really didn’t 

want to go. 

 

I would like to say just a word about the brief, a copy of which appeared in the ‘Leader-Post’, a copy of 

which I have, which is marked ‘A Memorandum to Brief of a Brief to Members of the Legislature’. I 

comment only on one or two inaccuracies in it. It says, for example, this: 

 

“Regina is the only city in Canada, of comparable size without degree-granting facilities.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, one only has to travel to the city of Calgary where there are no degree-granting facilities. 

The University of Alberta there offers a two-year course in one college only, the College of Education. 

It offers, in addition, a first-year course in Commerce; in a sense a more restricted offering than is 

available for the residents of Regina at Regina College. The statement is made that the buildings at 

Regina College are presently available, and suitable for the purpose of these proposals – all ready for 

classes and professors to move into. Yet, reports the Dean of Regina College (1954-55) “space 

requirements remain our primary problem, not only in the College proper, but in the Conservatory as 

well. With the reclaiming of Happy Landing Apartments, some alleviation of congestion in certain areas 

may be realized this coming fall.” So they are pressed for space for present commitments; certainly this 

does not indicate that there is space for new commitments. 

 

It has reference to the fact that Victoria College in British Columbia was given its own charter, and an 

annual appropriation from the government, without having to pass through the hands of the University 

government. I have here the Bill, the result of which Victoria College’s “charter” was established. I will 

just read a few sections from it: 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

23 

“Instruction in all branches of a liberal education, and the education of teachers as may be 

approved by the Senate of the University of British Columbia. 

 

“The management, administration and control of the property subject, however, to the powers of 

the President, the Board of Governors, and the Senate of the University of British Columbia. 

 

“The powers of the Council include: the power of submitting to the Minister of Education, 

subject to the approval of the Board of Governors of the University of British Columbia, annual 

budgetary provisions and capital expenditures. 

 

“The deans of the University shall be ex officio deans of their respective faculties. The regular 

sessions of the College shall commence and terminate on the days prescribed for the University 

of British Columbia.” 

 

I think it is unfortunate that some of these arguments have been dragged into the discussion. Reference 

is made to the situation in Manitoba, where they have, and have had for many years, a degree-granting 

institution at Brandon. Well, Mr. Speaker, if the Regina city residents and council wish to do what is 

being done in Brandon, I suppose it could be arranged. The government, or the University of Manitoba 

makes available to Brand College $25,000 every year for the carrying on of that institution. 

 

All of this is not to say that the time will not come when conditions will indicate, and financial 

considerations make possible, a degree-granting institution in the southern part of the province. 

 

But it is fair, Mr. Speaker, to remind ourselves that there are other educational considerations; other 

educational needs, and they deserve priority. If we have extra money for university education at this 

time, I suggest that we can get a better deal for Regina students, and those from the rest of the province, 

by providing more financial assistance to make attendance at Saskatoon more possible. Regina students 

need not be deterred by the financial problems arising out of the cost of university courses. We have a 

loan fund which is making available some $200,000 to students this year, and which will meet 

reasonable needs presented by students of Regina and other parts of the province. I admit that if students 

have to have some recourse to that they probably pile up some debt by the time they have finished their 

course. But, it is also true that a young man going into farming, or going into business, would probably 

accumulate some debt, too. I can see no reason why the debt for an engineer or a doctor is any more of a 

handicap, or any less worthy, than the debts of a young farmer or a young business man. 

 

I am given to wonder at the Leader of the Opposition’s rather sudden endorsation of this matter. I 

wonder if the Liberal Party has really tried to think it through, or whether this is just one more addition 

to the price of votes in the city of Regina. 

 

Reference was made in the Throne Speech to the planning of a 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

24 

technical institute. Technical schools in Saskatchewan are located at Moose Jaw, Saskatoon and Regina, 

and they came into operating during the years 1930 and 1931. 

 

Since 1945 we have developed in the province, under an agreement – or rather support from an 

agreement – with the Federal Government, some 30 centres providing composite school services, some 

degree of what might be called technical education. There are some other areas which have an itinerate 

programme, and some areas, such as Maple Creek, where they have a shop mobile which visits various 

places, and makes some degree of technical education available. But I think all of us know that this is 

not a full vocational programme. It is, to some extent, free vocational training; it is excellent vocational 

guidance, and it is excellent general education. 

 

There has been activity, also, with regard to vocational agricultural education. A short course, as it is 

called, has been in effect at the University for a number of years, and a new building for this purpose 

was provided in 1949. Some of the school units are undertaking this kind of a programme. The most 

advanced one is Kindersley; there are also programmes at Sturgis and Kinistino. In Kindersley their 

agricultural adult programme has some 18 farm clubs, involving about 500 farm facilities in that area. 

These meet regularly for purposes of vocational education. In addition they have some 350 adults taking 

evening classes in some of their composite schools. 

 

There is an apprenticeship programme in the province. For a number of years dating back to the middle 

‘thirties, there has been a Canadian Vocational Training programme, providing some degree of technical 

or trade education. 

 

Not all of the graduates of our high schools want to go to University. Not all of the graduates of our high 

schools should go to University, and of course, not all of our students graduate from high school. Many 

of these people would like more training of a different kind. Their interests are not necessarily in the so-

called professions. We need badly, Mr. Speaker, trained minds. We need also trained hands; more 

particularly, we need people with trained minds and trained hands. 

 

More and more there is less and less opportunity for the unskilled labourer. The increasing 

industrialization in the province is providing more opportunity for skilled workers, and more need for 

skilled workers. From the point of view of our individual citizens, or from the point of view of the 

provincial economy, it is good business to provide more advanced training opportunities. 

 

So, it seems to us that the need for advanced training, that is, technical training, is indicated. Our present 

technical schools are doing fine work; something additional is required. The institution of the type we 

are planning will not interfere with the work of existing technical schools. It should benefit and 

encourage the work in those schools. We have considered the possibility of some kind of a partnership 

in our existing technical schools, and there probably will be some activities of that kind. But in the major 

picture, there are many administrative problems which seem to recommend a different pattern. There 

would be an age group much different from that 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

25 

attending our present technical schools; there would be varying academic qualifications. There is 

considerable doubt in my mind that the desire flexibility could be obtained by doing all of the work in 

conjunction with existing technical schools. 

 

You might well raise the question as to what courses will be offered. Courses will have to be based on 

the employment opportunities in the province; and on the interest of potential students. Some of them 

will be short courses – a matter of months; others will be of one or two years duration. The planning of 

those courses will have to be carefully carried out in conjunction with representatives of industry and of 

labour. 

 

With all of this in mind, the staff members of the Department of Education have, for several years, been 

studying this problem. They have visited a number of institutions in other parts of Canada and also the 

United States. They have placed some estimates and some plans on paper, and the Government felt that 

the thinking was advanced far enough that it was desirable to make an announcement at this time. 

 

I wish to make three concluding observations with regard to this proposal, Mr. Speaker. First of all, this 

is not just a service for urban residents. There will be programmes in connection with what might be 

called the ‘industrial needs’ of our farmers. Then, too, this: every area which is, as we are, 

predominantly rural, must face a rather uncomfortable fact, and that is that there is not enough land to 

absorb the population which is produced on our farms. That is going to be increasingly true, as we have 

increased the size of our farms due to mechanization. Secondly, of course, not all the young people who 

are born on farms, and grow up on farms, want to stay on the farms, or should stay on the farms. This is 

as much a contribution to the rural life of the province as it is to the urban. 

 

The second observation I wish to make is in the nature of a hope – a hope that we shall have, in order to 

assist with the financing of it, a new agreement with the Federal Government. I mentioned this in the 

House before on two occasions; the Legislature has unanimously endorsed a resolution asking for a new 

agreement. The situation is, at the moment, that the old one has been extended for another year. This 

does not make any provision for any capital money or monies for capital purposes at all. I hope that we 

will have a new agreement, and that it will be of sufficient amount to enable us to continue assisting the 

development of the composite school programme, and also the provincial technical institute. 

 

My third observation is this: the school must be more than just a trade school. A French philosopher of 

education, a long time ago, made this observation: “my pupil is not, first of all, a priest or a solider. He 

is, first of all, a man.” A man is much more than just a hewer of wood and a drawer of water. This must 

be an institution, not just a trade institution for the training of hands, but an institution for the training of 

people. 

 

I want to join, Mr. Speaker, with others who have paid tribute to the Jubilee year activities. I want to add 

personal thanks to members of 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

26 

the staff, the chairman of that committee, the members of the committee, and particularly to the 

community committees. May I say, too, how much I appreciated what was done by the schools, the 

teachers and pupils, during Jubilee year. They made a marvellous contribution in many ways. I do not 

know, Mr. Speaker, how many of the members were able to hear the broadcast in May when it had been 

arranged that school children from all over the province would engage in singing songs about 

Saskatchewan. One could get a picture of thousands of Saskatchewan school children at the same time, 

singing these songs and hymns of praise of our province. 

 

It was a most gratifying experience to have been on the committee, and to know the response which was 

forthcoming from the people of the province. Thousands of people got into the act, which was played 

across the face of Saskatchewan’s landscape and Saskatchewan’s history. The member from Regina, 

speaking yesterday, referred to many of the tangible, physical activities and records which have been left 

behind. I think we have been made more conscious of Saskatchewan as a real, living entity- not just a 

blot on the map somewhere between the Rocky Mountains and Niagara Falls. I think we are much more 

conscious of our history, particularly of the history of our communities. There are many people, 

particularly the young people in the schools, who realize now, better than before at least, that in every 

community in this province great people have lived and achieved great things, and great people live 

there now who will achieve great things in the future. We have been made more aware of our physical 

resources and of our human resources. Certainly we were made more aware of our destiny to play a 

greater part in the future of a greater Canada. 

 

The speech of His Honour just over one week ago indicated something of that part which Saskatchewan 

has played, and something of the plans to move towards that greater destiny. The mover and seconder of 

the Speech from the Throne ably elaborated. Two days ago the Premier of the province did, as he has 

done on so many occasions in this Legislature, and outside of it, once again put into moving and 

memorable words, the only philosophy which can guide us to the fulfilment of that destiny. Such a 

programme, Mr. Speaker, such leadership, I am proud to be associated with and I will support the 

motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 – An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act 
 

Hon. J.W. Corman, Q.C. (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, I hope no one will shudder when they 

see that I propose saying just a few words about this Bill. If I talk a little longer 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

27 

than is my usual custom I hope I will be forgiven by reason of the fact that The Saskatchewan Bill of 

Rights is pretty close to my heart. Since I had the pleasure of introducing it in 1947 I think we have all 

taken a lot of satisfaction and a lot of pride in the fact that Saskatchewan, I believe, has taken first place 

on the North American continent in respect and in consideration for civil liberties and in almost a total 

wiping out, or total eclipse, of racial and religious discrimination. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Is there anything in it that we haven’t practised before? 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — I am not suggesting that. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — Don’t go out on a limb! 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — I don’t think what you said is in disagreement with my statement that this 

province of Saskatchewan now does stand at the top place on this continent in respect of those things. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — It always has. 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — I am not suggesting that it is altogether because of The Bill of Rights. I hope that 

when I have departed this political scene that I won’t be remembered so much for the many mistakes 

and errors I have made over comics, etc., - but I believe it was the ‘Leader-Post’ that was generous 

enough to call me the father of The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights, and I appreciate that and will be glad 

to draw it to the attention of my grand-children. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Bill before the House, today, proposes certain amendments to The Saskatchewan 

Bill of Rights. The amendments are by way of deletion and they are made necessary because I will be 

bringing before you two new sections – The Fair Employment Practices Act and The Fair 

Accommodation Practices Act – which will carry, in the separate statutes, Sections 8, 11 and 12 of The 

Bill of Rights. Those are the sections dealing with racial and religious discrimination in respect of 

employment and in respect of the right to the enjoyment of the facilities of public places, such as hotels, 

restaurants, theatres, etc. I would like to make it abundantly clear that there is no substantive change 

being made in The Bill of Rights. I suggest it has stood the test of time and I think it has become the 

envy and the aim of every civil liberty association in Canada. 

 

If you give Second Reading to this Bill you will only be approving, in principle, those other two Bills 

which I will be introducing later. 

 

Now The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights, as I have said, was passed in 1947; and while Saskatchewan was 

near the last of the provinces to enter Confederation, we were the first province to pass a Bill of Rights 

guaranteeing the fundamental freedom and outlawing racial and religious discrimination. 

 

The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights can be broken down into two parts – Sections 1 to 7 make it illegal and 

an offence punishable by fine 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

28 

or imprisonment to deprive any person or class of persons of the enjoyment of certain freedoms which 

are commonly spoken of as the ‘fundamental’ freedoms. Among them are freedom of religion, freedom 

of speech and freedom of assembly. It might be noted here that The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights 

guarantee the enjoyment, under the law, of freedom of speech and freedom of expressions through the 

press and the radio and the arts. Perhaps I could draw the attention of the Assembly to the fact that 

freedom of the press is guaranteed and that is true in a province in which at least 90 per cent of the daily 

press and the weekly press are opposed to the things for which the Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation stands for. It is noteworthy that Saskatchewan is the only province that has legislation 

permitting the newspapers to say what they like about the Government. I don’t know what I have proved 

by that. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — You didn’t improve anything, anyway. 

 

Hon. Mr. Corman: — And I might say, in passing, that another fundamental freedom guaranteed by 

The Bill of Rights is the right of any elector to demand an election at least every five year s- probably I 

should bring that up in this peaceful atmosphere, this afternoon, but in any event an election in 

Saskatchewan must now be held every five years. It doesn’t say that an election cannot be held in four 

years, and it doesn’t say that it cannot be held in the spring or in the summer or in the autumn, but it 

does require us to go to the country every five years. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Just when is it going to be held? 

 

Premier Douglas: — It will be too soon for you fellows! 

 

Some Hon. Member: — Ask your seatmate – he knows. 

 

Hon. MR. Corman: — This is the first part of The Bill of Rights, guaranteeing the fundamental 

freedoms. 

 

The second part of The Bill of Rights, as it stands, makes it an offence, punishable by fine and/or 

imprisonment to discriminate against any person or class of persons because of the race, religious creed, 

religion, or national origin of such person or class of persons in respect of the following activities: 

 

By Section 8 – The right to obtain and retain employment; 

 

By Section 9 – The right to carry on any occupation, business or enterprise under the law; 

 

By Section 10 – The right to the ownership and enjoyment of real property; 

 

By Section 11 – The right to the enjoyment of the accommodation and facilities of public places 

– hotels, theatres, restaurants, etc.; 
 

By Section 12 – The right to membership in professional societies, trade unions or other  

      occupational organizations; 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

29 

By Section 13 – The right to an education. 

 

What is happening in one of the southern states could not happen in this province. 

 

I might say penalties are provided for practising discrimination contrary to the Act – penalties by way of 

fine or imprisonment and the right of injunction is given. 

 

Now, in most respects The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights stands alone in Canada; I think it can truthfully 

be said that everybody talks about a Bill of Rights, but Saskatchewan only has done anything 

worthwhile about it. I may say that our Premier, at every Dominion-Provincial conference, constitutional 

conference, has pressed for an amendment to the B.N.A. Act, incorporating a Bill of Rights for the 

whole of Canada. He has made his voice heard but he hasn’t, so far, been successful; I just notice, in that 

connection an editorial in the ‘Star Phoenix’ that came to our desks this morning – I do not propose 

reading it all, but I would recommend it to every member of the Assembly; it reads in part as follows: 

 

“Recently Mr. M.J. Coldwell introduced in the House of Commons a resolution proposing that 

consideration should be given to the inclusion in the British North America Act of a Human 

Rights section.” 

 

I have noted some things here I would like to read; I won’t detain you long; with the invitation I have 

given to you all I think you will read it yourselves, but the ‘Star Phoenix’ is recommending that Ottawa 

should move a little faster in seeing that, by way of amendments to the B.N.A. Act, a Bill of Rights is 

provided for the whole of Canada. I might say that the ‘Star Phoenix’ says, in referring to Mr. Garson, 

the Minister of Justice – in referring to his argument that we don’t need it, that provincial legislation, for 

instance, and the Parliament of Canada, do observe these human liberties and freedoms. The ‘Star 

Phoenix’, I notice, says this: 

 

“We need mention only the attempt of the Alberta government in 1937 to control the press, the 

attempts in some provinces to restrict the land holdings of Hutterite colonies, the Quebec 

‘padlock law’, and Premier Duplessis’ recent steps to give his Government the means of 

dominating the newsprint industry in the province . . .” 

 

The ‘Star Phoenix’ could have added the recent Quebec legislation curtailing the freedom of religion. 

 

In any event, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan can take pride in the fact that since the passing of our Bill of 

Rights some other provinces – that is, three provinces – and the Dominion have paid us the compliment 

of copying it, of following it, to some extent. Now this is true, not in regard to the fundamental 

freedoms, but this is true in regard to the provisions outlawing racial and religious discrimination in 

employment and in the enjoyment of the facilities of public places. None of the other provisions of our 

Act have, so far, been followed by either the Dominion or the other provinces. 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

30 

Chronologically, Mr. Speaker, this is what has happened: The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights was passed 

in 1947, making it an offence to discriminate in hiring and firing employees because of race, colour or 

religion. In 1951, Ontario passed a “Fair Employment Practices Act” based on Section 8 of our Bill of 

Rights. In 1953, the Dominion followed suit by passing “the Canada Fair Employment Practices Act”. I 

might say the Federal Act applies only to employment in connection with any undertaking or business 

that is within the legislative authority of the Parliament of Canada. It is not of general application; and I 

might point out that this deprives Federal employees working for the Government; it is not binding on 

the Crown. I might say here that our Bill of Rights is binding on the Crown. 

 

Next to fall in line was Manitoba, with a Fair Employment Practices Act, in 1954, and Nova Scotia, in 

1955. So we have it this way: Fair Employment Practices Legislation was passed in Saskatchewan in 

1947; by Ontario in 1951; by Ottawa in 1953; by Manitoba in 1954; and by Nova Scotia in 1955. The 

other provinces have no such legislation. 

 

Now so much for Fair Employment Practices. That brings us to Section 11 of The Saskatchewan Bill of 

Rights. Since 1947 it has been an offence, Mr. Speaker, in this province, to deny anyone the right to 

enjoy the facilities of public places because of race, colour or religion. No other province has passed 

such legislation, with the exception of Ontario, where a Fair Accommodation Practices Act was passed 

two years ago, in 1954 – seven years after the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights. 

 

It may be asked, Mr. Speaker, why we are asking for separate statutes when these matters were dealt 

with in 1947. I might point out the reason for it is principally in the interests of uniformity. The 

Dominion and three other provinces have followed us in one respect and Ontario in another respect and 

we feel that to encourage the trend, now that they have accepted the principle that we can do no less than 

to try to establish some uniformity in these Acts throughout Canada. So for that reason I will be 

submitting the two Bills that I have mentioned and because of the new statutes it is necessary to delete 

certain sections from The Bill of Rights. 

 

I would, therefore, move, Mr. Speaker, Second Reading of the Bill amending The Saskatchewan Bill of 

Rights. 

 

Bill No. 32 – An Act respecting the Centralized Teaching Programme for Nursing Students 
 

Hon. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure all members of the House 

are quite familiar with the Kellogg Foundation, which is one of many foundations which interest 

themselves in the fields of human welfare, which of course includes matters affecting health and training 

of individuals for participation in health services. 

 

A few years ago the Kellogg Foundation, in discussion with the Department of Health in Saskatchewan, 

and other interested agencies, 



 

February 17, 1956 

 

31 

suggested that they would be prepared to finance an experiment in the training of nursing students. The 

experiment was to be that the students who are enrolled in the various nurse-teaching hospitals in the 

province would attend a centralized lecture course dealing with the basic sciences and academic 

questions which are required in their studies and training; this course would be undertaken at a central 

place during the first four months after enrolment. Nine of the 11 teaching hospitals in the province 

undertook to support the experiment. The Kellogg Foundation put up the original amount of money for 

the first year, with the understanding that in succeeding years the province would enter into the field; 

and at the end of the three-year period an assessment of the value of the experiment would be made and 

if the province was agreed that it was a worthwhile programme, then the province would undertake to 

carry on from there on and Kellogg would withdraw. 

 

During the experimental stages the programme was administered by a Board of Administration 

composed of representatives of the teaching hospitals and the other professions in the province as well 

as from the Department of Health. Now, however, since Kellogg has withdraw, it is necessary to 

establish statutory provisions for the continuation of this programme and it was deemed advisable by the 

Government that rather than have the programme administered by an agency of the Government itself, 

that the Board of Administrators would continue, but would be set up under a legal statute and this Act 

is designed to provide for that purpose; and will be called an Act respecting the Centralized Teaching 

Programme for Nursing Students. The details can be dealt with in Committee, but with those few words 

of explanation, I would move Second Reading of the Bill. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 

 


