



















































Hansard: February 28, 1956


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session – Twelfth Legislature 

14th Day 

 

Tuesday, February 28, 1956 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

Debate on Address-In-Reply 
 

The House resumed, from Monday February 27, 1956, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain) for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I will dispense with the preliminaries of this speech, 

and just say that I think there have been some very fine political speeches given in this debate. One 

would almost think we were in the final days of an election campaign. I doubt whether many have made 

friends or influenced the people, but possibly what I have to say won’t change the situation any either. 

 

I sometimes like to reminisce and go back to when I came to this country as a youth, with no economic 

or political experience, and then later on when I because a young married man, raising a family, and 

buying a home, and trying to make a pay cheque stretch, which didn’t seem to go half far enough in 

those days; but if I was in difficulty then there were hundreds around me who were in far more desperate 

straits than I was. And it appeared to be very confusing in those days. There wasn’t a great deal of 

political choice; in fact there wasn’t any choice. I would listen to the Liberal party and think, possibly, 

that they had some solution and support then, and in the next election I would get rid of them and 

support the Conservative party, but it didn’t seem to matter whether I voted for Tweedledee or 

Tweedledum, the final result was just about the same – not much improvement for the people around 

me. 

 

Then I saw the great upsurge of political and economic thinking during the hungry ‘thirties’ when 

people had many leisure hours to read, and they did read much on economics. They were able to think 

and discuss and study with their neighbours, the problems of that day and how they got in that position. I 

am rather inclined to think, Mr. Speaker, that much of the vote during the 1944 election was not just a 

mere negative, not a mere vote to get rid of the Liberal government which had sat here and done nothing 

for a while; but much of it was a vote to elect a government which would give leadership to the people 

for a better way of life than they had experienced in the past. 

 

We might ask ourselves, “has that position been bettered?” Of course, we on the government side 

definitely would say “yes”, and I am sure the members on the other side would say “no”. That doesn’t 

prove a great deal. The final opinion will be left with the people, and on two 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

2 

 

occasions the people have given their decision, and there isn’t any doubt in my mind as to what the 

decision will be when they are asked for it on the third occasion. 

 

I sometimes wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the Opposition don’t go to different places to get their public 

opinion than I do, because I meet all kinds of people. I meet people who are critical of this Government, 

but they do admit that this is the best government that Saskatchewan has ever has, and they are long and 

loud in their praise of our Leader, the Premier of this Province. They frankly admit that it would be a 

bad day for the people in this Province if we should lose such an able Leader, and a spokesman for our 

people. 

 

I don’t believe that the Opposition have advanced a great deal in their economic thinking, and I wonder 

if the people of this Province will take too kindly to the statement of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

McDonald) when he refers to the Commission set up on Rural Life as “rubberstamps to a government 

policy”. I am sure that this Commission, who have been all over this province, meeting people, coming 

in contact with people, have got the respect of the people, and I am quite sure that they will not take too 

kindly to that remark of the Leader of the Opposition. And, I say I doubt very much if they have 

advanced in their economic thinking when they make the statement that “this Government has done 

absolutely nothing to solve the farmers’ problems, but blare at Ottawa and protest to the Federal 

Government”. I say that, because I don’t think they realize where the jurisdiction of a provincial 

government should assist the agricultural industry in every way possible; to assist it in the raising of 

better crops and to better land conservation, and so on. I believe that our Department of Agriculture are 

doing a good job along these lines wherever it is possible to do so and wherever the farmers will request 

that kind of co-operation. 

 

We, too, as a provincial government must give services to our rural people, and I will say something 

about that later. They must give educational, medical, social aid and some assistance in market roads. 

But the main problems, the basis problems which affect the farmers are problems which the Provincial 

Government have not jurisdiction over. I refer to markets, a very serious matter for an agricultural 

industry. We have no jurisdiction over the markets, and we have protested to the Federal Government 

that they are not carrying on a vigorous enough salesmanship to get rid of our agricultural products. We 

have made suggestions to Ottawa as to how they might get rid of some of the surplus products of our 

farms. We have no jurisdiction over the price that the farmer will get for his produce, and definitely we 

have no jurisdiction over the price that he will pay for the things that he must have to produce his crops, 

and that is widening and widening – the price that the farmer will receive and the price that he will pay 

for his production costs. And it reflects, Mr. Speaker, down to the business man and down to the 

labourer. As the member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. Kohaly) yesterday pointed out, our decrease in 

unemployment is not as good as the average picture across Canada, and for that very reason, because of 

the loss of income to our agricultural industry. 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

3 
 

Now I would like to say, perhaps, just a few things of what I think we have done for the people of this 

province. I think all of us were impressed by the number of celebrations held during the Jubilee Year. 

We were impressed, and I think the Committee was certainly impressed, by the extraordinary number of 

communities which held celebrations. They held celebrations of the kind unique to their particular 

district. People gathered together to pay homage to their pioneers, to review the history of that district, 

and to give thanks to God for his blessings over the last 50 years. And there seemed to be a spirit 

prevailing there, Mr. Speaker; a spirit of pride that this was their home, this was where they were 

content to be. You could almost see them pick up the torch laid down by the pioneers to go on to greater 

things, to build a better place than they already had at their disposal. 

 

I am impressed when I drive around the prairie at night to see lights dotted all over this prairie, farm 

yards lighted up, homes and barns, people enjoying electric power. I am impressed when I go into 

communities, large and small, to see the business sections will lighted, in some cases they have neon 

lights; the residential districts all lit up, and very often one will find the most modern stores in these 

small communities, and cages; the kind of store that one would expect to find in the larger urban centres. 

 

I can’t help thinking, when I hear the people on the other side talking about power, that they know no 

more about power today than when they sat as a government on this side. It appears that when they talk 

about giving free power to farmers, they haven’t done too much studying. To them it is just a matter of 

putting up poles and stringing wires, and I would like them, when they visit Saskatoon, to take a trip 

through the power plant. I believe I am correct in saying that that is the largest generating plant in the 

province. I have watched that plant grow from a moderate plant to a very imposing plant today. At the 

present time, the last extension is going onto that plant. It is worth anybody’s while to go through there 

to see the extent, the investment and the work that is put into a generating plant, and I was amazed to see 

a press statement on Saturday. I had to read it two or three times, I am a mechanic, and have seen many 

boilers in my time, but I was certainly impressed when I read it, and I had to read it several times to 

make sure that I read it correctly. There was an item there for $1 ½ million for a boiler, an order that the 

General Manager of the Corporation gave to some firm in Eastern Canada of $1 ½ million for one boiler 

to into the new $40 million generating plan, which will go up about one mile south of the present plant 

in Saskatoon. That will give you an idea of the work that goes in a power system, and, as I say, I don’t 

think the members on the other side have any idea of what this system has meant to the people of this 

Province. Certainly it wasn’t a service that they ever intended, I don’t believe, to provide to the farmers. 

 

I don’t think I need to say too much about education facilities, I think our Minister covered that pretty 

well in his debate. I want only to say that certainly we can be proud of some of the many composite 

schools that have been built, providing technical schooling for our children. True, they are costing 

money; but will we deny our children those privileges in this day and age? 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

4 

 

I hardly need to say anything about health. One can hardly get any argument today on the health services 

provided by our people in this province. Our old-age pensioners don’t have to worry about having to go 

to the municipality or rely on the generosity of their relatives or friends, should they become ill in their 

old age. 

 

I would like to say one thing, and I might say that I was rather amazed, the other night, when the 

member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) was talking about crowded conditions in the mental institutions. 

Of all the members on that side that ought to talk about it, had one of the younger members done so, I 

would not have been so amazed because, perhaps, they don’t know all the facts. But I remember in 1944 

going to Weyburn with a group of members on this side of the House and one was a lady member from 

Maple Creek, Mrs. Trew, the only lady member that we had at that time. If it was an ordeal for the men 

members, then I certainly think it must have been for the lady who came along with us. It was just a 

terrible sight: overcrowding, and overcrowding of the type of mental patient that became unruly outside 

and was detained in that – I don’t want to call it a prison, I will say a detention home. There were plenty 

of others outside, Mr. Speaker, who were kept in the back, away from other people, because of the 

shame that it might bring upon their family. We have gone a long way since that day. We have today in 

our mental institutions a trained staff which is second to none in any province in Canada, and they are 

anxious to do a job, and long with the Canadian Mental Health Association with their vigorous 

educational campaign, they have done a lot to bring up the status of mental health to the same level of 

any physical disease or complaint. It seems to me that it is nothing short of criminal, that our Federal 

Government has not progressed to the point from where they will put mental health on the same basis as 

any other physical sickness or disease, and I refer to the fact that they have not included mental health in 

an all-embracing national health programme. They have not considered mental illness, and they have 

also excluded T.B. under their national health programme, and I would think that if we had our friends 

from the other side over here as a government, it would be a sorry day for our people who might become 

mentally ill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is one other Department that I would like to say a few words about and that is a 

service that, in my opinion, has done a very valuable service to our people in the out-laying districts, I 

refer to the Air Ambulance. Surely the people in our distant parts of this province must feel a certain 

amount of security in knowing that they are almost as close to a hospital as any person living within a 

few blocks of that hospital. I might say that this wonderful service has just completed 10 years of 

service. It has increased its aircraft from one to five, and in that time of 10 years it has travelled 

approximately 2 ½ million miles, or the equivalent to 90 times around the world, in their work of mercy, 

and I would like to end up by quoting from an editorial in the ‘Star Phoenix’. We often receive praise by 

our paper in Saskatoon, who are not quite so prejudiced as the ‘rag’ here in Regina. It went on to say: 

“The present personnel numbering 17, their predecessors in the service, and the Saskatchewan 

Government which inaugurated the service, all deserve the commendation of the people of this 

province”. I think, Mr. Speaker, that they have done a wonderful job in providing that service to the 

people of the rural districts. 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

5 
 

I was rather interested in the remarks of the member for Rosthern (Mr. Carr) the other day, talking about 

“we won’t get industry in this province, because we don’t believe in profits”. Then he went on to say 

something about wage controls, and I wonder if he ever remembers that, during the War, the Federal 

Government did adopt some kind of a controlled economy. It was, I think, fairly good. Industry did all 

right; industry, of course, wasn’t satisfied. Wages were pegged to the cost-of-living index. There wasn’t 

too much complaint, but everyone including those on small pensions, old-age pensioners and those 

getting small pensions and no income, could get their share of the necessities of life. Industry 

complained and price controls were lifted, and, naturally, the fight was on – ‘the survival of the fittest’. 

It is a pretty pitiful situation today that our old-age pensioners, those on small pensions and those of low 

income find themselves in, and our farmers today are getting in that position also. The only ones, 

apparently outside of the professional group, who have been able at least to hold their own, are those 

who are in organized labour and have just been able to slug it out with the power of their organizations 

to maintain a half decent standard of living. The member for Rosthern said “we would not have any 

industries here, but we don’t believe in profits”. I say if we follow that argument through, then we 

should have had all kinds of industry here when the Liberal government sat here in government before 

us. 

 

This was certainly a very fertile field, they could have made all the profits they wanted, and they could 

have exploited labour to their heart’s content, because there was very little labour legislation. In fact, 

outside of an attempt at a Minimum Wage and Industrial Standards Act, and a Compensation Act which 

was brought down by the Anderson government and held out by the Liberal government as a bait (and 

nobody bit) in 1929, outside of those two pieces of legislation there was nothing, absolutely nothing, to 

prevent industry from coming in here and doing as they pleased, when the Liberal government were on 

this side of the House. 

 

I would like at this time just to pay tribute to one service at least, of the Labour Department. I refer to 

the Compensation Board. It has been my privilege and, I suppose, as a member of the Legislature, to 

have considerable dealings with this Board. I usually get the tough cases; when everybody has kicked 

them around and can’t get anywhere, then I usually come into the picture. But I have got to say that I 

have to give this Board credit for bending backwards just as far as it is possible to go to give the injured 

worked every break possible. I have found that their decisions are really true and fair, and I have every 

respect for the work that they are carrying on in that Board. 

 

I would like to say a little bit about my own constituency. We are, carrying on from the Jubilee spirit, 

about to erect some homes for our old-aged people. I think it was a splendid community effort to have 

fraternal organizations, yes, even the Teachers’ Federation, also the aid of the city municipality and the 

provincial government, but above all the community itself coming in and subscribing so that we may 

provide better housing accommodation for those people who have given such wonderful work to us in 

the past. 

 

I notice that there is some sort of ‘schemozzle’ going on here in Regina over natural gas. Of course, we 

had a sort of schemozzle in Saskatoon, too. However, ours was spearheaded by the mayor at that time, 

who commanded a great deal more recognition than the small fry here in Regina is commanding. This 

carried on, of course, for a considerable time, mostly 



 

February 28, 1956 

6 

 

political, until the people of Saskatoon thought it was time that these people had had their fun, that they 

wanted natural gas and they had better get down and bring it into Saskatoon, Natural gas, of course, had 

been kicked around in Saskatoon for some 25 or 30 years. First, we had it and then we didn’t have it, 

and finally I think the people got good and fed up. I have come in contact with many people who are 

enjoying this good, clean, cheap fuel, and I have had very few complaints. As to the costs, certainly the 

kind of fuel is appreciated by those people in Saskatoon. I am sure, of course, Mr. Minister, any time 

you want to lower the cost, the householder will appreciate that too; but we do appreciate what the 

Power Corporation, or the Gas Corporation, are trying to do. I think we have a fair-minded group of 

people in Saskatoon, who would like to see others also enjoy the benefits of natural gas. 

 

I want to say a little about the University Hospital, and I believe that that is a memorial to the people of 

Saskatchewan. Not only is it a fine structure, but it is also giving a very wonderful service. It has a 

wonderful trained staff. I often visit in that institution. I have visited several times, and it just seems to 

me that about all the patients want to talk about is the service that they are getting in that institution, and 

I get very little time to discuss their problems or how they are getting along. I hope that if I am 

unfortunate enough ever to want hospital attention, that I pick a doctor who is not so prejudiced as not to 

want to send me to the University Hospital. 

 

I want to say that we also have a nice, new Telephone Exchange just about completed in Saskatoon, 

which should take care of our needs for some considerable time. Saskatoon is progressing; we are 

building now many miles of pavement. Traffic, of course, is increasing in our urban centres. We can no 

longer live in the horse-and-buggy days, and we have to keep up with the times. It is natural, of course, 

that this is expensive. People want services, but when they have to pay for those services, it isn’t quite so 

good. I remember the member for Arm River (I think it was) the other night mentioned that one of our 

budgets is three times one of a Liberal government when they were in power. Well, that is right in the 

matter of dollars, Mr. Speaker; but dollar value today is a long way off the value of the dollar in 1943. I 

wonder where he has been lately. Does he ever spend any money, or does he ever ask some of the 

housewives just how much they do get if they were go into a grocery store with a five-dollar bill? Costs 

have gone up, taxes have gone up. I believe my taxes have not just doubled, from 1939; but if I take the 

value of a dollar, I don’t think I am being taxed too far out of line at the present time. 

 

A lot has been done in Saskatoon in the last couple of years. We in the urban centres, of course, are 

noticing it particularly, because of the influx of population into the urban centres from the rural districts. 

We are having to build more and more schools, and you can’t buy school today for peanuts. We like to 

build nice schools. We pride ourselves on the schools that we have in Saskatoon, and we are maintaining 

that type of institution. 

 

I see that my time is just about up. I am, of course, sharing my time with the Opposition, and I don’t 

want them to cry that I have stolen a half-minute of their time. They haven’t much else of a case to put 

up, and apparently they are appealing to the people on sentiment. So with those few words, Mr. Speaker, 

I would say that I take great pleasure in supporting the motion. 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

7 
 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that my remarks this afternoon are not 

going to be controversial; they are going to more educational for my hon. friends on the other side. 

Before I go into the matter, however, I would like to refer to the unique situation; or at least, the 

happenings, of yesterday. 

 

We witnessed the hon. Minister (Hon. Mr. Bentley) agreeing with the member for Maple Creek (Mr. 

Cameron) to the extent that there were secret Communist sympathizers within the civil service, and they 

were in high places. Then he went on criticizing him, calling him to task that he should go and tell 

anybody about it, and that was the most unique act I have ever witnessed here in this House, and he 

spent about half an hour doing it. 

 

Then he went to work and spent about 15 minutes going after Ross Thatcher for having done them the 

dirty trick of resigning from the party, and alluding to the same reason as the member from Maple Creek 

had referred to. I want to say here, it is my opinion and I think it is the opinion of many people 

throughout Saskatchewan, that Ross Thatcher has done a great service to the people of Canada. We had 

been with this party for 10 years; he could be a member of Parliament as long as there is a C.C.F. party 

in Saskatchewan, with practically no expense to himself to get elected. Now he gave up all that. He 

sacrificed this unique position that he held in order to let the people know just what was going on within 

the inner circles of the C.C.F. party. I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that many people owe gratitude to 

Ross Thatcher (a man whom I have never met) for the courage and for the satisfaction that he has 

conveyed to those thousands who have left the C.C.F. party since they first came into power, and the 

encouragement to the thousands that are on the fence today – there are a good many thousands of them 

not voting for the C.C.F., next election, let me assure you that. 

 

Now, having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to one remark that the hon. Minister made. He said 

that “it was all humbug that there was a split in the C.C.F. party.” I just want to refer him to a report. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I never 

mentioned that word ‘humbug’. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, you have got another better word? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — The hon. member ought to know; he is using it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I’m sure that is what you did. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well anyway, I can assure the hon. Minister, that it is quite true that there is a split in 

the C.C.F. party, in Moose Jaw at least. And I am referring to. . . 

 

Mr. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — It is nothing to what there is in yours. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — . . .in the latter part of the year, on December 23, 1955 – that is only last fall, when it 

said: “Several of the former executive members who supported Dempster Heming in the provincial field 

and Ross 



 

February 28, 1956 

8 

 

Thatcher in the federal field have now formed a separate organization known as the ‘Commonwealth 

Club’, and have set up an executive and board of directors.” Well now, I would say that looks as if there 

isn’t much unity in Moose Jaw. There is another part of the same article: 

 

“The formation of the ‘Commonwealth Club’ would serve to confirm this belief that Mr. Heming will 

not consent to such an arrangement and will stand independently, disregarding the official C.C.F. party 

in Moose Jaw.” 

 

That makes it appear that Mr. Heming is in this thing, too. 

 

Premier Douglas: — May I ask my hon. friend what he is quoting from, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I am quoting from the Moose Jaw ‘Times’, December 23, 1955. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — A good Liberal paper. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Now then, having said that. . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Probably copied from ‘The Leader-Post’. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — . . .we had another unique performance in this House, last night, which would indicate 

to all parties that Saskatchewan is quite a paradise for promoters. 

 

Some Govt Members: — Order! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — At least the House passed a Bill, at the request of the Provincial Treasurer. . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I submit that it is entirely out of order for a 

member to allude to debates and motions passed in this House, in the course of this debate. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — . . .not out of order at all. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he was the sponsor of it; who else could I have referred to it? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is quite right. Under the rules of the House, you 

may discuss any debate which has taken place in previous sessions. . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, he is taking up these few minutes. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — . . .I know all about it; I am going on anyway. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — But, Mr. Speaker, I am asking you for a ruling. The hon. member. . . 



 

February 28, 1956 

9 
 

Mr. Loptson: — There is no ruling. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! It is out of order. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I ask you for a ruling, Mr. Speaker, as to whether or not that particular debate can 

be continued. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, anyway, to guarantee the loan. . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Order! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — . . .to a cement company. . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — . . .for building. . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I am asking Your Honour for a ruling as to whether or not this. . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — He said it was out of order and I have accepted that it is out of order. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I gave a ruling that it was out of order. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — But I can discuss this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must ask the hon. member, if he accepts the point of order, that he must not continue 

along that line. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Along what line? Are you referring to the. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — This Bill is something that has already been debated and disposed of as far as this 

House is concerned. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, can’t I refer to something that has passed in this House? 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Of course not. 

 

Premier Douglas: — No, not unless you go against the rules of the House, and you. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It has been done all the time. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — It has always been done – that is a new ruling. You are ashamed to have it said, that is 

why you don’t want it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — But I’m not going to speak of it any further. 
 

The next thing I want to refer to in this House is a thing that has been referred to often by members of 

the Government and that is to the effect that the Liberals have never done anything for Saskatchewan . . .  



 

February 28, 1956 

10 

 

Some Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — . . .and that they have done nothing for Canada. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Except for your Jubilee! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Now I’m going to refresh their memories with some of the things that have been done 

in the past by Liberal governments, not only in Saskatchewan, but also in Canada. They are not my 

words, Mr. Speaker. They are taken from the official records, and that proof is obtainable by anyone 

who wants to know the truth. 

 

First I am going to tell what the Federal Government has done – only some of what they have done. In 

the first place, I want to refer to the Act of 1897, the effects of which every farmer is enjoying, today, 

and that is the Crow’s Nest Pass Agreement, whereby every bushel of grain delivered to the terminals at 

Fort William (later on it was added so that it could go to Vancouver or Victoria) for a set freight rate. I 

know my hon. friend from Swift Current (Mr. Gibbs) doesn’t agree with that; he is one of those who has 

been wanting that broken and the rate increased. But that is still in effect, since 1897. 

 

In 1898, the Federal Government gave aid to co-operators in these western prairies (which was then 

called the North West Territories). 

 

In 1927, a Liberal government brought in the Old-Age Pension and Saskatchewan adopted it the next 

year. 

 

In 1927, the Farmers’ Credit Arrangement Act, reducing some $54 million debt of Saskatchewan 

farmers. In addition to that there were other large reductions made, which I will refer to later. 

 

In 1935, the P.F.R.A. expenditures in Saskatchewan amounted to some $48 million. 

 

In 1937, an Act aiding education, to 1954-55 grants, went up to a total of some $198,000 paid in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1937, again, blind pensions allowances, now paying $300,000 a year to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1938, P.F.A.A., and they have paid $128 million in Saskatchewan, which is $78 million more than 

collected from the one per cent levy in Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1941, unemployment insurance, where the Government contributed one-third of the fund for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1944, Farm Improvement Loans, where farmers in Saskatchewan have borrowed about $200,000,000, 

making it possible for a farmer to borrow up to $4,000 to improve his farm surroundings, buy 

implements, buy furniture, repair his house, and some have borrowed to pay this Government for 

electrification for his home. 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

11 
 

Then, in 1935, the Family Allowance was adopted and no less than $20 million a year is paid to the 

people of Saskatchewan by the Federal Government. 

 

In 1947. . . 

 

Mr. Gibson (Morse): — They were paying the people back. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — In 1947, subsidy and payments under the Tax Rental Agreement, now about $28 

million a year is paid to this Government, without any strings to it at all, and without which they would 

collapse at the rate they are spending money. 

 

In 1948, National Health Grant, now about $2 ½ million a year is paid into Saskatchewan. Oh yes, they 

try to make people believe that they are paying all the health grants, but yet there is this $2 ½ million 

coming from the Federal Government. 

 

And in 1953, Disabled Persons’ Allowance Act was set up; and we should never forget that, in 1945, the 

best veterans charter in the world was established by the Federal Government, which is the envy of 

every nation in the world. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Under a Liberal government. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Yes, by a Liberal government. Now these are some of the things that Liberal 

governments have done for Canada and done for the province of Saskatchewan during the years since 

they came into power, or have been in power, in Ottawa. 

 

Now I will turn to Saskatchewan, and of course that dates back to the origin of the province; 1906 was 

about the first year an Act was put on the Statute Books. The first thing they did, when they got into 

power in 1905, was to establish a Department of Agriculture. That year they set up a livestock branch, a 

field service branch, dairy branch and the agricultural representative service. In 1920, co-operatives and 

marketing branch, and the Lands Branch were established, under a Liberal government. A Natural 

Resources branch; extensive drainage work was done as far back as 1909, and my hon. friends think that 

they have the first drainage problem there ever was in Saskatchewan. We had a drainage problem as far 

back as 1909, and there was no squealing about it either. We went about fixing it up ourselves, with a 

little aid from the Government. Co-operative seed cleaning plants in Moose Jaw, with fees less than half 

of what they are now. Grants and assistance to agricultural societies, horticultural societies and boys’ 

and girls’ clubs, and that was established as far back as 1908. 

 

In 1917 the Farm Loan Board, which has been discontinued by this Government, gave aid to farmers 

who were being pressed pretty hard by the mortgage companies because they were charging as high as 

10 per cent interest in some instances; and the Farm Loan Board reduced the interest to 7 per cent, 

because they loaned money for 6 ½ per cent. 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

12 

 

Then we come to the Health Department. The Liberal government of Saskatchewan, in 1911, built 

mental hospitals. I don’t think there have been any additions made to those hospitals since. They built 

the T.B. sanatoriums; started infantile paralysis clinics, provided for diagnosis and treatment of venereal 

diseases. In 1945, they provided free diagnosis and medical care, surgical and hospital care for cancer 

patients. . . 

 

Some Govt Member: — You were out of office before then. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — After the C.C.F. came into power they cancelled that diagnosis clause. The Liberal 

government provided outpost hospital and nursing centres in northern areas. They provided free 

hospital, medical, dental, optical and drug services for people in necessitous circumstances; provided an 

extensive disease preventive campaign, including free vaccine and services; established a public nursing 

system and baby care centres. That is what the Liberals did. 

 

Under Liberal administration virtually our whole system of hospitals was established – Blue Cross plans 

were established. Prepaid hospital, medical, surgical care was provided for municipal governments, in 

1944. One hundred and six rural municipalities had prepaid hospitals; 105 rural municipalities had 

prepaid medicals; 29 towns and villages with prepaid hospitals; and 71 towns and villages had prepaid 

medical. 

 

In Education, the Liberal government of Saskatchewan built the University buildings; they built the 

Normal Schools; they built the school for the deaf, provided for the education of the deaf and the blind; 

and, in 1908, provided free public schools. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, and yet these people go running around the country saying the Liberal government 

never did anything. 

 

In 1942, we started the plan of financial assistance to students of universities, normal schools and 

nurses’ training schools. We started equalization grants. In 1940, we passed enabling legislation for 

Larger School Units. In 1942 we passed the present Teachers’ Superannuation Act, and restored the 

contributions which had been used up. 

 

Under Liberal legislation and assistance the whole university, high schools, vocational schools and 

public school system was established; audio-visual branch established; book bureau in operation, and 

correspondence schools were put in operation. 

 

In the Social Welfare Branch, the Liberal government of Saskatchewan started, in 1927, the old-age 

pensions. In 1937, the Blind Persons’ allowances; in 1943, supplementary pensions; in 1927, Mothers’ 

Allowances and maternity grants; provided legislation to establish and finance children’s welfare 

institutions; passed legislation provided for care for neglected and dependent children; care of unmarried 

mothers; corrective care for juvenile delinquents; adoption of children. They provided hundreds of 

millions of dollars for relief and social aid, law enforcement and goals; they provided industrial schools 

for boys where they could get institutional and correctional care. 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

13 
 

Now, with the respect to this relief item. I would just like to give the House an item from a speech that 

was made in this House, in 1938. We would never have found it if it hadn’t been for my hon. friend, the 

member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) who never misses anything. He gave me this clipping of a 

speech that had been made to illustrate the magnitude of the relief that the Government provided for 

fodder and feed and seed alone, from the fall of 1937 until the 5th of March, 1938. I am just going to 

read this to the House. It says: 

 

“Up to the 5th of March, 1938, the Department of Agriculture has shipped into this province, directly 

or indirectly through free freight certificates about 450,000 tons of fodder. That represented 

approximately 5,100 miles of bales lying end to end, or a string of bales from Halifax to Vancouver, 

and almost back again. It would build a stack from Winnipeg, Manitoba, to Swift Current, 

Saskatchewan, two bales wide and 7 ½ feet high. It has taken 4,500,000 lbs. of baling wire, or 100 

carload of 45,000 lbs to a car. The baling represented 28,125 8-hour day working days, with a crew of 

six men and a power baler. Or in other words, it would take 225 power balers and 1,350 men working 

every day (working day) from this first of October to the 5th of March to bale this fodder. 

 

“To haul this by horse team and men, averaging a haul of approximately five miles, it would take 

1,100 from the 1st of October to the 5th of March in order to get this amount of fodder. During this 

period it was necessary to load, on track, 360 carloads every working day from the 1st of October to 

the 5th of March. Seven hundred and thirty-nine shippers have taken part in providing this fodder; 

1,125 points have received shipments. In addition to this there have been approximately 5,000 cars of 

feed grain shipped in.” 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, these men think they have something to do when a few farmers are short of feed, 

and they think they are doing wonders if they pay freight on 100 or 200 cars. It would be interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, for my hon. friends just to read this, because it is taken right from the records of the 

Department of Agriculture at that time. 

 

Furthermore, the number farmers receiving assistance was 80,000 – 80,000 farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan were served with fodder. Seed wheat supplied amounted to $7,000,000. Seed oats 

supplied amounted to $8,000,000. Seed barley supplied $1,000,000. Feed oats supplied $6,000,000 – 

total $17,000,000. 

 

Tractor fuel supplied was $1,750,000, distributed into 1,500 shipping points. Feed grain, gas and oil, 

summerfallow, amounted to $700,000 – total $19,450,000. 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

14 

 

Mr. Gibson (Morse): — May I ask the hon. member a question? Who finally paid for all of that? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Most of it was cancelled. 

 

Mr. Gibson: — By whom? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — By the Federal Government, and by the municipalities, too, because the 

municipalities. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — This Government didn’t cancel anything. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They never cancelled anything. 

 

Now the, I will go on. We come now to highways, roads and bridges. During this period the Liberal 

government built 8,000 miles of provincial highways. They built 970 miles of secondary highways. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Do you hear that? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They built and maintained practically all timber bridges on municipal roads. They 

assisted municipalities in building municipal roads. They built, or assisted in building all the bridges 

across the north and south Saskatchewan rivers. 

 

In the matter of Co-operatives, we passed virtually all the legislation that is now on the Statute Books 

for the establishment and promotion of co-operative enterprises. We established a Co-operative branch 

of the government, loaned money to a number of co-operative organizations and assisted in the 

establishment of the Saskatchewan Co-operative Elevator Company to the extent of 85 per cent, in 1911, 

and the Wheat Pool organization, in 1923. Nearly all existing co-operative organizations were 

established under Liberal governments, carefully avoiding making any political use of co-operatives. I 

don’t know whether that exists, today. 

 

Then a Municipal Affairs Department was established in 1908, with all its branches. The province was 

organized into rural municipalities and local improvement districts. A northern area branch was 

established and all agricultural land re-assessed. 

 

In Natural Resources, Mr. Speaker, more lumber, fish and fur was being produced than is being 

produced today. Numerous sawmills, which are not now operating, were set up. Conservation 

programmes for lumber, fish and fur were established. All the metal mines which are now in production, 

except uranium, were started under Liberal governments. 

 

Roads in the northern areas were built. Extensive sodium sulphate production was started under a 

Liberal government. Extensive exploration for gas and oil, most of which was discontinued when the 

C.C.F. came into power,. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You chased them out. 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

15 
 

Mr. Loptson: — Yes, you chased them out. Large quantities of coal were in production. Six hundred 

fur farmers operated under a Liberal government. A Game Branch was set up, a Survey Branch was set 

up, a Parks Branch, a Provincial Natural History Museum, which collected nearly all the material now in 

our possession – only they didn’t have a million dollar building to put it in. 

 

Premier Douglas: — They didn’t have any buildings; it was in storage. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Brockelbank got that. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Labour: in 1913 there was established a Labour Branch of the government; started 

Workmen’s Compensation; provided minimum wages; provided apprenticeship training; passed the 

Trade Union Act. In 1909, they passed legislation preventing the employment of young people in 

dangerous occupations; provided for the protection of female employees; provided for one day rest in 

seven; provided for weekly half-holidays, and the Industrial Standards Act also was passed. 

 

Then in the matter of utilities, Liberals established the Power Commission in 1928, and the Telephone 

Company in 1908, to provide service at cost, and not for profit, as my hon. friends are trying to do. 

Liberals provided legislation for the rural telephone companies. An Attorney General’s Department was 

set up. The whole judicial system as it now operates was established. R.C.M.P. established a provincial 

police force. The whole system of registration of land titles was established under a Liberal government. 

 

We come to the Public Works. In 1906, virtually all our public buildings were built with the exception 

of the Museum and a huge addition of buildings purchased and constructed to house the C.C.F. party 

workers, mostly additional workers, who have been given jobs in the civil service. The Legislative 

Buildings were built by a Liberal government; the Revenue building was built by a Liberal government; 

the Court House; Land Titles Offices, goals; normal schools, etc., and I think we went through that 

before. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Liquor stores? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — No liquor stores were built by a Liberal government. Debt cancellation and 

adjustments – the Liberal government provided for the cancellation of some $206 million of farm and 

individual and relief debts. They provided all the legislation now on the Statute Books for the protection 

of the debtor; any addition made by the C.C.F. government has been declared ultra vires. The Liberal 

government established the Local Government Board, and it did most of its good work during the 

depression, and I want to give them the credit and I believe that they are a worthy body for any 

government to have. 

 

Administration of estates of the mentally incompetent was established by a Liberal government. Despite 

what was said over the air here by the hon. member for North Battleford (Mr. Kramer), this 

administration Act 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

16 

 

 

was passed in 1921, and this Government has not changed a word in the Act since. 

 

Expenditures – expenditure of the Liberal government – gross revenue – averaged, for the first 10 years, 

$3 ½ million; the second 10 years, $10 million; and the last 10 years, only $23 ½ million. The 

expenditure on revenue account for this year, as my hon. friends know, Mr. Speaker, is about $90 

million. Under a Liberal government, at no time did the overall expenditure including both revenue and 

capital exceed $30 million. This year the total amounts to about $160 million. One wonders how the 

Liberals could possibly do as much with so little, and how this C.C.F. Government can do so little with 

so much. 

 

Some Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I think that is a fair question. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The C.C.F. Let them answer it. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, now, one might say, “Well, who is the Liberal party? Who are they?” 

 

Mr. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Who were they? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, I want to say that the Liberal Party is an association of men and women of all 

walks of life, who believe in the philosophy and the ideals of the rights of the individual,. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Of doing the most for himself. . . 

 

Mr. Gibson: — That is what the Social Credit say. . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — . . .as long as he doesn’t interfere with his neighbour doing the same thing. We believe 

that a man should make the best of his talent and that he should profit by it, and if he is fortunate enough 

to make a little more than maybe the average, Liberals believe that he should share with his unfortunate 

brothers, and to this end they tax part of his income, they tax profits on corporations. We have often 

heard the C.C.F. going around the country and saying that this is a capitalistic government – the Liberal 

party never taxes corporations. How would you like to be taxed $52 out of every $100 profit you make, 

Mr. Speaker? Yet that is what the Liberals were taking out of the corporations in 1952. They are even 

taking $49 out of every $100 that they make now over $20,000 a year. On the small corporations they 

took 25 per cent of the first $10,000; now they only take 25 per cent of the first $20,000. That is the 

money that the Liberal government is now using to pay the old-age pension, the family allowance and 

the $28 million that they are giving to this Government. That all comes out of taxes of that kind. No, Mr. 

Speaker, the Liberal Government is no friend, or should not be considered a friend, of the capitalist. 

They hardly ever hand them out a plum like the C.C.F. did here, last night. 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

17 
 

Now, having said this, there is another matter that is talked of very much in the country, and that is this 

wheat situation. I want to say a few words on that. But first of all I want to say that there would be no 

wheat problem in western Canada if it wasn’t for the C.C.F. 

 

Mr. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — I’m glad you’re on the air! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — There would be no problem. Let us check the records. Let us see what was the effect 

of the speech of the hon. Premier in 1953, on the market. We must remember that the Premier of 

Saskatchewan represents the majority of the western wheat farmers. He represents the farmers that grow 

more than half of all the wheat that is grown in western Canada; so when he speaks he is expected to 

speak with authority, and when he made speeches in the fall of 1953 about giving away our surplus 

wheat, what happened? In the year 1952-3, we had exported no less than 385 million bushels. In 

1953-54, following my hon. friend’s speeches it dropped down to 255 million. It didn’t drop in the other 

countries; but it dropped here, in Saskatchewan, why? They were waiting for this five-away programme 

which the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan said would have to be adopted in order to get rid of 

all our surplus wheat. 

 

Argentina was probably the first on the break the International Wheat Agreement ceiling. When they 

heard of the terrible conditions in Saskatchewan and Manitoba and Alberta, they went to work and 

under-sold; I think my words are correct. They were the first ones to start to unload their surplus, and 

they, that year, exported some 100 million bushels more than they had the year before. And the price 

continually dropped and dropped until Mr. Howe said “this has gone far enough” and he stopped it at 

$1.70. And these fellows were still harping and yakking around the country, “Give the wheat away.” 

And then they said, “Well, we will probably not altogether give it away, we’ll take some sterling for it.” 

Well, that kind of got stopped in the bud, because apparently the United Kingdom is not very fussy 

about buying wheat for sterling. 

 

I want to put on record an article that appeared in ‘The Free Press’ on December 14, 1955, which alludes 

to this dealing in sterling. It states this: 

 

“The people who say that Canada could and should ‘sell’ wheat for sterling fall into two classes. Some 

do not know what they are talking about and some do; the latter, that is, know they are talking 

nonsense. But it is convenient nonsense, and particularly convenient for some Saskatchewan 

Socialistics. It gives an impression that they have a simple, government-dealing, non-capitalist answer 

to our wheat troubles, when, in fact, they have no answer at all. 

 

“For this reason, the myth that ‘sales’ for sterling are possible and desirable no doubt will persist, in 

face of the most direct and simple evidence to the contrary. There are none so blind as those that do 

not want to see. 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

18 

 

But one is entitled to hope that the Saskatchewan myth-mongers will in time gain fewer dupes; that 

their allies of the other class, the ill-informed will shrink. 

 

“Two weeks ago, on November 30, Mr. Gordon Bowen spoke to the convention of the 

Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union. He said that Britain would not buy a bushel more wheat if Canada 

accepted payment in sterling. Mr. Bowen is the United Kingdom’s senior trade commissioner in 

Canada; if anyone ought to know the official British policy in this matter, it is he. And his 

pronouncement surely is a concrete enough, and sufficiently simple, to penetrate any head.” 

 

Evidently it doesn’t penetrate the head of the Premier of Saskatchewan: 

 

“Even those who profess not to be able to understand the most definite and simple statements of the 

case, made many times by Mr. Howe and other Canadians, may pay some attention to the official 

word of Britain as the buying country. 

 

“There is one direct untruth that may, however, have to be disposed of first. It is sometimes said, by 

advocates of Canadian ‘sales’ for sterling, that the United States now makes such sales. It does not. 

 

“The United States takes inconvertible foreign currencies from all kinds of countries whose currencies 

play no great part in international trade; whose governments, therefore, do not mind having such 

claims on them blocked in the hands of other governments; and which have no objection to living on 

charity. 

 

“The United Kingdom, for all its economic weakness, is not that sort of country, and sterling is not an 

unimportant currency. Sterling that is not blocked – sterling that can be used at all – is the same thing 

as dollars to Britain, and to everyone else. To take payment in such sterling would be no different at 

all from what we do now. Blocked sterling, on the other hand, is useless to Canada – it means simply 

giving wheat away – and to the United Kingdom the exchange of blocked sterling for wheat would 

represent a further weakening in the status of sterling as an international currency. The Canadian 

advocates of sterling sales are apt to pose as friends of Britain, even though it be at the expense of the 

Canadian taxpayer. In fact, they are not anything of the kind. They are doing nothing at all but peddle 

a convenient political myth.” 

 

Put that in your pipe and smoke it! 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

19 
 

Premier Douglas: — May I ask the hon. member what he is quoting from? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — ‘The Free Press’. I think this article is very sound and sensible, and I can quote many 

other references if you want me to, from other journals, too. But I think the time is getting on. . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Oh, keep on, you’re digging deeper. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — In order to prove my argument that this speech of the Premier – in other words, he’s 

talking about something he doesn’t know anything about – has cost the farmer of Saskatchewan a lot of 

money. Mr. Howe states here in his speech: 

 

“The situation was aggravated by various propaganda originating in Canada. When he heard 

Opposition members use extreme language to describe the wheat situation, Mr. Howe was wondering 

what that speech was going to cost the producer in western Canada.” 

 

Everytime we would get results from the Board of Trade in various areas, we would say to ourselves, 

‘That postpones buying orders’, and that is why we haven’t been getting buying order; and, as Mr. Howe 

says, since my hon. friend took on that sales programme of giving things away (that is the only way he 

knows of disposing of a surplus), orders from importing countries have been slow coming in. Mr. Howe 

stated that it was not until the 1st of November, this fall, when the importing countries saw that Canada 

was going to stick tight to its price levels, that they started to come in with orders, and that has relieved 

the situation now. I realize that we have a surplus, and it might be of interest to you to know just where 

this surplus is. The way the C.C.F. is going around would indicate that it is fairly well distributed. 

 

I have here a survey of Saskatchewan; as a matter of fact, I have a survey of the four western provinces, 

which is quite interesting. It isn’t far from what has been quoted by the Committee, or what we have 

heard in Committee, this last two sittings, with respect to the number of farmers. I find in this survey 

that about 17 per cent of the farmers of Saskatchewan are one-quarter section farmers. About 30 per cent 

are half-section farmers; 22 per cent are three-quarter section farmers. That gives you about 70 per cent 

small farmers in the province of Saskatchewan, which leaves about 30 per cent of what you might class 

as large wheat producers. I have surveyed the eastern area east of Regina and north into the Kamsack 

district, and there are very few farmers in that area who have enough wheat worth-while to borrow on, 

or on which to obtain an advance. Many of those areas will have no wheat at all to deliver on another 

one or two-bushel quota. There is room in the elevators right now to take what quotas are open when the 

roads open up. We’re not going to blame the Minister of Highways for the roads not being open out in 

the country; but that is the situation so far as this area is concerned. 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

20 

 

That means that 30 per cent of the farmers in Saskatchewan are holding about 70 per cent of the surplus 

wheat, and these men who are asking the Government to advance money on this wheat without interest, 

are proposing that these small farmers who have nothing to borrow on or sell, should pay their share of 

the interest of the loan to these big producers. The big producers are not looking for it; they don’t want 

something for nothing. They are quite satisfied to have an opportunity to borrow on it if they need to; 

but the farmer that has nothing and is not mentioned at all, and we have thousands of farmers in 

Saskatchewan, who, as a result of last year’s weather conditions, couldn’t sow any wheat. They got their 

barley in too late and the aphids got it; and their oats got in so late that the heat wave in July got it. 

Nothing is said about these people. They must be well-to-do, because they have no grain to borrow on, 

according to the C.C.F. – at least that’s the way I have it figured. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — They never mention it. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — No, they have never mentioned it. Now, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if any 

farmer is entitled to free-interest money, then it is the man who has no crop at all, rather than the man 

whose granaries are full. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — A little bit of both, Minty. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I have another interesting survey here. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that, if it was 

possible, my hon. friends would leave politics out of the Wheat Board. There is nothing more damaging 

than to have politics mixed up into an industry of the country, when all the people depend upon that 

industry, and with which people of all political stripes are connected. 

 

Mr. Kramer (The Battlefords): — When did you find that out? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I have said so here in the House before; but if it is going to be a political bout, then I 

would say that if the farmers of Saskatchewan have enough confidence in this Government to run the 

province of Saskatchewan, then they should have enough confidence in them to run their Wheat Board 

as well. And since they have so much ‘brain’ among themselves to give so much advice, and if the 

farmers think that advice is so good, and the people down at Ottawa, and the other people down in 

Ontario and Quebec cannot see the same way as they do, then I can’t see any reason why they should 

not hand it back to this Government – and I think that is what they want. I think that is forecast by this 

gentleman who lives in Alberta. This is a report from this Albertan under the caption, ‘Cash-Conscious 

Farmers Sell Good Wheat for Feed at 60 Cents’. I shall read it all: 

 

“A sharp break in the price of wheat being sold by the farmers to operators of large livestock feedlots 

in southern Alberta is expected to become more widespread. 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

21 
 

“In the price break, feedlot operators lowered their offering for No. 2 Northern wheat to 60 cents a 

bushel from the former level of 75 cents. Only a few weeks ago they offered 90 cents. (Wheat Board 

asking price for No. 2 is around $1.70). 

 

“Cause of the sharp decline: the general glut of grain in western Canada and the poor cash position of 

many farmers overwhelmed with surplus grain that they cannot market. 

 

“At the 90 cents level, feedlot operators were swamped with delivers of high-grade wheat. Many 

bought enough grain to maintain feeding operations for two years. 

 

“Disappointed over the 60 cent price, one large wheat grower who went into this winter with more 

than 150,000 bushels of wheat on his farm told the Post: 

 

“I’ve just sold 10,000 bushels of No. 2 wheat at 60 cents a bushel, not because I need the cash, but 

rather because I don’t see any hope of selling all my grain to the Wheat Board within the next two 

years. And two years from now I may not be getting 50 cents a bushel for the wheat after storing it that 

much longer.” 

 

“Meanwhile, a new appraisal was being given the situation by car dealers and other retailers who have 

been accepting wheat as payment. Most of these have been allowing farmers 75 cents a bushel.” 

 

He is expecting that the C.C.F. Government by that time will have the Wheat Board, and I submit, Mr. 

Speaker, that that’s what the price will be under their policy and their advice. I am going to suggest a 

theory of my own that might be considered in dealing with the surplus which we have, and which is in 

the hands of these farmers who have had two crops in one for two years. They have an accumulated 

surplus that has got to be disposed of somehow above the present quota, and I would suggest that, 

instead of giving our wheat away, and advocating more acreage and more wheat, we should set some 

regulation as to who should produce the wheat, next year. I would suggest. . . 

 

Mr. Wahl (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — That’s Communism. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I would suggest that the farmer who has 10,000 bushels in his granary over and above 

this year’s quota should not get a quota for 1957 wheat. He can afford to rest his land; he can grow flax; 

he can grow rape. I have grown both of these and they are good money-makers. Then. . . 

 

Mr. E. Walker (Gravelbourg): — You’ve got a special connection, though. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Then I would suggest that in order to encourage some of these small farmers, and help 

these farmers who have been unfortunate these last two years, that we should give them a little more 

than the regular price for their wheat. I think it might well be considered, not only to help those 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

22 

 

who have had two crop failures, but to help out what we call ‘the family farm’, that the first 1,000 

bushels that were delivered to the Board should carry a price of $2 a bushel each crop year. 

 

That is merely a suggestion. I think that most of the members who know about small farms would 

realize that if you got $2 a bushel, say, for the first 1,000 bushels of wheat, or the equivalent for other 

commercial grains, that the money would go a long ways to help in making your payments on your land. 

I am not encouraging the man who thinks he can live on half a section, and just grow wheat or grain; I 

think there is a problem there that we can consider in Committee very profitably. I agree with some of 

the recommendations of the Royal Commission on Rural Life; I think they have brought in a lot of good 

information; and they were not new to me – because I lived in that environment all my life. I have lived 

among farmers who have made their living on one-quarter sections. I lived in an area where most of the 

farmers have a half-section, and I lived in an area where a lot of them have three-quarter section farms; 

so I don’t know who should know more than myself, since I have put in close to 50 years among them, 

and have farmed in those same areas myself. 

 

Nobody can tell me that a man needs to starve on a quarter-section of land. Nor is anybody going to tell 

me that a man is going to get rich on a half-section of land; now can we say we could have a higher 

standard of living on a three-quarter section land unless the management goes along with the quality of 

land. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that I am not going to support the motion. 

 

Hon. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

MOTION RE SELECT STANDING COMMITTEE ON RADIO BROADCASTING 

 

Moved by Mr. Howe, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Burton: 

 

“That the First Report of the Select Standing Committee on Radio Broadcasting of Selected Proceedings 

be now concurred in.” 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out that the 

report of the Committee was a decision to divide the radio time which is made available for the 

broadcasting of the sittings of the Legislature, would be divided into groups giving three hours of radio 

broadcasting time to the Government side of the House, and one hour of broadcasting time to the 

Opposition. I would like to submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that to every question there are two sides, and I 

would like to submit to you that it is as much the duty and responsibility of the Opposition to a 

government, to criticize and to sometimes compliment 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

23 
 

governments for the type of decision they are bringing into effect here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

For that reason I believe there ought to be a more equitable distribution of the time that is being paid for 

by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

There are other types of free broadcasting available, not only in Saskatchewan, but outside. That is, 

types of broadcasting that are paid for by public funds, and I can refer to the ‘Provincial Affairs’ series 

which we have over eight stations in the province of Saskatchewan. I note that when the Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation divide that time among the political parties in Saskatchewan, I understand 

they take three factors into consideration. First of all, they consider the number of candidates that each 

political party had in the field in the last provincial election. They take into consideration the number of 

members that were elected from each political party. They also take into consideration the percentage of 

the popular vote that each political party receives, and we find that the Provincial Affairs broadcast for 

the present season had them divided among the various political parties on the following basis: The 

C.C.F. party are receiving 12 15-minute broadcast; the Liberal Party are receiving 9 15-minute 

broadcasts; the Conservative Party are receiving four 15-minute broadcast, and the Social Credit Party 

are receiving four. 

 

There was a second division of free time made here, a few days ago, in regard to the television broadcast 

that will be carried by the C.B.C., and I noted from the press report that carried this decision of time, 

that it was suggested it was being divided on the basis of the number of members who sat in the House 

of Commons from each different political party. I noted there that the C.C.F. have, in the House of 

Commons at Ottawa, 23 members, and they are given two 10-minute periods of free TV time, but I 

noticed the Liberal Party, with 169 members in the House of Commons, are taking four periods for 

themselves. The Conservatives, with 54 members, are taking three periods. The Social Credit, with 15 

members, are taking one period. 

 

Well, if you could take the figure of 12 members of the House of Commons, giving a political party the 

right to one broadcast, which would be the pattern that would be followed if they decided to follow the 

same pattern we use here in the province of Saskatchewan for dividing radio time here in the 

Legislature, then you would find that the Social Credit would remain with one broadcast, or one TV 

show; the C.C.F. would still have two, the same as they are granted now; the Conservative Party would 

be given four, but the Liberal party would be given 14. So, Mr. Speaker, I think that probably here again 

the CBC has recognized the fact that there are two sides to every question, and they are giving the 

Government of the day, the Government that sit in the House of Commons with 169 members, four TV 

spots, and they are giving the Opposition five. 

 

The same thing in regard to ‘Provincial Affairs’. We find that the Government of the day in 

Saskatchewan have 12 broadcasts, and the Opposition parties to that Government have 17 broadcasts. I 

might submit that in the division of the time, as far as broadcasting the proceedings of this Legislature 

are concerned, if we were to adopt a policy of considering the number of candidates that each political 

party had in the field in the last election, and the 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

24 

 

number of members that that political party elected, and the percentage of the popular vote they 

received, then we would have a far greater share of the radio time in the opposition. 

 

It is not my intention here this afternoon to debate whether we should have radio or whether we should 

not. I know there are arguments on both sides. Some people have found it is quite a service; they 

appreciate it, and they enjoy it. Other people have said that it interferes too much with the daily routine 

procedure in the Legislature; but that isn’t the point that I want to debate here this afternoon. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in my opinion and in the opinion of the Opposition, the Opposition are 

not being given their fair share, and have never been given their share, of radio time, at least since I 

became a member of this Legislature. I believe the Opposition should have 50 per cent of the total radio 

time as far as this Legislature is concerned. The reason I say that is because of the fact that every 

question that is presented in this House, there is another side to it, and we are not given the opportunity 

to present our case to the thousands of people who listen to the radio broadcast. There isn’t any doubt 

that there are far more people listen to the radio broadcast here from the Legislature than they do to the 

average political broadcast that you may buy, and pay for out of the party funds. I estimate there are 

probably somewhere in the neighbourhood of 100,000 people at least, who listen to the Legislative 

broadcasts. I also believe there are about 10,000 who would listen to a political broadcast, when the time 

is being paid for out of party funds. 

 

Therefore, I believe that the Government of the day, in taking three hours’ radio time out of every four 

to put across their side of the story, are taking advantage of the political propaganda which should be 

made available to the Opposition, if any part of this House is going to use it. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to move non-concurrence in the report that has been brought into this Legislature. 

 

Hon. T.G. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I think is somewhat strange that the Opposition should 

be taking exception to this report from the Committee on broadcasting, since, I understand from the 

report, the division of time which they have suggested is exactly the same basis that has been carried on 

every year since the broadcasting started. Why the Opposition now, after nine or ten years following this 

basis of time, should suddenly find it is unfair is, in my opinion somewhat strange. My hon. friends are 

not usually that slow in finding an injustice or inequity. It seems difficult to believe that after having this 

basis of decision of time all these years, they should now be coming along and saying it is not fair. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition has based his whole case, it seems to me, upon a misconception of the 

reason for having these proceedings in the Legislature broadcast. He bases his whole case on saying that 

in political broadcasts there should be a division of time to allow both parties to present their case. He 

cites the ‘Provincial Affairs’ broadcast, and the 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

25 
 

‘National Affairs’ broadcast, and the new television regulations that have just come out of the C.B.C. 

Mr. Speaker, I maintain that the two situations are not at all analogous. 

 

The ‘Provincial Affairs’ broadcast and the ‘National Affairs’ broadcast, and the proposed TV 

broadcasts, (and I think they are to be congratulated on it). The C.B.C., a public utility, had said, “Here’s 

free time which is going to be given so that every point of view in Canada may be expressed.” They 

worked out a formula based on the number of members in the legislature and in Parliament, and on the 

last popular vote for the various parties and the number of candidates they ran. All parties who have 

been running candidates and can be recognized as provincial or national parties, are given a chance to be 

heard. That is as it should be. One of the things we can be proud of in Canada is that we have that type 

of democratic society: one of the things, may I say, that I don’t think we would have if we did not have a 

publicly-owned radio and television system in Canada. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the purpose of broadcasting the proceedings of the Legislature is not that of providing 

free political time. The purpose of having a broadcasting of the proceedings of the Legislature is in order 

that the people in the country, the people in this great scattered province of ours who can’t visit Regina, 

may have an opportunity of hearing what their particular representative has to say with respect to the 

important issues of the day. As the Leader of the Opposition has pointed out, the cost of carrying on this 

broadcast is paid for by all the people of the province. People of the province in whatsoever constituency 

they may reside, have a right to hear what their member has to say on some particular discussion, or in 

some particular debate. 

 

If we are going to divide the time as my hon. friend has said, so that both sides can express their point of 

view, what would be the situation? Let us assume that there were 10 hours for the Government, and 10 

hours for official Opposition. Each constituency represented by an Opposition member would be entitled 

to one hour (10 members). Each member of the Government side would be entitled to less than 15 

minutes. Now, I maintain that the people in a constituency represented by the Government member has 

just as much right to hear their member and to ascertain what his stand is on the particular issues of the 

day, as have the people who reside in a constituency represented by an Opposition member. That is why, 

strictly speaking, we ought really to divide the time for broadcasting the proceedings of the Legislature 

on the basis of representation in the House. 

 

I don’t consider myself as being in this House alone to represent the C.C.F. people from the Weyburn 

constituency. I consider that when I speak, I am speaking for the Weyburn constituency, trying to 

advance their interest. I say what I have to say as their representative. Every other member is the same. 

The people of that constituency, whether they be Liberals, Conservatives, Social Credit, or C.C.F., have 

a right to know what stand I am taking, or the stand of any other single member when he speaks in 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

26 

 

this House. Therefore, strictly speaking we ought to be following the representation in the House. If we 

are going to follow the representation by popular vote, and the number of candidates that have run, then 

we ought to allow the Social Credit and the Conservatives to come in and have a chance to say 

something in the House. The L.P.P. ran 10 or 11 candidates, last time. They should come in and make 

use of the radio. That is not the purpose of broadcasting the proceedings of the Legislature. There are 

other facilities for doing that: ‘Provincial Affairs’ and ‘National Affairs’, and other facilities. The 

purpose here is to allow the people in the constituencies to have a chance to hear their member, and if 

we were to follow that the division of time in this House would be roughly four to one. Now that is too 

one-sided. Therefore, it was agreed by the representatives from this side of the House who were on that 

Committee, that the division should be three to one. I know that there are members on this side of the 

House who are not too happy about the fact that per capita they have less time than the Opposition. But 

they are bound to, for it is part of the penalty they have to pay for being with a larger group. To ask them 

to reduce the time to the place where they would get one-quarter per capita of what the Opposition is 

getting, would certainly be unfair to them, and would be unfair to the people in their constituencies. 

They have a right to know what their members say, and how he stands on any particular subject that 

comes to the attention of this House for discussion and debate. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think that the Committee has been most generous to the Opposition, when 

they suggested the division of time on the basis of three to one. That is the basis of time we have gone 

on in the past. What would happen if we carried this thing to the logical conclusion that my hon. friend 

is suggesting? I want to remind him of the one time in this House when we had five in the Opposition. 

Another time five were in opposition, over against 47 on this side for C.C.F. If you gave 50 per cent of 

the radio time to five members and the other 540 per cent to 47 members, what an impossible position 

you would be in! To members who sit on the Government side of the House, their people in the country 

would have a perfect right to say, “Well, surely our tax money is being taken and some of it ought to be 

spent so that we may have a chance to hear what our member says, and how he stands on these various 

matters that are of public interest.” 

 

Therefore, I think this division is quite fair. I think to go on a 50-50 basis would be a distinct disservice 

to the private members on this side. I think it would be more, Mr. Speaker; it would be accepting a 

wrong principle – a principle that the broadcasting of the proceedings of this Legislature is simply a 

medium for political propaganda. I hope it isn’t. I hope that the broadcasting of the proceedings of this 

Legislature is for the purpose of allowing the people of the constituencies to hear what their member has 

to say. We should not depart from the principle that any member has a right to some time, whether he is 

in the Government or the Opposition, or sitting as an Independent, or whether he is a member supporting 

the Government who wants to criticize the Government. He has a right as a member – not as a member 

of the Government or the Opposition, but as a member representing people who have sent him here to 

the Legislature. He has a right to be heard, and to be heard by the people of his constituency. I think any 

reduction of the time, or any change in the time, would defeat that purpose. 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

27 
 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I cannot agree with the Hon. Premier. His reasoning does 

not seem sound to me. It might be all right if everybody was C.C.F., and you were in a C.C.F. 

constituency; but how about the Opposition people that are interested? They would like to hear from the 

Opposition. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He’s still their representative. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Quite true, but he’s not their representative by choice, and they would like to listen to 

the Opposition just as much as they would like to listen to the member himself. I submit for that reason 

that the division should be more in line with popular vote than by members elected. Now, you wouldn’t 

like us, when we get over there after this next election, if we gave you hardly any time. We wouldn’t 

treat you that way. 

 

Mr. R. Walker (Hanley): — You won’t be in. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — No, Mr. Speaker, that is not the fair way of doing it. After all, the Opposition is here 

for a purpose, and the people of every constituency should hear it, and every C.C.F. and every 

Opposition member should hear the Government members, too. The best way to do that is to give 

divided time as equally as possible between the Opposition and the Government members, and that, I 

think, has been done by the Liberal Government at Ottawa. Apparently they even took less than half, in 

spite of the fact that they have probably five times as many members as the whole Opposition put 

together; there’s no doubt about that – no, I guess there’s about three times as many. 

 

But I think in all fairness to the people, if we are going to consider the people instead of the political 

party advantage that we have by number of members, it should be divided more equitably by popular 

vote. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — As one of the back-benchers who would be affected by any reduction in the 

amount of time distributed to the Government side, I want to say that I have a good deal of sympathy to 

what the member for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) said. I wished, this afternoon, that I could have given five 

or ten minutes of my radio time, so that he could get the rest of what he said broadcast, because it would 

have ensured the re-election of the C.C.F. Government, even if nothing else was said in this election 

campaign! 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — Oh, go on! 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, if I could be sure it would be allocated to the hon. member for 

Saltcoats. . . 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of Opposition): — Words of wisdom! 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, checking back the division of times since this House met on 

February 9, I find on the Government side we have had a total of 660 minutes, and on the Opposition 

side they have had a total of 225 minutes. Now, dividing that by the number of members on each 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

28 

 

side, I find that a Liberal member has had 20 ½ minutes, while the average C.C.F. member has had 15.7 

minutes. Now, I’m saying that the average is arrived at by dividing the total number of members on each 

side of the House, which suggests that the Opposition is receiving one-third, a little better than one-third, 

better treatment per member than is the Government side. 

 

I think it ought to be recognized, which it certainly is on this side, that those of the Government 

members who have to discharge a cabinet responsibility, have got to do something in the nature of a 

report of the work of their departments in addition to their ordinary legislative functions. As a matter of 

fact, they are under greater obligation to take time in this House than our ordinary private members, and 

so if some special allowance is made for them, then the average for the members on this side of the 

House is even less than 15.7 minutes. It’s also worth remembering that there are more people in 

Saskatchewan who think we have something sensible to say than there are who think that the hon. 

gentlemen opposite have something sensible to say. 

 

If that is the case, then I think we ought to continue to give to the people of Saskatchewan what they 

want. What they want is more and more of the things which the members on this side of the House have 

to say. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They’re sick and tired of what you have to say! 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — I’m rather timorous about suggesting that some of the things the people want 

to hear sill haven’t been said by any of the hon. members opposite, even in the time which has been 

allotted to them, namely 225 minutes. There are many things which the people would like to hear them 

explain away, that they haven’t done in the 225 minutes which they have used. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as a back-bencher, I want to say that I would object very strenuously to any further 

disparity brought about in the allocation of time to the two sides of the House. I would object very 

strenuously to still further reducing our 15.7 minutes, in order to increase the 20.5 minutes which each 

member of the other side has, on the average. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I believe this matter has been discussed at some length. I 

would like to point out something in connection with the figures mentioned by the hon. member for 

Hanley. He told us a moment ago that we represent 20 minutes against 15.7 minutes as far as the 

Government side of the House is concerned, but by the time the session is over, the thing has been 

reversed, and the discrepancy between the two will be far greater than it is now. So, I don’t think we 

need to take these figures too seriously, by what the member for Hanley has said. Then, too, after all, the 

Premier is always given to exaggeration, and he goes to work and he tells you what might happen with 

so and so, and so and so; when we get down to five minutes, and then we would have. . . 

 

Mr. Kramer: — There’s a good possibility that could happen. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It can happen, but we don’t know which side of the House. 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

29 
 

We’re dealing with the matter as it is now, as it is today, and we wonder why we have not raised this 

question before. Well, I was on the Committee, Mr. Speaker, for several years, and I know the question 

was raised in committee, but was just like everything else; when they put the steam-roller to work over 

there, then there is absolutely no right or wrong to it; it didn’t matter at all. It is a question of what 

benefits them, and the advantage that they have in spite of whether it’s right or wrong, they’re going to 

continue to exercise that particular (what they call) “right”, which is nothing else than just a rule by 

force. That is all it amounts to. Mr. Speaker, even in the province of Saskatchewan, it doesn’t make a 

difference whether it is a member from this side or a member from over there, speaking, this goes over 

the whole province of Saskatchewan. It isn’t any particular constituency. The premier said that people of 

the various constituencies would like to listen to their members. That is true to some extent; but 

nevertheless, the people who are politically-minded in the province of Saskatchewan, almost every 

person in the province more or less, listens to these radio broadcasts. It does not make any difference 

whether it is the member for Cannington, or the member from Gravelbourg, or who it is that speaks in 

this House; all the people of Saskatchewan like to listen to it. 

 

The fact of the matter is this, that 40 per cent of the people of Saskatchewan voted Liberal. No matter 

what they say on the opposite side, Mr. Speaker, that is a fact. Here we have the radio time divided by a 

majority of the Government, which relegates the Opposition to a very minor matter so far as publicity in 

this Assembly is concerned. 

 

It is all political, Mr. Speaker, and there isn’t a fair-minded man in the province of Saskatchewan, 

whether C.C.F. or anything else, that does not think it is wrong. I will say this, without any fear of 

contradiction, that you can go out and speak to any person, whether it is in hotel, a home, in a station, 

bus or anywhere else, and they will say to you quite frankly, “Why don’t you make a speech sometime, 

we never hear you any more?” 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — That’s because they shut the radio off, Herman! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, that may be for you, but not for some people who prefer to listen to something 

else besides the C.C.F. 

 

I don’t think there’s anything more I can add here, but I want to emphasize again that this a wrong thing; 

it has been condoned now for 11 or 12 years – ever since we started, I think in 1945 to 1946. It has been 

kept on at the same rate all the time, and don’t let the Premier tell anyone there hasn’t been protests. It 

has never been brought up by resolution in this House, because we have come to the conclusion, Mr. 

Speaker, that it is useless to waste the time, because they decided what the steam-roller was going to do, 

and they did it, and they are going to do it this time. 

 

We’re raising the matter because this is a session, I think, where the people are more conscious, and 

more interested, and more keen in listening to what is going on in this House. If the question had been 

debated, 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

30 

 

Mr. Speaker, wouldn’t that have been a real entertaining period last night, if we could have had this 

particular Bill go through on the radio? I’m sure I would have donated $25 to have had it broadcast, but 

they were darn sure to keep it off. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — So would I! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That’s the idea. The people of the province of Saskatchewan are the audience here – 

not us that sit here. If that is the case, throw this radio clean out of here. We don’t need that in here to 

hear each other. We can all talk loud enough so that everybody can hear in here, and so do you, Mr. 

Speaker, sometimes! This thing is kind corralled into this chamber, but don’t forget that the audience we 

speak to is the people in the province of Saskatchewan, approximately 800,000 of them, if you figure 

them all. More than half these people, probably, are ready and eager to listen to what goes on in this 

House, and they are just as much interested to listen to us expound the Liberal philosophy, as to listen to 

the members over there who are spreading Socialism all the time. 

 

I say again that I think the things as it is now it outrageous. It is injustice of the worst king. 

 

Hon. J.W. Burton (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, you, as chairman of the Radio Committee, 

no doubt wondered, the same as I did, why all at once at the beginning of this session, that some 

objection was taken by the members of the Opposition of that Committee. Permit me to say that the few 

years I have had the pleasure of being a member of the Committee have been friendly, and never very 

argumentative, but this year, it appears that the Opposition representatives on the Committee were all at 

once dissatisfied with the ration of the time. You no doubt wondered, the same as I did, what was the 

reason for it; but I think that, after we listened to the hon. member for Arm River just now, we begin to 

get an inkling as to the cause of it. There are apparently some people sitting on the Opposition side that 

have, throughout their lives, been so taken up with special privileges, and believe in special privileges, 

that they have been prodding the members of this Committee, that special privileges should be carried 

on further into the division of radio time. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Well, it is now. That’s what we are objecting to. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Sure it is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Burton: — My friends across the way have been so used to standing for special privileges, 

incidentally, that they cannot think of anything else than above the lines of special privileges. I want to 

say that when we agreed to the division of time on the three to one basis, I was not very happy about it, 

because when the Leader of the Opposition gets up here this afternoon, and referred to wanting to have a 

more equitable distribution of time, he absolutely forgets all about the members on this side who are not 

going to have their fair share. When he refers to the political propaganda, as has been pointed out by the 

Premier, they have an opportunity to spread their political propaganda over the medium which has been 

provided for them 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

31 
 

by the Provincial and National Affairs broadcasts, deliberately done so that the various viewpoints of the 

party could be heard. But no, they want to look at this here as a political propaganda medium. 

 

I want to say to my friends who sneer at this Government about a number of things. One of them is, 

“Would you have had the broadcasting of these legislative proceedings in this Assembly yet if we didn’t 

have a C.C.F. Government? They were the only ones that had the vision and the courage to establish it. 

What other Parliament in this country, what other Legislature in this country have you got proceedings 

of the Legislature broadcast? It was brought in by this Government because they had some vision, and 

they had some courage. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — This has nothing to do with it. The people are paying for this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Burton: — I want to tell you this much, Mr. Speaker, that there isn’t a parliament or 

legislature government in existence in the British Commonwealth of Nations, or even beyond where 

they follow parliamentary procedure, that the members come into the Assembly or Parliament with a 

list, a percentage list of the people that voted for this or that party, and vote according to that. In other 

words, Mr. Speaker, the representation in the House of Commons and in the Legislature, is based on one 

member, one vote. But, if the idea of the hon. member from Arm River was adhered to, he would come 

in here with a list, pulling it out of his hip pocket, and say, “I come in here with a list, pulling it out of 

his hip pocket, and say “I represent so many people in the Arm River constituency and I am entitled 

to. . .” 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Oh, silly! 

 

Hon. Mr. Burton: — . . .Ever since I have been here, sitting back of me here there are quite a number 

of members that did not have an opportunity to make use of air time, and others had to cut it up so fine 

that they didn’t have near the breaks that the members on the Opposition side have had. 

 

I want to say one thing further, before I sit down. From the experience that I had sitting on the 

Opposition side along with you and some of he other of our colleagues, when the hon. member for Arm 

River was sitting over here, had they by any chance of stretch of the imagination brought in a radio 

coverage of the proceedings of this Assembly, then we would have been held down to the exact amount 

of one out of five, instead of what they have now – one out of four. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Who says so? 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Who says that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Burton: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that by the experience that we had when we were 

sitting on the Opposition side. I can furthermore tell you that when the hon. Leader of the Opposition 

was making the plea about having a more equitable time on radio, he forgot that in Parliament, in the 

Legislature, we vote one member, one vote. 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

32 

 

Mr. McDonald: — What has that to do with it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Burton: — And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that if this is so dissatisfying to the members of 

the Opposition, I will reserve, insofar as I am concerned, my opinion as to the advisability of carrying on 

this radio business from the Legislature because apparently, they want now, instead of making it a public 

serviced feature, to make it a political propaganda medium which I am opposed to. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You made it that way. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, I won’t be very long, but after listening to some 

of the speakers on this side of the House, I thought that probably the other side should be convinces as to 

purposes of parliament, the purposes of the members sitting here, and how we are to be given the chance 

and opportunity to present a case for our constituency. But, as the saying goes, “A man convinced 

against his will is of the same opinion still”, so I don’t think there is any chance of converting them. 

 

I represent Cumberland constituency, and when I say that, Mr. Speaker, I mean I represent every person 

who lives in that constituency whether he voted for me representing the C.C.F., or whether he voted 

otherwise; and I want to have a chance in this Legislature to present the feelings, the opinions and the 

things that my constituents want me to submit in this House. I stand by my right by being in parliament 

here, that whether it is radio time or any other time, I should be able to get on my feet and take the 

necessary time, a fair share of the time to perform my duty. Certainly, as has been pointed out, we on 

this side at the present time are the ones who should complain because we are discriminated against, and 

the only thing that I can say concerning the members opposite is that they are behaving like the 

proverbial camel, when you let him put his head into the tent, he tries to get his whole body in! I shall 

not support the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I have just a couple of points I wish to make. First of all, I have had 

something to do with this right from the time radio was inaugurated until about three years ago, and this 

question has arisen from time to time. I think we had a very happy solution during the last Legislature, 

when we had three broadcast on this side and two from the other side of the House each week. 

 

In other words, there were 20 members over on the other side, and at that time they were quite content 

that they should have two broadcast a week; and we should have three, because that was directly based 

upon the strength in the House. However, that 20 was cut down after the last election to 10; they were 

out in two, and they should, of course, have lost one of those two days. In other words, they should now 

be getting one day a week, while over here there should be four. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Better give us some more, then. 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

33 
 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, we do this – it is not only in broadcasting; but we have precedents that 

you can go to all over the British Commonwealth of nations. We have committees that are established 

by parliaments and legislatures all over the Commonwealth, and wherever they are established, 

committees are set up on the basis of the numerical strength of parties in the House – not by the number 

of votes they got out in the country. If they are based on that, then we should get a dummy to come over 

to this side to bolster up the other people in Arm River constituency, for example, where we got almost 

as many voters as the hon. member himself. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You’ve got some! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — So that actually, we have already established a precedent through our memberships 

in the committee, and I think that we should follow that same principle. I was very disappointed this 

afternoon to hear the Leader of the Opposition point out that there were only two sides to every 

question. I hope that we are not going to make a political issue out of every question that comes into this 

House. I would like to see 53 points of view on some of these questions. Most of the time is spent on the 

Speech to the Throne. I think instead of having only two points of view, we should be able to have 53 

points of view; there should be sufficient independence among members that they can express their own 

feelings. If the hon. Leader of the Opposition had his way, he would not allow that; he would crack the 

whip and he would have two points of view only. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That what you’re doing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has pointed out that the ‘Political Affairs’ 

broadcast is dealt with in a certain way. Well, of course, the Political Affairs broadcast does, because it 

is what it says; it is a political affair. It gives the people of the province the different points of view of 

the various political parties; but the Legislature is not that. The Legislature is an institution where men 

and women come and present the point of view of their constituencies, and who has a better right to hear 

that point of view than the people living within the constituency? 

 

May I say, Mr. Speaker, that I think we have, on the basis of three to one, pretty well representation on 

the basis of the membership, because there are, I believe, two points of view, Government and 

Opposition, in the principle addresses that are given on the Speech from the Throne and the Budget. I 

would hope that when I deliver a budget address I am speaking for the Government side of the House. I 

would hope, too, that when the financial critic speaks, he speaks for the Opposition. On the Speech from 

the Throne, when the Premier gets up to give his address, he presents the Government side in the 

key-note address. The Leader of the Opposition presents that side. So there are five days. Now, if you 

leave those four and then the mover and seconder, which must use up one period, take those five days 

out, and that leaves us on a basis of five weeks’ broadcasting, a total of 20 days left. Well, I worked it 

out roughly, and if we took four-fifths of the 20, that would give us 16 days, plus the three days that I 

spoke of, which would give us 19 days, and it would give the Opposition six days. On the basis 

presently being used, taking three-quarters of the 25 days, works out 

  



 

February 28, 1956 

34 

 

at 18 ¾, and 6 ¼, so that it really works out (leaving out the principle addresses that have to be given) 

pretty well on the basis of the four to one, which we are represented by in the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is only one thing further I want to say, and that is the question that has been raised as 

to the usefulness of these broadcast. I read the article in the ‘Star-Phoenix’ the other day, where the 

Leader of the Opposition is quoted as being very much opposed to the broadcasting of the debates from 

the Legislature. That is his privilege. The Opposition were opposed to this when we introduced it in 

1945. They were against it then, and they have been against it ever since, because they realize that as 

long as we have the radio broadcasts and the people can get the truth of that is going on in this House, 

then the Leader of the Opposition realizes that there are no hopes for him or his party. 

 

The question being put on the motion for concurrence, it was agreed to. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


