



















































Hansard: March 01, 1956


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session – Twelfth Legislature 

16th Day 

 

Thursday, March 1, 1956 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

CASH ADVANCES ON FARM-STORED GRAIN 

 

Moved by Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg), seconded by Mr. Dewhurst: 

 

“That this Assembly, recognizing that the Federal Government guaranteed bank loan scheme is 

inadequate to meet the serious financial crisis now confronting the western grain farmer and the entire 

prairie economy, deplores the failure of the Federal Government to provide a prepayment on the initial 

price of grain in the form of a cash advance on farm-stored grain.” 

 

Mr. E. H. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, this motion has been on the Order Paper since the 

House met. Unfortunately, we have not been able to deal with it until this time. I think, even though 

some two or three weeks have passed, the problem is still just as important, and probably more 

important than it was at that time. Since there is no indication of relief coming to farmers who are short 

of cash, I think it would be most proper, and of good value, if we discuss this motion at this time. 

 

I want to point out that it is not a matter which is entirely new or unfamiliar to the members of this 

House. This has been mentioned in other debates, and it has been mentioned a good deal by most 

members throughout the country over the past five or six months. 

 

This topic has had a good deal of discussion in the House of Commons, much to the regret of Mr. Howe 

and the other Liberal members down there. It has also had a good deal of discussion in public meetings 

throughout all of Saskatchewan; not only by farmers, but by farm groups, and by practically every 

organization in the province. In fact, I think any time two farmers meet, I believed 90 per cent of the 

time of their discussion is taken up with the problem of a cash shortage. 

 

I should remind the hon. members that such organizations as the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 

has endorsed this principle of cash advances, away back in ‘The Leader-Post’ of Saturday, October 29, 

in which the heading was ‘Board Supports Cash Advances’. Most of these resolutions are similar, Mr. 

Speaker, and I won’t spend too much time in reading the actual resolution that was suggested at that 

time, because they all have the same thing in mind. They are not talking about bank loans, but are 

talking about cash advances. For instance, the Saskatchewan Board of Trade talks about immediate 

advances on farm-stored grain, and they go on to 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

2 

 

Suggest that it should be equivalent to the initial payment of six bushels of wheat per cultivated acres. 

 

We are not at this time taking issue with how these cash advances should be given, or to what extent 

they should be given, but we are suggesting that they should be discussed at good length in this House. 

 

The Saskatchewan Farmers Union has, from time to time, made many statements in support of this 

resolution, and when they called their mass meeting in Regina, as reported in ‘The Leader-Post’ or 

Saturday, November 12, Mr. Hansen stated as follows: 

 

“The grain problem is two-fold, Mr. Hansen said in introducing the subject to the meeting. First, the 

farmer needs immediate cash to carry him through until he can sell his grain, and second, Canada must 

expand its market for wheat if it is to deal with the present surplus. 

 

“He said: The S.F.U. has held 17 district meetings and not a single farmer at any of them said he 

favoured the bank loan system on farm-stored grain, as announced by Trade Minister Howe. 

 

“He quotes: They feel (that is, the farmers of the province) that if the present orderly marketing system 

is extended to the farms by way of cash advances through facilities of the Canadian Wheat Board, cash 

will go where it is needed.” 

 

The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool at their annual convention this fall, discussed this matter, and as a matter 

of fact they discussed the matter just as soon as they met. It was not on the agenda, so it required a two-

thirds majority to have it placed on the agenda. Their resolution reads as follows: 

 

“The current problem of a shortage of farm cash was considered as soon as the annual meeting 

opened. The delegates went on record in favour of a system of cash advances against farm-stored grain 

to be paid out by the Canadian Wheat Board to elevator companies, with the Federal Government 

assuming the interest on the loans involved.” 

 

Again I say, Mr. Speaker, this resolution passed by the delegates of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool was 

passed with a two-thirds majority. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — It must have been C.C.F.! 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — No, they are just good, intelligent farmers, Mr. Speaker. And as I said, 

practically every Board of Trade throughout the province; labour organizations, both provincial and 

federal; the inter-provincial Farm Union Council; the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, and 

practically every major organization in the 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

3 

 

province of Saskatchewan, has asked for cash advances on farm-stored grain. Not only farm 

organizations, Mr. Speaker, but other organizations who realize that, because the farmer is desperately 

short of cash, it is going to hurt all business and all people in the province. 

 

I said practically every other major organization supported cash advances – it may be debated as to 

whether the Liberal party is a major organization or not. However, they are the only group which has 

taken from time to time exception to cash advances, and it is a little bit difficult to find out just where 

they do stand. In preparing a little material for this, Mr. Speaker, I started looking though newspaper 

clippings all the way from September right up to the present time, and in almost every clipping the 

Leader of the Opposition (Mr. McDonald) has taken a different stand on this question. 

 

I should say at this time (and I am sorry that the Leader of the opposition is not in his seat, because I was 

going to pay him a compliment); but since he is not here, I will suffice to say that his very pleasing smile 

and glad hand-shake and very nice manner have won probably a lot of goodwill in this province. I 

hardly think it has won him any votes, because the people of Saskatchewan have been noted for voting 

for people for what they stand, and not for how they smile or how they say ‘hello’ to you! 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — I hope that’s correct. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — However, we do appreciate the fact that the new Liberal leader has a 

new look. 

 

The reports of his stand started away back on September 27, when the ‘Star-Phoenix’ reported: 

“McDonald to Ottawa with Secret Plans”; and in their article they suggested that he was after cash 

advances for farm-stored grain. On October 18, ‘The Leader-Post’ reported: “That two plans were 

outlined by Mr. McDonald when he was in Ottawa. The first provides for payments of 50 per cent of the 

initial payment of $1.40, and half the wheat in storage as security. The second provides for payment of 

$1.00 per bushel, with all the wheat in storage as security.” Now I think in there he was certainly 

suggesting a cash advance on wheat. That was when he went to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When he returned a few days later, ‘The Leader-Post’ reports again on a ‘Secret Plan with Bank Loans’. 

It seems that when he reported on his ‘secret plan’ before he went to Ottawa, he was talking cash 

advances, and when he reported on his visit to Ottawa, on his return, he was talking about bank loans. I 

don’t know what changed him during the time he was away; whether he forgot what his representatives 

wanted him to do in that short a time, I don’t know; but somehow or other he changed his mind at that 

time, and ‘The Leader-Post’ quotes in the article: 

 

“Mr. McDonald returned Saturday from Ottawa, where he held talks with the Prime Minister on farm 

cash problems. He said he made two proposals to Prime Minister 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

4 

 

St. Laurent in bringing cash to western farmers. The first one was to increase grain storage space, so 

farmers can move their grain from the farms.” 

 

I don’t think there are too many farmers throughout Saskatchewan that have soon any results of that 

proposal to date. The second proposal was: 

 

“That the Federal Government make provision to guarantee bank loans on farm-stored grain.” 

 

And he goes on to explain how bank loans are going to help the farmer of Saskatchewan. Later on in the 

article, he wonders why the western farm organizations “had not to date, this year, asked for legislation 

similar to 1951.” I wonder if he has found out yet why they haven’t asked for it? 

 

Then on September 26, ‘The Winnipeg Free Press’ had a rather interesting editorial on Mr. McDonald’s 

report after he returned from Ottawa, suggesting bank loans, and they headed their editorial, 

“Saskatchewan Red Herring.” I just want to read a portion of it, Mr. Speaker. It says: 

 

“How can grain be moved off the farms and be started at least on its way to market? A great variety of 

ideas no doubt will be brought forth on Tuesday and Wednesday at the Saskatoon conference, 

organized by the inter-provincial Council of the Farm Unions. 

 

“The conference is not to be despised merely because a good proportion of these ideas will be 

inevitably quite unrealistic. At present none will be sillier than one of the ideas that Mr. McDonald, 

Liberal Leader in Saskatchewan, has been making such a fuss about.” 

 

Further down they say: 

 

“Mr. McDonald has earned marks for vigour. His other proposal to Prime Minister St. Laurent, 

designed to ease bank lending to farmers against undelivered grain, was unoriginal. It may now come 

to something, and might be on a small scale helpful. If so, Mr. McDonald no doubt will be entitled to 

claim some credit, but the defence production proposal is a red herring to the farm people. 

 

“That no one by Mr. McDonald ever thought seriously about it is hardly surprising, and the sooner it is 

forgotten now the better hope there is of assembling practical ideas on grain marketing.” 

 

That is the comment which ‘The Winnipeg Free Press’ makes in regard to Mr. McDonald’s advocacy of 

bank loans to help out the cash shortage in Saskatchewan. 

 

And then again on September 27, just the next day, ‘The Leader-Post’ again reports a speech by Mr. 

McDonald in which he spoke at 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

5 

 

Fort Qu’Appelle. The headline is: “Appeal for Grain Advances”; and it says: 

 

“Liberal Leader, A. H. McDonald, Monday night, urged prairie farmers and business organizations to 

make representations to the Federal Government for advances on farm-stored grain.” 

 

He goes on to explain how they should all get organized to demand cash advances, when just the 

previous day he was advocating bank loans. And on October 21st, ‘The Saskatoon Star-Phoenix’ reports 

on Mr. McDonald’s speeches in which he says, “To Continue After Cash for Farmers”: 

 

“Again urging farmers of western Canada to organized, to put pressure on the Federal Government to 

get cash advances, and not bank loans.” 

 

On October 22nd at Moosomin, Mr. McDonald lashes out at loan proposals. (He is back home again 

now). The headline is: “Mooted Grain Scheme less effective than a stirrup pump in a blazing forest 

fire.” And in ‘The Leader-Post’ at Langbank the same day, “Mr. McDonald claims Wheat Loans as 

ineffective. . .” – again refers to the “stirrup pump in a forest fire.” 

 

It is peculiar how Mr. McDonald changes his story every time he talks to a different group. When he is 

talking to the farmers, he is in favour of cash advances; when he is talking to Mr. Gardiner or Mr. Howe, 

he is in favour of bank loans. 

 

Then on November 8th, Mr. McDonald is again reported in ‘The Saskatoon Star-Phoenix’ in which he 

talks about “loans will help farmers who need aid.” He proceeds to explain how the loans are going to 

help the farmers. I should probably read just a few paragraphs from it: 

 

“The Federal Government was not bound to keep the Canadian Wheat Board in existence, he said. It 

was instituted only as a service to the farmers of western Canada in the first place. If they are going to 

criticize its policies continuously, the Government can always throw it out the window.” 

 

There he is threatening us that, if we demand cash advances, the Liberal Government at Ottawa will 

throw out the Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — That’s what you fellows want them to do. You have been working at it for 

the last five years. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — They are trying to hold a big stick over the heads of the farmers of 

Saskatchewan just because they asked for something that is realistic; the Liberal leader threatens they 

will throw out the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. Kramer (The Battlefords): — How is that for arrogance! 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

6 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — And to go on further down in the article, it says: 

 

“Asked if he thought farmers would take advantage of the guaranteed bank loans made available, 

November 15th, Mr. McDonald said: 

 

“Any farmer that needs financial help will take the loans.” (Probably they will if they can get them.) 

 

Further down he says: 

 

“In this way the Federal Government was taking care of people who really needed help. It is their duty 

and responsibility to take care of people who are unable to cope with their own problems.” 

 

There is one point that we agree on. 

 

“Loans are only a stop-gap measure. The big thing about the legislation is that it is giving the farmer 

an opportunity to deliver his grain.” 

 

I wonder if he will still say that. I doubt very much that he will. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That’s what the Royal Commission said – just a stop-gap. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — There is certainly no indication that grain is moving to any extent in 

Saskatchewan. If it did, the bank loans would certainly have nothing to do with it. This one is rather 

confusing. Here he says: 

 

“At the convention of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in Regina, delegates without exception were in 

favour of what the Federal Government were proposing to do about bank loans.” 

 

Completely contradictory to what the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has to say. They tell us that the 

delegates voted, with a two-thirds majority, that they didn’t want bank loans, but rather they wanted 

cash advances. 

 

And now we can come right up to date, Mr. Speaker, and read in February 17th ‘Moose Jaw Times’: 

“Liberal Leader Addresses Rally at Assiniboia”; where he is talking about the Canadian Wheat Board 

sale policy – “has steadied agriculture in the world”, adding: 

 

“The bank loans are not the answer to the present unfavourable situation.” 

 

Once again we are in agreement. It is unfortunate that he is not in his seat today so that he could have 

the opportunity of telling us where he stands. 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

7 

 

Mr. Loptson: — He will. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — We have found, in the following the clippings of his travels throughout 

Saskatchewan, that he has been on one side and then on the other side, and he’s been back again and 

changed over again. Of course, Mr. Speaker, one purpose of having the elected representatives of the 

people of this province come into this Legislature is to find out where they stand on important issues. 

But it is easy for a member to say in the country that he was misquoted, or that he didn’t really mean 

that, and so we have the advantage in this democracy of ours that we can always assemble here in this 

Chamber; we have little recording speakers on our desks, and we record what is being said, and we can 

find out how the members of this Legislature stand. I think it is very important that we do that here in 

this Chamber and not wait until the House is adjourned, then go back out into the country and start 

talking again as the Leader of the Opposition does. He talks to satisfy whomever he happens to be 

talking to. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Sure you won’t do that, too? 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — So I was happy to hear that the hon. members on this side of the House 

have offered today to give the Liberal members on the opposite side, particularly the Liberal leader, an 

opportunity to find out how their party stands in this issue. They have offered to make sure they have an 

opportunity to express themselves on this issue. They have been noticeably quiet since they came into 

the House on this particular matter, and for a good reason; but I think it is time the members opposite 

indicate how they stand on this very important matter. 

 

I want to remind the hon. members that for the past 10 years the C.C.F. party has been advocating cash 

advances as a permanent policy for Canadian farmers, and it should be available to them any time they 

need it. In the past five years alone, Mr. Speaker, this House has on two occasions passed unanimously 

resolutions calling for cash advances. In 1952, the hon. member for Kindersley (Mr. Wellbelove) moved 

a resolution, seconded by the hon. member for Morse (Mr. Gibson), that this Assembly request that the 

Federal Government, as a matter of policy, so amend The Canadian Wheat Board Act as to provide for 

substantial cash advances to farmers on grain stored on the farms. It was agreed to unanimously, 

including most of the members over there. The now M.P. for Rosthern (Mr. Tucker) who, on recent 

occasions has made a turn-about and voted the other way; and again on Tuesday, April 7, 1953, I moved 

a resolution once again calling for substantial advance payments on grain stored in approved bins. That 

resolution was agreed to unanimously, including most of the members on the opposite side of the House. 

Mr. Walter Tucker, the M.P. for Rosthern, who is now away down in Ottawa, sees fit to vote the other 

way. 

 

The C.C.F. members in Ottawa have from time to time, and year after year, put this question before the 

members of that House in an attempt to get cash advances written into the policies of the Canadian 

Wheat Board, but they have always been voted down by the huge Liberal majority in Ottawa. The 

House of Commons recently has spent a good deal of time discussing this resolution and, during that 

long debate, only one Liberal private 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

8 

 

member from Saskatchewan spoke on that debate and he spoke against it. There wasn’t one Liberal from 

Saskatchewan who spoke in favour of cash advances and there wasn’t one Liberal member who voted in 

favour of cash advances. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They knew what they were doing. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — In fact every Liberal member, including those from western Canada, 

voted against cash advances in Ottawa just the other day. 

 

Mr. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Rubber stamps. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — The C.C.F. moved in the House of Commons very early in the session 

a resolution which I want to read to you so that you will know what was in it. On page 53, January 12, of 

Hansard, the Resolution can be found: 

 

“We respectfully represent that Your Excellency’s advisors, by reason of their indifference, inertia and 

lack of leadership in the face of serious national problems, including their failure to provide cash 

advances on farm-stored grain equal to not less than 75 per cent of the initial price, to alleviate the 

serious financial crisis now confronting western farmers and the entire economy of the prairie 

provinces; and their disregard of the rights of Parliament, are not entitled to the confidence of this 

House.” 

 

As I say, Mr. Speaker, every Liberal member down there voted against that resolution, including every 

Liberal member from Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is what you did on the Public Revenue Tax. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — The Liberals down there were not even interested in discussing this 

topic. They tried to keep it out of the House of Commons as best they could. When the C.C.F. persisted 

in discussing it, they objected many times. The other Opposition parties in the House of Commons made 

an about-face, and turned around and started to support the C.C.F. The C.C.F. led the way right from the 

start, but the Social Credit and the Conservatives came in after the first vote was taken. There were 

seven votes in all, in a matter of 12 days’ debate. I see a very good report on it in the ‘Leader-Post’ of 

Wednesday, February 29, headed: 

 

“Bitter Finale as Loan Passed: 

 

“The last-ditch opposition to the Government’s grain loan legislation to prairie farmers produced a 

flurry of votes a resurgence of bitter debate Tuesday before the Bill received final passage in the 

House of Commons. 

 

“The Progressive-Conservatives and C.C.F. members made two successive attempts to block the 

controversial Bill just before the House gave it third reading. It 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

9 

 

was a climax; a stormy passage for the measure which was voted on seven times in the 12 days it was 

under debate. 

 

“The Bill will ratify Federal Government guarantee in effect since November 15th on bank loans on 

farm-stored grain.” 

 

During the latter part of the debate, Mr. Argue is quoted as saying: 

 

“The main reason that the Government won’t change the Bill is because Trade Minister Howe is not 

prepared to admit that he was wrong, last fall, in thinking that farmers would accept the loans.” 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He must have been wrong too, then. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — It has been suggested in some quarters over the new broadcast by an 

official of the Alberta Wheat Pool that politicians are making a political issue out of cash advances. I 

want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if certain leaders and certain farm organizations had done their job, it 

would not have been necessary for politicians to get into this fight at all. Politicians only get into a fight 

like this after it has gone away past its deadline, and only when they have to. If the Federal Government 

at Ottawa had done what they were supposed to do, and what they should have done last fall, the C.C.F. 

would never had to get into this fight. 

 

We not only have members of the House of Commons and the Opposition supporting us; we even have 

on Senator supporting us. Senator Haig, speaking in the Senate, Thursday, January 19, this year, says: 

 

“I agree with the proposal of the C.C.F. party. The Government should pay at least 75 per cent of the 

initial price of grain to the farmer for the quantity in his granary, or on his farm, so as to enable him to 

carry on.” 

 

He goes on to elaborate why he thinks the Federal Government should be giving us cash advances on 

grain rather than bank loans. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is, I think, a very good reason for the farmers demanding cash advances this 

fall, not only because their product – wheat – is not moving, but because of the unfavourable cost-price 

relationship which the farmer finds himself in. He knows that the costs of farming and living have 

continually gone up, and that the things he has to sell are continually going down. The cash income in 

1954-55 dropped 42 per cent, as estimated by D.B.S. Percentage change since 1935 and 1955 – cash 

income is down 39 per cent; net income down 34 per cent; and disposable products down 51.7 per cent. 

The cost of living – or rather the cost-price squeeze is estimated to be at a 28 per cent disadvantage to 

the farmer today. 

 

The hon. members opposite keep suggesting that cash advances are not going to solve the problem in 

Saskatchewan, and I will be one of 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

10 

 

those to admit that cash advances are not going to solve all the problems of the farmer in Saskatchewan, 

simply because it is costing the farmer too much to farm, and he is not getting enough for the products 

he does have to sell; but I am suggesting that those farmers who have wheat on their farms should be 

able to sell it, and get that much cash out at least. 

 

As I suggested when I started out, Mr. Speaker, I still think that this resolution is important at this date. 

If we look back the records in the House of Commons, we find that, away back on February 18 – just a 

little over a year ago – Mr. Howe started making promises as to how much wheat was going to move. In 

the Hansard of February 18, 1955, Mr. Howe makes a statement in regard to wheat deliveries up to the 

end of the year. I will just read the paragraph: 

 

“However, as I say, our sales are very good. I can assure hon. members, I think, with certainty that 

before the crop-year ends on July 31st, any producer who has grain of any kind that he wishes to 

market will have had an opportunity of marketing it. The suggestion of farm-storage on the farm, I 

feel, is one that will not help very much, considering the short period that should ensue between now 

and the day the Wheat Board will be able to market all the grain he has to market.” 

 

Well, I know a good many farmers that didn’t market that grain until December of 1955; just about ten 

months after Mr. Howe made his statement. 

 

Then again in July – that was in February, remember; this was in July, 1955, when Mr. Howe makes 

further statements in regard to yearend deliveries. This is in answer to a question by Mr. Coldwell, in 

which he asked: 

 

“I should like to ask him if he is still of the opinion he gave the House on February 18th, that before 

the crop-year ends, any producer who has grain on hand that he wishes to market, will have an 

opportunity to market it; and that assurance be fulfilled.” 

 

Mr. Howe replied: 

 

“This matter was discussed in the committee on agriculture, and at that time I corrected my former 

statements to say that there would be certain points in Saskatchewan that would be undelivered of 

wheat at the end of this crop-year. However, we will certainly arrive at the 8-bushel quota, and I am 

still confident that before the next crop-year starts to move, we will have off the farms all the grain the 

producers now wish to deliver.” 

 

Mr. Loptson: — It would have been, too, but for the yapping of the C.C.F. party. 

 

Some Govt. Member: — I suppose we slowed down the moving of the boxcars, too, eh? 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

11 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Then Mr. Coldwell asks: 

 

“Are there many points on the 8-bushel quota which will be in effect on the 31st of July?” 

 

The reply was: 

 

“The 8-bushel quota will be in effect everywhere by the 31st of July.” 

 

And I guess it was. And then further on, Mr. Coldwell says: 

 

“But it will be some time beyond that before the quota will be lifted on the grain now on the farms in 

storage?” 

 

The reply was: 

 

“I wouldn’t like to talk about lifting the quota. There are points that have had heavy crops for a 

number of years. . .” 

 

And he suggested that in the area around Regina the farmers are so prosperous that they don’t really 

need to deliver the wheat which they won’t be able to deliver by the end of the crop year, and so on. 

 

Then Mr. Argue gets into the question a little later on, and he says, 

 

“I would like to ask the Minister of Trade and Commerce a supplementary question arising out of the 

question asked by Mr. Coldwell. Can the Minister assure the House that in addition to having an 8-

bushel quota in our marketing points, sufficient boxcars will be available so that farmers may, in fact, 

take advantage of the 8-bushel quota? It is nice to have an 8-bushel quota, but it does not mean much 

unless there are enough boxcars.” 

 

Mr. Howe replied: 

 

“I can assure my hon. friend that the difficulty is not in the number of boxcars engaged in moving 

grain in western Canada. The distribution of boxcars is closing in the points today that have delivery 

surpluses, and I am afraid that these points will be flooded with boxcars.” (He is afraid they will). 

 

He also expressed opposition to bank loans for quite a number of reasons, along with the hon. Leader of 

the Opposition, who has at times even expressed opposition to bank loans, and I think they are very 

legitimate reasons. They object to the interest rate which they have to pay on bank loans, and they object 

to the interest rate because they feel it is 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

12 

 

interest on their own money. The farmer of Saskatchewan thinks he should be entitled to his wages for 

the summer, and to sufficient income to pay his expenses throughout the operating year. 

 

Now, not only are we objecting to bank loans for that reason, but we are also objecting to bank loans 

because they are not available to farmers that need the bank loans. First of all, we are at the whim of the 

bank manager. He has the sole right to refuse to allow a farmer to have a loan, and even if the bank 

managers were 100 per cent co-operative, still there are not enough banks throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan who know enough about grain, and who know enough about giving loans to grain, that 

they would be in a position to advance money to farmers realistically. 

 

Some Opposition Member: — That is just about as true as his other statements. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — There is nobody but the elevator agent who knows as much about 

grain, as to its condition, as to the amount that is there; and after all, if a farmer has got 10,000 bushels 

of grain on his farm, that is what he is worth; he is not worth what some bank manager tells him he is 

worth. It is quite true that any advance given on grain should be entered in the quota book so that it 

would be readily selectable. I don’t think they would have any difficulty with that, if the farmers could 

just get the bank loan. 

 

Before leaving the discussion about Mr. Howe and his tactics in Ottawa, I should mention the Royal 

Commission on Agriculture and Rural Life, in which it comments in its recommendations on cash 

advances and bank loans. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — What page is that, please? 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — On page 207 – that is where I am at the moment. As I say, the Royal 

Commission in its conclusions, towards the latter part of its report, comments on bank loans and cash 

advances to this extent, and I quote: 

 

“Delayed deliveries of wheat, necessitated by lack of storage space, resulted in high farm storage 

expenses and delayed returns to producers. For farmers with limited resources the resulting financial 

hardship is serious. The proposal that farmers be paid storage for farm-stored grain has considerable 

merit. In addition, the provision of emergency credit by banks and credit unions, guaranteed by the 

Federal Government, would be a useful part of any long-term agricultural programme.” 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Emergency credit. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — The Royal Commission admits that every year there are parts of 

Saskatchewan, and there are farmers in every point who have grain but cannot get it delivered because 

of congestion in the elevators. There are farmers who have possibly overspent a little bit during the 

summer time, and they now find themselves short of cash to take off their crop. For that reason, the 

Royal Commission tells us they 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

13 

 

recommend that “provision for emergency credit by banks and credit unions guaranteed by the Federal 

Government would be a useful part of any long-term agricultural programme.” 

 

Mr. Loptson: — And you are opposing that, eh? 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — No, I’m not opposing it at all. I said that the Royal Commission 

suggests, as a permanent part of our agricultural programme, for all those farmers who find themselves 

short of cash before harvesting comes and before they get the wheat into the elevator, that therefore, 

there should be guaranteed bank loans by the Federal Government available to the farmers at all times. 

And they suggested just before that, that there should be cash advances available in a crisis like we are 

experiencing at the present time. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, we’ve got one ‘Moses’ here to lead us out of the wilderness. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — They go on to say: 

 

“A survey of present storage facilities is urgently required to determine whether new storage is needed 

and, if needed, where it should be guilt. In the meantime, advance payments could be made by the 

Wheat Board on properly stored grain on the farm to ease the farmer’s immediate cash shortage.” 

 

Despite everyone recognizing that there is a shortage of good storage in Saskatchewan and that the 

farmers would have to spend a good deal of money to improve their storage if this programme of cash 

advances on farm-stored grain is going to 100 per cent successful, once again we get back to the old 

position that the farmer is simply too broke to be building good storage, and certainly no one but Ottawa 

is responsible for that. 

 

Later on, the Royal Commission again comments on these cash advances, and one of their 

recommendations – Recommendation No. 14 says: 

 

“That in view of the grain producers’ immediate need for cash and their present difficulty in selling 

farm stocks of grain, the Federal Government promptly established, on an emergency basis, a system 

of cash advances on farm-stored grain.” 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — Well, this all right for an emergency. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Let’s talk about the farmer who hasn’t any grain. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — The hon. members opposite are again attempting to confuse the issue 

by trying to deny the farmers the rights to which they are entitled. 

 

I just want, in closing, Mr. Speaker, to suggest some of the advantages of cash advances. One of the 

more important advantages is that cash should be available to the farmer as a right, not as something 

which we have to fight for every time this emergency situation arises. Cash should 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

14 

 

be available to the farmer, whether he can sell his wheat or not. It should be advanced through the 

elevator agents, because they are in a much better position to look after it. They are in much closer 

contact with the farmer and his needs than are the bank managers. Now, I want to suggest one further 

advantage which cash advances have, and which has not been mentioned often, and that is the inequity 

in the quota system; quotas between delivery points and individual farmers. The United Grain Growers, 

in their presentation to the agricultural committee in Ottawa, has a very interesting paragraph here which 

I will quote: 

 

“We repeat the simple suggest which we have already made – leave it to the Canadian Wheat Board to 

allocate its shipping orders on an equitable basis to an elevator company, as long as elevator 

congestion continues, and as long as it has special needs for certain kinds and grades of grain.” 

 

No one denies that the Canadian Wheat Board should not have the right to draw wheat from the points 

from which they wish to draw, but because they do that, Mr. Speaker, it means that other points have to 

wait many months before they can deliver their quota of grain. 

 

No, we are not arguing that the Canadian Wheat Board should not continue to do that; but I am 

suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that if the Federal Government, through the Canadian Wheat Board, would 

provide cash advances then nobody in Saskatchewan would mind if the Canadian Wheat Board talks all 

the wheat from one or two delivery points. Nobody would object, because they have to do that; we ask 

that they provide cash advances to other farmers who are not fortunate enough to be at those few 

delivery points. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in moving, seconded by the hon. member for Wadena (Mr. 

Dewhurst), the resolution which stands under my name on the Order Paper. Just before sitting down, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to repeat that I hope the hon. members opposite will stand up in this House and tell us 

what they stand for in this regard. They have made a lot of confusing statements throughout the province 

of Saskatchewan; they have failed to explain what their stand is. I think now the time has come for them 

to stand up and be counted. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Like you did on Public Revenue, eh? 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure at this time to 

second the motion moved by the member for Gravelbourg (Mr. E. H. Walker). 

 

Throughout the past five or six months in Saskatchewan I do not believe there is any topic which has 

received greater public attention than the plight of the Saskatchewan farmer, and the western farmer as a 

whole, due to the inability of the farmer to be able to market his product. I agree with what the member 

for Gravelbourg has said, wholeheartedly, but I would like to add a few more words to what he has said. 

 

I noticed, when the member for Gravelbourg quoted the resolution of the Wheat Pool which they passed 

early last November, he pointed 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

15 

 

out that the resolution not having been originally on the agenda, it was necessary to have a two-thirds 

majority of the delegates in order to bring it before the convention. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Since when? 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — And a two-thirds vote was taken. The member for Saltcoats chimed in when the 

member for Gravelbourg said that this resolution was passed overwhelmingly by that convention, and he 

said the Wheat Pool must be all C.C.F. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is quite different to what I have been 

hearing in and around these Chambers the last couple of weeks, as to how the farmers all deserted the 

C.C.F. The Wheat Pool is a pretty large organization – and now he tells us they are all C.C.F. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — . . .nominated. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — At one time they were organized by the Communists; now they are C.C.F.! And the 

member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) wanted to know what the Royal Commission had to say on it. 

Well, I would like to refer to what the Royal Commission had to say on it. I would like to refer members 

of the House to the Agricultural Support and Prices, published by the Royal Commission on Rural Life – 

Book No. 8, and if they will turn to page 207, Conclusion No. 17, which the member for Gravelbourg 

quoted, they will see in that recommendation that cash advances are recommended for our situation. 

Again, if they will turn to page 216 and read Recommendations Nos. 14 and 15, they will also see that 

there again they are recommending cash advances. 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — Why don’t you read it? 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — It is true that they make reference in No. 15 to the Prairie Producers’ Interim 

Financing Act. What do they mean by this, Mr. Speaker? I think members of the Opposition, as well as a 

good many of the members on this side of the House, have had a pretty good opportunity of knowing 

what the Commission meant by those recommendations and conclusions. 

 

As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, and all members of this House are aware and I think the public of 

Saskatchewan also, a Special Committee was set up to investigate the problems of marketing and farm 

income. That Committee has held a number of meetings. One of the first witnesses to present evidence 

before this Special Committee. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I don’t think you should bring into the House any of the proceedings of that 

Committee until their final report has been presented. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — I shall bow to your ruling, Mr. Speaker. But I want to point out that any member of 

this Committee can understand better what was said there if they will peruse the proceedings of the other 

Committee; and I agree with you, Mr. Speaker, I am not entitled at this time to quote them in the House, 

but I would ask the members to go over the transcripts and see for themselves. 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

16 

 

on other occasions I have discussed with the Royal Commission exactly what they meant by some of 

these points, and no later than this morning I had a talk with some of the people on the Royal 

Commission and they pointed out to me what they meant by an Act which could come under an Interim 

Financing Act, and that would be if the Federal Government would set up legislation whereby the 

farmers could be guaranteed a place to get credit from. They do not mean that that would have to be 

prepaid out of the immediate crop. As an example, they pointed out to me, when I was discussing it with 

them this morning, that if a farmer’s cost of operation was $20 an acre (just using round figures, Mr. 

Speaker) and his crop only netted him $18 per acre, then consequently he would not have enough 

income to carry on. There should be Federal legislation whereby he could turn to them to get the 

additional money he needed. Then, in the following year if he had anything over and above his cost of 

production he could pay it back. They do not suggest, on a long-term financing set-up for agriculture, 

that it should be paid back necessarily in the same year. 

 

We have heard people contend that labour is one of the reasons for the price-squeeze we find ourselves 

in now. I mentioned in one debate in this House, last year, the increased cost of production on a 

combine, over the last ten years, has gone up by $3,000 on the larger combines. That amounts to 30 

mills of taxation on a $10,000 assessment on a farmer’s land, over a period of ten years, or 300 mills for 

one year. It isn’t labour’s fault that we are in this trouble. If that was so, Mr. Speaker, then would not the 

farmers have been well off in the ‘thirties when labour was so cheap that you could get labour at your 

own price, and teachers got little or nothing for their work? So it isn’t labour that is the cause of all our 

trouble. We are in a price-squeeze, where the cost of our production is going up and the price of our 

produce is going down. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think you are getting away from the subject matter of the motion. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the cost of the farmer’s commodities are going 

up and what he has to sell is going down; so consequently we find ourselves in a squeeze. The official 

figures show that, in 1954-55, we exported less grain than we did in 1953-54, and as of January 4, this 

year, we were down 23 ½ per cent on our exports compared to the same period, last year. That being the 

case, Mr. Speaker, with the farmer’s casts going up, he must, then, be able to get money some place in 

the fall of the year to pay his obligations. If he cannot market his grain just how is he going to get that 

cash? 

 

I have here in my hand a copy of one of the forms which came out, last fall, for the farmers to have to 

sign if they wanted to get a bank loan; and one of the clauses in this contract stated: 

 

“To the best of my knowledge and belief there are no lions or other claims against the grain or any part 

of the grain described in paragraph 2, save those I have described below, and I hereby authorize you to 

make any search or obtain any information as to the existence of liens or other claims against such 

grain as you may think necessary, and I agree to reimburse you for the cost of doing the same.” 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

17 

 

Mr. Speaker, the type of forms they had to sign in order to get a bank loan was most ridiculous and most 

unfair. The farmer should not have to be put to all that trouble. I may say that this form has been 

emended since that time. Some of the objectionable features have been struck out, but the whole 

principle to the farmers of this province is still objectionable. 

 

We believe that the farmers should have the right, when we produce the grain, to get an advance – if no 

other system is set up, we should be able to get an advance at least on a portion of our grain. And I am 

not too sure that it should only be on the estimated quota, because if the Department of Trade and 

Commerce sets the estimated marketable quota at three bushels per acre, then if they got 75 per cent of 

that, it would be far less than 75 per cent of an eight-bushel quota. They should be entitled to 75 per cent 

of all marketable grain on their farms. 

 

When the munitions makers make supplies for the Department of National Defence they do not have to 

wait for their pay until those munitions are taken by the Government and actually use, as do the farmers 

with their grain. Half of Canada’s national budget, over $2,000 million, goes to the Department of 

National Defence. These companies contract, and when they are able to deliver the goods they are paid 

for them. Why don’t the farmers get paid for their commodities when they are in a deliverable position? 

If they cannot deliver that is no fault of the farmers. 

 

The mover has pointed out a number of the statements which were made by the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. McDonald) and others on their stand on this question. I am sorry that the Leader of the 

Opposition is not in his seat; I am also sorry that the member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. Kohaly) isn’t here, 

because I would like to see where both these members stand on this question. I would like to see them 

also make some of their views known on air time, and I intend to make way for them shortly, if any of 

them want to do so. I understand there are some of my colleagues on this side of the House who would 

like to say a few words on this resolution, but they would be only too glad to allow some of the 

Opposition members to make their views known over the air. 

 

There are many more things that I could say on the reason for cash advances. I know of farmers in my 

constituency, last year, who had grain to market, and couldn’t sell it; and their husbandry on their farms 

was carried on very poorly as a result. I have talked to some of those farmers and they said they had 

equipment sitting in their yards; they had everything necessary to go out and do their fall work, but 

instead of that they were just burning off their stubble fields and burning off the straw. They said they 

didn’t have the money to buy the gas to keep their tractors going. They felt that by burning off the straw 

at least it may kill a few of the weeks and make it that much more economical to get over this coming 

spring, because they wouldn’t have the straw in the wheels of their machines. I think that is a very bad 

condemnation of our Canadian society, when we put Canada’s agricultural economy in that position. 

When we have about 20 per cent of Canada’s population engaged in agriculture throughout Canada and 

we get six per cent of the national income, something is wrong. 

 

At a later date, Mr. Speaker, I hope to have more to say on what I believe, myself, should be done along 

the line of parity price for 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

18 

 

agriculture, but with these remarks and in order to make time for some of the other members of this 

Legislature, and I take great pleasure in seconding this motion. 

 

Mr. Harry Gibbs (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I am going to say a few words with regard to this 

resolution because I believe all members in this House know that I am not a farmer. I earn my living by 

labour, that is my mechanism of labour; but I know, as a labour man, that we cannot live without the 

farmers in this province and the farmers cannot live without us. It reminds me of a song that was sung in 

the first Great War, and that song went something like this: “We are all out of step but Jim.” It seems to 

me, Mr. Speaker, that everybody in the province seems to be out of step but the Liberal party, with 

regard to the matter we are discussing. 

 

We all know that agriculture is the stable and established industry of this province. None of us are going 

to deny that, and there is no doubt about it that the farmer has the right to have money for what he 

produces just like the labouring man has the right to the wages which he earns. We cannot live without 

this money, and how in the world do the Liberals think that the farmers of this province are going to get 

by without any money! Surely they know what took place here years ago in this province, and if we 

don’t do something, under the monetary system under which we live, well then the farmers will be in the 

same predicament as they were back there in the dirty ‘thirties. 

 

It seems rather strange, Mr. Speaker, that ever since the crop has been taken off and the farmers couldn’t 

see the grain, there have been various discussions all over the province and probably all over the 

Dominion of Canada, with regard to this situation. It comes to my mind that, a few months ago, the 

Chamber of Commerce from Montana was up to visit the Chamber of Commerce in Swift Current, and 

myself, as the provincial member for Swift Current constituency, was invited to a banquet which the 

Chamber was putting. Mr. Irwin Studer, the Liberal member of Parliament for Maple Creek-Swift 

Current was also invited. So after we had the banquet we were asked to say a few words, and of course 

Mr. Studer was asked to speak first. And I was amazed and astounded, Mr. Speaker, because of the fact 

that Mr. Studer never mentioned one word about the agricultural situation in this province, or the plight 

of the farmers – and him being a farmer! Him being an actual, practical farmer – he never mentioned 

one word! He went on speaking and all he talked about was the Iron Curtain, which is one of his 

favourite topics. Of course maybe it was for my benefit, but I don’t know whether it was or not. 

 

However, he did mention – and mind you, at the time, just prior to this meeting, the Russian delegation 

or commission on agriculture was in this province and they had been received with open arms and been 

given every courtesy, and as far as I could read (although I never met them myself) they thought 

Saskatchewan was a wonderful province; in fact, they said it was the best province they had been in, in 

Canada. But Mr. Studer never mentioned anything about the agricultural commission coming over from 

Russia. They were here on a peaceful mission and they were here to see how we did things in Canada 

and to see if we could probably drum up some 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

19 

 

business. I noticed in the ‘Leader-Post’ yesterday, although I know we have been selling wheat to 

Russia, but I think there is a big consignment now about to me made, probably running into millions of 

dollars. I wonder if the Liberals are going out yet and selling the farmer’s wheat to Russia. I don’t know 

whether they are or not, but I am just wondering if they are going to object to selling our wheat behind 

the Iron Curtain. 

 

Well, anyway, this banquet was over and when I got up to speak, and there were a lot of delegates from 

Montana, and they came to me and talked to me afterwards. They said, “What do you do, Harry; what is 

your business?” I told them I was just a labour man, that I was a railroad an, a boilermaker by trade; and 

they thought it funny that I was speaking on agricultural matters when Mr. Studer never even mentioned 

the word. “Oh, well” I said, “probably out of step again, like the old song.” 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — At that time you were looking for farmers’ votes. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — So, back there in October, the editor of the Swift Current ‘Sun” invited Mr. Studer and 

myself to make statements with regard to the wheat crisis in this province, and there it is, sitting right on 

the front page, too. It is not very long, Mr. Speaker, but I would just like to have this go into the records 

– what I said in October; not in February or not in March, but last October, with regard to the wheat 

crisis. I am not a farmer, but I said this: 

 

“What is the answer? Everywhere I go into small gatherings (and this was the truth, at that time) 

meetings, and even when I stop and chat on the street, one hears the same questions, ‘What are we 

going to do with our wheat?’ There is no doubt but what the farmers are deeply concerned about their 

inability to dispose of this crop and to get the required money to meet their debts and obligations for 

the coming year, and I am sure we all feel that the situation is critical – or do we? The question arises, 

‘How are we going to dispose of the farmers’ surplus products, essentially wheat?’ The Saskatchewan 

C.C.F. Government has been advocating for years that the Wheat Board should be empowered to give 

a cash advance of at least 75 per cent of the initial payment on all farm-stored grain. It is to the interest 

of everyone concerned that farmers should be able to realize some cash from a crop, which, through 

no fault of their own, they are unable to deliver at the present time.” 

 

Mr. Loptson: — What would the C.C.F. do? 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — Continuing with the article: 

 

“Premier Douglas, back in 1942 when he was a member of the Federal House, made a proposal to the 

House of Commons advocating cash advances on farm-stored grain, and he has still to hear one sound 

argument as to why it is not feasible. 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

20 

 

“The Saskatchewan Provincial Government has been submitting resolutions dealing with (as my hon. 

friend from Gravelbourg has already quoted) cash advances and orderly marketing for farm products, 

religiously to the Federal Government for quite a number of sessions. The result was always the same 

– complacency with no action as regards the proposals. In fact, C.C.F. speakers throughout the 

province have been ridiculed by the Liberal press as being ‘economic illiterates’. . . (oh, can you 

imagine that?). . . who didn’t know what they were talking about.” 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Is that true? 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — I want to finish this press report: 

 

“Well I don’t know whether the average person in our province coincides with what our political 

opponents think and say on these important matters. I would rather think that the rank and file of the 

people of our province would much rather deal with the realm of economic planning, of planned 

production, of forward pricing on the basis of parity for the farmer; and of international planning to 

help feed the hungry peoples of the world, and I think we all realize that food and materials are badly 

needed in vast areas of the world, and that Canada could do more in this field – but not at the expense 

of the farmer. The whole nation should carry this burden and it seems to be the only ultimate solution 

to the problem of surplus reduction. 

 

“Actually, I am convinced there is no real surplus of foodstuffs in the world, but evidently there is a 

lack of planning for the purpose of fulfilling human needs. I believe the time is overdue and that we 

should do some plain talking on such matters as are confronting the people of our province during this 

critical period. It is a matter of urgent importance that questions should be asked and answered as to 

‘why should the farmer be required to go to the bank to ask for a loan on his farm-stored grain?’ Who 

lost the British market, and why?” 

 

Mr. Loptson: — The C.C.F.ers. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — “Why haven’t the Saskatchewan Federal members of parliament raised their voices in 

protest about this urgent situation?” 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Did you say all that, Harry? 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — Wait a minute, there is some more coming: 

 

“Why is it that before the western farmers can get any action from the Federal Government they have 

to call 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

21 

 

mass meetings, organize delegations and treks to Ottawa, threats of strike action, etc.” 

 

And you know that is the truth. They have always, if they wanted to get anything from their own 

productions, or parity prices, - you know what happened in 1942 – a trek to Ottawa. There will probably 

be another trek to Ottawa. That is the way it has been for the farmers. They get nothing until they do go 

down there. And they get nothing when they do go down. 

 

“The farmers I have spoken to are definitely opposed to bank loans with interest. Probably it does 

seem like ‘hauling coals to Newcastle’. I am convinced that the time has come, not for assurance, but 

for action. We people of the prairies should speak with one voice and demand that Parliament be 

called into session immediately to deal with a situation which has been too long neglected.” 

 

Now, did they call Parliament? You know what happened. They did nothing! I would say this to the 

farmers of this province – and mind you there are a lot of them that still believe in that flea-bitten 

politics of Liberalism, but if they are going to see the actions of the Liberals, and the Federal members 

of this province, and the Liberal members of this province, carrying on and not even helping and 

assisting the farmer when he is in a spot, they deserve everything they get. They do; they deserve 

everything they got. We have worked and worked for years and years for what we have got. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Yes, and you wrecked yourself. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — And we are still struggling, and it is up to our Federal members. We can get it in various 

ways. They can get a lot by political action if they want to take it, but it is only, as I understand it, the 

more or less wealthy farmers in the province who do not want cash advances on their farm product. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They want the right to sell. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — I know hundreds that want it, and they have a right to it. As I said before – if they 

produce, and work for it, they have a right to their wages. What would you think? I don’t know what a 

lot of you fellows over there – whether you are wage-earners or not; you all look pretty fat on it, 

anyway. But what would I think if a company I work for, when it came pay day, didn’t give me any pay. 

What would I think? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to ask the hon. member a question. If he is so concerned 

about the fellow who has so much wheat, what are you going to do with the fellow that hasn’t got any 

wheat? And there are lots of them. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — Well, we will have to give them something, too, if they haven’t got it. Like you say, you 

can’t take blood from a stone. They will have to be fed and they will have to be housed, even if they 

have nothing. But probably it won’t be done under a Liberal government. 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

22 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You’re feeling sorry for. . . 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — But as far as I am concerned, it wouldn’t matter whether they had nothing at all; they 

would have to be housed and fed and clothed, as far as I am concerned. And I think our Government 

feels the same. 

 

Some Opposition Member: — Oh, big shot! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — The Premier and the press are going to. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — It’s probably your last chance, Harry, go ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — Well, anyway, the situation, as previous speakers have pointed out, is serious. It 

wouldn’t be serious if we didn’t have to deal with money – if money wasn’t the thing that is exchanged 

to buy provisions and products; but it is, and that makes all the difference in the world. I cannot buy a 

loaf of bread unless I have the price to pay for it, and neither can you. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You had better see the Premier. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — I couldn’t trade a pair of pigeons or something like that for a loaf of bread because. . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You could charge it up, Harry. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — Well, you could put it on the cuff, all right, and that is what a lot of them have to do, too. 

This is a vital situation and I cannot, for the life of me – in fact, I know you guys are going to be put on 

the spot, because the farmer of this province is demanding to know, politically, how you fellows stand 

on this situation. Some of you are farmers. Well, if you are all supposed to be good Christians – live and 

let live; and we’ll see what you do. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — That is Liberalism for you. 

 

Mr. Gibbs: — I say this, and I have told it before, that without the farmer we cannot live and without us 

fellows in the labouring fields of industry you cannot live. We should all be pulling together. It is about 

time, too, that we started having some reasonable political thinking behind us, so that we can fuse, so 

that we can become solid, because you and I and our children and our children’s children – they will 

have to eat the bread that is provided by the product of the farmers in this province. It is true that you 

cannot live by bread alone, but it goes a long way. 

 

I like to treat everybody the same; I don’t care whether he is a farmer, a professional man, a business 

man, a miner, a bricklayer or anything else. After all is said and one we are all human and we have to 

look at it in that light, and I say to you fellows: we have to get some money into the pockets of our 

farmers so that their families can live happily and 



 

March 1, 1956 

23 

 

comfortably like you and I do. 

 

I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

NATIONAL HIGHWAY POLICY 

 

Moved by Mr. Feusi (Pelly), seconded by Mr. Berezowsky (Cumberland): 

 

“That this Assembly request the Provincial Government to recommend that the Government of 

Canada adopt a comprehensive National Highway Policy to meet national needs in the fields of 

economic development, transportation and safety.” 

 

Mr. Feusi (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, the topic of this Resolution is of widespread interest in the Canadian 

nation today, particularly in the western provinces where mileage of highways is a problem with the 

small population to foot the bill of the miles of road needed. We have had, within the past few years, a 

programme of Federal aid for highways, a programme dating from 1949, that will terminate in 

December of 11956. That has been the only stable or organized programme that we have had from 

Ottawa. Prior to this programme Ottawa’s aid on roads has been more or less piecemeal and spotty, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Trans-Canada Highway Agreement came into effect in 1949, and to date the majority of it has been 

completed, or is near completion. Saskatchewan’s share of the Trans-Canada was 449 miles, and I 

believe there are some 40 to 50 miles yet to work on. The programme was on a 50-50 basis 

approximately, with Ottawa sharing just a little under the 50 per cent cost. 

 

Ottawa’s commitment on this project, Mr. Speaker, was not to exceed $150 million, and it has averaged 

from $12 million to $13 million a year, across the Dominion. Because of the fact that some of our 

provinces are delinquent or are considerably in arrears in the completion of Trans-Canada, Ottawa has 

proposed a stimulation of the scheme as of last November, which will take place this year, and continue 

to the year 1960. The purpose of this stimulation is to get into being a national road across Canada at as 

early a date as possible. This stimulation by Ottawa meant that Ottawa was going to provide 9- per cent 

of the costs of the remainder of a portion of Trans-Canada, and this offer was to stand up until 1960. 

 

The newspaper of last November did pick up the Conference between the provinces and the Federal 

Government and some of our Saskatchewan newspapers had very pertinent items in connections with 

the Resolution and in connection with the Trans-Canada Highway Agreement, and I would like to quote 

the ‘Star-Phoenix’ of November 14, 1955, and it reads as follows: 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

24 

 

“The Trans-Canada Highway will certainly not be finished by the end of next year. (meaning 1956) 

But if it is to be finished within a reasonable period a new Federal approach would seem to be 

required. It is strange indeed that though Ottawa has followed a definitely national policy with respect 

to railway construction, it has been much less enthusiastic about a cross-country highway link. Yet in 

economic as well as in spiritual terms a good highway across the country would probably have as 

much nationalizing influence today as the laying of steel from coast to coast had half a century ago.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a national highway policy would mean considerable to Saskatchewan. The province 

of Saskatchewan today has probably the greatest road mileage in comparison with population of any 

province in Canada. We are familiar with the figures of 38 per cent of the road mileage and seven per 

cent of Canada’s population having to foot the bill here in Saskatchewan. Our road mileage is, I believe, 

in the vicinity of 150,000 miles, of which 8,300 miles are on the highway programme, and 12,000 miles 

we hope to get into a road grid before too long. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of this great road problem that Saskatchewan has of serving her settled portions, 

there hasn’t been too much development in the north, and I would just like to call to the attention of this 

House the difference in assistance given by outside agencies such as the Federal Government in the 

neighbouring provinces, which has not been given to Saskatchewan in transportation development in the 

north. I would like to turn to a map. I have been unable to find a map that would show the western 

provinces with both the railroads and the highways, and I just have to quote from figures obtained from 

the Library. I would like to show the advantages that Alberta has and Manitoba has in the opening up of 

the northern parts of their provinces through the railroads, a form of transportation. 

 

In Alberta today, from Edmonton to Dawson Creek there is 495 miles; from Edmonton to Waterways, 

305 miles; McLennan to Hines Creek in the Peace River area, 106 miles; and Edmonton to Athabaska, a 

further 100 miles – a total of 1,006 miles that Alberta has that helps in the opening up of the northern 

portions of their province, and takes a considerable load off the people of the province of Alberta that 

we have not in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now turning to Manitoba on railroads: from The Pas to Churchill, 510 miles of railroad; The pas to 

Lynn Lake, 241 miles; and The Pas to Flin Flon, 97 miles – making a total of 842 miles of railroad in 

Manitoba which helps that province in its northern transportation problem. 

 

We have not got that in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I mention these things because I find many of 

our Liberal speakers go across the province today and bemoan the fact that much of our northern 

Saskatchewan trade must have to go through Alberta and through Manitoba. There is a tremendous 

fallacy in their argument, and if they just followed the practice of the public school boys who look in an 

Atlas, they will find the facts and the figures of the railroads and the highways before them. 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

25 

 

In highways, Manitoba obtained with the aid of Federal grants the Flin Flon highway, a strip of some 

200 miles, and Alberta has the Alcan highway, a war emergency road, that is a considerable boost to that 

province; and the amount of Alcan in Canada is 1,221 miles, in the provinces of Alberta and British 

Columbia, and the Yukon, and the road system there has helped tremendously in opening up the 

northern reaches of those provinces, and has been instrumental in taking a load off the backs of those 

provinces. 

 

Saskatchewan had to stand on her own feet, and Saskatchewan has built 108 miles of road to Lac la 

Ronge. I find also that there is a tremendous mileage of forest management roads that the province has 

built, all at the expense of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. I believe the Minister of Natural 

Resources quoted yesterday some facts and figures as to the mileage that the Department of Natural 

Resources had built in the northern reaches of Saskatchewan. 

 

A year ago, I asked a question in this House, Mr. Speaker, on an Order for Return, asking for the aid that 

has been given northern Saskatchewan in transportation, both from the Federal Government and from 

the Provincial Government, and I received this reply: 

 

“Question (1) The aid Saskatchewan has received from the Federal Government for each of the fiscal 

years 1944-54 for the construction of roads in the northern provincial forests.” 

 

These are the forerunners of our highways into the North, Mr. Speaker, and I found that the answer from 

the Department of Natural Resources was that Ottawa assisted in the building of a road from Uranium 

City to Lake Athabaska, and in the two years of 1951 and 1952 the Federal aid amounted to $75,582.76. 

The expenditures put out the Department of Natural Resources of this province in road in northern 

Saskatchewan reads as follows: In 1944, $2,035; in 1945, $20,000; in 1946, $49,421; and so on, until the 

last year that I have on record here, 1954 - $106,974; making an overall total of expenditure by the 

province through the Department of Natural Resources in the northern road development of 

$1,309,540.28. If we compare these figures with the Federal expenditures in northern Saskatchewan, 

you will find that Saskatchewan’s expenditures were $17 to every dollar spent by Ottawa in northern 

development of road transportation. 

 

Another question, No. 3, that was asked: The number of airfields constructed for the fiscal years 1944-

54 in northern Saskatchewan, and we find there was one built at Uranium City, and that was a Federal 

Government project, and the number of airfields constructed by the Provincial Government was eight, 

Stoney Rapids, Snake Lake, La Ronge, Cumberland House, Ile a la Crosse, Buffalo Narrows and La 

Loche, plus an emergency landing strip at Cree Lake. 

 

Question No. 4 – the number of wharfs, which aids the water transportation, the number of wharfs 

constructed for the fiscal years 1944-54 in northern Saskatchewan. Under Federal help there were four – 

Buffalo Narrows, Black Bay on Lake Athabaska, Stoney Rapids and Dore Lake; and under the 

provincial there were five constructed – La Ronge, Snake Lake, Wollaston Lake and two at Beaver 

Lake. And so, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

26 

 

has, within her financial limitations, pushed transportation development into northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to check another angle of our road situation, and that is to make a comparison of what is 

done in the United States, with their road scheme, in comparison with that of Canada. These are some 

figures that follow along the same figures given, I believe, in this House, by myself last year. These 

figures come from a report from the United States Bureau of Public Roads, and is dated 1955. The 

United States have their roads classed into four groups, and I would like to list them as much. 

 

Their primary road system, which is the equivalent of our Trans-Canada, comprises well in excess of 

200,000 miles; to be exact 216,246 miles of rural highway that falls in their Trans-United States system, 

and 17,902 urban that fall within the city limits. During 1955 Washington (that is the United States of 

America) spent $247.5 million in aid on Trans-American roads equivalent to our Trans-Canada 

highway; and in 1956 they anticipate spending $315 million. On their secondary highways in the United 

States, such as rural mail routes, market roads, school bus routes, a system of 507,676 miles, in 1955 the 

United States of America spent $165 million. They anticipate spending in 1956, $210 million. 

 

Their third system of roads known as additional urban aid in primary systems, and this is on a 50-50 

basis – in 1955 the United States government spent $137.5 million. In 1956, they anticipate spending 

$175 million, and this is mostly in aid to transportation in and around cities, and would deal with such 

traffic disposal systems as clover leaf, expressways, freeways and by-passes. 

 

Their fourth type of road system is probably the most important, and the one with the heaviest traffic, 

and is known as Inter-State highways. These are inter-city and border connections and road connections 

between industrial centres and the system comprises some 37,682 miles. In 1955 there was $25 million 

spent on this road system and they anticipate, in 1956, $175 million shall be spent. And on this latter 

group, Inter-State roads, the matching basis is $60 Federal for every $40 put up by the State. The 

amount of money I quoted there was the amount of expenditure by the Federal government. So that 

means, Mr. Speaker, a total Federal aid from Washington to the states of America, or to all America, in 

1955, on their road systems, amounted to $671,230,960. It will go up in 1956. They anticipate spending 

$875 million on the road systems of the United States this year. 

 

If we check the records, Mr. Speaker, the expenditures by the Government of the United States of 

America approximate the revenue collected through the automobile industry. In a comparison with 

Canada, Ottawa spends each year on Trans-Canada between $12 million and $13 million – a grand total 

of between $12 million and $13 million across Canada that Ottawa has spent yearly in assistance on 

roads. The United States anticipates spending $875 million this year. Ottawa has collected throughout 

the years on average of $150 million through excise and sales taxes on cars, trucks, tires, etc., those 

taxes in connection with the automobile industry. Now if we take the $12 million to $13 million that 

Ottawa 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

27 

 

returns to the provinces in aid on roads, you will find that Ottawa’s share is not even 10 per cent of the 

collections that she has made through taxes on the automobile industry; and that is a very sore spot. 

Ottawa will spend more though, in the years 1956-60. They will up this $12 million to $13 million (the 

assistance to the road scheme of Canada) by a considerable amount, making their total payment roughly 

around $30 million yearly during the next four years, to stimulate the completion of Trans-Canada. 

 

A second comparison I would like to make is between the State of Montana and the province of 

Saskatchewan. They are very similar, Mr. Speaker, in topography and in population and in road mileage. 

In fact, Montana, I think, has approximately three-fifths of the population and has three-fifths of the road 

mileage of Saskatchewan. They compare very favourably in the facts that we would like to use, that is 

the population and the road mileage and topography. 

 

Now the Federal aid funds – and again these figures come from the Annual Report of the Bureau of 

Public Roads for the fiscal year 1955, in the United States. The aid that Montana received from the 

government of the United States for roads again are broken up into the various groupings I listed earlier 

under the aid given to the nation as a whole. Here is Montana’s share on primary roads, that is 

equivalent to our Trans-Canada. Montana received in 1955, $5,631,588. On her secondary roads, the bus 

routes and so forth, rural mail routes, Montana received $3,425,226. On urban roads, roads of assistance 

within the city limits, $333,948. On inter-state roads there was no assistance in 1955, but there was 

assistance on a defence road to the tune of $23,506, making a total that Montana received from 

Washington of $9,422,813. If we compare that with Saskatchewan’s aid from Ottawa, Saskatchewan 

receives approximately $2 ½ million yearly. Yet, if we look at Saskatchewan, the expenditure 

Saskatchewan has made during the past few years, averaging on her road systems, of about anywhere 

from $17 million and $18 million to $20 million per year it corresponds with the collection that 

Saskatchewan has made in the revenue derived from the automobile industry, such as gas tax and motor 

licenses. 

 

So we can see, Mr. Speaker, that the provinces have not received a fair deal from Ottawa, if we compare 

the figures with the United States. It is only fair that the expenditures be made in comparison with the 

revenues derived, and it is very important these days, when more and more of our traffic is rolling on 

rubber. The transportation burden is yearly getting greater and greater, and the burden is becoming too 

difficult for some of the provinces to foot the bill for a modern road system, and it certainly is too great a 

load for municipalities who cannot cope with the modern needs of transportation within municipal 

boundaries. 

 

I would like to quote another item from the ‘Star-Phoenix’ which again bears out the broad meaning of 

this resolution. This is from the ‘Star-Phoenix’ of November 14th last: 

 

“A national highway policy ought not to be limited to the completion of one cross-country artery, 

however, nor even to two such highways. Most of our most important highway routes run north and 

south rather than east and west, and many of these must by extended still farther 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

28 

 

north if the promise of our Canadian Northland is to be realized. The provinces lack the revenues to 

provide adequate highways in their areas of established settlement, let alone to push roads into new 

territory. The Federal Government has much greater financial resources on which to draw, and the 

Federal Treasury would share with Provincial Treasuries the benefits which would flow from 

increased traffic on improved highways and the opening up of the North to industry and to tourists.” 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to state that the resolution simply calls for a nation participation in 

Canadian development by assistance in an overall transportation scheme. Ottawa collects the major 

finances for our roads; Ottawa should, and must, contribute fairly, and share in a broad national road 

plan. 

 

I therefore move, seconded by the member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) the resolution standing 

under my name on the Order Paper. 

 

Mr. W. J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend the member who just 

preceded me. He has done a wonderful job of presenting the case for the people of Saskatchewan and 

the people of Canada, insofar as road problems are concerned. 

 

I would like to open my remarks by quoting an article that appeared December 21, 1955, in the ‘Leader-

Post’ headed “CAA Urges New Federal Road Development Setup.” The article says: 

 

“The Federal Government was urged Tuesday to adopt a whole new programme for highway 

development in Canada, and back it with the resources of the Federal Treasury. 

 

“The suggestion was made by the 43,000 members of the Canadian Automobile Association in a brief 

presented to the Hon. Robert Winters, Public Works Minister. 

 

“The brief said ‘Canada is a nation on wheels, but the Federal Government does little to keep the 

wheels in motion’.” 

 

It goes on in this brief to say that: “The Federal Government should assume more responsibility”; as was 

pointed out by the mover of the resolution. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as a Canadian citizen and a citizen of Saskatchewan, I recognize that although we 

may have the finest human resources in Canada, yet the standard of living of the people of Canada and 

their life depend tremendously upon the natural physical resources of our country, whether it is in the 

field of agriculture, mining, or whatever it may be. In order to get the greatest benefit for the people of 

Canada, as well as for those who have invested money in Canada from foreign countries it appears 

urgent that we have the best possible transportation communication system. 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

29 

 

We in Saskatchewan know that at least two-fifths of our province has forest and mineral potentiality. 

North of this province we have the Northwest Territories. To the west and to the east in the northern area 

we have tremendous wealth, natural wealth, that cannot be valued in millions but in billions. As far back 

as 1867 the first Senate Committee recommended that the Government of Canada should look to those 

resources and their possibilities, for in them were contained a future for the people of Canada. Now that 

is a long time ago, it is nearly 100 years ago, Sir, and yet as I look at the picture of the North I see not 

too much development at this time, due to lack of access roads. 

 

As the former speaker mentioned, there have been 1,221 miles of highway built, probably as a defence 

project. That is all to the good for the project helped open up areas where there are natural resources. 

There were other roads built, as has been pointed out. I find also that there has been some precedent in 

assisting mines and provinces to build access roads and development roads, and that is what I 

particularly want to discuss here today. 

 

I notice on going through the estimates for Canada for the year 1957, that on page 415, a contribution to 

the extent of (I will give it to you later, Mr. Speaker); a contribution for the cost of constructing a 

resources road between the settlements of Elsa and Keeno to serve the various mines in the area was 

voted, in accordance with the terms of an agreement between Canada and the United Keeno Mines 

Limited. The estimates for 1956-57 are $75,000, and the estimates for 1955-56 are $150,000. There are 

a few other accounts in the estimates; on page 427 of the estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

1956, near the bottom of the page, you will find that the contribution of 50 per cent toward the cost of 

construction of a mining road from the Alaska highway to the property of Cassiar Asbestos Company is 

shown to be in accordance with the terms of an agreement between Canada and the Cassiar Asbestos 

Company; and as you go through these estimates you find others. The thing that struck me is that those 

particular companies in that particular area, both the Keeno Mines and the Cassiar Asbestos Company, 

who apparently have a mine up in the Northwest Territories, or British Columbia, that a road was built 

for them and the President and Vice-President of the company happens to be F. M. Connell, with W.H. 

Connell Vice-President. The other mine for which a road was built, and I think also a road to a power 

plant, for the United Keeno Mines Limited, have as their President F. M. Connell, with W. H. Connell as 

Vice-President, and they are connected up with Con-West Mines. It is rather strange that all the 

assistance given in that particular area should go to mines that are apparently owned by the same group 

of people; at least the President and the Vice-President are the same people. Yet I didn’t see any other 

mines assisted with mining road grants, and it made me wonder why. 

 

One other precedent was set. Some times we hear it said that, after all, roads and bridges in the province 

are the responsibility of the province. Yet, it is not quite so. Just not so long ago, Mr. Speaker, you will 

note that in Nova Scotia, to connect the mainland to the island (Cape Breton), the Dominion 

Government spent $19 million for building a causeway. I know the people of Nova Scotia couldn’t build 

it themselves and I recognize that it is worthwhile. The Dominion Government should be commended 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

30 

 

for giving that particular assistance to building that causeway as a national venture, but after all it is $19 

million, and I could not help but that what we in Saskatchewan could have done with $19 million, not 

just build a causeway, but we could have built a tremendous system of highways into the north, as has 

been suggested by the former speaker, and has been suggested by various groups in Saskatchewan, to 

provide access to the resources that we own in this rich province, and open them to development. 

 

I suggest it would have been a very wise thing for the Dominion to be as generous to the province of 

Saskatchewan as it has been to the province of Nova Scotia, because, after all, I do not think anybody 

will disagree that in the final analysis it won’t cost the Dominion Government a cent. I am not an 

economist; we know that once you circulate money the Dominion Government collects taxes, and every 

time it is circulated, so much of it goes back to the Treasury, until eventually all of it gets back there, 

except that which is hidden banks or vaults. But here is what it would have done by opening up the 

mineral wealth in the north. We know that the Federal authorities would have collected from 40 to 50 

per cent of corporation tax on the profits made by those companies, and I am quite sure that with the 

kind of development that we would have it wouldn’t take too long for the Dominion Government to get 

their $10 million, $15 million or $19 million back. As I pointed out some time ago (I think it was three 

years ago, Mr. Speaker), on mine alone, I think paid in one year to the Federal Treasury somewhere 

around $11 million in corporation tax. 

 

At the same time I might also point out that I think the province of Saskatchewan should contribute 

some small amount, or fair share (if you want to put it that way) towards constructing some of these 

northern access roads, for the simple reason that we too would benefit from royalties, and probably we 

should give some consideration to see that more wealth is opened up for the benefit of the present 

generation and future generations. 

 

There is one point that I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker. Originally, when the British North 

America Act was set up, at that time, of course, nobody visualized the tremendous traffic by way of 

vehicles that we have today. It was the day of oxen and horses, and it was established that after all road 

building should be the responsibility of the local communities or the provinces. Today, the situation is 

quite different. Today and every day you see trucks passing through the province of Saskatchewan from 

Ontario, British Columbia and other parts, moving in all directions. They go north and they go south. 

Today the road problem is not a local problem, it is not a provincial problem; the road problem is 

definitely a problem for the country as a whole. And, as I said, the same thing applies to the 

development of natural resources. If we are going to have a prosperous Canada we cannot just consider 

ourselves in Saskatchewan as a closed area; we have to have it opened up to all of the people in Canada, 

and whether it is for the sportsmen or just for the purpose of the development of minerals or forests or 

whatever it may be, I think a large share of the responsibility lies on the shoulders of the Federal 

authorities. 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

31 

 

There is one other point. The members opposite here, on many occasions have indicated in speeches that 

we are no contributing enough towards other services, and one of the reasons why we cannot do this is 

because we have to spend money which the Federal Government should be spending in opening up 

access roads into the areas that contain wealth. If that money were not spent for that purpose, then 

whether it is $100,000 or $1 million, we would have that much more to put into education or other 

services, which are assumed to be more the responsibility of this province. 

 

Now, going back to what I said about the change that we have undergone, a kind of transition from the 

day of the horse and buggy to the present mechanical age. I think that the Federal authorities should be 

told (and that is what we are doing right now) that after all they should consider transportation and 

communication just as important as they considered it after Confederation. For the good of Canada in 

those days the Dominion Government assisted the Canadian Pacific Railway and other railways with 

tremendous grants of land. I think somebody at one time mentioned about 55 million acres of land, 

together with all the mineral resources that we underneath. They gave them straight money grants; they 

gave these companies loans. They did everything possible to help these companies to put this 

transportation system through Canada. Is not now the situation just as parallel when you come down to 

the need for roads? Are not the roads and highways in Canada just as important today as the railway was 

100 years ago, or 80 years ago? I say, Mr. Speaker, it is. If we are going to have the kind of 

transportation and communication this country needs, and if we are going to have the kind of 

development we are entitled to, and future generations are entitled to, then we must have those roads and 

highways. 

 

I say this, Mr. Speaker, if we do not act quickly we are going to be left behind. We will become, in time, 

a backward nation that is going to be exploited by stronger nations, and it is already being done today. 

References have been made on previous occasions that 85 per cent of the exploitation of the natural 

wealth of Canada is in the hands of many people from other countries. It is a bad situation, and the only 

way that we can correct this situation is to see that that wealth is opened up to our people and to give 

some confidence to the people of Canada, so they would invest in their own industries. 

 

I would say in conclusion that I believe that a country is as good as its people. If you have a well 

educated society, you have a fine country. If you have good natural resources, there is a possibility of 

having a high standard of living; but you cannot have that high standard of living unless wealth is 

exploited, and we cannot have the kind of development that we as Canadians visualize, unless we have 

the proper transportation and communication system. And, therefore, I will support the Motion. 

 

Mr. H. G. Dunfield (Meadow Lake): — I am pleased to take part in this discussion, because I am in 

full agreement with the motion. I would like to point out that there are a few things this Government 

could do in the way of northern roads. During the ‘thirties, those desperate years, a delegation of us 

approached the Government to start No. 4 Highway north from Meadow Lake. We had two reasons in 

mind. One was to give immediate work and wages to many people who had come into the north 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

32 

 

country and who were not adaptable to farming or ranching and who needed some other form of income. 

 

Notwithstanding the shortage of finances at that time the Government did build in those years some 50 

miles of Highway No. 4 north of Meadow Lake. Since then this Government has, through its 

Department of Natural Resources, pushed a fairly good road north 50 miles further on toward Buffalo 

Narrows, and it has been very much appreciated, but it will only carry a limited amount of traffic. We 

have asked repeatedly that the last 50 miles of road be finished into Buffalo Narrows, if only as a winter 

trail 

 

We had in mind, years ago, not one the immediate work programme for those people, but we had in 

mind the possibilities of quick access to the southern edge of the pre-Cambrian shield. In 1938 I was in 

Goldfields just to see what was going on. I have lived in northern areas a long time, and if any new 

developments arose I liked to see what it was all about. I was in Goldfields in 1938 and I asked there, 

their opinion of the possibility of this highway being extended to Goldfields then. They said it probably 

wouldn’t be feasible nor economically sound, insofar as they were concerned up there, but one of the 

engineers made this statement, which I thought was of very great value. He said, “We are making 

discoveries in northern central Saskatchewan, in the Goldfields and surrounding area, because easy 

access by water to this particular area,” but he said, “We know that there are just as great opportunities, 

just as much chance of finding values almost anywhere in the great storehouse of wealth that we have in 

the Canadian shield, and by all means push your road north as quickly as you can, to the southern edge 

of the shield, because if you do, then exploration will be made much easier than it is now into the great 

area just north of Buffalo Narrows, which is very close to the southern edge of the shield. 

 

That has been our dream for many years. Just a short time ago a few citizens of Meadow Lake decided 

to try to locate a winter road into Athabaska, because last year at freeze-up some 5,200 tons of freight 

were left at Waterways – freight that was greatly needed in Uranium City. The Eldorado Mining 

Company flew in some 4,200 bags of cement. That was quite possible, and quite a sound proposition for 

them as they have extremely high profits from their operations. But the shortage of goods for some of 

the people up there because so acute that the people of Uranium City really gave some thought to a 

winter road, and they proposed (since most of their affiliations are with firms in Edmonton) a winter 

road directly paralleling the southern border of Lake Athabaska, but they didn’t know the country as we 

do. Such a road is utterly impossible, because from Buffalo Narrows, a short distance to the west, there 

are some 42 rivers and creeks running northwest to Lake Athabaska, and a road along there would just 

be a series of ups and downs. Going to the east a short distance from Buffalo Narrows you run into 

enormous muskegs and sandhills, and into the raw, bare rocks – small mountains; but we have known 

for a long time that directly north of Buffalo Narrows, which is also directly north of Meadow Lake, is a 

type of terrain which we believed was suitable for a winter road if not a summer road, when conditions 

warrant it. 

 

A few weeks ago four men from Meadow Lake rigged up what we term a ‘swamp bug’. The difference a 

swamp bug and a snowmobile 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

33 

 

is that a swamp bug has much wider tracks and can go over almost any depth of snow. This swamp bug 

had been hauling fish from a point. I believe, about 160 miles south of Lake Athabaska to Buffalo 

Narrows. We were quite sure that it would be possible to go straight through. One of the very few white 

men who has travelled that country by canoe and on foot told me just about two months ago that he 

knew definitely there was nothing in the world to stop a winter road being found from Broach Lake to 

Uranium City. I had written the Hon. Minister of Natural Resources (Hon. Mr. Brockelbank) about this, 

and I quite agree with him, too, that it is economically unsound to consider building a summer road at 

the present time, but a winter road requires very little construction. As I announced the other day, it was 

a matter of great pride to the people of Meadow Lake anyway, that four of their young men would spend 

their own money and risk their own lives, in that attempt to locate a road across 160 miles of barren 

country. 

 

It is not quite as barren as some people think. This flier and ex-trapper, whom I know very well, said 

that during his trapping experiences through that country, years ago, and coming down the various rivers 

and creeks in canoes, he found it one of the most beautiful areas in western Canada. There is sufficient 

tree-growth there to protect a road from most of the winter drifting, and there is just this one 

comparatively narrow strip, probably varying from 50 to 100 miles wide, straight north of Buffalo 

Narrows that would be ideal, in his opinion, for either winter or summer construction. 

 

In Alberta many years ago, that Government built a road 400 miles long, or more, just for the fish 

business emanating from Slave Lake. It is a very heavy producing lake. That road now has proved to be 

of immense value because it is led right into the unbelievably rich lead and zinc fields around Pine 

Point. 

 

I would like to say again, Mr. Speaker, that I think, though I am in full agreement with this and will 

certainly support the motion, I think that we in Saskatchewan could give a little more thought and a little 

more attention to opening up opportunities in this great northern area of our own. 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — I am very glad to have the opportunity of saying a few 

words on this very important question. As a matter of fact, none has been quite as close to my heart for a 

number of years. I realize that it is very difficult to carry on a discussion to carry on a discussion on the 

full scope of this resolution; it is rather a wide one, but what I am going to say this evening will be 

confined almost completely to the need for Federal aid to our highways and roads in Saskatchewan. 

 

To get to the basis of the need for Federal aid in this province, all one has to do is to turn back to the 

Annual Report of the Department of Highways and Transportation for the year ending 1943-44. I have 

this on my desk, because not long ago I read in the local paper a statement made by one of the members 

of this Legislature that the Liberal Government had built a highway system of over 8,000 miles while 

they were in office. I want to say that this is not correct, because here is the 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

34 

 

record as of April 30, 1944. During the time they took office there were not too many miles of road 

built, so these figures are accurate. At what time I find that they had some grades constructed to 

standard, but not surfaced – 2,270 miles; and they had some grades constructed to standard and surfaced 

with untreated gravel, 4,872 miles; and they had 138 miles that were surfaced with bitumen and gravel, 

but they has almost 700 miles of that area that was not touched at all, except possibly for putting up a 

few highway signs. 

 

So that is the basis for the need of Federal aid in this province. Now, in addition to the small mileage 

which has been constructed which I have given you, most of these roads were worn out by 1944, and as 

I have told this Chamber before, were in need of reconstruction. It has been intimated by the member 

from Meadow Lake (Mr. Dunfield) that possible the province has not done too much since we have 

taken over. I want to remind this House that we have reconstructed over 5,000 miles of the provincial 

highway system, and I also find that during that time we have (and this was at December 30, 1954); the 

figures I am going to  quote are up to that date. At that time, the province of Manitoba had a total of 

1,013 miles of road that had a bituminous surface or cement. In 1944 they had 546 miles of bituminous 

surface; so in that period from 1944 to December 31, 1954, they increased their mileage by a bituminous 

surface road of 467 miles. 

 

Saskatchewan, during the same time, increased their mileage by 1,006 miles and Alberta increased theirs 

by 947 miles, so the record we have in this province is not a poor one, particularly when you compare 

the money which we have had to spend on highways with that of our two sister provinces. But, in spite 

of all of this work, in spite of all we have done, there is still a tremendous amount to be done, as has 

been pointed out by the mover and the seconder of this resolution. 

 

Last fall when I attended the conference in Ottawa of the Dominion and the provinces, trying to find 

ways and means of speeding up work on the Trans-Canada highway, in the submission which I made at 

that time, I pointed out the need for Federal aid because of certain conditions. One is that the expanding 

role of the motor vehicle in the social and economic life of the nation made it imperative that the Federal 

Government do enter this picture to a larger extent than they are doing at the present time; and due 

regards to the prompt responsibility on the part of the Federal Government in the development of a 

national highway designed to weld the provinces of our far-flung country more closely together and an 

adequate concern for the needs of the provinces in relation to their prime responsibilities for the roads 

and highways within their borders. Because, as I pointed out at that time, until the Trans-Canada 

highway is completed, a system in which some of the provinces at least, and we were one, that did use 

up a great deal of our provincial revenue to try and live up to the agreement which we have signed with 

the Federal Government; namely, to construct that highway by December, 1956, it would be difficult for 

the province to meet other than that highway obligation. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that of all the 

provinces in Canada, Saskatchewan leads the way in the percentage of work that has been done in regard 

to the Trans-Canada Highway. 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

35 

 

Now, I pointed out at that time also that one of the inducements to getting the Trans-Canada Highway 

completed as early as possible would be for the Federal Government at that time to announce that they 

were prepared to make a proposition to the provinces whereby they would commence a comprehensive 

programme of highway construction not only for just the Trans-Canada Highway, but for roads of 

national and international importance. If the provinces had that assurance from the Federal Government, 

then we would be in a better position to plan our other works; we would be in a better position to know 

the other roads on which we could spend provincial money. 

 

I also want to say that while I was very glad to sign the agreement at Ottawa, getting their assistance on 

50 per cent of certain costs of the Trans-Canada (not all of the costs), I knew at the time it would require 

a lot of money from the province that would be needed for other roads. At the time we signed the 

agreement, I pointed out that in my opinion, the Trans-Canada Highway should have been a Dominion 

responsibility for its construction costs, and while again I was very glad to have their belated increase to 

90 per cent of the cost, I would like to remind this House that that only represents about three per cent 

extra on the overall cost of the Trans-Canada Highway. 

 

So there is, as has been pointed out by former speakers, a very great need for Federal aid if we are to 

take our rightful place in not just Canada but on this continent, because the American Federal 

Government has, since 1916, been making very large contributions to the federal states, not just for the 

primary system of state highways, but they have been making contributions to the urban centres, and 

particularly to what they refer to as their farm-to-market roads in the United States. Until our Federal 

Government is prepared to take a realistic view of this matter, we are going to have the situation, as 

pointed out by former speakers here this afternoon. We are not going to be able to give the people of the 

province the services which they require, particularly in view of the rapid development that has taken 

place in the mechanism of our farming economy. 

 

I want to point out that the use of the truck, which has become necessary because of this mechanism, is 

placing a burden not only on the municipalities of this province but also on the province, and we are 

finding that this change has been so rapid that it is taxing the financial ability of both the province and 

the municipalities to provide roads for the use of our trucks. The trucks are here to stay, and they are 

playing a most important part in the development of this country. We must recognize the fact that they 

are here to stay, and we must recognize the fact that we are going to be required to build a much higher 

standard of road than we thought was necessary even 10 years ago. 

 

I have on my desk the report of the W.A.S.H.O. test in the state of Idaho, and when you read the report 

and realize the beating that roads take because of truck transportation, and read the recommendations 

which those who are in charge of the test are recommending, you will realize that we have got to be 

prepared to spend a great deal more money than we are spending now, if we are going to provide roads 

to carry the truck 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

36 

 

transportation which we not only have today, but which I am quite sure is going to increase as the years 

go on, because it is very noticeable that since 1944 the number of trucks in this province has increased 

by over 142 per cent. That gives some indication in that type of work. 

 

There is another factor which makes for greater need of federal aid, and that is the fact that 

Saskatchewan is becoming a corridor province as far as truck transportation is concerned. We have a lot 

of trucks. Today you can enter Saskatchewan at the Manitoba border and drive possibly all the way 

through Saskatchewan without buying a gallon of fuel; at least very little. The same is true of trucks 

coming to this country from the United States. They travel up to Regina from North Portal and back 

again without spending a single dollar for fuel. In other words, we are carrying that heavy traffic without 

getting any recompense at all from these foreign cars and trucks, and for that reason the Federal 

Government should assume some responsibility for now announcing a comprehensive programme of aid 

for highway construction. 

 

It is quite true that the agreement which has been offered to the provinces, and I expect will be signed by 

most of us, does extend the length of the Trans-Canada agreement to March, 1961. But for those 

provinces, like ourselves, which hope to finish that road much before that date, I say it is going to be 

most unfair to us, if they do not now, when this is brought up in the House of Commons, be prepared to 

make some announcement that they are going to proceed with a further agreement with the provinces to 

assist them in this very important work with which we are confronted. 

 

There is much more I could say about this, but I do not want to prolong the discussion, and I also want 

to make mention a few of these facts when I speak later on in the Budget Debate; but I just want to give 

my support to the resolution which has been brought forward here today. 

 

Certainly if we are to take our place with the other provinces and with the States across the line, then the 

time is now overdue for the Federal Government to make some contribution, particularly when we 

realize that they are collecting from the highway users of this country a great deal more money than is 

collected by the provinces when we collect our gasoline tax and our car licenses. 

 

I think it was pointed out here today that the revenue which Ottawa receives from one source alone 

amounts to over $150 million a year, and that sources is the tax on cars, sales tax and the excise tax; that 

tax alone brings in a total of $150 million a year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those few remarks I want to say that I am very pleased to support this resolution. 

 

Hon. J. H. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural & Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, before the vote 

is taken on this question, I would like to say just a few words, because I think that this question of 

transportation is very fundamental, not only in the southern part of the province, but also in the north of 

the province as well. It is not roads alone, but there are other forms of 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

37 

 

transportation in the north will play a very important part for many years to come. As a matter of fact, 

some of those forms of transportation, I think, will probably never be displaced by roads, and it is very 

doubtful if they will ever be displaced by railroads either. 

 

One good example is the water transportation down the Athabaska River from Waterways, Alberta, to 

serve all of the far north in the Territories, and the northern part of Saskatchewan. More attention should 

have been given to this highway transportation at an earlier date, because last year a bottleneck 

developed there, and the freight could not be handled over that system of transportation. Strong 

representations were made by the people concerned, and I had my say, too, with regard to that question, 

and steps are being taken now to increase very substantially the number of barges and boats operated by 

Northern Transportation Company, which is a Crown corporation – a subsidiary of Eldorado Mining and 

Refining Company. Also I hope that everything possible will be done by way of dredging, by way of 

supplying navigation aids, so as to enable the barges to travel on the river at night, as well as in daylight, 

and that the situation will be investigated to find if it is possible, by some programme of water control, 

to eliminate periods of very low water on the Athabaska River. This low water, of course, very seriously 

interferes with transportation. 

 

The building of wharves is also an important item, but in this day and age, the building of air-fields is 

most important, and I believe that we can be justified in asking the National Government to make a 

substantial contribution to that work. We have received some help. We received during the last year 

some help on Lac la Ronge, and hope to get some more work done on it during the coming year; but in 

an area as large as that from Lac la Ronge to Stony Rapids and Uranium City, there is need for an 

intermediate landing field of good enough quality to handle at least planes the size of the DC-3, and at 

the present time we haven’t got that. The field at Stony Rapids was built by the Provincial Government. 

 

Now, in regard to roads in the north. We were of the opinion a few years ago that the Federal 

Government had announced a policy under which they were, or would be willing, to share the costs of 

construction of mining roads. We did get a sharing of the costs between the mining company, the 

Federal Government, and the Provincial Government for the construction of the mining road (which is a 

portage road) between the eastern end of Lake Athabaska and Black Lake, a distance of about 14 miles. 

 

Then when Eldorado Mine was being established near Uranium City we did get help from the Federal 

Government. The mining companies put up some money, and the Federal Government put up some 

money, as well as the Provincial Government, but it was the mining companies and the Provincial 

Government that carried more than their share of that expense. In this particular case, I often thought 

that as the principal mining company in the area at that time, which required a road, was a company 

owned by the Federal Government, it was not a case of the Federal Government helping the province to 

build a road but rather the province helping the Federal Government to build a road which they 

absolutely required. 

 

Now, I have no objection, and I am not sorry they did that, but since that road was built, we have made a 

number of applications together with mining companies, to get assistance on comparatively short roads, 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

38 

 

roads which run into a cost of a good many thousands of dollars, and we have not been successful in 

getting help on one mining road since the Eldorado road was built. I do not think that is a good policy. I 

do not think it is good business for the Federal Government, because not only does the Federal 

Government receive very substantial revenue in its taxation on cars and trucks, but it receives very 

substantial revenue on its taxes levied on mining companies. 

 

The Hudson bay Mining and Smelting Company will, I believe (and I admit that this is a guess) pay in 

one year to the Federal Government in corporation taxes some place between two and four times as 

much as they pay to the Provincial Government in royalties. They issued a statement a short while ago; 

it was at the end of nine months that their profits after taxes were around $9 million. If that is the case, 

you can imagine they have paid pretty substantial revenue to the Federal Government. Looking it from a 

national point of view, it is the best of business for the nation to get additional mines, and to get further 

revenue like that coming into the Federal Treasury, so I do not think we are being unreasonable in 

suggesting that it is good business for the Federal Government to get mines developed. 

 

The hon. member from Meadow Lake (Mr. Dunfield) mentioned that Eldorado flew in a large quantity 

of cement, and they could do that on account of high profits; that they got the profits. Those profits are 

not just taxed by the Federal Government, but all belong to the Federal Government. 

 

So I am very happy to support this motion, and I think it is most important from a national point of view 

that we do have a more up-to-date and practical and effective policy on a national basis, in regard to 

transportation. We have seen that kind of a situation in other parts of Canada, where it has cost ten times 

as much as the sums we might think about in our situation. The Great Lakes Navigation, the Welland 

Canal, the St. Lawrence River and ocean ports, the Canso Causeway – it is recognized that 

transportation is of national importance, but I think we have got to have a policy in transportation that 

does recognize all parts of the country, whether they happen to be on the ocean, whether they happen to 

be in central Canada, or in the centre of the western part of Canada, as we are. Mr. Speaker, I will 

support the motion. 

 

Mr. S. H. Carr (Rosthern): — I do not wish to say very much on this motion, Mr. Speaker. I am 

certainly in favour of a comprehensive national highway policy, but there are a few things I feel haven’t 

been made clear in this debate. The hon. member from Pelly (Mr. Feusi) indicated that in his opinion the 

Federal Government should provide more money for highways. 

 

Now we, in Saskatchewan, would like the Federal Government to pay more money for a lot of things. 

Under the Tax Rental Agreement, we get quite a large sum of money. All the provinces that come under 

the Tax Rental agreement, I believe, got somewhere in the neighbourhood of $400 million. Now, $400 

million is about the amount of money that is spent on highways in Canada, but if you wanted to twist it 

around you could say that the 

  



 

March 1, 1956 

39 

 

Federal Government is paying for all the highways. 

 

Mr. C. G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — That’s nice twisting! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Carr: — Now I did not wish to start an argument, but I just wanted to mention that, to indicate to 

you that while money can come from the Federal Government, should the Federal Government build 

highways? They did make a contribution to the Trans-Canada Highway, but the Federal authorities said 

where the highway should be. I could not be in favour of the Federal Government providing a good deal 

of funds for highways in Saskatchewan, other than the Trans-Canada Highway, and telling the 

Provincial Government where the highways should be built. I am certainly in favour of them giving 

money to the province, additional funds; but I think it should be done under the Tax Rental Agreement, 

and that the Provincial Government should decide where the highways are to be built – not a national 

authority. 

 

For that reason, while I am in favour of a comprehensive national highway policy to try and get the 

provinces to co-ordinate their highways, I am certainly not in favour of the Federal Government telling 

the provinces where the highways should be built. So that as far as finances are concerned for highways, 

I would favour the idea that the amount of money paid to the provinces under the Tax Rental Agreement 

should be increased, rather than they should earmark certain funds to be spent for highways. 

 

With those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support the motion. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to unanimously. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:25 o’clock p.m. 


