



















































Hansard: March 26, 1956


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Twelfth Legislature 

 

33rd Day 

 

Monday, March 26, 1956 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

Tribute To Jubilee Committee 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the final report of the Saskatchewan 

Golden Jubilee Committee. In laying this report on the table, I would like to take this opportunity 

formally of paying tribute to Mr. Justice Culliton, Chairman of the Committee, and to all the members of 

that Committee for the magnificent job which they have done on behalf of the people of the province, in 

celebration of our 50th anniversary. 

 

I believe the members and their wives are invited to a dinner to be held tonight with the Golden Jubilee 

Committee, and more will be said at that time. There is no need, therefore, for me at this time to do any 

more than to formally place on the records of this House the deep debt which this Legislature and all the 

people of the province owe to the men and women who are members of the Committee (some of whom 

we have the privilege of having with us in the galleries today) for the really splendid job they did as a 

provincial committee, and as the representatives of local committees and sub-committees, which made it 

possible to carry on one of the best celebrations which I think our province has ever experienced. 

 

I therefore commend this report to the members who I hope will read it because it is a very fine 

summary of the Jubilee activities. I commend it to their attention, and I am sure I speak for all members 

of the House when I express to the committee our thanks for a job well done. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would like also to say a word or 

two at this time with regard to the members of the Jubilee Committee, and I, too, want to congratulate 

them on a tremendous effort which they put forth in making our Jubilee year the great success that it 

was. 

 

I also want to congratulate the many people scattered about the province of Saskatchewan who put forth 

a tremendous effort on their own to make our Jubilee a great success, and I sincerely hope that we will 

have the opportunity of meeting some of the members of the Jubilee Committee this evening. I have 

only received the final report of the Jubilee Committee last Friday, so have not had the opportunity to 

peruse it, but I am sure that it will tell of the tremendous job that was undertaken by the Committee, and 

the wonderful work that they were able to do for us, the citizens of Saskatchewan, this summer. 

  



 

March 26, 1956 

 

2 

 

I want to concur in what the Premier has said, and to thank the members of the Jubilee Committee for 

the tremendous job which they have done over the past year. 

 

Mr. J.W. Horsman (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, as a member of the Jubilee Committee, I would like to 

say a few words at this time, too. I know it was a tremendous job that was undertaken to celebrate the 

50th anniversary of the founding of this province, but I think the response which we have had is really 

remarkable, and more than anyone ever thought we would get. 

 

It was my privilege to attend a good many of the Jubilee celebrations during the summer, and even in 

small communities to see what those people turned out and did on their own was really remarkable. 

Everyone was greatly interested in the thing, and people came from thousands of miles. I know people 

who came all the way from California up to our town to be there are on Jubilee Day, and they certainly 

took a wonderful interest in it. 

 

Another thing I think was very important was the writing of our Saskatchewan history. Histories of great 

things are all written — the important things that happen, but in the history such as this you get a lot of 

the small things — very important, too, but things that are never written in an ordinary history. Histories 

have been written, and written for years, but there are many of the small things that are never written up. 

Most of you no doubt have read the poem called "Hiawatha", the poem about the first Indian who is 

supposed to have written a history of his people. He invented the picture-writing to try and preserve 

some of the things his people have done, (that is according to the story) and to quote Longfellow: 

 

"Great men die in are forgotten; 

Wise men speak; their words of wisdom 

Perish in the ears that hear them, 

Do not reach the generations 

That, as yet unborne are waiting 

In the great, mysterious darkness 

Of the speechless days that shall be! 

On the grave-posts of our fathers 

Are no signs, no figures painted; 

Who are in those graves we know not, 

Only know they are our fathers." 

 

That is the purpose of writing a history, and I think it is a wonderful thing to get a history of 

Saskatchewan written at this time, because if we had waited very much longer, most of the older people 

who settled this country, and knew most about the early days would have passed on, and we would have 

lost that opportunity. History such as this — not only the history that we have written here, but many 

small communities wrote up a history of their own activities during the last 50 years; and they get a 

history of the simple things, and the true things, and the silent men who do things. Those are the things 

that average history does not record. 

  



 

March 26, 1956 

 

3 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, may I just have a word with regard to the 

dinner this evening. The time on the invitation was 6:30 o'clock, I believe. We are hoping that the group 

might gather at 6:15 o'clock. If you have a few minutes before dinner is ready there is an exhibit of some 

of the publications produced during the year on display in the cafeteria, which I am sure would be of 

interest to all of the members and their wives who may be able to attend. 

 

I want only at this time, Mr. Speaker, to second most heartily the remarks which have been made this 

afternoon with regard to the Golden Jubilee activities. Those of us who were close to the idea had indeed 

great hopes in regard to what might be forthcoming. I think each of us, and all of us, could say that in 

every way, our fondest hopes were achieved, and indeed more than achieved. The whole result of the 

Jubilee celebrations was summed up this morning at the final meeting of the Jubilee Committee. I could 

have hoped that all the members of the Legislature might have heard the comments by several of the 

sub-committee chairman, and particularly by Mr. McGuiness, the executive director, who has done such 

a fine job for us. 

 

I want again to say, along with the others, a very sincere word of thanks to the members of the 

committee, and thank you to all the people of the province for the exceedingly fine response which the 

idea received. 

 

Hon. J.W. Burton (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the others who 

have spoken in connection with the Jubilee celebrations. I might say that I consider it a great honour and 

a privilege to have served on the Jubilee Committee and executive, and to have worked with the men 

and women of that committee, with the chairman and also the executive director. My only hope is that 

after we have seen how the people of the province rose to the occasion and in their enthusiasm carried 

the Jubilee celebrations from one end of the province to greater heights than any of us had hoped for, 

that we now, all of us, resolve that in the disbanding of our Jubilee Committee we will not consider it 

dead and buried, but that we will do our utmost to see that the spirit of the Jubilee lives in Saskatchewan 

for years to come. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 
 


