



















































Hansard: February 22, 1956


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session – Twelfth Legislature 

10th Day 

Wednesday, February 22, 1956 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed, from Tuesday, February 21, 1956, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

Mr. Brown (Last Mountain) for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. S.H. Carr (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, before I adjourned the debate yesterday, I said some things 

in the Throne Speech pleased me. Today I would like to speak about some things that I regret. The first 

thing that I would like to draw to the attention of the House is my impression of the debate so far. 

 

Some of the speeches, particularly from the Cabinet Ministers, in my opinion, have been beneath the 

standard expected of statesmen. Some of the vicious attacks on the Opposition have been unworthy of 

representatives of this Government of the people of Saskatchewan. I had expected, in view of the fact 

that we would be having an election this year, as everyone expects, that the Government, particularly the 

Cabinet Ministers, would present to this House their proposals for the development of Saskatchewan 

during the next four or five years. 

 

Instead of that, a great deal of time has been taken up in attacking the Opposition, and particular 

attention has been given to the Leader of the Opposition. Those same tactics were used in 1948 to attack 

the Leader of the Opposition, to criticize him, to put him down in the opinion of the people, and the 

same tactics are used now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural Resources): — I imagine that’s why he isn’t here. 

 

Mr. Carr: — I would like to serve warning on this Government and the C.C.F. Party that the people of 

Saskatchewan are sick and tired of that kind of politics in this province. 

 

Now it appears to me that there are three points that are bothering the Government, and they arise out of 

suggestions that have been made by the Opposition. The first one is that the Liberal Party is sabotaging 

industrial development in this province. 

 

Some Govt. Member: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Carr: — The hon. members agree. And the second one is that the Liberal Party does not care what 

happens to the farmers. 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

2 

Some Govt. Member: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Carr: — They agree. The third one is – and this is bothering the C.C.F. a great deal, and bothering 

this Government a great deal, perhaps because the thing is sound, and that is because the Liberal Party 

has undertaken to bring power to the farmers without capital outlay for the distribution system, and to 

refund the cost paid by farmers who have had power installed. 

 

The fourth one is the Liberal Party’s contention that the municipalities in Saskatchewan are not getting a 

fair deal from this Government and that this Government has failed to solve the problems facing the 

municipal councils in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Government has endeavoured to prove that they have been very kind to the municipalities. The 

Government has endeavoured to prove that it is impossible to bring power to the farmers without 

charging them at least half of the cost of the distribution system; they have endeavoured to prove, as I 

mentioned, that the Liberals do not care about the plight of the farmers, and that the Liberals are 

sabotaging industrial development. 

 

I would like to deal first with the question of industrial development, and who is sabotaging it in this 

province. The hon. member for Pelly (Mr. Feusi) yesterday brought into his remarks the Weston 

Bakeries. He made some to-do about the fact that they had made a profit, that they had sufficient funds 

to buy a chain of grocery stores in the United States at a cost of $3 million. He went on to say that the 

problems in Saskatchewan were aggravated by the fact that the Federal Government took off price 

controls. Several other members on the other side said that our problems were aggravated because the 

Federal Government had removed price controls. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak (Minister of Telephones): — And increase all our taxes! 

 

Mr. Car: — Now, it is quite apparent to everyone in this House that the C.C.F. believe that price control 

is a sound, economic measure. That is price control on the things that industry has to sell. They are 

absolutely opposed to control of wages. Now if wages are uncontrolled and the price of the product that 

the manufacturer has to sell is controlled, then there will be no profits for industry. To now . . . 

 

Mr. Erb (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. member a question? 

 

Some Opposition Members: — Sit down, sit down! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Is the hon. member willing to answer a question? 

 

Mr. Carr: — No, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Erb: — I would like to ask the hon. member . . . 

 

Some Opposition Members: — Sit down, sit down! 

 

Mr. Carr: — Mr. Speaker, our time is limited, limited by action of this Government. 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

3 

Some Opposition Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carr: — I did not interrupt any speaker on the government side during air time, and I hope that no 

speaker will interrupt me during air time. I will answer any questions after air time, but I won’t be able 

to now. If the House will give me permission, I will answer any questions after air time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said that the policies advocated by the C.C.F. Government would destroy the profits of 

industry. How are you going to induce industry to come to Saskatchewan if the fundamental policy of 

the C.C.F. is that they cannot make a profit? 

 

The hon. Minister of Agriculture in a very bitter attack against the Liberal Party yesterday, a very bitter 

attack against the Leader of the Opposition, said many things that I won’t have time to deal with today. 

But one thing he did say, “Mr. Nollet contended, according to the ‘Leader-Post’, that without the Dam, 

there was no possibility of industrial development in Saskatchewan. Without power there is no 

opportunity for industrial development.” That may be a very sound observation, but what does the 

industrialist in eastern Canada and the United States think when a Minister of the Crown says that there 

isn’t sufficient power for industry here. Well, he says: “I will write off Saskatchewan as far as industry 

is concerned”. 

 

Who then is sabotaging industrial development in this province? The policies of this Government and 

the policies of the C.C.F. 

 

Some Opposition Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carr: — If this Government wishes to encourage industry to come to Saskatchewan, let them bring 

in a resolution in this Session that they repudiate the Regina manifesto, that they believe in free 

enterprise and industrial development. So I think that the people of Saskatchewan know who is keeping 

industry out of Saskatchewan. 

 

No another point that the members on the other side have tried to put over, is that the Liberals do not 

care what happens to the farmers. They have made a great to-do about cash advances on farm-stored 

grain. They accuse the Liberals of not wanting to deal with it, not wanting to talk about it. I do not think 

that anybody in the Liberal Party needs to be afraid to talk about cash advances on farm-stored grain. 

 

Some Govt. Member: — Walter Tucker is. 

 

Mr. Carr: — When the C.C.F. Party was organized in this province, they believed that it was sound 

policy to take over and control the means of production, distribution, and so on. Now what have some of 

the hon. members on the other side said. I believe I read in the paper last fall that the Minister of 

Agriculture said: 

 

“The farms have done their job, now they should be paid.” 

 

The Premier, the other day, said: 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

4 

“They have produced the wheat, now they should have their wages.” 

 

The Minister of Education said: 

 

“Now they should have their wages.” 

 

That is the way they do in Russia. When the people produce the wheat it becomes the property of the 

Crown. The C.C.F. didn’t have the, well, I won’t use the word, they didn’t have the intestinal fortitude 

to socialize agriculture. Now they are asking the Federal Government through the Wheat Board to 

socialize agriculture. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Is that why you voted for cash advances in 1953? 

 

Mr. Carr: — The hon. Premier, Mr. Speaker, has an excellent memory, but he should know that I was 

not in the House in 1953. 

 

Some Opposition Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — All your colleagues voted for it. 

 

Mr. Carr: — The Liberals do care about farmers, the Liberals are pledged to assist farmers in every 

way possible, particularly to help them to improve their economic position; that is why the Liberals say 

at the present time, because farmers are having difficulty, particularly the smaller farmers, that power 

should be brought to them without capital cost. 

 

The hon. member for Pelly (Mr. Feusi) yesterday said, in praising the Power Corporation, that by the 

end of this year 40,000 farmers will have received power. That is excellent. The farmers of 

Saskatchewan and the Liberal Party are pleased that so many have received power, but there are still, 

according to the hon. member for Pelly, 70,000 farmers who haven’t got power. In most cases, through 

my district and your districts, it is the poorer farmers who haven’t got power. If we are to keep them on 

the farm, it is necessary that means be found to bring power to them, and the Liberal Party has offered 

the solution to bring them power, without capital cost. 

 

Some Govt Member: — That’s about all they are going to do. 

 

Mr. Carr: — Not all the farmers are poor, and not all farmers are rich. The efficient grain farmer has 

been getting along quite well, and actually is not suffering very much right now. The man who has 

balanced agriculture, who depends for part of his income on some livestock, is not doing too badly, but 

if he is to stay in business he must have all the help that the government can give to assist him to 

mechanize his operations, to cut down his labour costs, so that he can produce his products more 

cheaply. 

 

That is why we believe that every farmer should be assisted in every way possible. 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

5 

Mr. Wooff (Turtleford): — That’s the way they do in Russia. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Carr: — Now, now, my hon. friend. 

 

Some Hon. Member: — Why don’t you go there if you like it. 

 

Mr. Carr: — Now, Mr. Speaker, there has been considerable said in this House in regard to the 

assistance, the great help, that has been given to the municipalities. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — All through with cash advances? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Carr: — The hon. member asks am I through with cash advances. There has been a Committee set 

up in this House to deal with this matter. There is a resolution on the Order Paper also. Does the hon. 

member want us to talk about cash advances in every debate? 

 

Mr. Walker: — I want to hear your views on it. 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — If you’ll keep quiet we will get a chance to hear him talk. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — He can’t keep quiet. 

 

Mr. Carr: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, there has been considerable said in this House about the 

millions of dollars of help that has been given to municipalities. The Liberals have said that the 

Government has done nothing to help the municipalities. I am sure that the general public would be 

rather confused if they didn’t know the situation, but I am afraid that they do know the situation; but the 

hon. members on the other side try by words to convince themselves that the municipalities are in good 

shape, and that this Government should have the credit for this condition. 

 

I would like to read the last two paragraphs of the brief that the Urban Municipalities Association 

presented to the Royal Commission on Agriculture and Rural Life. This is taken from the Western 

Municipal News: 

 

“At the request of the Royal Commission on Agriculture and Rural Life a brief was presented on 

behalf of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association at a hearing of the Commission 

held on October 8th, 1953. The substance of the brief pointed out the problems being posed to 

the urban municipalities by the shift from rural to urban life. The following which are the two 

concluding paragraphs of the brief sums up the arguments.” 

 

This is from the brief: 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

6 

“The Association feels it can be of little service in analyzing rural trends. It does submit, 

however, that if the Royal Commission concludes there will be a continuation of the large 

population shift from rural to urban life, or from smaller to larger urban centres, then it might 

appear altogether advisable for the Provincial Government to examine very closely and promptly 

the difficulties which beset the urban municipalities and the limitations under which they operate 

as creates of government. 

 

“Many students in the field of government have expressed the opinion that vigorous local self 

government is necessary to maintain democracy in national politics and government. In other 

words, democracy, like charity, begins at home. It will not be a healthy situation, therefore, if 

urban municipalities lose that sense of vigorous self government, by operating with a feeling of 

continued frustration.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker in the few minutes that I have I cannot hope to deal with the problems of the 

municipalities of Saskatchewan in an adequate manner. I can lay only briefly the problem before this 

House, and discuss some of the things that should be done. The feeling of frustration applies to rural 

municipalities as well as to urban municipalities. 

 

Now, we say that the government has done nothing. All this Government has proposed to solve the 

problems of municipalities is a suggestion or a proposal that municipalities be reorganized into larger 

units. Now, Mr. Speaker, there has not been one shred of evidence brought forward to prove that larger 

units will solve the problems that are facing municipalities. The Government had that idea several years 

ago, that larger municipal units would solve the problems of the municipalities, the same as they hoped 

that larger school units would solve the problem of education in Saskatchewan. In the 194 Session, a 

Committee was appointed to look into this question of larger municipal units. They heard briefs from 

various organizations and individuals. I hoped that I could have had a copy of that brief, but it is not 

available. If the Committee reported to the Government, the Government didn’t make its report available 

to the public. But there is some indication of the Government’s attitude in regard to larger municipal 

units. I have here a copy of a speech made by the Minister of Municipal Affairs, in 1945, the Hon. Mr. 

Brockelbank, who said at that time speaking on the organization of the municipalities: 

 

“I have had resolutions favouring it and some asking for a vote to be taken. On the question of a 

vote, I want to point out to you that there was no vote taken when the present municipal 

boundaries were set up. 

 

“Legislation is being prepared which will be introduced in the House, I believe, which will give 

to the Minister power to endorse a map of the boundaries.” 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

7 

No consideration of what the municipalities wanted! That was the intention of the Government. 

 

“How will we get this map? We will do the best we can with your Executive, and I think that we 

will send it out to the municipalities in Saskatchewan and some will simply throw it away, 

because you cannot make larger units and have every municipality still exist. 

 

“We will get proposals from the people suggesting changes and some of them will be 

worthwhile. There will have to be some minor adjustments to the Rural Municipality Act to 

make it fit into the picture, but that’s the general outline of the legislation being prepared at this 

time.” 

 

The next year, however, I suppose the Government had had a report, because the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs at the Convention mentioned that a Committee had been appointed, and he said: 

 

“I want to say, this Committee up to date, if it never does anything more, has done work which 

has been worthwhile. A great many people have submitted briefs, and discussed this whole 

question of Municipal Government before the Committee. That in itself has been of definite 

value.” 

 

Now that was all that was done by this Government for municipalities until 1948. You know, in 1946, 

the Federal Government, following the Rowell-Sirois Commission report, had got the provinces together 

to work out some new sharing of responsibilities and new sharing of tax revenue. The Federal 

Government had realized, as everybody in Saskatchewan had realized, that there must be a change in the 

responsibilities for the load that was put on municipalities; that the Provincial and the Federal 

governments must assume some of this burden, that new revenues must be found to pay for the services 

that were left to be provided, and that there was to be a co-operation between Federal, Provincial and 

Municipal governments. 

 

Now, I can’t find the words to express the situation more clearly than the Premier did at the Convention 

of the Association of Rural Municipalities in 1948. He said: 

 

“At almost every turn, people are assisted and affected by government in some form, be I 

municipally, provincially, or federally. 

 

“It is, therefore, extremely essential that we should have a proper integration among these 

respective governments and that we should have a proper division of responsibility among these 

governments, and proper allocation of the financial sources of revenue to which these respective 

governments should have access.” 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

8 

Further, towards the end of his speech, he said: 

 

“We have been discussing the Federal-Provincial arrangement and the policies, the things that 

the Federal Government would assume and how they would share the revenues with the 

Provinces.” 

 

He went on, later on: 

 

“We feel that the job is just being begun. We are proposing to have a Provincial-Municipal 

Conference to do on a Provincial-Municipal level which already has been started on a 

Dominion-Provincial level.” 

 

Mr. Cameron: — What a hurry they are in. That was four years ago. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — Eight years ago. 

 

Mr. Carr: — “That is, just as the Dominion-Provincial governments have sat down together, and should 

sit down together, and should sit down together again, to work out their respective fields of 

responsibility, and their respective fields of income, necessary to discharge those responsibilities. 

So we think the time has come for the Provincial Government and the municipalities, both urban 

and rural, to sit down and work out the same problems. Thus we will be better able to decide 

who will be responsible for each government function, and where each authority will be 

expected to secure the money to discharge those particular responsibilities. 

 

“We already have some men who are well qualified to do research on these problems, and as 

soon as they have gathered sufficient data, so that we can place these problems and some of the 

recommended solutions before you, such a Conference will be convened, and we will try to work 

out our Provincial-Municipal relationships so that each of us will know clearly where our 

responsibility begins and where it ends, and secondly, where we can secure the money to 

discharge those responsibilities.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Government had done that in 1948 or 1949, the Liberal Party would not now say that 

the Government has done nothing for municipalities. 

 

Some Opposition Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Very good indeed. 

 

Mr. Carr: — Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the hon. members opposite have said that “it is unfair and 

unjust for the Liberals to say that this Government hasn’t treated the municipalities well”. The member 

for Redberry and the member for Kelvington, in their speeches, commended the Government for how it 

had helped the municipalities. According to the press report the member for Kelvington said that: “In the 

last six 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

9 

years under the C.C.F. his constituency had got $182,462 in assistance from this Government. That is 

for roads. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are about 45 rural constituencies, if you multiply that by 45, it is more than 

twice as much as all the grants that were given to the municipalities in those six years. 

 

Mr. Howe (Kelvington): — This wasn’t all grants, Mr. Speaker, it was bridges, and grants for special 

projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Carr: — I know, I know, I know all about it, but it’s more than twice as much . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — . . . campaign funds . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Carr: — Now, the hon. member for Redberry said that in 1952 and 1953 the municipalities in his 

constituency had got $70,000 in market road equalization grants, and if you multiply that by 45 it is 

more than five times as much as the grants that were given in the Province for those purposes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it appears to me that while some assistance is being given to the municipalities, it is 

not being given on a fair and equitable basis. The amounts of grants that are given to municipalities 

according to what the Minister of Highways told the Executive of the S.A.R.M. was that it exceeded the 

amount of the equalization grant. Because, Mr. Speaker, grants are given to some municipalities because 

of their bargaining position. I would like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if the constituency of Kelvington 

and the constituency of Redberry got extra grants, it is because they were in a better bargaining position 

than some other constituencies – my own for instance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Burton (Provincial Secretary): — Humboldt, too. 

 

Mr. Carr: — Speaking at his nominating convention, the hon. member for Redberry, this last summer, 

said: 

 

“The constituency of Redberry has received more special grants toward the grid system than any 

other constituency in the Province”. 

 

Now, I mentioned a few minutes ago that if our governments were to give the kind of service that the 

people wanted, then we must have some kind of co-operation between all three levels of government 

(Federal, Provincial and Municipal). Our Federal system is based on those three levels of government 

working together in harmony. Because of the difficult times that we had in the ‘thirties’ people realize 

all over this country that there must be a sharing of these responsibilities. The Liberal government at 

Ottawa has done its part as far as municipalities are concerned. 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

10 

Mr. Feusi (Pelly): — Where? 

 

Mr. Carr: — I am glad you asked that. In the constituency of Kelvington from 1939 to 1954, the 

Federal Government paid in Prairie Farm Assistance alone $799,999. 

 

Mr. Howe: — I never mentioned Prairie Farm Assistance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Carr: — I didn’t say you did, I am just showing that the Federal Government did far more for you 

than the Provincial Government did. 

 

Now, the constituency of Redberry received $3,455,000. Let’s take the Premier’s seat – his constituency 

received $4,283,000. 

 

Mr. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — How much did they pay in levies? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Over what period of time? 

 

Mr. Carr: — From 1939 to 1955. 

 

Premier Douglas: — How much did they collect in one per cent levy at that time? 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — About one-third of it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — No, no, in that seat, in that seat. 

 

Mr. Carr: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier thinks I don’t know. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I would just like to find out. 

 

Mr. Carr: — In that period – it is going to take up my time, but I will tell you. In that period the total 

paid out was $126,895,805, and of that they collected in the one per cent in Saskatchewan, 

approximately $50 million. Is that good enough? 

 

Premier Douglas: — No, I was asking by constituencies, but I don’t want to interrupt my hon. friend. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — That’s very nice of you. 

 

Mr. Carr: — The Minister of Education mentioned about the help too. The Federal Government helped 

his constituency far more than the Provincial Government has ever helped it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): — What did they pay out in salaries? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Carr: — By $5,368,000. And the hon. member for Pelly said that the Liberal Party had a deliberate 

plan to destroy 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

11 

agriculture. There isn’t anything, there isn’t any statute that has been passed in Canada that helped the 

municipalities more than the Prairie Farm Assistance Act. 

 

Some Opposition Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carr: — Another measure that has helped the municipalities a great deal is the Family Allowance. 

In 1954, if it hadn’t been for the Family Allowance there would have been a great deal more paid for 

social aid in this Province; $20 million a year. The Province hasn’t assumed any of that. The Old Age 

Pensioners over 70 - $20 some million a year. These measures have helped the municipalities a great 

deal. Unemployment Insurance – and now this new plan to assist when the unemployment goes over a 

certain figure is bound to help the municipalities more. All of these laws have been put in the statutes of 

Canada. 

 

Now then, sure this Government has assumed certain costs of social aid, this Government has assumed 

certain costs for the health and welfare of our aged and our unfortunate people, but it is not on the 

statutes of Saskatchewan. The law of Saskatchewan is that the municipality is responsible for all of these 

things. The Cabinet could tomorrow decide to discontinue supplementary allowances. It could decide to 

discontinue paying the medical costs for the aged, without bringing the matter before this Legislature. 

The burden would be thrown back on the municipalities. 

 

The time has come, Mr. Speaker, when the municipalities must have a new deal. Their responsibilities 

and their sources of revenue must be clearly defined by law, and this Government can never say that 

they have helped the municipalities until they have put such laws on the statutes of this province. 

 

Some Opposition Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carr: — Now, Mr. Speaker, my time is almost up, but I would like to say this that this Government 

has failed to solve the problems of the municipalities and that they are afraid to give the municipalities 

the help they need, because if the municipalities are free and independent, socialism can never come to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, it appears that it is customary in this Session to quote a little poetry. The 

members opposite are trying to convince themselves, by words, that they have helped the people of 

Saskatchewan a great deal – the farmers, the municipalities, everyone. Now I think that the hon. 

members should read some of the books of poetry that the Premier does; I would refer them, Mr. 

Speaker, to the words of Robert Burns; when they say that they are helping municipalities, that they are 

the champion of the farmer, that they are the friend of industry, that they are the benefactor of the 

unfortunate. I would ask them to read just that part: 

 

“O wad som Pow’r the giftie gie us 

To see oursels as others see us!” 

 

I will not support the motion, Mr. Speaker. 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

12 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, in rising in this debate, I would like to congratulate 

all the previous speakers, especially the mover and seconder, the Leader of the Opposition and our 

Premier. 

 

This document, the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, is one of the best that has been brought down 

since I have been sitting on this side of the House. I want to say that all the previous contributors to this 

debate have acquitted themselves well, considering the material they had at hand. There is not a great 

deal more to be said in this debate; there is not a great deal new that can be brought in. I hope to be able 

to say a few words on topics that have not been dealt with a little later on. I feel that I must draw the 

attention of this House and of the public who are listening on the air, and who will read the press, to 

some of the statements that have been made by the members opposite. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier got through, I said there was not a great deal left to be said; 

and I think by now, the way the Opposition have been squirming, they must be busy on their second pair 

of pants, and I think the Leader of the Opposition has gone through three pair. 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — A nice comparison, eh? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I would like to say that these hon. members, and especially the Leader of the 

Opposition, have been, for the last 18 months, going up and down the length and breadth of 

Saskatchewan suggesting that the only problem that we have in Saskatchewan is high taxes, and that if 

we could only reduce the burden of taxes on the municipalities, school and municipal, all our troubles 

would be over. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that that is nothing short of ridiculous. 

 

I wonder how long a man is going to be excused, such as the Leader of the Opposition, who was born 

and raised in this country, for making the juvenile statements that a 12-year-old schoolchild would know 

better. He must accept the responsibility. It is not good for people to ay that the Leader of the Opposition 

is a young man, and, after all, he is bound to make a few mistakes, and he is bound to misjudge. When 

one accepts the leadership of a political party, I believe that they have to forget some of their silly 

statements and ridiculous behaviour, and get down to some serious thinking. 

 

I don’t know how we can continue to be subjected to this type of tripe. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

draw the attention of this House to the fact that now, I am going to speak for northwestern Saskatchewan 

and the people in my constituency, and the area surrounding my constituency. The hon. gentlemen 

opposite have said in this House that nothing has been done. Well, I would like to have them say that up 

in our area, where there are miles and miles of power lines, miles and miles of new roads; very few of 

the highways that existed in 1944 have not been re-built. There are a very few miles on No. 29 Highway 

and a few miles on No. 40 that have not been completely rebuilt since 1944. You also 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

13 

have the services now, and I think that this is something that we should be made aware of, and the public 

should have their attention drawn to; the fact that towns and villages, which, a few years ago, never 

thought of getting out to the larger centres so that they could take advantages of some of the facilities in 

the larger towns and cities, are now getting, almost 12 months of the year, use of their automobile 

licences. 

 

Those are the things that the people of Saskatchewan are grateful for, and that is the situation now. On 

the farms and in the villages they have been brought into a new way of life through improved roads, 

improved maintenance, extension of various services. 

 

The hon. member for Rosthern (Mr. Carr) made the accusation of favouritism in grants to municipalities, 

and he referred to the member for Redberry (Mr. Zipchen) and the constituency of Redberry. That 

constituency of Redberry lies just north of the constituency of The Battlefords, and I want to say that the 

grants that were received in the constituency of Redberry were far greater than the grants that were 

received in the constituency of The Battlefords, and rightly so, because there was a far greater need. Due 

to the complete neglect and disregard of that area by previous governments, not one single mile of 

highway had been built in that vast area throughout Meeting Lake, and Rabbit Lake, and Mayfair. 

Nothing had been done through that area, and those people were wallowing in the mud from spring until 

fall, and then snow-bound for six months of the year. Today, even in a winter such as this, Mr. Speaker, 

more and more of them are able to get out to the city of North Battleford and have a little touch, a little 

bit of social contact with the outside world, simply because this Government has recognized the needs of 

these areas which had been neglected for years. 

 

You only need to take one look at the highway map, and you will see that vast section that was not 

served. Sure, it is an area that is not highly assessed; and if the hon. member for Rosthern suggests that, 

for instance, a municipality with some 50 or 60 miles of highway running through it should get the same 

assistance as a municipality that hasn’t one foot of highway in it, I suggest that he is just “off his eggs”. 

 

I want to suggest that the hon. member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff), and the hon. member for Redberry 

(Mr. Zipchen) have worked very closely together. They know their constituencies like they know the 

back of their hands, and they know the problems in those constituencies. When they took their places in 

this House, they commenced working then; they recognized the need for this market road grid, and, 

because of their work, because they drew the attention of the Department of Highways to the fact that 

these roads would automatically and absolutely be in the grid because there was no other route, that grid 

had been started two years previous and is well on the way now to completion. Those people in the 

Redberry constituency and in Turtleford constituency are seeing some light ahead for an all-weather 

winter road system throughout their entire area. 

 

I heard the candidate for Redberry constituency speaking not so long ago about a need for a highway in 

Redberry constituency, 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

14 

and that we should have a highway through Redberry constituency. Is he going to suggest that one 

highway through the middle of that vast area is going to be better for all of the people of Redberry than a 

network of all-weather market roads that is going to bring roads within two and three miles of most of 

the people in that area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural Resources): — Which candidate? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Korchinski, the Liberal candidate, I mean. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Another political speech, eh? You’re not campaigning now, you’re in the 

Legislature. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Yes, I’m quite aware of that. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — When’s the election? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — In less than six years, anyway. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, I want to contrast the hard work and diligence of these two members who 

are my neighbours, to the antics, for instance, of the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Dunfield). To hear 

him you would think there was nothing in Meadow Lake constituency but muskeg and muskrats. You 

would not think, for instance, that the town of Meadow Lake, and the area surrounding Meadow Lake, 

was a great producer, and one of the best producers, of cattle, hogs, wheat and coarse grains in 

Saskatchewan; or that it is known, and the people in that area proudly refer to it, as the ‘Garden of the 

North’, and it is. 

 

You would never think, to hear the hon. member from Meadow Lake, that there was a problem in wheat, 

or in livestock, or that there ever has been. The only thing that he can see is a few select friends, some of 

them who used to sit on top of the pile and exploit the trapper and the Indian up in that area, and dabbles 

with the people he chooses to speak for in this House. Those are the people he feels he is responsible to; 

not the vast group of farmers and cattlemen in that area; just a few people who have exploited the north, 

and have no other interest in it except to continue to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words about an editorial in the ‘Leader-Post’ . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — Here we go! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — . . . when they referred to the ‘shadow cabinet’, these shadows that are looming up – 

they have more the resemblance of spectres, Mr. Speaker, than shadows. Referring to the proposed 

Minister of Labour, I want to quote from a speech he made in this House on March 18, 1954, (Mr. 

Dunfield, the member from Meadow Lake). I would like to quote from what he said just to give you 

some idea who is going to be in charge of the Department of Labour in Saskatchewan, should, by 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

15 

some foul chance, the Liberal ever regain power. Here is what he said, quoting from page 17 of the 

Journals of this Assembly, the third paragraph: 

 

“When prohibition ended in the United States, a great many gangsters lost their most lucrative 

source of income, and looking around for replacements, they saw within the unions there they 

could find an incoming power beyond their wildest dreams. They muscled in, and took over by 

any means, by fair or foul, and it was then that the day of lawlessness in unions was launched. 

 

“I do not think this lawlessness which has become apparent is contributable, in any way, to that 

great body of men and women who constitute the bulk of the membership of the union, but 

nevertheless they must be held responsible for that lawlessness.” 

 

That’s the new Minister of Labour for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Isn’t that a nice start? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That’s a real nice start. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I’m sure the union people in Saskatchewan and throughout Canada will be interested 

to know what the attitude of the Liberal Party, and their proposed new Minister of Labour, is towards 

unionists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote, from a booklet entitled, ‘The Power of Abundance’. It is a booklet 

containing the submission of Walter Reuther, one of these ‘lawless gangsters’ in the United States that 

‘muscled in’ and took over the unions of the United States. Walter Reuther – speaking for labour? No, 

not for labour, Mr. Speaker; but speaking for agriculture, and bringing in his submission to the House of 

Representatives on behalf of the farmers for parity prices. Mr. Reuther stated, among other things, that 

one of the greatest unions in the United States stood fairly and squarely behind the application and the 

payment of parity prices to the farmers of the United States. 

 

Contrary to the statements that are being made by the Liberal Party, and those who would drive a wedge 

between labour and farmer here in western Canada, these labour unions in Canada and the United States 

have come out and said they are for a parity price, or a price based on the cost of production to the 

farmers because they know, Mr. Speaker, that as long as the farmer is securing a good price, an 

equitable price, for the things he produces, there will not be a depression on the North American 

continent. 

 

I would like to suggest this document for reading by the hon. member from Meadow Lake, and the rest 

of the members opposite; also for the hon. member for Rosthern who says now – it’s quite interesting 

that in 1953, Tuesday, April 7, every member opposite, including his 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

16 

predecessor, the hon. Leader of the Opposition at that time (Mr. Tucker), voted for this resolution. The 

wording of the resolution was this: 

 

‘That, in view of the fact that present public grain storage and transportation facilities seriously 

failed to meet the present day conditions arising in part from farm mechanization, and 

inequalities in the quota system, this Assembly urges that, in the interests of orderly marketing 

and the stabilizing of farm income, the Federal Government make immediate provision for a 

storage payment, comparable to elevator storage charges on grain suitably stored by farmers; and 

the substantial advance payments on grain stored in approved bins’. 

 

The debate continuing, the question being put, it was agreed to unanimously, in this House. Now it 

becomes “Communistic”, Mr. Speaker, though that is what these people voted for two or three years 

ago. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — All but him! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — All but him! No, he wasn’t here. I wonder what his stand is now? Will he stand up in 

this House and say whether he is, or is not, for advance payments on farm-stored grain today? We know 

where they stand, but we want the public to know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Well, you’ll know. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — You’ll know before you want to. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that these people go around whining, and telling through 

their P.F.A.A. inspectors, the paid political organization of ‘Jimmy’ Gardiner (the Liberals keep their 

political organization going through the expenditure of public funds). Then he has the nerve to get up 

here and talk about those payments, Mr. Speaker, that were given under the P.F.F.A. last year. He has 

the audacity to brag in this House about an Act that has been outdated ever since 1939. 

 

They have done nothing to change that Act. In 1939 when that Act was brought in it was a good Act, 

and it meant something. We thought we were well on the way then, to a stabilized system of crop 

insurance. Since that day, it has deteriorated year by year into a cheap, political organization. Just read 

the 600 and some odd names that are on the P.F.A.A. roster as hirelings and inspectors that go around, 

doing a job that is totally unnecessary, Mr. Speaker; running through the country, last year, inspecting 

crops that everybody knew had rotted two months before; going back time and time again to farms and 

spreading their little bit of political propaganda about taxes, school taxes, and one thing and another, and 

about this “dictatorial Socialist Government”. 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

17 

 

I would like to compare that prepaid crop-failure insurance to our own Saskatchewan Hospitalization 

insurance, where we have used the existing facilities of municipal secretaries and town clerks to collect 

that tax, and it has been done with a minimum of expense. What would the ‘Leader-Post’ and these 

members opposite have said, Mr. Speaker, had we hired tax collectors to roam around the country, 

collecting this tax from every Tom, Dick and Harry; going back and forth, running up mileage? 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, what the cost of the administration of the P.F.A.A. is, and it is completely and 

absolutely ridiculous, to say nothing about some of the extra ‘stooges’ that are hired by P.F.A.A. We 

know about them, too. We have a list of every name and address, and the amount they are paid. There 

never was a blot of the pages of the history of Saskatchewan like a prepaid insurance scheme such as 

that. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Keep it up; you’re defeating yourself right now! 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — You’re doing fine – keep it up! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, we have suggested, and the farm organizations – the Canadian 

Federation of Agriculture, a municipal association, too; the Farmers’ Union and the Pools – have 

suggested that last year this Act be up-dated. If they had done that, then, I think and rightly so, the 

members opposite could have got up and bragged in this House; if they had brought that Act in line with 

the present cost of production. But they are trying to administer that Act with a 1939 dollar; with a 

maximum of $500 per farm, which does not even pay the fuel bill on the average farm today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that is enough to be said about these gratuitous payments that the member for 

Rosthern talks about, and the wonderful advantages that we are enjoying because of them. 

 

Family allowances? Certainly they are appreciated, Mr. Speaker, but it is strange to say the Act was 

introduced in 1945, the same time that the Federal Government relinquished price controls. Shortly after 

that they increased the federal sales tax from 8 per cent to 10 per cent. The returns to the national 

treasury, due to the increased cost of living, and the fact that we were paying 20 cents where we used to 

pay 8 cents on every article we had to buy for groceries and clothing; on everything we had to buy, the 

Federal treasury got twice as much back in sales tax after inflation set in than it ever paid out in 

Mothers’ Allowance, so the result was this: they took it out of one of our pockets, and put it back in 

another. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That’s just the time the Provincial Treasurer increased the tax by 50 per cent. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, I hope they can find better material to brag about in this House from now 

on, and I hope that, instead of those members across the floor standing there, throwing up a smoke 

screen in an effort to protect the Liberal Government at Ottawa; why, Mr. Speaker, you would think they 

weren’t members for Saskatchewan at all. You would think they were members 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

18 

from Ontario or Quebec, shipped in here to protect the Liberal Government at Ottawa. The antics they 

go through, and the efforts they make, trying to protect the Liberal Government at Ottawa, and their 

great god, Gardiner, and his mistakes; and C.D. Howe and his mistakes; it is completely and absolutely 

ridiculous. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You’re getting worse all the time. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — They sure are getting worse all the time. There’s no doubt about that. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — You’re certainly doing wonders; you’re miring in the mud. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, every farm organization and every business organization in western 

Canada, or at least in Saskatchewan (we’re talking about Saskatchewan), have asked the Retail 

Merchants’ Association that this advance payment on farm-stored grain be paid. The only ones that say 

it can’t be done, or won’t be done, are the people who can do something about it – who can pay the 

farmer the money that he has coming to him. If he had not done the job he was supposed to do – he has 

bought the tractors; he has bought the expensive machinery which is made in eastern Canada and the 

United States; he has been up at 5 o’clock in the morning and gone out there and planted that crop; he 

has reaped and harvested it; paid for expensive storage on the farm in order to get it under a dry roof, 

and now he sits, Mr. Speaker, waiting for some movement, praying that something will be done by the 

people who are in a position to do something about it – Mr. C.D. Howe, Mr. Gardiner, and the Liberal 

Government at Ottawa. Those are the people who can do something about our financial situation. Those 

are the people who can put money into our hands in Saskatchewan, and if there is any sabotage of 

western Canada, and the province of Saskatchewan, it certainly is going on now in the policies of the 

Federal Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you hear (and some of the members on this side of the House have been guilty of it, too) 

talk about subsidies to the western farmer. I am not asking that they subsidize the farmer in 

Saskatchewan. I am only asking that they give him some of the money he has coming, and take their 

monopolistic friends that they are protecting with tariffs and direct subsidies in eastern Canada off our 

backs. We are paying income taxes, and every other tax here in western Canada, and so are all the rest of 

the working and agricultural people in Canada, in order to keep ‘big business’ in business. But, when it 

comes to one of the mainstays of the country, our agricultural economy, they will do absolutely nothing. 

Not only will they do absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker, but they want us to further subsidize ‘big 

business’. 

 

Now, everyone knows – or at least, ought o know – that down in the United States a parity price is being 

paid, and we also know that the United States used 80 per cent of the wheat they grow. They have to 

export 20 per cent. The immediate opposite is true here. We only consume 20 per cent of our bread 

wheat here in Canada. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if these people really want to do something for the 

western farmers, they take a good look at that particular aspect of the situation. I would suggest that this 

is what would happen if they did, and you can’t tell me that, with 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

19 

a standard of living across country such as we have, the people of Canada are not prepared, ready, 

willing and able, to pay a parity price, or a price based on the cost of production for the wheat that the 

farmers of western Canada raise. We would be getting at least 60 cents per bushel more on 20 per cent 

of our wheat, and we would have been getting that for the last 10 years. 60 cents per bushel on 20 per 

cent of our wheat is 12 cents a bushel on all of our wheat. Multiply that by 10 years, Mr. Speaker, 12 

cents a bushel on all of our wheat for the past 10 years, and then let Mr. Howe talk about subsidizing the 

farmers of western Canada! I never heard of a more ridiculous statement; just as ridiculous as the 

statements they gave us. 

 

Regarding the wheat situation, last fall I held a series of meetings in my constituency so that I could get 

some idea of what the situation was. I tried my best to get information as to what the storage situation 

was in the terminals. We were told then the problem was storage space; there was no storage space 

available in the terminals. Basing my information on the authority of those statements by the people who 

ought to know, I told the people in my constituency, those farmers who came out to those meetings, that 

it was because of storage, and that it seemed the only solution would be advance payments on 

farm-stored grain, to try and get a payment out on the farm. 

 

Well, a month or so later, Mr. C.D. Howe speaks at Edmonton, and he said, “Oh, there’s room for 

millions and millions of bushels in storage; the problem now is box cars; there are no box cars, and we 

just can’t get the wheat moving”. Of course, Mr. Gardiner said that too, as well as making a flying trip 

through Saskatchewan saying, “the only people who were complaining about the bank loan were a few 

business men”. On record throughout our press, throughout Canada, that is what our Minister of 

Agriculture, who represents a farming area right here in Saskatchewan, tells the people of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now after the box cars were the problem, we have the man who does know about the 

situation, Mr. Roy Milner, our Transport Controller, making a statement in the press a few days ago, 

saying, “There’s lots of box cars”. When in the world, Mr. Speaker, are they going to get their story 

straight? When are they going to get down to some constructive thinking, and some constructive 

leadership that is going to do something for the farmers to alleviate our cash problem, and get a pay 

cheque into the hands of the farmers of this province? That’s what I want to know, and I’d like to hear 

the gentlemen opposite, who want to protect these people, say something about that. 

 

There’s where our problem lies, Mr. Speaker. We have done everything – this Government has done 

everything to provide social security here in the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve done everything we 

possibly could to provide industrialization; but the great problem still is a secure standard of living for 

our agriculturists, who will and will continue to be for a long time the mainstay throughout this 

province; we want security for our farmers on the farm. 

 

It is all very well for these people across the way saying that we are not doing anything for the 

municipalities. It has been abundantly 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

20 

proved by statistics given here, by the Hon. Minister of Education, by the Premier, and by the Hon. 

Minister of Agriculture, and by various other speakers, that the tax situation is much better in 

Saskatchewan than it is in Alberta or Manitoba. 

 

We have a Liberal Government in Manitoba, and a Social Credit Government in Alberta. Now we 

understand the Social Creditors want to come out and help us out, too. Well, I want to suggest right here 

and go on record to say that if they want to do something for us, they can clean up our drinking water 

that they are dumping garbage into, in the Saskatchewan River! If Mr. Manning is so anxious to do 

something for Saskatchewan, he can make a start there, and the people of The Battlefords will appreciate 

it. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — And in Prince Albert, too. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — The problem we have to face, as the hon. member for Qu’Appelle-Wolseley said, we 

have to get the attention of the Federal Government. We have to convince them that there is a problem. 

Heaven only knows why they are so long in being convinced! I hope that they don’t have to have the 

drastic treatment that Harry’s mule did, when they had to hit him over the head with a beck-yoke in 

order to get his attention. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Better learn your language first. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I don’t speak their language, that’s one thing certain. I don’t speak the language of the 

eastern Liberals; but apparently these western Liberals in this House do. That, Mr. Speaker, is what we 

have got to point out to the people of western Canada. There has been one group that could have done 

something, if they had had the intestinal fortitude to do so. If the hon. Leader of the Opposition, instead 

of cow-towing and jockeying for position, along with a lot of other western Liberals – there’s so few of 

them now, that when the ‘cushie’ positions, the senate positions and judgeships are being dealt out, they 

have got to really put on a good show for the great god, Gardiner! So they are jockeying for position, 

trying to say, ‘Yes’ and “amen’ to everything that eastern Canada and eastern monopoly says. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What’s worrying you, anyway? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — And they are failing in their responsibility to present the picture for the people they 

represent here in the west. They are failing us, and they have failed us; and they will never get anywhere 

until they stand up on their hind legs. I told the hon. Leader of the Opposition, last year, that he would 

win the respect of the Liberal supporters who have hidden in their fox-holes now for some 10 or 11 

years, ashamed to get out and admit they are a Liberal; if he wants to gain, or regain, the respect of the 

people of Saskatchewan, let him stand up and speak for the people of Saskatchewan, and not for eastern 

monopoly, and not cow-tow to those people down there who cannot see beyond that rock pile in 

Ontario. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I don’t think they are worrying much about Saskatchewan votes. 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

21 

Mr. Kramer: — They certainly are not worrying about Saskatchewan, or Manitoba, or Alberta. They 

are not worrying about the agricultural industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out a few things that were said by this “lawless racketeer”, and I would like 

to quote what he said. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Who was the lawless racketeer? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Walter Reuther, leader of the C.I.O. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Better ask him . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Quoting from page 11 of a pamphlet entitled, ‘Power of Abundance’, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to quote the words of Walter Reuther: 

 

“We simply say that, as a free people, since we are n fact the last best hope of freedom 

everywhere, if we in America cannot demonstrate the good sense, and moral and social 

responsibility, to find a way to mobilize our economic power, a creative genius in peacetime, 

then the Communists will have to be right in their propaganda. 

 

“I think they are wrong. I think that we can have full employment in peacetime; and yet this 

whole question of farm prices, the income of farm families, is inseparably tied together with this 

question of how can we, a free people, achieve and maintain full employment and full production 

in peacetime, making the good things of life for people.” 

 

That is one of these lawless racketeers that Mr. Dunfield, the hon. member for Meadow Lake, spoke 

about! 

 

Mr. Speaker, he goes on to speak of the ‘genius of America’. Then, talking about the ancient problems 

of food, clothing, property and hunger, he says: 

 

“The people of America, free people, can co-operate in creating and sharing abundance; that this 

is really the genius of America. It is the capacity of the free, human spirit within the framework 

of a free economy, and a free country, to co-operate together, all economic groups, in creating 

economic abundance, and then sharing that abundance so that we can go on, creating more 

together, raising living standards, and finally reaching that place in the human history where 

man’s struggle to satisfy his basic economic and material needs, will have been met. 

 

“This is really what we talk about when we talk about farm problems. The problem on the farm 

is the problem that grows out of the capacity to create abundance. Your problem is a problem of 

abundance”. 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

22 

This is one of the most analytic documents that I have read, Mr. Speaker, and the amazing part is that it 

signifies the trend of the times, where the two great forces, the agricultural producer and the labour man, 

are finding a common meeting ground so that they can march ahead together, toward a greater and more 

prosperous economy, and a greater abundance. 

 

A great tribute was paid to this man, when he completed his address to the House Committee, by the 

chairman of that Committee. I would like to quote from what he said: 

 

“I would like to say that I think you have just made one of the best speeches I have ever heard. I 

want to compliment you highly for your presentation. I regret that it was not possible for every 

member of both the Houses of Congress to have heard your speech. I earnestly hope that every 

member of Congress will read it, will consider it in the same spirit in which you have presented 

it. 

 

“I especially regret that the president of the greatest farm organization on earth could not have 

been here this morning to have heard the speech that you have made on behalf of the farmers of 

our great country. I know that the members of this Committee have enjoyed your presentation, 

and I hope that it will be read throughout the length and the breadth of the farming areas of our 

vast republic. 

 

“We have had many farm leaders appear before this Committee during the 20 years that I have 

served on the Committee, and I want to say that not one of them has surpassed you in the 

presentation of the farmers’ case. I agree with the sentiment that you have expressed on behalf of 

the Committee, myself particularly; and I want to thank you for coming here and giving us the 

benefit of your views.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that, I think, is a tribute to the labour organizations in both Canada and the United States, 

because they have both taken up the cry for a better deal for agriculture, and they will continue to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they can say what they wish, but you cannot escape the inevitable fact that the basic 

problem is to get the pay cheque into the hands of the farmers of Saskatchewan. As far as I am 

concerned, if that is not the problem, it is the problem as I see it in my constituency, and I will rise or 

fall on that in the next election, whenever this Government may choose to call it. Once again, Mr. 

Speaker, I say this Speech from the Throne is a document that I am proud of, as the member for The 

Battlefords, and I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. J.W. Horsman (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, in rising this afternoon to speak in this debate, I want, 

first, to congratulate those who have already taken part in the debate, and each of them have made 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

23 

a contribution and, I suppose, expressed the opinions which they hold. 

 

The two hon. members who moved and seconded the Speech did a very good job. I was a little 

disappointed at the hon. member for Kinistino (Mr. Begrand), being the only French-speaking Canadian 

in the House; I thought that he would do, as he has done on former occasions, make part of his speech in 

that great French language. We have a good many French-speaking Canadians in this province and I am 

sure they would have been very proud to have had the only representative of that race in this House 

speak to them in his own language. Perhaps he will do it next time. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if there ever was any doubt in the minds of any person in this House, or any person 

in this province, as to whether or not there would be an election this year, I think that doubt is very well 

dispelled by now, after listening to the speakers on the Government side of the House who have taken 

part in this debate up to this time. They are taking full advantage, of course, of the radio time to make 

political speeches; and I think the campaign is on right now – starting right here in this House, as I listen 

to what the speakers on the other side of the House say. You know it is a wonderful opportunity for 

members of the Government to do some of their campaigning now, not at their own expense, or not even 

at the expense of the C.C.F. Party, but at the expense of the people of Saskatchewan who, after all, pay 

the bill; and that is what they are doing with their radio time. 

 

We, on the Opposition, are only allowed 25 per cent of radio time, in spite of the fact that, in the last 

election, we polled 40 per cent of the votes; and I would say that we represent 40 per cent of the people. 

The Government seems to think that radio time should be divided on the basis of the number of 

members on each side of the House, taking no regard to the fact of the number of people that each party 

represents. To us, the Opposition, this seems a very unfair division of radio time. However, as they have 

us outnumbered here four to one, they are in a position to do as they please, regardless of anything else. 

 

Right from the very first day that the Session opened, Mr. Speaker, it was very plain to anyone that took 

time to listen or to pay any attention at all, that there was an election coming up this year; and the plan 

of campaign unfolded very early in this Session. It appears to me that there will be two methods of 

attack. They will carry on in this election campaign just the same as they are doing in this House. The 

first thing they will try to do, of course, is to attack ‘Hammy’ McDonald, the Leader of the Opposition. 

They will do everything in their power to make him appear as small as possible in the eyes of the people 

of this province. 

 

The second is an unprovoked and bitter attack on the Federal Government at Ottawa. Most of the 

speeches, so far, have dealt very little with provincial affairs; most of the speakers have put in all their 

time, like the hon. gentleman who just sat down, cursing the government at Ottawa for what they 

haven’t done. He did not say anything about what they have done, he just spoke about the things that 

they should do. 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

24 

When the Premier spoke in this debate, Mr. Speaker, on Wednesday last, he did everything in his power 

to make the Leader of the Opposition appear, in the eyes of the public, almost as a traitor. He spoke 

about what Mr. McDonald said in Ontario – he said Saskatchewan had missed the boat; and the Premier 

said he should hide his head under the desk. Mr. Speaker, I do not think ‘Hammy’ McDonald needs to 

hide his head under the desk from anyone in this province or in this country. He has faced death too 

often in the defence of his country to be harmed by what anyone can say about him in this House. 

 

He said something about the Saskatchewan River dam – that ht wouldn’t be built until we got a Liberal 

government in Saskatchewan – so the Premier said, and I am not doubting his word. I think the Leader 

of the Opposition thought he was speaking the truth, because he doesn’t think and we do not think that 

this Government will be in office long enough to build the dam, provided there is an election this year, 

and that is reason enough to make that statement. And those ideas, Mr. Speaker, are shared by thousands 

of people across this country. 

 

Now if we ever expect sufficient capital to come into this country to develop our natural resources we 

must have a government in power here in whom investors will have confidence. This Government, Mr. 

Speaker, after 12 years in office, are still standing solidly behind that old worn out political textbook, 

commonly referred to as ‘The Regina Manifesto’; a document that they still claim is the greatest 

political document that was ever written. There are embodied in that manifesto certain clauses that are 

enough to discourage any investor, or at least to arouse his suspicion as to the wisdom of investing 

money in this province as long as there is a C.C.F. Government in office. I do not wish to state, Sir, that 

there hasn’t been considerable capital come into Saskatchewan in recent years; I wouldn’t be honest if I 

said that. I will admit that quite a bit of development work and so on has been done towards the 

development of our natural resources; but I think that this has been done in spite of this Government, not 

on account of it; and I believe that development would have been much greater if we had had a different 

government in the province. 

 

Now when any political party embodies in their platform clauses such as the following, they are 

certainly not inviting the confidence of any person who has money to invest. I am going to quote you a 

few lines, Mr. Speaker; I know you know them by heart, from ‘The Regina Manifesto’. In speaking of 

the evils of capitalism in this Manifesto – and I do not mind admitting that capitalism has some evils – 

but I still think it is the best political system devised by man up to this time. I am going to quote a line or 

two: 

 

“We believe that these evils can be removed only in a planned and socialized economy in which 

the natural resources and principal means of production are owned, controlled and operated by 

the people.” 

 

By the people, means by the State, or by the Government. 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

25 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Does it? 

 

Mr. Horsman: — Another clause . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Does it? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, my friend cannot misquote a document. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — . . . which says . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege, my hon. friend cannot misquote a 

document. It says “by the people”; it does not say by the State. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — I didn’t say that it did. I quoted you right there. I said “by the people”. I said that in 

this connection, when you say “the people” that means the Government. Here is another: 

 

“No C.C.F. government will rest content until they have eradicated capitalism and has put into 

operation a full programme of socialized planning which will lead to the establishment in Canada 

of the Co-operative Commonwealth.” 

 

Now these quotations from the political platform of the Government, Mr. Speaker, are enough to 

discourage people who have money to invest, it seems to me; and they can go to some other place and 

investment their money. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . Oil Company spent $82 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Horsman: — If the C.C.F. Government of this province, Mr. Speaker, do not intend to eradicate 

the capitalist system, provided that they can expand this government and their socialism far enough 

across Canada, then why in the world do they not remove those objectionable clauses from their 

platform – if they have never intended to act on them. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the members to your 

right are just as strong socialists as they ever were; and I believe that they would stand up any time and 

be counted as standing solidly behind the Regina Manifesto. I believe they would. 

 

So how can any government expect to attract risk capital to this province as long as they stand behind 

such a platform as this? That leads to the destruction of the very system under which these people who 

have money to invest operate. And I might say under the system under which Saskatchewan has 

prospered the last 12 years; there is nothing to do with socialism here. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — Not because of it – in spite of it. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — I do not believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition in this House needs 

to fear that our people 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

26 

will fall for any kind of political propaganda such as is being spread around the province about him. 

They know him too well for that. They know his record too well for that. 

 

I was interested in the remarks, the other day, of the Minister of Public Works (Hon. Mr. Darling). I was 

somewhat surprised to hear him quote from Shakespeare; I would not have been surprised if he had 

quoted from Robert Burns. This is what he said: 

 

“All the world is a stage, and all the men and women merely players.” 

 

He should have gone on and finished that quotation, Mr. Speaker. The next line is: 

 

“They have their exits and their entrances . . .” 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Are you on your exit? 

 

Mr. Horsman: — Mr. Speaker, this Government has had their entrance; when we have the next election 

they will get their exit. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You’re just whistling to keep up your courage. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — When the Premier took part in the debate he said that, in 1944, when the C.C.F. came 

into office the municipalities were burdened with a terrible load of debt. They owed more money and 

they were in worse condition than that of any other province in Canada. Of course, he did not explain 

that we had come through the worst depression in history and we were just coming out of the worst war 

in history. That is the reason why the municipalities were heavily in debt. He said the municipalities in 

Alberta are in a worse position than the municipalities in Saskatchewan. I don’t know much about the 

municipalities in Alberta, except I know they have larger municipal units than we have here – something 

that has been supported by the men on your right, Sir, for many years; somewhat along the line of the 

larger School Units. I think that might be one reason why the municipalities in Alberta are in a worse 

position than we are. 

 

Now I am not going to go into figures, Mr. Speaker – up into the millions or anything like that. I am 

going to leave all those millions and hundreds of millions to the hon. Provincial Treasurer, because he 

knows all about that kind of thing, but I am going to speak to you for a few minutes about just a small 

unit – one municipality that is just an average municipality in this province; and I think I can prove to 

you what this Government has done to the municipalities of Saskatchewan, because I do think this is just 

about an average municipality. 

 

This particular municipality has an assessment of about $2½ million, and the taxes, in the last few years, 

have just about doubled in that municipality. School taxes have increased from 7½ mills to 25 mills, last 

year, and I understand there is another raise of 2 mills 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

27 

this year. Now that is a great increase in taxes. The taxes, in this municipality, in 1924, amounted to 

$60,390 – that is school tax, out of a total levy of $120,674 – a little more than half. I do not intend to 

mention every item of expenditure that this municipality has, but I do wish to make a comparison 

between the cost of education and two of the other services in this municipality. They have complete 

health services, Mr. Speaker; and health services, during the year under review cost that municipality 

$14,230; and this amount includes medical and dental care, health region levy, and union hospital levy 

. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Was that in 1944? 

 

Mr. Horsman: — That was in 1954. The other item that I will mention is Public Works – mostly roads; 

roads and road machinery, repairs and maintenance; and for that service they paid $27,681. Now these 

two items combined amount to $42,111; while education alone was $60,390, or $18,279 more than 

Public Works and health services combined. 

 

Now I would like some of the members opposite to go down to that municipality and try and tell those 

people that you have reduced taxes for them, or tell them how much you are going to help the situation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Give me the number and maybe I will go. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — I’ll give it to you. I have . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You don’t know the number? 

 

Mr. Horsman: — Oh yes, I’ll give you the statement some day, too, if you want that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Might I ask the hon. member if he will just give us the number of the 

municipality, or the name? 

 

Mr. Horsman: — I can give you both. I can give you the financial statement if you want it; I am 

quoting from it. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — Well, will you give us the name? 

 

Mr. Horsman: — As I said before, this is just an average municipality . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Sure! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Is it in Saskatchewan or Alberta or Manitoba, or where? 

 

Mr. Horsman: — There are farmers in some parts of this municipality who are paying a little over $100 

per quarter-section per year on school taxes alone, and that is not the whole story, Mr. Speaker. The 

tragic thing is that the Large School Unit of which that municipality forms a part goes further and further 

in debt, and some further means must be found to raise money or I don’t know what will happen; and I 

wonder where the end is going to be. 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

28 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Do you know what School Unit it is? 

 

Mr. Horsman: — Yes, I know that, too. It should be apparent . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You won’t tell, though. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — . . . to every member of this House . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — It’s a secret mission. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — . . . that the only way to help a situation of this kind is by increased government 

grants for education. 

 

Some Opposition Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Horsman: — And I do not believe that any fair-minded person would expect that a municipality 

that pays those kinds of taxes for school purposes could be expected to have them raised any higher. I 

don’t think you could even expect that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That’s just your radio speech you made the day before the House opened. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — And it is true that the standard of education in this province is no higher than it was at 

the time this Unit was born – not a bit higher. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You do listen to our speeches then, Brock? 

 

Mr. Horsman: — We have had great difficulty in getting qualified teachers – lots of difficulty. Many 

schools have had to settle for study supervisors. Now the principal reason for the scarcity of qualified 

teachers is the low salary rate. I know as well as everyone does that school teachers’ salaries have 

increased a great deal in the last 10 years; they have increased a lot; but other salaries, for other 

professions and so on, have increased much more than teachers’ salaries have. Any bright young man or 

woman, today, can go out in the world, even if he has very little education, if he is not afraid of work, 

and can make more money than a school teacher s- than the average young school teacher could get. But 

you can go right out here in Saskatchewan and get work on these oil drills or something like that, and 

any young man who is not afraid of work can get a job that will make him more money than any school 

teacher gets. And I am sure that if we are going to have qualified teachers in this province that the 

Government of this province must put up more money to help out in the education of the children of the 

province. 

 

Increased grants is the only answer. I believe that the C.C.F. Government, out of the greatly increased 

revenues they have had in recent years, could afford to increase these grants substantially. I think they 

could. I believe they have been shirking their duty in this line long enough. I think that they should pay 

at least 50 per cent of the cost of education. 

 

I will give you another set of these small figures – not 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

29 

 

millions, only hundreds. If you take a farmer in this municipality that pays $100 per quarter-section 

school taxes alone, and as I said, this amounts to about half his total tax, that would make his tax about 

$200 on a quarter-section. Most people around that country summerfallow about half their land each 

year. That would leave him 80 acres of crop land, and on 80 acres of crop land, a quarter-section, he 

would pay $200 in tax which would make the tax per crop acre $2.50 - $2.50 per crop acre. Now no 

member of this Government could tell those farmers that they have eased the burden of taxation. I have 

seen many years when the net crop in that area wasn’t worth $2.50 an acre; I hope we don’t see those 

days again, but I cannot help but feel that we are very likely to, sooner or later. 

 

Now I am going to say a word about the school buses. We have a few of them, but not very many; and 

when we get into a winter like this the children are home when the roads are blocked and it is absolutely 

impossible to get them to school. I think this is something like putting the cart before the horse. Now I 

am not talking about the Larger School Units; I see a good many advantages in the Larger School Units, 

but this thing of running these school buses when they have no roads to run them on is where I find a 

great deal of fault with the system. Unless you have some kind of vehicle in the winter time that can go 

over the snow it is just impossible to get the children to school. School buses plowing though snowdrifts 

in the winter and mud in the summer time on the bad roads that most districts have won’t last more than 

two or three years; and then you have to turn around and pay $6,000 for a new bus. Many schools have 

been closed and moved away and so on. I think this is a case of putting the cart before the horse. 

 

A great deal has been said about rural electrification. It is true considerable progress has been made in 

this very important service, but the plan under which the Government of Saskatchewan is working is 

very well known to everyone in this House and to the people of the province. I believe that most 

members will agree with me when I say that, prior to the last ten years, a very small percentage of the 

farmers of this province could have afforded to pay the price that they must pay now to have electricity 

brought into their farmyards. They have to pay $550 to have the power brought in, then wire their 

buildings and everything, and ultimately it takes about $1,000. I remember, as many of you gentlemen 

do, when, if a man had $1,000 in this province, he would be considered pretty well off. I know there are 

farmers in this province today, and lots of them who cannot afford to pay this price to get farm power 

into their yards. I think it is altogether too expensive. You pay for the transmission line – I remember 

asking the Minister of Public Works a question (I think it was last year) as to what it cost to build one 

mile of single power line; his answer was about $700. Well on any installation that have been put in that 

I know anything about, they insist on an installation about every seven-tenths or seven-eights of a mile; I 

am not sure which; but at $700 a mile, $550 would just about pay for the construction of that portion of 

the line. Then they have to pay for the use of the line after that, and the Power Corporation, being a 

monopoly and having full control of production and distribution of power in this province, can set their 

rates where they are sure to make a profit. 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

30 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — What were the Liberal rates? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Don’t make yourself sillier than you are. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — I am not trying to suggest that the Power Corporation should be placed under private 

control. I am not suggesting that. I am saying that it is a Government monopoly and it could become just 

as vicious as any other monopoly if it is not properly handled and carefully handled. 

 

Mr. Walker (Gravelbourg): — It’s a good thing it is under the C.C.F. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — No private company could get away with that; if they wanted to build a line they 

would certainly have to build it themselves; the farmers wouldn’t have to build it. 

 

Some Hon. Member: — What about across the border, in Alberta? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Horsman: — Now then, being a monopoly, as I say, the Power Corporation has no competition and 

I sometimes wonder why it becomes necessary to do so much expensive advertising on radio 

programmes, television programmes and everything else, when they have no competition. Most 

companies advertise for a purpose; they try to show prospective buyers that they have a product that is 

as good and better than what their competitor has to sell. In this case, Mr. Speaker, there is no 

competition. They have no competitors, and it seems to me that to spend thousands and thousands of 

dollars of the people’s money every year on this sort of advertising is not good business. Of course, 

other departments of the Government do the same thing; the Saskatchewan Insurance Office does, but 

they haven’t a complete monopoly, but they have a very good partial monopoly at least. A great share of 

the business that they do they have a monopoly on and the business can go nowhere else. Although there 

might be some loopholes for the Insurance Office, there are certainly none that I can see for the Power 

Corporation. 

 

I think this advertising is done for purely political propaganda purposes. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Hear! Hear! There is no question about it. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — That is why I think it is done, just a way to put it across at public expense; it doesn’t 

cost the party a cent. 

 

The Federal Government of Canada extend many various services over this country, over Saskatchewan 

and all the other provinces, but I have yet to hear a radio programme or see a television programme 

sponsored by the Government of Canada to tell the people what they are doing for them. I have yet to 

see that done. 

 

We have another example here, too] of a monopoly in Saskatchewan and that is the Timber Board. The 

Timber Board purchases lumber from the operators at a certain price, and they tell them what the price 

is. Then 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

31 

they market it through the country . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You are wrong! 

 

Mr. Horsman: — . . . at prevailing high prices. I am not wrong on how you sell it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You set the price. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — Now this system is making it increasingly difficult for private operators to work in 

northern Saskatchewan. You wouldn’t admit that either, would you? It has already been pointed out to 

members of this House that one of the largest companies in northern Saskatchewan left and went to 

Alberta. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — To B.C. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — Yes, to British Columbia, just to escape the vicious regulations laid down by the 

Timber Board, making it impossible for them to operate successfully. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — That’s falsehood. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — I don’t think a system like this has the effect of attracting industry to this province. I 

think it has the very opposite effect. 

 

Now we hear a great deal about the desperate position of the farmers here in this province. I am not 

going to go into this thing very far because we have a Committee appointed from this House to study 

this very carefully. They are caught in a price squeeze – falling farm prices and higher farm operating 

and living costs. That is true, Mr. Speaker. No one knows any better than I do the truth of that assertion. 

The big difficulty in our country, of course, is that we cannot market our wheat, but there are many parts 

of this province where they have no wheat to market and the situation is somewhat different there. I 

cannot help but feel, though, that the farmers think they are pretty secure as long as they have a few 

granaries full of wheat. But last fall, when the crop was harvested, one of the greatest problems that 

presented itself to the farmers at that time was storage on the farms – some place to put their grain. They 

had to go out and buy lumber provided they could get the money to buy it with – many of them couldn’t, 

and had to put their wheat on the ground. Now it would appear to me that that was a wonderful 

opportunity for the Government of Saskatchewan to have come to their assistance through the medium 

of the Saskatchewan Timber Board. They handle all the lumber that comes out of northern 

Saskatchewan and they could have sold farmers that lumber at least at cost to help take care of the crop 

that was taken off, last fall. There was nothing of that nature done, or no other move that I know of was 

taken to help the farmers with that problem. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Could I ask the hon. member a question? I take it 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

32 

the hon. member would prefer that the lumber industry was handled by private enterprise. Would he 

suggest, then, that the private enterprise would sell it to the farmers at cost? 

 

Mr. Horsman: — No, no, I wouldn’t expect them to. In fact, I know, Sir, they would not; but this is 

different from the private operators. This is a Government Crown Corporation, handled by a government 

that is supposed to have the best interests of the people of this province at heart. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — And when the farmers were up against it for lumber, last fall, why didn’t you do 

something about it. You had the chance; you had the lumber, but you didn’t do it. 

 

You know the Premier said, the other day, that when the C.C.F. came into office they took over a 

bankrupt province . . . 

 

Some Govt Members: Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Horsman: — That was a very unusual statement. I didn’t think he would make a statement quite 

that broad, because it takes in a lot of territory. Certainly, the province wasn’t in very good shape, after 

coming out of a war and coming through the depression; you must admit that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — It had nothing to do with the war. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Horsman: — The foundations of government and everything had been well laid here long before 

that. Schools were built, these Parliament Buildings were up, the University was built, roads were built 

to some extent; and the country was developed. Here is the way it looked to me when this Government 

took over this province; it was just like a farmer who goes out and works most of his life, breaks up his 

farm, gets it in good shape and then turns it over to his son as a going concern and he goes in and takes 

over from there. That is what this Government did in this province. This country was taken over first, 

Mr. Speaker, by the Liberal government that handled it first; it was a wilderness at that time and it was 

turned, in less than 40 years, into one of the greatest grain-growing areas in the world – long before we 

had any C.C.F. Party. 

 

You hear a lot of talk about money to start young men out farming and in agriculture; that there should 

be loans made to them. This Government, Mr. Speaker, has never made any move in that direction, to 

help young farmers get started in agriculture, if that is what they wish to do. But they can go out and 

guarantee bonds for a company that is going to put up a cement plant here – bonds of $5,500,000, Mr. 

Speaker. Now I am not arguing against the wisdom of doing this, either; it may 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

33 

be a good investment and I think a cement plant is needed here; but it just shows the difference between 

their attitude toward men such as are going to put up the cement plant and agriculture, or the farmers 

concerned. 

 

It is very easy to attract industry to a province, Mr. Speaker, if the Government guarantees the bonds for 

them to build their industries. Now I say, in this case, it may be a good thing; it may be; but you can see 

on the fact of it that it would be easy enough to attract industry anywhere if someone else put up the 

money to build the factories with. 

 

I am not going to start defending the Federal Government but I am going to mention one or two things, 

because members opposite – every one of them – have gone out of their way to criticize, in every way 

they could, the Government of Canada. Not one of them expressed any appreciation whatsoever for 

anything that the Federal Government has done, or any good legislation that they have passed in recent 

years. They never mentioned the Old Age Pension or the Family Allowances, payments under the 

Provincial Tax Agreements and so o. Well, maybe they don’t amount to anything, but there is one thing 

that the Federal Government has done in recent years – and that everyone who is a farmer or knows 

anything about agriculture at all must admit, that has been a great boon to the farmers of this province – 

and that was the Farm Improvement Loan Act. You probably saw this little item in the paper last night; 

probably you may have read it. In case you didn’t, I am going to read it to you: 

 

“Repayment of Farm Improvement Loans indicate western agriculture basically must be in a 

fairly healthy condition, says B.M. Macrae, supervisor of the Farm Improvement Loan Act, in a 

press release. 

 

“Of the loans made to farmers throughout the country 30 per cent were made in Saskatchewan. 

Canadian farmers repaid a total of $66 million under the Farm Improvement Loan, in 1955. 

During the period $67 million in new loans were granted in 1955. Since the inception of this 

legislation some 12 years ago approximately $580 million has been borrowed, of which 

approximately $450 million has been repaid. 

 

“The Farm Improvement Loan Act was set up with the objective of providing intermediate term 

and short term credit suited to the individual farmer’s resources which would improve his farm 

by enabling him to install modern labour-saving equipment, to procure more and better livestock 

and to make other improvements that would increase productivity.” 

 

Mr. Loptson: — And they did that in spite of the C.C.F. 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

34 

Mr. Horsman: — Now I think if the Government at Ottawa never did anything else for agriculture in 

this province, that that alone should win them the gratitude of the people of Saskatchewan, and, Mr. 

Speaker, as you probably expect after my few halting sentences, I will not support the motion. 

 

Hon. L.F. Mr. McIntosh (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, in the fourth session of the 

12th Legislature, I note with a great deal of interest the programmes as suggested in the Speech from the 

Throne. It is rather interesting to go back over the 50 years of the history of the province of 

Saskatchewan and check the Speeches from the Throne from 1906, the first session of the Saskatchewan 

Legislature, on to the fourth session of the 12th Legislature. If the hon. members opposite would take 

that trouble, I think they would find it very interesting, they would appreciate the 10th, 11th, and 12th 

sessions of the Legislature, and the Speeches from the Throne in connection therewith, will indicate that 

from 1944 on, a substantial amount of progress has been made in developing for citizens of the province 

of Saskatchewan, the heritage that is rightly theirs. 

 

This being the 4th session of the 12th Legislature of the province of Saskatchewan in its 52 years of 

history, suggests, Mr. Speaker, that there have been some sessions that went beyond the four years. It 

probably would indicate that some sessions might have gone the life of the Legislature, or on the other 

hand it might also suggest that some sessions went beyond the life of the Legislature. 

 

The present Speech from the Throne that is now under debate makes reference to our Golden Jubilee 

celebrations, and I think has been amply dealt with, Mr. Speaker, by those who have taken part in the 

debate up to the present time. I believe it is worthy to note that from one end of the province to the other, 

our present citizens joined in a community effort to pay tribute to the men and women that made such a 

substantial contribution to the development of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speech from the Throne also makes mention that the freight rates division of the provincial 

government has made representation to the Board of Transport Commissioners during the fiscal year 

under review, relative to equalization of freight rates and also in connection with the increase for 

domestic grain rates. 

 

I do not think I would like this opportunity to pass without making mention of what the President of the 

Canadian Pacific Railway stated to me in person during mid-summer of last year. I think this House will 

recall that freight rate increase cases started back some eight years ago, and at that time the government 

of this province was fortunate enough in securing the services of Mr. M.A. MacPherson as counsel. The 

President of the Canadian Pacific Railway stated to me last year that had it not been for the excellent 

services rendered by the counsel chosen by the province of Saskatchewan to present their case before the 

Board of Transport Commissioners, he was confident that it would have cost the consuming public, 

which includes the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan, many millions of dollars more, as a result 

of further increases in rates. 



 

February 22, 1956 

 

35 

The Speech from the Throne makes mention of the emergency condition that existed throughout a very 

large number of municipalities, as a result of the floods that took place in the early spring of 1955. It 

also makes mention of the fact that the Government of the province of Saskatchewan used its resources 

to the limit to assist the rural municipalities in the repair of the public works programme, and assisted 

very large sections of this province in launching a draining programme. Mention is also made here of the 

plan of the Government of Saskatchewan to assist the rural municipalities in the construction of 12,000 

miles of all-weather main market road grids. 

 

It is interesting to note that the Speech from the Throne brings out very clearly the tremendous 

development that has taken place in northern sections of the province of Saskatchewan, in the mineral 

areas of this province. It makes mention of the exploration and the development of the Uranium and 

Beaverlodge areas. It makes mention of the exploration that has taken place in and around Lac La 

Ronge, Stanley Mission, and in the Creighton area, over on the east side of the province. It is because of 

the very substantial development that has taken place in and around Uranium City that the Government 

felt it advisable to introduce legislation whereby the people of Uranium City and community would be 

able to develop their own government, and that Act, which will be brought before the Legislature, and 

which is mentioned in the Speech from the Throne, will be a unique type of legislation in the history of 

the province of Saskatchewan, giving the people within the corporated site of Uranium and the 

surrounding community, the right of local self-government in the field of municipal, health and 

education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not think I should let this opportunity pass without making mention of the proposal for 

the training school. That in itself is a very strong indication of the industrial development that has taken 

place in the province of Saskatchewan. An increasing number of citizens are paying a tribute to the 

university hospital and its staff, and I have heard on more than one occasion that the university hospital 

is now staffed with the type of medical people, type of nursing; and has laid down a programme to assist 

the ill and the sick, that will equal any type and kind of hospital anywhere in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

It is also interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the Speech from the Throne makes mention of a new 

women’s gaol. It is actually my hope that this gaol will be located, not at a place where it might be most 

needed, but at a place where those that might find it necessary to stay in such an institution for a few 

weeks, or a few months, will enjoy the environment an the atmosphere that is characteristic of the young 

and developing northland of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 

 


