



















































Hansard: March 13, 1956


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session - Twelfth Legislature 

24th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 13, 1956 

 

The House met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed from Monday, March 12, 1956, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of the 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair. (The Assembly to go 

into Committee of Supply). 

 

Mr. R. A. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned debate last night, I was 

speaking on our grid road system. I said yesterday that the Government had made three distinct promises 

in the Speech from the Throne last year with regard to these grids, and they hadn't carried out any of 

them. Now, while the municipalities have asked for a grid system they never had any idea they would be 

saddled with the sort of a grid they have today. In the first place, I believe the Government got the cart 

before the horse, when they were laying out the location of it. I think if they had gone to the 

municipalities in the first instance and asked them to draw a map indicating where they thought the 

proposed grid should go, then called them into Regina and let them co-ordinate it with adjoining 

municipalities, they would have had a much better system of roads as far as location is concerned, and 

much more acceptable to municipal men. 

 

However, they used C.C.F. technique and had a bunch of the boys in the backroom set up a bunch of 

maps, draw some lines without consulting the municipalities, and after they had done that, went out and 

said to the municipalities, “Now here is your grid system.” 

 

Hon. L. F. McIntosh (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Such nonsense! 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Many of these grids are not satisfactory as to location. Certainly no municipal man 

would have included secondary highways and marked roads into a grid system, and we have 

approximately 200 miles of secondary highways and marked highways included in our grid system at 

the present time. Most of the municipal men with whom I talk, especially in the eastern and southern 

part of the province have told me that this thing was out of their reach at the present time. The only thing 

they can take any particular advantage of it or go ahead with their grid would be to levy a special levy of 

four or five mills to carry the grid system, and they told me that they could not and would not do that at 

the present time. So it works out that your grid system as laid out, and as set up, is out of reach for a 

great many municipalities, without their being prepared to increase their mill rate for road purposes very 

substantially, and most of them are now in a position where they do not feel they can do it at all. 

 

Now, another thing about this grid system which is a little misleading is the fact that you say it is a 50-

50 deal. Well, I haven't any doubt 



 

March 13, 1956 

2 
 

that it is a 50-50 deal in the overall picture, but some of the municipal men tell me that they are being 

asked to put up a great deal more than 50 per cent of the grid. I think that should be clarified, because a 

lot of them, when they came in thought it was a 50-50 deal, but they soon found afterwards that that 

wasn't true. In my opinion this Government has shown more incompetence and arrogance in setting up 

this grid system than anything they have so far done in the rural municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with your permission I wish to make a few remarks in connection with a radio speech 

made by the hon. Minister of Highways (Hon. J. T. Douglas) on January 24, 1956, just about six weeks 

ago. 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — Pretty good one, wasn't it? 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I am going to do this like an Irishman - I am going to read the last paragraph first. 

This is quite a paragraph, I assure you, to come from a Minister of the crown. He ends up by saying: 

 

“These facts clearly indicate that since the C.C.F. took office in 1944 there has been a rapid and 

constant rise in municipal assistance for road purposes, and (this is the part I rather object to) gives lie 

to the silly and stupid statement that this Government is neglectful in its responsibilities to rural 

municipalities.” 

 

I think that is pretty strong language for a Minister of the Crown to use over the air, Mr. Speaker. There 

are just two or three sentences in this which I want to comment on, and see just where the truth does lie 

in these matters. He starts off by saying: 

 

“The basic problem faced by Saskatchewan rural municipalities in their attempt to provide roads for 

the ratepayers is one of too many miles of road with too few people to pay for the construction and 

maintenance.” 

 

Well, I covered that yesterday fairly well, Mr. Speaker, and I am not going to say too much on it. But I 

am just briefly going to say this, that as far as the municipalities are concerned, land tax is the base of 

their taxation, and the number of miles of road remains the same whether you have 100 or 300 families, 

and your tax base is the same. So this statement was just so much political propaganda. Your tax base is 

the same; your miles are the same, and the sparse population doesn't enter into it. 

 

Now, the next statement that I want to call your attention to is, he goes on here and says a lot about what 

the Liberal Government did from 1944 on . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — It's what they didn't do! 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Some of it isn't true, of course. He has said that so often that I don't think anybody 

believes him now. I am not going to go into that. But what I am going to read is this sentence from his 

speech, after he got through telling us how bad the Liberals were: 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

3 
 

“in 1944 the C.C.F. Government inaugurated a policy of making road grants available to all the rural 

municipalities of the province.” 

 

That's fine - I wonder who is telling the truth here! If they inaugurated that policy in 1944, they sure 

didn't stay with it, because in the last three years nearly half of our rural municipalities received no grant 

at all. 

 

Now, reading that you would never think - the fellow out on the farm, listening on the air would say, 

“Well, that fellow is a pretty good fellow; he’s really giving us grants;” but the fact of the matter is that 

138 municipalities received no grants in the last three years. 

 

Then he comes up with his old pet Public Revenue Tax, and he says: “It was turned over to the 

municipalities - the entire field of land taxation, which I would remind you, cost of the province over $2 

million annually.” I wonder how long we are going to have to put up with that sort of thing? We've 

heard a lot about it, and they are still giving it to the municipalities, according to them. They didn't give 

the rural municipalities anything; what they did do was pass a law saying the municipalities didn't have 

to collect it, and didn't have to remit it to the Government. So that statement is just so much C.C.F. 

propaganda. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): — What was the situation before that? 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of Opposition): — You voted against it. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Now, the next thing that I want to look at is this $2 million item here. I think the 

Provincial Treasurer and the Minister of Highways should probably get together on that. The Provincial 

Treasurer, in an article in ‘The Leader-Post’ January 30, 1956, mentioned this, in trying to compute the 

amount of money that he had given to the municipalities - he mentions it is $1,800,000; and the 

Highways Minister says it is $2 million. Well, they can't both be telling the truth, but of course when a 

good C.C.F.’er gets up to make a speech a matter of a couple of hundred thousand dollars is neither here 

nor there, but I suggest they get together on this. It must be very confusing for people in the country to 

be told these two stories all at once. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to leave it to you and the people of this province to decide where the truth does 

lie in these matters. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak (Minister of Telephones): — They can't get it from you. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I would like to say a few words about our proposed larger municipal units. Our 

municipalities are one of the few bodies that this C.C.F. Government hasn't been able to push around. 

Ever since they took office they have been attempting to put the rural municipalities into larger units, but 

they haven't succeeded. They are attempting now, in my opinion, through the Royal Commission, to do 

by the back-door what they were unable to do otherwise. They are attempting to brain-wash the public 

into the opinion that these municipalities aren't any good and probably never were any good; and to 

justify that statement, Mr. Speaker, I just want to read you a couple or three chapters out of this 

Commission report. The first one is Page 264, Chapter 64, and this is what it says: 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

4 
 

“Problems of appropriate organization were not generally recognized by communities and 

organizations. While the farm people of the province recognized all the major deficiencies of the 

present municipal system and suggested ways in which the deficiencies could be overcome, they did 

not give much consideration to whether the suggested improvements could actually be provided within 

the present nine-township municipal system.” 

 

And here is a very potent statement - at the end of that it says: 

 

“This Commission’s studies have provided conclusive evidence that there is no practical way in which 

modern road services can be assured until a basic municipal reorganization has been completed.” 

 

There you have it – there’s you're C.C.F. programme; that these municipalities are no good - they 

haven't been any good and the only way they will work is to put them in larger units. 

 

Hon. J. T. Douglas: — You're the one that stated that - we didn't. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — That's what this says. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege, I must draw to the attention of my hon. 

friend that he is reading from the report of a Royal Commission - not speaking for the Government, or 

laying down Government policy. That has been made clear to my hon. friend repeatedly. The 

recommendations by the Royal Commission will be considered by the Government, and by the local 

governing bodies; but he is not quoting from C.C.F. policy, and he is perfectly aware of that. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Well, do you repudiate the findings of this Royal Commission, then? This is your 

own Commission, appointed by your own Government. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. gentleman asked me if I repudiate the recommendations. I 

said in the Speech from the Throne debate that the Government will give careful consideration to the 

recommendations of any Royal Commission, but we are not bound by them, nor do we consider any 

Royal Commission infallible. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — That's fine, that's fine. You've taken up a little air-time; nevertheless I say, in my 

opinion, this is C.C.F. policy, and I think I am entitled to say that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — You're showing how stupid you are! 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Now, No. 65 says: 

 

“The average nine-township municipality is too small to provide the financial and population 

resources for modern services. It is incapable of establishing sound jurisdictional relations because of 

the small size and lack of conformity with larger areas in which rural people associate for trade and 

other 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

5 
 

services. It is incapable of achieving integration of its activities with other agencies, local and 

provincial, because of its area and jurisdiction.” 

 

And here is the potent part of this paragraph: 

 

“Its inability to build adequate rural roads, cited by nearly all communities and organizations 

contacted by the Commission, is a symptom of its deficiency. Unless revitalized soon, the rural 

municipality may well disappear as an important influence in Saskatchewan.” 

 

Now that is what the Royal Commission says, and I think I have heard similar things like that said over 

on the other side. 

 

Now, there are just another couple of chapters I wish to call your attention to, Mr. Speaker, and it is 

Page 252, Chapter 6, and this has to do with land taxes. I think I have heard the Minister of Education 

(Hon. Mr. Lloyd) make some similar statements to those in here. This one says: 

 

“Local property tax is based primarily on land values and it is assumed that land values are a fair 

measure of ability to pay. Recent trends toward farm mechanization have meant investments in 

equipment as well as investment in land may need to be taken into account when determining the basis 

of taxation.” 

 

What does that say? It simply says that they are recommending that, in addition to land, you tax the 

farmers’ means of production - that is, tax his implements. 

 

Now, Chapter 7 on the same page says this: 

 

“While all farm costs have been rising, land taxes have shown the least tendency to increase relative to 

other costs. This means that improvement in municipal, school and health services have been 

sacrificed to meet the rising cost of farming.” 

 

So what does that mean? It simply is trying to tell us, I think, that we haven't been levying enough taxes. 

Now, I doubt that very many municipal men will agree with that. 

 

I would rather take the opinion of our present municipal men of this province on those matters than the 

combined opinions of those so-called experts, many of whom had had little or no municipal experience. 

They are recommending larger units to be about the size of our provincial constituencies. I am sure 

practical municipal men will recognize this as just so much muddled thinking. The C.C.F. Government 

appears to have the mistaken idea that by putting our local institutions into larger units, they can solve 

their financial problems. 

 

A quick look at our larger school unit set-up and a quick look at our larger school units’ debts, both in 

operating costs and capital expenditures running into millions of dollars, should show the fallacy of this 

thinking. After all, Mr. Speaker, the local people are going to pay those taxes, and they are the ones who 

should have the most say about how and where they are spent. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

6 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think what is needed in this province is a provincial-municipal conference where we can 

sit down with the municipal men - the Government sit down with municipal men and go into their 

problems and properly allocate the responsibilities and sources of revenue as between this Government 

and our rural municipalities. It is long overdue. They go down to Ottawa a couple of times a year, and 

they get adjustments, but it doesn't work back to the municipalities. This Government should have 

courage to bring the municipal men in here, sit down with them and discuss their problems, and try to 

see if they cannot be ironed out, because after all, 25 cents of the municipal tax dollar is far too little for 

the municipalities to operate on. Some people over there I know don't believe that, but I am quite sure if 

you talk to the average municipal man he will tell you that. If we had this municipal-provincial 

conference, we could probably restore our municipalities to the proud position they once held in this 

province as the most efficient and democratic form of government that we had in the province. Today 

they are being regulated into just a puppet of this Government - a collection agency for other 

organizations over which they have little or no control. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my air time is almost up, but just before I sit down I would like to say just a few 

words about that fine constituency that I have the honour to represent, the constituency of Cannington. It 

is one of the most historic and best constituencies in the province of Saskatchewan. In that constituency 

(it is in the park area) we carry on a system of mixed farming there, and in a great majority of cases the 

people live on their own farms, and keep stock; and after all I think the Minister of Agriculture will 

agree with me that is the soundest system of farming in this province of ours. It may not make as much 

money quickly, but over the years it is the soundest programme of farming that we can have in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This past few years down there we have had excessive rainfall in eastern Saskatchewan. Some of the 

boys up north think they have all the water. Certainly they have got all the money (or most of the 

money) for paying for it, but they haven't all the water. In the constituency to the north of mine, where 

the hon. Leader of the Opposition lives, there is a great lot of damage in there. In all of Cannington we 

have had a lot of damage from water, and that is true to a certain extent, to the northern part of the 

constituency of Souris-Estevan. I think probably we have in that constituency one municipality that is 

suffering worse than any constituency in the province, and I would just like to give you, Mr. Speaker, a 

quick rundown. I have here the report which that municipality sent in to the Municipal Affairs 

Department in the spring when the water was high. Just to give you a quick rundown of this, they asked 

the number of miles of improved roads in the municipality and the answer was 365. Number of miles of 

improved road under water, 59. Number of miles of improved road not under water, but seriously 

damaged, 253. The number of approaches to bridges washed out, 38. The number of approaches to 

culverts washed out, 99. The number of bridges destroyed (10 feet), 27; 10 feet 20 feet, 37; 20 feet to 40 

feet, 8; number of culverts, 81. Cost of repairing and damage, according to their estimate, was $168,000, 

I believe, when the damage was appraised, but that was cut in two. 

 

Now I just bring that to your attention, Mr. Speaker, because some of the members over on the other 

side are boasting about the amount of government money that went into their constituencies. I can assure 

that very little has gone into Cannington, except for this flood damage, and I'm going to say that they did 

. . . 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

7 
 

Mr. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — How much did the Federal Government give? 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I'm going to say it. They did a fair job on that. They paid about 20 per cent of the 

final estimate of the cost, and I have no objection to it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak (Minister of Telephones): — What did Gardiner give? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — But outside of that flood damage, and this flood damage didn't just start this year, 

Mr. Speaker, this has been building up for three or four years - some four years ago we had a town in 

there in the east end that had 38 inches of rainfall in one year, and that is where our water started to 

build up. Now, I don't know whether we are not as good at hollering as the fellows are in the north, but 

we certainly don't get near the money that they do in special grants, and yet we have similar problems. 

In fact, in some municipalities - I don't say all of them - we have a bigger problem. Why, the Minister of 

Highways even took a picture of an outfit - it must have been pretty bad because of all the work he was 

doing, he took a picture of an outfit working down there in Cannington, under difficult conditions on 

No. 13 highway. And they were difficult, but I can assure you that the municipalities difficulties were 

equally as great with a far less revenue to look after those difficulties. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my air time is up and I can assure you that I will not support the budget. 

 

Mr. J. W. Horseman (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take a small part in this debate, I can assure 

you that my remarks will not be too controversial, I hope, but I want to congratulate the Provincial 

Treasurer on the able manner in which his budget was presented. I didn't hear him, as I was not here, but 

I have heard him on many occasions and he always makes a very fine job. I should also like to 

congratulate him on the fact that he has presented more budgets in this House than any other Provincial 

Treasurer has, that is 12. Now if you take the numbers from 1 to 12 they are always considered sort of 

lucky numbers, but number 13 is considered by many people to be a very unlucky number, and I wonder 

if the hon. gentleman does intend to present another budget. You know, I have an idea that he is a little 

bit superstitious anyway, because before the budget was presented, we, the Opposition, would have liked 

to have had him bring in his budget on Friday. He refused to do so, and Friday is considered by many 

people to be an unlucky day, so I think he is just a little superstitious about these things. I wonder how 

he'll make out the next time! 

 

Now, I must also congratulate my hon. friend from Canora (Hon. Mr. Kuziak). He gave us a great 

oration here the other day, and he was so carried away with his own eloquence at one time that he 

addressed the House as “Ladies and Gentlemen.”He was, of course, delivering a political speech 

anyway, and I suppose the thought was in his mind that he was speaking to an audience somewhere out 

in the country! But he made a wonderful oration. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

8 
 

I think as the session progresses, Mr. Speaker, it becomes more evident all the time that the C.C.F. 

Government here in Saskatchewan are looking for some issue - some new issue to go to the country 

with. In other words, they are looking for a new horse to ride - that's a common expression in politics. It 

doesn't matter what course you ride, as long as you get into power! You know, they have been riding 

this old horse, and his name, Mr. Speaker, is ‘Regina Manifesto’. They have been riding him now for 20 

years, and they have given him an awful come-and-go. I think it is time to get another horse to ride. In 

looking around for a new one, I believe they thought a while ago that cash advances on farm-stored 

grain might be the answer, but that was pretty well passed out of the picture now. That has cleaned itself 

up pretty well. But you know, they remind me of Richard the Third, when his horse was shot out from 

under him in battle, he wanted another horse very badly, so he got up on his feet and waved his sword, 

and he said, “A horse - a horse; my Kingdom for a horse.” Now, Mr. Speaker, that's a pretty big price to 

offer for a horse, but then of course it just depends upon how badly you want a horse! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural Resources): — You'd better depend on a mule! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — You can always depend on “Jimmy”! 

 

Mr. Horseman: — You know, sometimes, too, when I see the gentlemen opposite standing up here, 

striking a very majestic pose, speaking on this, that and the other thing, I often think of a Napoleon, 

trying to avoid Waterloo. 

 

We have heard a lot about the terrible position the farmers are finding themselves in on account of not 

being able to sell grain. They are, in fact, in not too good a shape, but I think in the case of this kind, in a 

province such as Saskatchewan where agriculture means everything, that some responsibility in a matter 

like this should rest with the provincial government of the day. And I have been keenly disappointed, 

Mr. Speaker, that up to now this Government has made no move to help the farmers in this difficult 

period which they are going through. 

 

I think there is plenty of opportunity here, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to remind them of an old 

saying, and a lot of these old sayings have a lot of truth in them, that “lost opportunities never return.” I 

mentioned a few minutes ago that the Government here seems to be looking for a new horse to ride. We 

are all aware of the great filibuster that was carried on down at Ottawa by the Opposition members. The 

C.C.F. started it, of course, on cash advances on farm stored grain. They were supported by other 

Opposition parties. Well, they held the business of the House up for about three weeks pretty well, and 

the motion, of course, was defeated. As far as cash advances were concerned, they knew that the Federal 

Government of Canada - the people of Canada for that matter - would not adopt that policy. And the Bill 

was presented to the House to make guaranteed bank loans to farmers. The C.C.F. opposed that bill right 

through the House, even through the third reading. They knew when they opposed that Bill, or before 

they opposed it, that cash advances were out as far as that was concerned, but they wanted to try and 

deny the farmers what little bit of help they might get out of the guaranteed bank loans. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

9 
 

Now the Bank loans may not have been adequate - I don't think they are, but in a case like that there 

wasn't anything left, and yet they opposed it to the very last ditch. One of the federal members down 

there, as a matter of fact he is a federal member, made the statement in the House of Commons that 

many people of the west were talking about secession. I have heard rumours of that kind before many 

years ago, from a good deal of the same kind of course, and I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that statements 

of this kind by responsible public men cannot be too strongly condemned. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Irresponsible! 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — What about Studer? He was going to do away with Saskatchewan! 

 

Mr. Horseman: — Now, I want to tell you members of this House that I am not against any measure, 

no matter what, that might bring assistance to our farmers, whether it is in the form of cash advances or 

anything else. But I can see many difficulties in the way of such a proposal as that. First, I think all 

members of the House know there is a constitutional point involved here. The Federal Government’s 

jurisdiction over wheat rests on three things - control of grain elevators, control of railways, control of 

interprovincial and international trade. But within a province, outside of grain elevators and boxcars, the 

Federal Government has no control. Wheat on the farm, and within the province of origin, is outside the 

Federal and within provincial jurisdiction. Now, if the Federal Government were to instruct the Wheat 

Board to pay for wheat on the farm, it could not give first priority to its claim to this wheat. In terms of 

priority, whatever document was signed by the farmer would stand at the end of the line and be subject 

to provincial debt law. I believe that is correct. 

 

But there are many other difficulties besides, that as I see it, in the way of cash advances on farm-stored 

grain. When you look at it from a good, common-sense business standpoint, many unfortunate 

conditions come into this picture. One of the greatest difficulties I see is that if you go to the country you 

will find thousands of bushels of wheat on the ground, buried under the snowdrifts. I wonder what that 

wheat will be like in the spring. It is a very unfortunate condition, but I wonder what that wheat will be 

like in the spring, and what the loss on that kind of stored wheat will be. You'll also find thousands upon 

thousands of bushels in temporary storage like deep snow-fence built around them, and a little paper put 

around the inside. I had occasion to notice one of these granaries last fall a day or two after the big 

December blizzard. This had been filled up with wheat, heaped up nicely and rounded on the top, and 

after the blizzard was over, and the wind had died down, the whole top of this heap was gone, and the 

wind had even scooped it out down about a foot below the snow-fence top, and scattered that wheat for 

miles across the prairies. Conditions like this are one of the worst difficulties that I see in the way of 

paying cash advances on farm-stored grain, because the losses will be very heavy. You will find grain 

stored in old buildings, old barns without floors, old houses and old granaries that have been in use for 

40 years. We have an old building on our farm full of grain, and a lot of it isn't very good storage, but it 

is better than outside. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

10 
 

Now, there is another danger, too, with farm-stored grain, a very real danger, and that is mice and things 

like that that get into the grain. Rusty grain also is a danger. Now these insects attack grain when it gets 

a little out of condition, usually and they do sometimes cause very serious damage. I know a man who 

lives near my place who had 15,000 bushels of wheat stored in a big granary - pretty fair storage, too. It 

stood there until about the middle of the winter, and he went out to haul some of this wheat out. He 

found that the whole thing was almost a total loss, from the rusty grain weevil. 

 

Now these are some of the difficulties that I see in the way of cash advances on farm-stored grain. 

Another thing, of course, that would have to be done before cash advances could be paid - there would 

have to be a very rigid system of inspection of some kind. Someone would have to go to every farm, 

measure up the grain and see what there was there and see how it was stored before any common 

ordinary businessman would ever think of taking such a risk. Now it is unfortunate, but that is the 

situation as it exists. I think that to overcome this problem, the best way to do it is to provide more 

storage space at shipping points, where grain could be taken off the farms and put in proper storage 

where it could be looked after, and if the grain started to get out of condition they would have the 

machinery that could turn the grain over and cool it off again. If mice got into it, the same thing applies 

in the risk of losses would be very, very much reduced. If sufficient storage were provided, farmers 

would be able to deliver their wheat, or a good portion of their wheat, and receive the full initial 

payment for it, and would not be required to run the risk of the heavy losses on farm-stored grain that we 

are bound to have in many instances. Money also would have to be provided for cash advances on grain. 

Interest would have to be paid on the money, and I believe that it would actually cost the farmers more 

to put this system into effect, then it does to pay the 5 per cent interest on government guaranteed bank 

loans. 

 

There is one thing about the bank loans. Very few farmers have taken advantage of it. The principal 

reason is this, that most any farmer who had a bunch of good wheat stored on his farm, provided that he 

had a reputation for honesty, and a reputation for paying his debts, did not need a government guarantee 

to go to the bank and borrow $1500. The bankers were quite willing to loan him the money and that is 

one reason why this plan was not taken more advantage of. I believe the plan was inadequate; it was not 

what we expected; it was not perhaps what we wanted, but when it got down to the fact that it was the 

only thing we could get, I do not think that the C.C.F. members in Ottawa should have opposed the Bill, 

making that little bit of relief possible for the farmers. 

 

Now, there is another angle to this thing. There are many farmers in western Canada who have very 

great quantities of wheat on the farms. I know a farmer who had as high as 100,000 bushels of wheat 

stored up. I wonder what the small farmer in the northern part of this province and in the eastern part of 

the province, where they had no wheat, and farmers in other parts of Canada, would think of the 

Government of Canada provided public money on the scale necessary to make cash advances on all this 

grain stored out on the farms. I wonder what the small farmer in other parts of the country would think 

of a system such as that. There have been lots of tears shed here in this house - crocodile tears, I think - 

over the fact that farmers have been unable to sell their wheat or their grain. Now, I am willing to admit 

the situation is bad; certainly not good; and 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

11 
 

in some cases I believe it is serious. But we all know that for the greater part of this winter, almost ever 

since the big December blizzard, the country roads have been blocked to such an extent that in most 

areas wheat could not have been delivered in any case, even if the elevators had been empty and the 

market had been open. The situation has changed considerably since last fall. Orders have been coming 

in from countries that we never sold wheat to before, and it looks to me that in the next month or two the 

situation will be pretty well cleared up. Boxcars are being provided in quantity now, and I believe that 

by the time roads are in shape to haul wheat on, the situation will be pretty well cleaned up. 

 

Another thing, of course, that has helped the farmers this winter is the payment on last year's wheat. 

Payment of 10 cents a bushel on 1, 2, 3 and 4 Northern. This was quite a help. And we know that we 

expect a final payment on last year's pool. We believe it will be about six cents a bushel. It will be 

another help. This payment of six cents a bushel that we expect was made possible by the fact that the 

Federal Government has taken responsibility for storage of farm grain in excess of the normal carry-over 

of 178 million bushels. This is a contribution to the western farmers direct from the Federal Government 

of $32 million. I do not think that is anything to sneeze at. It does not sound like hate me; it sounds like 

a lot of dollars to me. 

 

I am concerned about the farmer who has wheat that he cannot sell; I am; but I am much more 

concerned about farmers in many parts of this province who have no wheat and no grain of any kind to 

sell, where they were flooded out last spring and unable to get very much crop in. Many of them were 

unable to put in any wheat at all and they put in late barley, and we know what happened to late barley 

last year when the aphids came in and cleaned the whole works out. Now a situation like that - and I 

understand there are a good many places in the province that are in that very condition now. After the 

disaster of the rust epidemic of 1954, to get another bump again this year could cause real hardship, and 

cash advances or anything else does not amount to anything to the man who has no wheat to sell. 

 

Now, I was quite interested the other day to hear the Hon. Minister of Education (Hon. Mr. Lloyd) make 

some comparison between the tax rate in Alberta and the tax rate in Saskatchewan. He picked out certain 

municipalities along the 4th meridian out here and he sought to prove my statement - and I have no 

doubt he was correct - that the taxes in a certain municipality on this side of the meridian were less than 

they were on the other side, and one municipality that he took as an example, Mr. Speaker, was the rural 

municipality of Senlac. I happen to know the rural municipality of Senlac just like I do the palm of my 

own hand. My farm is only one mile from the corner of that municipality and I have been over it and 

across it many times for the last 40 years. It is one of the lowest assessed municipalities in that area - I 

think it is the lowest, but I may be wrong there. There is a wonderful group of people who live in that 

musicality, good people, but the land all across the south side of the municipality is very rough, very, 

very rough, mostly pasture land. There are here and they are some good farms, but it is a mixed farming 

proposition there. The people raise a lot of cattle and they are grazing very well on that land. Across the 

north side of that municipality you are right in the 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

12 
 

sand hills. There is very little grass even for cattle, but it is used for grazing and I want to tell the House 

that some of the best cattle in Saskatchewan are grown in that municipality, but as far as the assessment 

goes, it is a very, very low-assessed municipality. And here is another strange thing about it. When you 

get right to the west end of that municipality, or almost to the west end, north of that, there is a strip of 

very good land there, real good land, some of it as good as the Regina plains. But there is only a small 

strip. Well, of course, that good land extends across the 4th meridian. Naturally it would not stop 

because the 4th meridian was there. It runs on into Alberta. And when you get to the first town across 

the border - it is Haven and Ferrier that is a good country in there. It is immediately west of Senlac 

municipality but the conditions are altogether different. There is no comparison at all, as far as that goes. 

 

I haven't very much longer to speak, Mr. Speaker, and I am sure the House will be glad when I sit down, 

but there are a few more remarks that I would like to make. We celebrated our Golden Jubilee last year - 

50 years since the province was formed. I had the honour of being a member of the Jubilee Committee, 

but I did not do very much work on the committee. I attended some of the meetings, though. But, I did 

attend a good many of the pioneer jubilee celebrations throughout the country during the summer and 

the people in even many small areas went all out to celebrate their 50th anniversary. They went to a lot 

of work and even a lot of expense. Why in our town up there they got a big steam game tractor and 

brought it in and led the procession with it. Two or three men of the town went out and bought that on 

their own. They have got it there yet. They had no use for it, but they brought it in and led the procession 

with it. Two or three men of the town went out and bought that on their own. They have got it there yet. 

They had no use for it, but they brought it in and there were about a dozen old engineers, old steam 

engineers, and they made it look like a new one. I thought it was a wonderful thing to do. 

 

But in speaking of our pioneers, there is one group that we do not think enough about. We, the men, you 

know, the lordly men, like to think - and I think most of them do - that the progress that has been made 

in this province in 50 years was due to their efforts almost entirely. And they lose sight of the facts and 

the things that the pioneer women did in those early days. I have seen women come to this country from 

the East, from England and from Scotland and many other places; women who have been used to a lot of 

good things in life - at least better than the necessities of life, some of life's luxuries as well. And they 

settled down on these windswept plains of Saskatchewan and lived in sod shacks. They had many times 

only the bare necessities - just enough to keep them alive, but they stayed with it, and I often wonder 

how many men would have stayed on in this country if it had not been for the women. Of course, they 

raised their families under very trying conditions and I remember well - and many of you other 

gentlemen in this House will also remember - when it came along to the fall of the year and threshing 

time came, added to all the other duties, these women had to bake and cook for a gang of threshers. 

Twelve men was a small crew in those days. She would have to get the children ready to go to school in 

the morning, see that they were clean and dressed and get their lunches ready and then have dinner ready 

again for 12 or 16 men. When I look back at those times today - I didn't think much of it at the 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

13 
 

time - but I wonder how they ever did it. Yet, those were the things that have made this province great 

and I said before that I think the next 50 years should belong to Saskatchewan. I do not believe, Sir, that 

we have even anywhere near reached our peak in this province in agricultural production alone, and we 

can see other things coming in and other natural resources being developed as times goes on. 

 

The northern Saskatchewan that we always considered a wilderness; we did not think it was any good 

for anything - just a wilderness - fish, and fur and timber along the south edge. They are beginning to 

find out now that it is one of the great treasure houses of the world and people are beginning to get 

interested in it. I think that the government of Saskatchewan, no matter what party forms the next 

government, should pay a lot more attention to that north country than has been done in the past. There 

are areas up there with riches, I think, untold, and they are not even scratched yet. But if the country was 

made a little more accessible, growth or railroads, so the people could get in there, I think in the next 50 

years, to development of this province will rival the development in the last 50 years in agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is all I have to say, but I cannot support the motion. 

 

Mr. G. H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — You had better clean out your ears now. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am not going to try to emulate the member for Canora (Hon. Mr. Kuziak) because I 

don't have to, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — You're just 30 years too late. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You know, when he was speaking the other day I was sitting here - and I was down 

to the United States, last summer, on a trip and we put our car in a parking lot in one of the larger cities 

in the States; it was close to midnight before we got back to take the car out, and just as they were 

pulling out the cars and blocking every entrance into the parking lot, there was a gentleman came along 

in a sports roadster; he had a double horn and he stopped, with both horns blowing, blowing, something 

terrible, and the negro attendant of the parking lot went up to him and said, “Ah, partner; your horn is all 

right; blow your nose.” I was just thinking about that when my friend over there was blowing his horn! I 

will have to say a little more about that later on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was interested in the speech of the Minister of Social Welfare (Hon. Mr. Sturdy) 

yesterday. I never heard him deliver a speech of that kind, or the type of speech that he did, yesterday. It 

was mild and he was fairly moderate in his expressions, and he kind of had a pleading tone in his voice; 

and all he had to tell was what good work he was doing in the gaols in the province, and I agree with 

him - it is about time he did it - because it is sometime now since 12 years ago. But you would almost 

think, Mr. Speaker, that if he keeps on a little while like that - at least the way he spoke of it - pretty near 

all of us would want to go to gaol to get a big feed. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

14 
 

But the member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) is not here, . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Yes, he is in here, he is just in the wrong seat. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Oh well. . . 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — He is working down towards the opposite side. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I never heard a person who was raised on the prairies of this province, and he has 

probably been able to think for himself for the past 20 years or more, that talked as much nonsense as he 

did. He was speaking about hospitalization, and he was repeating all the good things and all the benefits 

that this Government has given the municipalities. “We gave them this; we helped them out there”; and 

he ended up in the millions. But when he came to hospitalization he made a special effort to impress on 

the audience listening to him that they should be grateful to this Government for what they have done as 

far as hospitalization is concerned. And he said this: “That, in the old days, the fact of the matter was, 

that if the municipalities couldn't pay the bill than the hospitals never got paid.” 

 

Mr. R. Walker (Hanley); - Mr. Speaker, on the question of privilege, I did not say that at all. What I 

said was. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What did you say? 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — What I said was that if the person confined to hospital was an indigent the 

municipality had to pay the bill, and that if the hospital. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — And that if the hospital bill was not paid by the patient, that it had to be 

added to the cost of operating the hospital and that added to the mill rate in the hospital district where 

the hospital was located. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He explains now what he should have explained yesterday. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — I did. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Of course this is all happening because I am on the air, but that isn't what he said. 

That isn't what he said, and he knows it, too. Now I am going to read. . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am not letting you take any more of my time. You can explain that tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker; - Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, on the question of privilege, I told the hon. member from Arm 

River what I said, and unless he is prepared to quote from the records and deny what I said I said, then 

he has to accept it. 

 



 

March 13, 1956 

15 
 

Mr. Danielson: — Any person who was raised here - not only now, but in years gone by, and you have 

probably had more experience with it than most men in this House, Mr. Speaker, when you were in the 

municipal work and other countries in the world besides us. And one thing was this - that in spite of the 

hardships we had, there was nobody went without hospital treatment if he needed it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Oh! Oh! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And I say that without fear of contradiction. 

 

Some Government Members: — Oh – oh – oh! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And my friend there can blow his horn all he likes. I know, because I lived here; I 

was chairman of the hospital board; I was on a hospital board for 32 years. . . 

 

Some Government Member: — So was I! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — . . . and I know what I'm talking about. And another thing, Mr. Speaker, I lived in 

one of the worst districts in the province of Saskatchewan so far as drought and crop failure was 

concerned. We piled up a hospital account of $28,000 - but there was nobody turned away from the 

hospital. And let me tell my friend from Hanley (Mr. R. Walker) it would surprise him if he knew 

anything about it, which he doesn't, as to how many in those days paid their hospital bills. A remarkable 

number of people - far more than half of them - came in and paid their hospital bills when they left the 

hospital. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — He was in short pants, then. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And in many cases, in a few weeks or a month, they came back and paid, if they 

were not able to pay when they were discharged. And I was also Reeve at that time, and I am going to 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, that when he says anything such as he said, that there were large amounts of 

money paid which he intimated would equal the amount that it costs the people now - for hospitalization 

that was paid by the municipalities, that statement is far, far from the truth. 

 

Let us see what happens now. Who pays the hospital bills now, Mr. Speaker? Well, you charge every 

individual $15 per person, every family $40 - that is the maximum - and any person from that family 

who is over a certain age is classed as an individual and he pays for himself. That is what they do. On 

top of that you have a sales tax of one per cent which brings in around $6 million a year. It brings in 

from every municipality, into this fund, by direct personal tax, Mr. Speaker, anywhere from $13,000 to 

$15,000 a year. It averages that, and maybe more. I was talking to a secretary-treasurer of a municipality 

not long ago, and he said that his municipality had paid $32,000. It varies, of course, 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

16 
 

depending on the population in any particular municipality. Now that is what they do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there wasn't one municipality in the province of Saskatchewan that had half of that amount 

during the ‘thirties to take care of their indigent patients. These fellows say they give it to us. They never 

gave a penny to any person in this province of Saskatchewan. They have taxed the people to the limit so 

they could have millions of dollars to render these services and to play around with. That is what they 

have done; and there have been a lot of things said during the last few weeks in this House. I heard about 

this ‘cost-price squeeze’ but there is another squeeze on, Mr. Speaker, due to the incompetence and 

extravagance of this Government and that is their ‘cost tax squeeze’. 

 

Some Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And you can see, today, that some businesses are lagging. Why did they do that? 

Because, Mr. Speaker, I, as an individual, and the rest of us here, we have a control of these expenses 

ourselves, and that is why we don't buy, and cannot afford to buy, and we hold back and try to harbour 

our resources; but not so with the taxes that were imposed by an extravagant government in this 

province of Saskatchewan. There is not a license fee or a tax, without it has been trebled and doubled 

several times since this Government came into power. And then they say they give the municipalities 

things! Well, Mr. Speaker, that is all I am going to say about that. I have said more than I intended to say 

now. 

 

Now then, the member from Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) said something in regard to rural 

municipalities. I am going to make one statement, and this is my own opinion, and I am just as sure as 

anything in the world that I am right. I have been watching these underground suggestions coming from 

certain influential people in connection with this Government; they haven't got the courage to come out 

and say, “we are going to do this thing”; they had an experience with the school districts; and I am going 

to say this: if this Government is returned to power, Mr. Speaker, they are going to do exactly with the 

rural municipalities in this province as what they did with the school districts after 1944; and they are 

not going to have anything to say about it, and when that thing is done, then their theories and ambitions 

to be able to control (they cannot control the municipalities as they are constituted today), that is one of 

rock they have stubbed their toes against during the last 12 years, they haven't been able to dictate or 

control or suggest. By doing as they did with the Larger School Units they can tie them together, and by 

doing so they will have an opportunity to try to pick their own class of people to run them; and then, on 

top of that they will have one of these supervisors - municipal superintendent - who will be sitting in at 

the council meetings, suggesting to the council, telling them what to do as they do with the Larger 

School Units, and they will have a direct connection between these units out in the country into the 

Minister’s office in the city of Regina. That is what they are aiming to do. They did it with the school 

districts, and it has worked fairly successfully, until, today, many of them are in a financial mess; they 

are in financial mire; and they are trying to rectify that. How are they rectifying it? They are now going 

to let the people 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

17 
 

pick their own school trustees, by popular vote - not by delegates; they are now going to be gracious 

enough to let these people pick their own school trustees by popular vote. They have hopes that they can 

pick somebody with some brains so they can be able to straighten out the mess that they are in, today. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That will eliminate you. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The good thing about that, Mr. Speaker, is that a fellow like the member from 

Weyburn (Premier Douglas) won't have anything to say about it. He thinks he will, but he won’t. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Will you be the new Minister of Education, Danny? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I'll be back again if you are not back. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Probably without you. It won't be long now, boys. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — You’ll have to do better than you did last time. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I was hoping that the Minister of Social Services (Hon. Mr. Sturdy), yesterday might 

go into some of the activities so far as his Department was concerned, but he skirted around the real 

important things and he dwelled, in a general way, on certain benefits and increases and so on, which 

have been brought about. I think perhaps he can say, that in some small cases - a number of cases - 

something has been done. 

 

I have here a list of comparable Mothers’ Allowances paid in Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta; and 

I am going to read it to you, Mr. Speaker, and I think it will be of interest to you and maybe to some of 

the other members. 

 

Now one mother and one child, in the province of Manitoba gets $51 a month as an allowance; in 

Saskatchewan, they get $40; and in Alberta they get $50. 

 

Two children and a mother gets $76 in Manitoba; $50 in Saskatchewan; and $70 in the province of 

Alberta. 

 

Three children and a mother get $92 in Manitoba; $55 in Saskatchewan; and $85 in Alberta. 

 

Four children and a mother get $107 in Manitoba; $60 in Saskatchewan; and $95 in Alberta. 

 

Five children and a mother get $125 in Manitoba; $65 in Saskatchewan; and $105 in Alberta. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

18 
 

Six children and a mother get $138 in Manitoba; $70 in Saskatchewan; and $115 in Alberta. 

 

Seven children and a mother get $150 in Manitoba; $75 in Saskatchewan; and $125 in Alberta. 

 

Eight children and a mother get $150 in Manitoba; $80 in Saskatchewan; and $135 in Alberta. 

 

Nine children and a mother get $150 in Manitoba; $85 in Saskatchewan; and $145 in Alberta. 

 

Ten children and a mother get $150 in Manitoba; $90 in Saskatchewan; and $145 in Alberta. 

 

The above rates, Mr. Speaker, for Manitoba to not include allowance for winter fuel; where the family 

has to purchase winter fuel the monthly rate is increased by amounts ranging from $12 to $22 per month 

for seven months of the year. The price of fuel allowance varies with the number of children. 

 

Manitoba also has a complex system, under which liquid assets over $3,000 are paid over to the Director 

and held in trust to be used for the benefit of the family. In Saskatchewan, when a mother has an 

income, not including family allowance, of more than $45 a month, the mother's allowance is reduced. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, would the hon. member. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — In Alberta, 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Just wait till I am through this. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I just wanted to ask you a question. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You can sit down. I'll give you a chance to ask me a question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — He doesn't choose to answer a question. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — In Alberta, when a mother has an income, not including family allowance of more 

than $100 a month the mother's allowance is reduced. So you see, in Alberta, the mother's allowance is 

reduced only when a mother has an income of over $100, not including family allowance; but in 

Saskatchewan they reduce its when the income is $45 a month. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I just want to ask the question. What is the hon. member quoting from; where did 

he get his figures? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — From Manitoba, and from Alberta. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

19 
 

Mr. Berezowsky: — From whom? 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Look them up yourself. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — They are not right, that's all. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And from Saskatchewan. You can go and get them yourself if you want to. 

 

Some Government Member: — They are not correct. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Some examples, Mr. Speaker, are cited here and they are very interesting. A mother 

and four children in Manitoba, heating their own home, would receive a mother's allowance of $126 a 

month for seven months of the year, or $107 for the remaining five months, or a monthly average of 

$118 - a mother and four children, and that is in Manitoba. 

 

In Alberta, a mother and four children would receive a mother's allowance of $95 a month, and family 

allowance. If the mother's additional income is more than $100, the mother's allowance would be 

reduced by the amount that was over $100. 

 

A mother and four children, in Saskatchewan, receive a mother's allowance of $60 a month, and a family 

allowance (of course that doesn't come from the provincial government as they would like people to 

believe); but if that mother's additional income is more than $45 a month, the mother's allowance must 

be reduced by that amount. 

 

This means, Mr. Speaker - I was mistaken a moment ago when I said $90 a month - as to when the 

reduction comes into effect in Saskatchewan. 

 

‘Humanity First’ - we heard that, yesterday, from the Minister of Social Welfare. Well here is the point: 

The Dominion Government pays to persons over 70 years of age $80 a month; the C.C.F. Government 

of Saskatchewan pays $80 a month of mother's allowance to a widow with eight dependent children. 

Now that is something that we should know, and I was thinking the Minister of Social Welfare might 

elucidate a little on that and give us the information which the people should have. 

 

Here is a comparison which I have drawn up myself, and I am going to give it to the House. A mother 

with one child gets $11 a month more in Manitoba, and $10 a month more in Alberta, than what they do 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

A mother with two children gets $26 a month more in Manitoba, and $20 more in Alberta per month. 

With three children they get $37 more in Manitoba, and $30 more in Alberta, per month. With four 

children they get $47 more in Manitoba, and $35 more in Alberta. With five children, they get $60 more 

in Manitoba and $40 more in Alberta. With six children, $68 more in Manitoba, and $35 more in 

Alberta. With seven children, $75 more in Manitoba, and $50 more in Alberta. With nine children, $60 

more in Manitoba, and $60 more in Alberta. With 10 children, $60 more in Manitoba, and $55 more in 

Alberta. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

20 
 

Now this is something that everyone should know, and yet you hear these people, and all these 

Ministers, making familiar statements - that our people are the best looked after in the world, at least in 

Canada, so far as social services and social benefits are concerned. And I can see the Minister of Social 

Welfare, in his sanctimonious way, telling the people what a wonderful blessing has been bestowed on 

the people in the province of Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is something that is not so in every 

case, as these figures indicate. 

 

Now I know what they will say. They will say, “Well, you have hospitalization.” Yes, that is true, but I 

want to remind them that that is $15 per person, per year. . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Not in Manitoba! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Now just a minute. Manitoba has got health services and you are not going to get 

away with that. You are not going to get away with it. That is for a year, Mr. Speaker - $15 a month - 

and there is three times that difference in the mother's allowance between Manitoba and Alberta and 

Saskatchewan. So there is nothing there. All they do is charge each person $15 hospital cost, and that 

places the Premier and me and the mother's allowance cases, exactly on the same basis. The same basis. 

Just the same, Mr. Speaker, as you and I. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — On the point of privilege, Mr. Speaker. . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Where is your point of privilege? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, Mr. Speaker, I am not going to allow him to interrupt. He can ask me any 

questions after my radio time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Will you just take your seat? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, no I am not going to do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — He has a point. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He has no right to butt in on me. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — He has. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, he hasn't. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — He is not going to butt in, I will see about that. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — All right, somebody. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Just state your point of privilege. 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — The information submitted by the hon. member is incorrect. The only. . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — That is no point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is not a point of privilege, I. . . 



 

March 13, 1956 

21 
 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! All right, all right, you have said the information is incorrect, and that is your 

point of privilege. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — It is correct. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, he said it is correct. Then, I know what they are going to say – “Well, what 

about medical services?” Well, your Health Service report, Mr. Speaker, shows there were more 

mother's allowance and child welfare cases last year. In 1953-54, on page 135, and there is no doubt but 

what the Minister will agree that this figure is correct, but the average per capita cost was $19.90 for the 

year; so if you take that out, there is still a tremendous gulf between the assistance that mother's 

allowance cases receive in the neighbouring provinces to what they do here. In this ‘human paradise’, 

Saskatchewan – “Humanity First” - don't let us forget that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — May I ask the hon. member a question, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I don't think you know how. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — There are 700 mothers. . . 

 

Some Opposition Member: — Sit down! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You had your day yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Yes, but I want to correct. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, I was very amused with the enlightening speech of the Minister of Telephones 

(Hon. Mr. Kuziak) the other day, when he talked about Crown Corporations. You know, it reminds me 

of the letter I read in this House a few weeks ago. You will remember, Mr. Speaker, the fellow who told 

in his letter that he couldn't pay the price for certain government services and he said he would have to 

run his windcharger with C.C.F. wind;. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Gardiner wind! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And the Minister was surely talking like a windcharger, the other day; but after all, 

he said one thing - and he emphasized it time and time again - and that was the fact, Mr. Speaker, that 

there had never been any of the earnings of the Telephone and Power Corporation used 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

22 
 

to conceal, or to cover up any losses of the other Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — That’s right. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That’s what you say. The Premier has said the same thing. Now I have gone into this 

pretty far, and I think the House should know the facts. His exact words when he spoke were: 

 

“There was no truth in the assertion made by the hon. member for Cannington in a radio speech last 

year that profits of the Power Corporation and Telephones were used to cover the losses of other 

corporations.” 

 

He said that. Each and every year, Mr. Speaker, in this Crown Corporations propaganda, some member 

of the Government - the Premier has done it (usually it is the Premier), or the Provincial Treasurer, 

making statements on Crown Corporations profits, which has included three things - and, by the way, 

here is your own report, so I am using your own figures; you don't need to worry that I am going to do 

like the member for Canora (Hon. Mr. Kuziak). “Profit claimed for C.C.F. Corporations” – that is 

included; “Net profit of Power and Telephones”; “Interest payments made by Power and Telephones” – 

these totals have not, of course, been broken down there; they would have revealed the true facts if they 

had been broken down - but they are there. Just the total has been given. As an example, I will take the 

profit for the year 1949 - by the way this is the 1949-50 report which, of course, covers the 1949 year of 

operations. In the Throne Speech debate of 1950, the Premier said this, when speaking of Crown 

Corporations. 

 

“Last year, taking even the losses, including the losses of the Fish Board, which was largely a relief 

proposition, our intern statement will show, and I think it will not be far off the final audited 

statement, that these Crown Corporations, after depreciation and reserves have been set aside, will 

show a return of over $3,000,000 in total, or about 7½ per cent of the capital invested.” 

 

That was the Premier speaking. 

 

Here is the first statement made about Crown Corporation surpluses covering the year 1949: The 

Premier said the total surplus was over $3,000,000. In his budget speech of 1950, the Provincial 

Treasurer repeated Premier's statement or claim, and here is what he said: 

 

“The individual reports covering operations during the fiscal year ending in 1949 indicate various 

results. When losses of the discontinued operations are excluded, net earnings of $3,270,000 on 

average advances of $39,440,000 show a rate of 8.2 per cent.” 

 

Well, he jumps the Premier by almost two per cent. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

23 
 

Now here is the ‘Saskatchewan News’ which is paid by the taxpayers, containing all the C.C.F. 

propaganda they can pack into it, and it says this: 

 

“March 15, 1950. Crown Corporations showed a net revenue of over $3,000,000 to the Government 

Finance office.” 

 

There you have the story - and it is a story in more ways than one. It is designed, Mr. Speaker, to leave 

the impression that the Government had been successful in making shoes and bricks and blankets and 

what have you. 

 

Now then, let us look at this thing. Now this is the proof or the foundation of what I am going to say. 

Here is the Premier and the Provincial Treasurer and to the ‘Saskatchewan News’ and they all, with a 

small variation in the money involved, make the same statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Not your statement, though. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, I am going to use your statements all the way through; and then surely you 

couldn't say it was hiding. Because you denied on the floor of this House that the Power Corporation and 

Telephones profits had ever been used to cover up. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — That’s right. I still deny it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You used them for several years, up to two years ago. You wait and see! Now here, 

Mr. Speaker, are the facts: When the report of the Finance Office covering this period was tabled in the 

Legislature one year later (that would be 1950) it gave the amounts of net revenue, before interest on 

advances; and I want you to bear these figures in mind: “Not, revenue before interest on advances - 

$3,097,000.” Note that it does not call this ‘net revenue’. The auditor doesn't do that; the auditor doesn't 

called this net revenue, nor surplus, as the Premier did; nor ‘net earnings’ as the Provincial Treasurer 

did. He calls it ‘net revenue before interest on advances’. The auditor then subtracts the operating costs 

of the Finance Office of the $61,252 and the interest of $1,229,187 paid to Power and Telephones. This 

leaves a surplus of $1,736,000. The auditor does another thing here. The auditor says the total amount 

carried to Surplus Account is $1,736,000 - and not $3,000,000. That is the auditor's statement, Mr. 

Speaker, and these men know that the auditor's statements are correct. . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Nobody is arguing with that. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, but that doesn't prove what you say. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — It doesn't prove what you say. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Not the way you read it, it doesn't; you only go halfway down the sheet. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

24 
 

Mr. Danielson: — Now then out of this, Mr. Speaker, you must deduct certain things. This surplus 

earned by Power and Telephones was $1,562,700. Subtract that and there is left a surplus of 

$173,000,577. That is not a surplus like the financial wizard, the Provincial Treasurer, gave last year, 

when he came in with that sensational sheet at the end of the session. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe the hon. member would like to correct himself there, when he said $173 

million. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am glad, Mr. Speaker, that you corrected me, because it was a slip of the tongue 

and nothing else. This surplus earned by Power and Telephones was $1,562,700; subtract that and there 

is left $173,577 of Crown Corporations profit. But even then, Mr. Speaker, this isn't profit - this isn't a 

profit - that is very much less than $3,000,000, but it is not a profit. Here is $173,577 and it is not nearly 

enough to pay the interest on money advanced to these C.C.F. corporations. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, the airtime is over. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The advances for it 1949 were $7¼ million; the money loaned and then borrowed by 

the Provincial Treasurer at 3½ per cent interest is $254,000. There is $80,700 more than the surplus of 

the Crown Corporations, and that shows a loss, Mr. Speaker, of $81,000 instead of your $3,000,000 

profit. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Would you permit a question? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Read your own. Go and get all your auditors you have and all the wizards and 

figures, and figure this out and see if it isn't correct. Everything will come out as I have said. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Would you permit a question? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And then a man that tries to pull that stuff, that ‘bunk’ over the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan is either a fool or else he is so conceited that he thinks he can make the people 

believe anything he says. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — You judge everybody by yourself. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That’s all right. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Will you permit a question? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is the situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member can speak for himself. Will the hon. member permit a 

question? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

25 
 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member made the statement that profits were 

transferred from Power and Telephones to the other corporations and I thought he was going to produce 

some evidence to substantiate his claim. Would he go back to that and submit some evidence? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — It’s in your own report. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You have your own reports and you can look at them. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! We can't allow this crossfire. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — You are going to abandon that claim, are you, Herman? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It is on page three. Of course, Mr. Speaker, it is just a waste of time to talk to the 

member from Hanley. He doesn't know anything. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — I’m just trying to find out, Herman. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — But that is not all, Mr. Speaker. This is not a new thing. All of their figures are the 

same way; just half-truths are told, and figures are used in such a way that they can convey something 

that isn't true. It isn't a fact. 

 

Mr. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — What a confession. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And that should never be in this House. Well, you can laugh all you like, but let me 

tell you this - there isn't one of them that disputed one figure that I used. Now don't forget that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — You haven't proved anything. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, then your own statement is wrong; do you want to say that your auditor’s 

statement is not correct? 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — You didn't show any transfer of profits. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, shut up. Go on back to Canora and talk to some of your friends back there - the 

only time they hear you is on the radio. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — You can't twist the auditor's statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, during the past few weeks, Mr. Speaker, many things have been said by these 

people, and you can't blame me if I pick out a few of these things, today, and say a few words myself. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

26 
 

Some Government Member: — We’ll be tolerant. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Things cannot be anymore misrepresented than what they have been on the floor of 

this House. One thing in all this is that we can go back and prove to these gentlemen on the other side of 

the House -they made certain statements in years gone by and they cannot deny that, because we have 

proof of those statements. I am rather amused when we hear the explanation, the excuses and sometimes 

even abuses that are heaped on us this side of the House, when we remind the gentlemen over there that 

they should have lived up to their promises, and that they should at least, when they had an abundance 

of money, which they have at the present time, and they are going to get more, that they should at least 

make an effort to try to rectify some of their mistakes which they have been making during the last few 

years. 

 

Many things have been said about education, Mr. Speaker, and we know by the reports submitted by the 

Larger School Units and the educational institutions in general that the thing is not very rosy; but when 

the Premier's promises were read to him on the floor of this House, a few days ago, he was quite 

indignant that such a thing should be drawn to his attention at this late date, and I am going to read it to 

him again. I have his broadcast here. He read one himself a few days ago, but it wasn't the one he 

thought it was, and he was stopped in his tracks. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I read the one the Leader of the Opposition sent over. It's the only one I had. He 

keeps those little billet-doux – I don’t. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — How in the world could he put it over a ‘superman’ like you are? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You get, though; you read the wrong one. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Here it is: 

 

“The first thing a C.C.F. Government would do would be to recognize education as a responsibility of 

the provincial government. There has been a tendency on the part of the provincial government to pass 

the buck to municipalities and local school boards for maintaining our educational facilities. The time 

has come when we must recognize that Canada's constitution places the responsibility for teaching our 

children squarely upon the provincial government and it cannot be passed to any other body.” 

 

I don't think he can deny that. He wishes he could. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I don't want to. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He has been trying to but he made such a fizzle out of it that nobody believes him, 

but I was, more than anything else, intrigue when his right-hand bower, the Minister of Education, had 

come to 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

27 
 

his rescue and he said this, in his speech in this House: 

 

“No intelligent person could interpret the Premier's promise to mean that the province would pay the 

entire cost of education.” 

 

Some Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Loptson; - What about the fellow that said it? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, isn't that something? The Minister of Education said that nobody should 

believe the Premier of the province when he makes a promise. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He said ‘intelligent persons’; you wouldn't understand that. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — By the way, Mr. Speaker, I agree with the Minister of Education 100 per cent. I 

discovered that 12 years ago, and I have told him many times that I don't believe him at all. But now I 

know I'm right because his right-hand man sits there, a Minister of the Crown, and re-affirms the 

statement that I have made time after time on the floor of this House. Don't criticize us any more, 

because we have evidence to prove that we are on the right side, and that. . . 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — But going the wrong way. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And the Minister of Education should know something about this thing, too, because 

he knows something about education. He is the fellow, you know, who is pretty positive in his ideas and 

very positive in his convictions. You know I remember in the early days here - I think it was in 1944 or 

1945 – the 1945 session likely, when I was sitting over here and there were only five of us here at the 

time; and we caught up and criticized the Minister because he didn't let the school districts vote as to 

whether they wanted to go into the Larger School Units or not, and he got up and made a speech, and he 

said this: 

 

“Those who oppose the necessary administration changes which will bring greater educational 

advantages to boys and girls can well be classed as scoundrels.” 

 

Well, I haven't forgotten that, Mr. Speaker. And now when he comes up and says that nobody can 

believe the Premier, no matter what promise he makes. . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Nobody with any intelligence. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — With any intelligence, that's right. Nobody with any intelligence. And of all these 

people over there who supported the Premier, only the Minister of Education says that he shouldn't be 

believed when he makes statements, so these other fellows must all believe him, except the Minister of 

Education. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

28 
 

Mr. Loptson: — They can't have much intelligence. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — But don't forget, Mr. Speaker, that the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

haven't forgotten about it, and they won't forget about it, either, because. . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Hear! Hear! And they told you on two occasions what they thought, too. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — They’ll be telling you this year, boy. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Who told who, Mr. Speaker. . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — John Dixon got you back in here. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! Cease the crossfire. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He doublecrossed you; he's a C.C.F. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — And he doublecrossed you. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The beginning of the end. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You’ll have to send up more Ministers to do anything to me. There is no place for 

C.C.F. there. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — You wait and see! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will the hon. member cease dealing with. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Say, Mr. Speaker, why don’t you speak to the Premier? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I have called him to order just the same as you. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — He doesn’t listen to you, though. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — But the people of the province haven't forgotten that. They are in a ‘tax-squeeze’ 

now. You bet they are, and as I said a little while ago, that particular tax-squeeze is not within their 

control, like other things are as far as their expenses are concerned. They can cut down and get along 

with what they have, but not so with the taxes that are growing every day and growing every month and 

they have to be paid, or else very land is jeopardized; and the longer they stay the larger and larger the 

obligations become. So don't forget this - there is one thing about this Government, Mr. Speaker, it has 

absolutely underestimated the intelligence of the people of Saskatchewan. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

29 
 

Now the gentleman from Canora (Mr. Kuziak) who spoke, he thinks that all the people in the province 

are like he is, probably, because I cannot believe there are people in the province of Saskatchewan who 

would take any stock of what he said the other day, because it was all a bunch of. . . 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose): — Good stuff. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — A bunch of ‘hooey’ that is all. There was no substance or truth, and I have proven 

that here today, with the Government's own statements. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — You had better start proving it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — So that is the situation. I can assure you, if you think you will put anything over on 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan, you are absolutely wrong. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — You have found it won't work, eh? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You are absolutely wrong, and I know you are very much worried - you bet you are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Don’t get too enthusiastic about it! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You are afraid. Don't laugh, because I know you are. You are afraid of these men 

who are turning away from you; they are all over the province and they are increasing day by day. 

 

Mr. Walker (Hanley): — Who are you going to nominate in Hanley? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I want to say a few words to this man who is Provincial Treasurer in this province. I 

said the other day, that he is the only man in the world, in Canada at least, who can borrow himself out 

of debt. I say that again, and he persists in telling the people that he is doing that, in spite of the fact that 

since December 31, 1948 to December 31, 1955 he has increased the public debt of this province by 

$55½ million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — He’s going to muddle the debt deck, too! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes - $55½ million. Will he must think he is talking to people like the member for 

Canora, too, because no person (using the phrase of the Minister of Education) of any intelligence 

whatever could swallow that, because when it comes to financing there is hardly a person living that 

hasn't had some troubles had some experience along that line, and they know this - that when you 

borrow a dollar, and you spend a dollar, you have to get it someplace; and if you don't have it, you 

borrow it; and that is exactly what he has done to the extent of $55½ million. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

30 
 

Now then, he has been rigging up certain figures to prove to the people that the public debt is not what 

the members on this side of the House say it is. It is peculiar thing that every bank, every financial 

institution of any size or reputation at all, never use his figures; they are using the figures that I have 

here. I have the D.B.S. statement here, and they give, as at March 31, 1955, the net debt for 

Saskatchewan, as being almost $184 million, Mr. Speaker. The Provincial Treasurer had given the figure 

at the end of the calendar year - that was three months earlier and he said there was $90½ million. Of 

course he got this result by subtracting $93½ million from the figure that the D.B.S. used. It was just as 

simple as that. Isn't he a wizard? I think he's a freak! He can do something with figures that no other 

man with a responsible position has ever done, and he expects us to believe him. Well I would say to 

him that people are not all fools. 

 

What about the Bank of Montreal? No bank, Mr. Speaker, or any financial institution that is dealing with 

the public in the line of investments or financial business of any kind would have dared use the figures 

that the Provincial Treasurer uses. They wouldn't dare do it, because they would mislead the people that 

do business with them. And here is what the bank says in the introduction, at the beginning of their 

book: 

 

“This compilation of the outstanding funds and loans and guarantees of the Government of Canada 

and also provincial governments at the 31st March, 1955, a statement has been prepared for the 

information of our clients who are interested in Canadian securities. This information contained in the 

booklet is not guaranteed, but has been okayed from authoritative sources.” 

 

That is the obligation of financial institutions and they will never - and that not only goes for the Bank of 

Montreal, but it goes for all financial institutions of any responsibility - they will not use figures which 

the Provincial Treasurer has been using in this House and in many other places when he is speaking. 

 

Now here again, Mr. Speaker, we find the statement which defers, it only a few short months, from the 

one I just read from the Dominion Bureau of Statistics - $184,527,000 as at March 31, 1955 - $184½ 

million. This figure does not include contingent liabilities; if the fees are added it comes to $180 million. 

They were given three months earlier - that is, the figures of the Bank of Montreal - as $80 million, and 

he gives his figures as $80 million instead of $184½ million; and he gets the figure again, by taking his 

pen and slicing of $100 million. It is just as simple as that. Well I would say, if he has any respect for the 

people that sit in this House - I know he has no respect for us on this side - but if he has any respect for 

the people on that side of the House he shouldn't try to put that over. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. member a question about 

the table, before he closes it. I am very interested in that. What is the net debt - that is, the total of the per 

capita debt for Saskatchewan there? 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

31 
 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, I can look that up, but I am not going to stay here and look it up for you. You 

can look it up yourself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — I would be interested in that, if you have it there. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I have it here but I am not going to take the time to look it up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Well, it's right there. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I think the per capita debt of the province of Saskatchewan is around $200, if I 

remember; I just glanced at it, the other day. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Well, Mr. Speaker, is it true that the per capita debt of the province of Ontario is 

showing bare as the highest in Canada? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — That has nothing to do with it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, I think there is one province higher than Ontario. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Ontario is the highest. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — But if you know it, why do you ask me? Any man can sit down and. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — May I ask another question? Has the hon. gentleman read the municipal debt in that 

particular table of the provinces? It is at the extreme right-hand side - the per capita municipal debt. 

Would he care to tell what the Bank of Montreal has to say about that? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am dealing with the finances of the province of Saskatchewan. You can get the 

debt so far as the municipalities are concerned; they are available; I think we had them here. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — They are right there in that book. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Sure, they are in there. There are pages and pages of debts of there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Just the last page. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There are pages and pages, divided into per capita and provinces and in different 

ways; and the amount of bonds that were issued and the interest rates, and all that sort of thing. There is 

all kinds of information in this book, and surely to goodness, if you know where they are, why are you 

asking me? If you don't know it, I will go over to your office and give you this book. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — I know; I was wondering if you knew. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

32 
 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, sir, I know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Are you willing to tell us what the municipal per capita debt, as quoted in that 

column, is? Let's have it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am going to say to him - if he will ask me that question I will tell him tomorrow. 

Sure, if he wants that information from me I will give it to him tomorrow. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — I want it now. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, I am not going to do it now, Mr. Speaker, because he is caught and he can't 

disprove one word I have said, so that is why he is trying to divert. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the hon. member should go on with his speech. 

 

Some Government Member: — Are you still going to be talking tomorrow? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The trouble is, Mr. Speaker, when I speak everybody else wants to speak over there. 

You see, the truth hurts. When you look him in the face and tell him the truth, that hurts him and he can't 

sit still. The Premier couldn't even contradict me, so there you are. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I could make another budget speech here if I had a little more time, but I want 

to talk about flood relief - for a minute or two, Mr. Speaker, because that is one of the first things the 

Premier attack to the Government of Canada on, when this session open, in the first speech he made, 

why he was very, very strong in his condemnation of the actions of the Federal Government, on account 

of the discrimination which they have imposed on the province of Saskatchewan. That is what he said. 

Of course, I am not saying that, but that is what he said. You see they are always looking for something 

to lambaste the Federal Government about. You know if these fellows didn't have the Federal 

Government they wouldn't have anything to say - they wouldn't have anything! Now the cash advances 

on which they were going to win this next election have boomeranged on them, and it has blown back in 

their faces and they have nothing there. Now what do they have to do. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet; - We’ll see when the election rolls around. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — . . . is distract attention from themselves through criticism of the Federal 

Government. These fellows couldn't operate very long if they didn't have the Federal Government, Mr. 

Speaker, because they are getting twice as much money, more than twice as much money from the 

Federal Government in cash, payable to them, as we had as our entire revenue in the province in the 

years when we were in office. On top of that the old-age pensions have been taken over by the Federal 

Government; family allowances are paid in here; medical grounds of almost $3 million a year are being 

paid into this Government; and now they are facing the prospect of getting $9 million for medical 

services in the province, and an increase in the tax agreement, which will net them approximately (if the 

press is correct and I don't think they are very far out) and increase to about $35 million; it is around 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

33 
 

$28½ or $29 million at the present time, so you see the increase there. That is the reason they have been 

able to hang on. They spend money right and left, it has never been very wisely spent, but nevertheless 

they have had enough to play with while they have been in office the last few years, and on top of that 

what they couldn’t get from the Dominion government, they just soaked taxes on to the people of the 

province. And as I said that tax-squeeze is on right now. 

 

The Premier to very, very strong exception to the deal that he got from the Dominion Government in 

regard to the cost to defray the damage which was caused by the flood last spring. And there is one thing 

I would like to point out to you, Mr. Speaker, and that is that the Dominion Government did not set the 

damages - the Provincial Government did that - and the Dominion Government, under a certain formula, 

which has been accepted all over the Dominion, paid half of that damage, or half of that claim. So when 

he set the price for this certain amount in the province of Saskatchewan, and the Premier of Manitoba 

did the same thing, that was the action of this Government and the Manitoba Government; and then they 

told the Dominion Government wants their claim was, and they agreed to pay one-half of that claim. 

 

Premier Douglas: — So that I do not mis-quote my hon. friend later on in the debate, do I get my hon. 

friend’s point clear - is my hon. friend saying that the Federal Government agreed to pay to us the same 

percentage they paid in the Fraser Valley and in the Red River Valley floods? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Just a minute - you are bringing in things that I never mentioned. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Well, I am trying to find out what you do mean. I may want to quote you, later. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Sure, you'll have a chance. You have lots of time for that yet. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I am not worrying about the time, but I am trying to find out what you mean. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — We’ll deal with that. The Dominion Government, Mr. Speaker, agreed to provide aid 

to those who suffered loss in the 1955 flood in Saskatchewan and Manitoba, and on the same basis as 

they aided for losses when Hurricane Hazel destroyed property in the province of Ontario. 

 

Under this agreement the Dominion Government will contribute equally with the province to assist the 

flood victims. The Premier of this province called it discrimination against Saskatchewan, and he said 

that the Dominion Government should provide 75 per cent. I don't blame him for asking for that, 

because sometimes you can get it that way, and he has never been bashful about asking Ottawa for 

anything, when it comes to getting something out of the Dominion Government. Here is the thing that I 

want to point out: In recent years the Dominion has come to the aid of provincial governments in at least 

six cases, to provide aid to persons who have suffered property losses in this country. There was the 

Fraser Valley flood in 1948; and the Red River flood in 1950; the fire in Quebec in 1950; Hazel 

hurricane damage in Toronto in 1954; and the flood in Saskatchewan and Manitoba in 1955. In 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

34 
 

each of these cases the Dominion has shared equally with the provinces concerned in compensating 

persons suffering property losses. There has been absolutely no discrimination against Saskatchewan. 

 

Premier Douglas: — What is my friend quoting from? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am just giving you part of the history - I am leading up to what you want me to. I 

am mentioning the instances and the cases which have gone before, where the same assistance by the 

Dominion Government has been extended in other provinces, as was agreed to in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Would you give the amounts? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Just hold your horses. In the Fraser Valley flood, the cost of the property damage 

and emergency relief measures was estimated at $10 or $11 million. The Dominion Government 

provided that sum of $5 million to this province in meeting these costs. 

 

In the Manitoba flood of 1950, the joint Dominion-Provincial Commission set the cost of the property 

damage and emergency relief measures at $26,632,000. The Dominion's share of the cost was 

$12,500,000. The damage covered did not include personal effects or farmers crop loss. 

 

The same policy was followed respecting the fires in Quebec. A joint Commission reported that the net 

loss of property destroyed, less insurance, at $7,493,000. The Government of Quebec decided to 

contribute $2,500,000, and the Dominion contributed an equal amount. 

 

In Coshana the damage was $825,000, in the province of Quebec contributed $300,000 in the Dominion 

Government contributed a like amount. 

 

For Hurricane Hazel in Toronto, the Dominion government provided $1,000,000, an equal amount to 

that contributed by the Government of Ontario. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Is that your speech you are reading? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, you can see that I am reading this because there are a lot of figures in it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I think we have a right to know 

whether it is his speech he is reading, or whether he is quoting from some supposed authority. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You can find out all this information if you want to go to work and find it, and set it 

out on a piece of paper. He's silly, that's what he is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I may be silly, but I never got up and read. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He said something, he said something. . . 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

35 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — On a point of order, I never got up in this House and read from a document 

without giving the authority. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — He prepared it himself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The hon. member refuses to give that authority. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Herman Danielson. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — And if he isn't quoting from a document, from an authority, then he is 

infringing on the rights and privilege of this House by reading his speech. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — In that case, half your Cabinet Ministers are out of order. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I am glad to take full responsibility for what I am saying here. The 

figures have been gathered from documents which are available to anyone. It takes a little while to get 

them; he would probably have to go outside his office to get them, but they are correct figures and I am 

giving information to the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — It’s your own speech, then, eh? Your own words? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am taking full responsibility for what I am saying and for what I am reading. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Okay. Well that settles that. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I think you could have come to that conclusion long ago. 

 

Mr. Kramer (The Battlefords): — You have 15 persons responsible. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — In each of these cases the Dominion Government paid something less than half of 

the damages and immediate relief measures; in addition to the Dominion contribution to compensate 

individuals for loss of property in the Fraser Valley case; and in the case of the Manitoba flood in 1950, 

the Dominion agreed to pay 75 per cent (and this is interesting to the Premier, but we must put this thing 

in its proper place) - the Dominion agreed to pay 75 per cent of the cost of building dikes; further 

reference will be made in this statement later on. But there is my point. 

 

The Premier complains that the Dominion payment to Saskatchewan is only $100,000. I am not 

criticizing him for that; that is his privilege, but what I want to say to him is that it was the 

Saskatchewan Government and not the Dominion Government that set that figure; and that is correct, 

too. This provincial Government was asked to decide the amount of compensation which it required for 

property damages. Provincial Government decided how much 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

36 
 

they were prepared to pay, and the Dominion Government would pay an equal amount. If the amount 

being paid by the Dominion is $100,000 is because the Provincial Government decided to pay that sum 

as its share of the damage costs. The Premier complains about the Dominion Government. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! It sounds very much to me as if you are reading something that has been given 

to you. The terminology there is certainly not as if you had prepared it yourself. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am referring. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If you are quoting from any authority, you should give the source of your authority. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The figures are got from their proper source, that is all – just the figures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Oh, don’t kid us; you didn’t write that. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I declare now, Mr. Speaker, and I have every right to do that - what about the 

Premier; the Premier has complained about the delay of the Dominion Government, time and time again, 

over the radio and in this House. He certainly made the statement in this House that it was a long drawn-

out affair and it was hard to get this thing straightened out and the Dominion Government had not done 

what they were supposed to have done. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Hear! Hear! I’ll say it again. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You see, he is backing me up. He will likely tell us more about it. 

 

In the Fraser Valley, as in the Manitoba disaster, the Government agreed to pay 75 per cent for building 

dikes to prevent a repetition of floods; that had nothing to do with damage, there was no connection 

whatever with the flood damage that was paid to the people who suffered losses. This was a protective 

action from further floods damage. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Well, that is just what we wanted – something for drainage and diking. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — And we couldn’t get it. 

 

Some Government Member: — The flooding damage doesn’t amount to a hill of beans, but you. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — From the very beginning this drainage business has been the business of the province 

of Saskatchewan. . . 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

37 
 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — But Jimmy tells us. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — . . . in B.C. and Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! We cannot have this crossfire across the floor. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — They can’t take it, that’s the trouble. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I felt kind of ashamed at myself sometimes, sitting here, when you 

have had kind of a hard time with us, keeping us in order, and I sympathize with you in trying to keep 

them in order. 

 

In an interview with the press of May 9th, the Premier said: 

 

“We hope, Mr. St. Laurent will take the same attitude towards our emergency situation, created by 

extensive floods, as he took in Hurricane Hazel in Ontario.” 

 

That is exactly, Mr. Speaker, what the Dominion Government is doing now. 

 

Premier Douglas: — On a question of privilege, Mr. Speaker. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Exactly the same thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, from what is the hon. gentleman quoting when he quotes me as 

saying that I hope he would give the same consideration to Saskatchewan as he gave in Hazel Hurricane. 

Will he tell what he is quoting from when he says that? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes. 

 

Premier Douglas: — What date, what press? Come on. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes. In an interview with the press on May 9th. 

 

Premier Douglas: — What press? What paper does that appear in? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The Regina ‘Leader-Post’. Right in the. . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — I want to state, categorically, that I have never at any time suggested that 

Saskatchewan should get paid on the basis of Hurricane Hazel, which was a flood in the city. My request 

in all public statements and in my letters to the Prime Minister were based on compare both conditions 

to Saskatchewan, namely, the floods in the Fraser River Valley and the Red River Valley; and I doubt 

very much if there is any such press statement as my hon. friend is quoting from, and if there is, I can 

assure him it is quite inaccurate. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

38 
 

Mr. Danielson: — We’ll get it for you. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Well, on the question of privilege, whether my hon. friend gets it for me or not, I 

am making the statement here that no such statement was ever made by me to the press. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You dent that statement? You deny that you ever said that? 

 

Premier Douglas: — About Hurricane Hazel – absolutely. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — All right. Now then, I want to say this, in answer to the Premier, that Hurricane 

Hazel and these two disasters that hit Quebec and the Fraser and the Red River in Manitoba, they are 

exactly the same as Hurricane Hazel. 

 

Some Government Member: — Oh – oh! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I say that again, and I repeat it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You go out and tell the people that! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am speaking now. They are exactly the same as Hurricane Hazel, but as to the 

damage or losses suffered by the individuals, Mr. Speaker; then the Dominion Government goes in and 

pays 75 per cent of building dikes and protection against future flooding, and that was on navigable 

rivers, not on any flat land in the province of Saskatchewan, so this argument is absolute nonsense. He 

thought he had something there, but he didn't get away with it. 

 

Hon. Mr. J.T. Douglas: — You will have to speak to the people in northeastern Saskatchewan, and see 

about that. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, he didn't get away with it at all. I have had to spend the last ten minutes showing 

him that there is no connection between damages paid to the public and the money spent by the 

Dominion Government to put up dikes and protection to protect the people of those localities against 

future damage from floods. But he is tying the two together and trying to confuse the issue, but that is a 

common practice for them, but they are not getting away with it with me. 

 

So I say to him that he has no grounds at all; there is no discrimination, there is no mis-application or 

any intention, or no sign in any shape or form that the Dominion Government has treated Saskatchewan 

and Manitoba any different from what they have done any other place where similar occurrences have 

taken place. And what about Mr. Campbell of Manitoba? 

 

“The Federal Government’s proposal, said Mr. Campbell, to provide an estimated $300,000 for 

Manitoba and Saskatchewan flood victims was generally acceptable.” 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

39 
 

That is what he said. Of course we shouldn't expect the impossible, Mr. Speaker, or expect anyone 

who is connected with the C.C.F. in Saskatchewan admitted that anything that the Dominion 

Government ever does, or ever will do, will be acceptable to this Government. It is just an 

impossibility and we shouldn't expect it, because it is just a waste of time to try to convince them; 

because there isn't a solitary thing, Mr. Speaker -whether it is flood relief, road grid system, 

hospitalization, grants from the Dominion Government, subsidy or otherwise, without it has been 

made a political football by this Government. There is not a thing but what has been made a political 

football. And from what I have said, Mr. Speaker, I don't think I need to tell you that I am not going to 

support the budget. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Here is your clipping, Herman. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker: 

 

“Mr. Douglas said he hoped Prime Minister St. Laurent will take the same attitude toward the 

emergency situation created by the extensive flooding in this province that he took in Hurricane 

Hazel in Ontario.” 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Go on; keep on. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, yes, - 

 

“And Hurricane Hazel, the Prime Minister is reported as saying that it is the Government. . .” 

 

Premier Douglas: — Go ahead; it’s out now. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am going to read it to you, don’t get excited. Here it is: 

 

“It is the government’s policy to treat every part of Canada the same when disaster falls in certain 

areas.” 

 

Well that is exactly what he has done. That is exactly what he has done. I have shown you here - in 

every case, in every solitary case and there are nine of them, Mr. Speaker, and the same treatment has 

been given to every province and in every case, no matter where it was. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I will deal with it. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — In your way. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I’ll straighten it up for you. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, I know what you'll straighten up; you'll distort everything that I have said. He 

cannot deny that he made that statement to the press, because it is right here. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

40 
 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member said I cannot deny what? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That you gave this interview to the press. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I am not denying that I gave an interview to the press. I am denying, categorically, 

that I ever said to the press or anyone else that Saskatchewan should be treated on the same basis as 

Hurricane Hazel. All the correspondence will show, and I would be glad to table with, that we asked to 

be treated on the same basis as the Red River Valley and the Fraser Valley. What is said here is that the 

same principle should apply; and when speaking of Hurricane Hazel, the Prime Minister said that every 

province should be treated the same, and that is all we are asking. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Have you put your bill in yet? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he got on his feet so I am going to read this thing to him again. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! If you are reading an article, read it all through, so they can see what it 

does mean. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am going to read what the Premier said: 

 

“Douglas said he hoped Prime Minister St. Laurent would take the same attitude towards the 

emergency situation created by extensive flooding in this province that he took after Hurricane Hazel, 

in Ontario.” 

 

Mr. Jas. A. Darling (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, I cannot hope to entertain the 

members as has the last speaker, and I will not try. I intend, Mr. Speaker, to devote my time to dealing 

with my departments. Before I do, however, I wish to say to you, Sir, that you have deserved the tributes 

paid to you. 

 

Yesterday the Minister of Social Welfare (Hon. Mr. Sturdy), and the member for Hanley (Mr. R. A. 

Walker) expressed very well my own feelings with regard to yourself as Speaker of this Legislature. I 

think it is unnecessary to repeat, but all of us who know you, Sir, know that even though you may not be 

a member here, your influence will still be felt in the public affairs of this province. 

 

The Departments of Public Works is a department which does not suffer from any excess publicity. It 

has been for a number of years an extremely busy department, because it had not only to make up a 

backlog of deferred works which accumulated during the depression and during the war, but had to keep 

pace with the expanding programmes of government since that time. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

41 
 

That expansion has been very great indeed, with expanding services of the Department of Public Health, 

of the Department of Social Welfare, of the Department of Natural and Mineral Resources, and the very 

great expansion at the University of Saskatchewan, just to name a very few activities which have 

occupied the Government, through the Department of Public Works, during recent years. 

 

The Hon. member from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) speaking last week made some mention of our 

continuing building programme. Now, I don't recall the tenor of his words, but I have some sympathy 

with his reaction to that programme. A good many times I have myself asked – “Will it ever end?” But it 

appears that we continue in order to keep pace with the demands which are made upon governments 

today by the people. One may visit neighbouring provinces, only to learn that they are facing the same 

situation that we are here, and that they are undertaking and carrying out fast building programmes. 

 

One point I think we can all agree upon is that worthwhile services should not be curtailed for lack of 

space from which to operate. Perhaps the most rapidly expanding departments are those of Natural and 

Mineral Resources, an index of the development in these fields. These departments have required greatly 

increased office space, and I know from questions that have been asked or appeared on the Order Paper, 

that the hon. members opposite are interested, naturally enough, in the cost of the large new 

administration building which is close to this building. 

 

As Minister of Public Works, I am very glad indeed that the University Hospital at Saskatoon is 

completed except for what might be called ‘mopping up’ operations, and I am glad, too, that the 

Training School for Mental Defectives is so near completion at Moose Jaw. These are two projects 

which have cost a great deal of money and which have extended over a long period of years. I share the 

satisfaction expressed by the member for Hanley (Mr. R. A. Walker) that at least we are able to come to 

grips with the Court House problem in the city of Saskatoon. The fact that the building of a new Court 

House there has been deferred to this time shows very clearly the urgency of the other essential demands 

that have been made upon the Government. 

 

All of this building activity has vastly increased responsibilities of the Department of Public Works, not 

only connected with the construction of those buildings but after they are built, with maintenance and 

repair, and caretaking. I take pleasure at this time in expressing my appreciation to the members of the 

staff of the Department of Public Works for the hearty co-operation which they have given in carrying 

out the work, and I am sure that they have made a good job of giving this province value for the dollars 

expended. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

42 
 

Now, with those few words concerning my Department of Public Works, (and I must apologize to that 

department for giving so little time - much could be said; there is much interesting material that could be 

spoken of concerning public works), but I think that so far as the general public is concerned, and so far 

as the members of this House are concerned, they are perhaps primarily interested in the activities of the 

Power Corporation. Details of Public Works programmes can be brought to light when the estimates of 

the Department are before the House. 

 

I want to turn immediately to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Now, although many factors must 

go into the organization of a large power utility, none can be more important than these sources of 

power production. It is in our power plants that all electrical energy originates and unless the utility itself 

is planning for future needs, literally looking forward far into the future, there can be little hope that the 

needs of customers in future years will be met. That is why I feel a sense of satisfaction in the work of 

the Power Corporation. Regardless of the fact the Corporation has been going through one of the 

greatest periods of expansion in its history; regardless of the fact that it is possibly half-way through the 

largest farm electrification programme ever undertaken on this continent, it has not neglected to 

maintain its power production capacity and to keep it up to schedule. There is no danger of power 

shortage in the province of Saskatchewan, thanks to the planning of the Power Corporation, and the 

policies which have guided that expansion. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the things I have to say have already been said in this Legislature by other 

speakers. I think, however, that it is worthwhile, at the expense of some repetition, that I attempt to give 

to the House a consecutive story concerning the operations of that utility. 

 

As we all know, the two largest and obviously most important power plants on the S.P.C. system are 

located at Estevan and Saskatoon. It was in 1929 that the former Saskatchewan Power Commission 

purchased the power plant from the city of Saskatoon. That's plants, at 10,000 kilowatt plant, was 

already old at the time of its sale by the city to the Power Commission. I believe it was one of the terms 

of the sale by the city that the Power Commission would undertake immediately the construction of a 

new power plant, and that new power plant, also at 10,000 kilowatt plant, was built adjacent to the old 

plant, and from that time on, the old plant was simply used as a standby to cover the peak load 

requirements of the city. 

 

Two years ago, the Power Corporation completed its third major expansion to the Saskatoon station 

since the war, raising its capacity to 75,000 kilowatts. I might add that at that time no trace of the 

original plant purchased from the city of Saskatoon remained, except the old building to the front of our 

property. This has since been demolished, and now a new structure is nearing completion to house a 

33,000 kilowatt power production unit which will bring the A. L. Cole Generating Station (which we 

have now named the Saskatoon Plant) took capacity of 108,000 kilowatts by the end of this year. This 

latest extension will have cost about $4,500,000, including the building. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

43 
 

I would like to stress that this is the last extension we can build to that plant, as no further land is 

available for further expansion. 

 

Most of the members of the House will recall that in May, 1954 we commissioned an extension to the 

Estevan power plant, and almost immediately continued work to make a still further addition, which we 

hope will be commissioned in the winter of 1956-57 of an additional 30,000 kilowatts of production 

capacity. Less than three years ago we had raised the total plant capacity to 42,000 kilowatts, and in 

1956 this will be again raised to 72,000 kilowatts of installed capacity. 

 

Again I believe it should be explained that this is, as in the case of the Saskatoon plant, the last addition 

that can be made to the present Estevan power plant. We are faced with the fact that we have reached the 

end of our cooling water facilities for the operation of the Estevan plant. Furthermore, it should be 

recognized that the plant is a little steam pressure plant, and is not as economical as it is now possible to 

build thermal generating stations; this, in spite of the fact that it is completely new within the last few 

years. We have continued to expand the plant several times since we purchased it in 1947 from the 

Dominion Electric Company. It is interesting to note that at the time of purchase, this plant has a 

capacity of some 7200 kilowatts compared to the 72,000 kilowatts it will have at the end of this year. In 

other words, we have increased the capacity of that plant 10 times in less than nine years. 

 

Now, I am going on with the generating programme -the programme of expansion of the generating 

plant throughout the province. During 1955, work was completed on the first phase of a new gas engine 

plant at Swift Current, designed to utilize lower-cost fuel and ensure continuity of power services in the 

south-west area of the province. In fact, the new power plant at Swift Current was actually 

commissioned in September, 1955, a little over one year from the time work commenced. It seems to me 

that was a very expeditious job of bringing a new plant into being, and those who had the privilege of 

being present at the official opening last September. I am sure, were impressed by the appearance of that 

plant, its condition and its obvious efficiency. 

 

The plant building itself was designed for relatively easy expansion. That is the way we do things in the 

Power Corporation -the way we have to do them, if we are going to keep pace with the demands that are 

being made upon us. A temporary south wall was built to that plant building, so that it could be removed 

readily to allow for an increase in the size of that building. We expect by the end of 1956 to have the 

capacity of that plant raised from 5500 kilowatts to 8500 kilowatts. 

 

I would like to mention that $450,000 will be spent this year for the purpose of expansion of this 

particular power plant, but I know that you will also be interested to learn that the installation of 

additional gas engine generating units is also planned for the years 1957 and 1958 in the Swift Current 

plant. 

 

During 1955 we also started work on a new gas-diesel plant in Kindersley. I cannot over-emphasize the 

importance of this new plant, for it 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

44 
 

provides, in conjunction with the plant at Unity, a suitable second alternative source of power for the 

north-western area of the province, including the city of North Battleford. This city and some of the area 

involved has for several months, particularly since the closing down of the obsolete steam plant at North 

Battleford, been dependent to a considerable degree on high-line power from Saskatoon only. It is now 

possible to feed the city and surrounding area from either Saskatoon or Kindersley. 

 

As I have indicated, the Power Corporation looks to two main generating centres, at Estevan and 

Saskatoon in the immediate future. It is recognized, however, that there are certain areas in western 

Saskatchewan where the supply of power can never be completely secure when the pending on 

generating plants 200 or more miles away. For that reason we are building up enough generating 

capacity in the immediate area to look after essential loads in emergencies. 

 

A $1,800,000 extension to the Kindersley plant will commence this spring, with the completion of the 

work scheduled for late in 1957. This extension will house two large gas-turbine generating units, each 

with an approximate capacity of 8,000 kilowatts. 

 

Gas turbines are subject to considerable change in capacity, according to weather conditions, but each 

turbine has a passive the of 10,000 kilowatts at the lowest temperatures we would encounter in 

Saskatchewan during cold weather peaks, and thus are capable of producing the maximum amount of 

power when it is most urgently needed. 

 

The installation of these gas-turbine units will mark the first time such generating equipment has been 

used in Saskatchewan. As a matter of fact, only one other unit of this kind is being used in Canada at the 

present time. While it is recognized that gas-turbines are not as efficient, in many respects, as gas 

engines, they do give relatively low-cost power when operated close to gas fields. They have the 

advantage of producing considerably more electrical power than the largest size gas engine, and they fill 

the gap that has previously existed between the restricted sizes of gas or diesel engines and the much 

larger steam plants, while at the same time they do not need cooling water for their operations, which is 

quite a consideration in that area. In addition, the units take much less space than do the ordinary 

engines, so that it does not require such a large building. 

 

I have often stated publicly, as have officials of the Power Corporation, that the power demands of the 

province are causing us to double our power production facilities every four or five years. In other 

words, where this year we had installed capacity of 160,000 kilowatts, by 1959 we will have to have a 

capacity of 320,000 kilowatts. 

 

The Corporation has for some time given serious thought to the construction of two new steam or 

thermal generating plants to be located at Saskatoon and Estevan. As you are aware, an announcement 

regarding these plants has already been made. I would like to point out that these plants are not going to 

be constructed to replace existing plants, but to augment them for the next several years. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

45 
 

As I said earlier in this presentation, we are ensuring that Saskatchewan will never, within the lifetime of 

this generation at least, be faced with a shortage of electric power, barring any unforeseen period of 

major disaster that may arise, and for which we cannot provide at this time. 

 

It has been decided to build a new thermal plant in the Saskatoon area, and this station will have a total 

capacity of 240,000 kilowatts. It is estimated that the plant will eventually cost some $40 million. This is 

a large sum of money to invest in one plant, but 240,000 kilowatts is in a single plant as compared with 

what we have now of 160,000 kilowatts in the entire system, in all the plants combined in this province. 

We plan to spend some $2,325,000 in 1956 to construct the station building and facilities as the first step 

in the new northern area power plant. 

 

Both of the new plants at Estevan and Saskatoon will be built in stages. Work at Saskatoon will begin 

this year, and it is planned that the first section of 66,000 kilowatts of power production capacity will be 

completed by 1958. Thus, the plants will be built in four sections, with the entire station being 

completed by 1964. 

 

I know that all members will be interested in the fact that this plant will be an unusual one from the 

construction viewpoint. Construction of the new plant will see the first time in Canada when a major 

power generating station has been built on a semi-outdoor pattern. The building itself will be built in an 

“H” plan with the four boiler units projecting above the roof level of the building. This type of 

construction permits considerable economy in original cost as well is in space, as the building will be 

comparatively low and will utilize only a shallow basement. The projection of the boilers above the roof 

line will permit considerably more space inside the building for such vital equipment as coal pulverizing 

equipment and pumps, etc. According to advice we have had from consulting engineers, this type of 

building is considered to be not only the most advanced, but the most practical as well, for modern 

generating stations. 

 

Just the other day the Corporation placed an order with a Canadian firm for a $1,500,000 boiler - the 

largest ever purchased for a power plant in Saskatchewan and the second largest of its kind in Canada. 

This boiler will be installed in the new Saskatoon plant, and will be matched with the 66,000 kilowatt 

generator ordered from Switzerland. Some people may wonder why we would place an order for a unit 

from Switzerland, when our preference to buy British is so well-known. The fact is, however, there are 

limits beyond which we cannot go in order to buy British, and it may be that British manufacturers 

require to be shown occasionally that there are limits. But our order placed in Switzerland saves the 

Corporation $180,000 on this unit, if my memory is correct, and its efficiency in the opinion of our 

engineers, is quite equal to the efficiency of the British unit. 

 

With reference to the proposed plant at Estevan, there are a number of matters of which I believe you 

should be made aware. First, it is highly desirable that we continue our power production operations in 

the Estevan area as long as possible, mainly due to availability of low-cost fuel in the form of lignite 

coal. According to surveys made, there are some 13,000 million 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

46 
 

tons of lignite coal described as “mineable probable” located in the southeast corner of the province. If 

this, some 3,000 million tons are within a few miles of the power plant site east of Estevan. 

 

Back, Mr. Speaker, is enough coal not only to run the Estevan plant, as it is now, but there is enough 

coal in the southeastern areas of the province to economically generate electricity on a scale greater than 

today's entire provincial needs For several thousand years. I mention this to point out the vast resources 

that exist in that part of the province for low-cost power production, and it may surprise some members 

of the Legislature to learn that using lignite coal, power can be generated as cheaply as water power, or 

hydro, as it is frequently called. 

 

Furthermore, it is estimated that we can mine coal in the Estevan area for less than $1.50 per ton, and at 

that price it represents heat energy for power production at approximately 10 cents per million BTU’s. 

From that, you will realize that lignite coal, under present mining operations, is as cheap, if not slightly 

cheaper, then natural gas at the wellhead. It is also about one-third the price of bunker oil or Alberta 

coal, delivered to Regina. 

 

During the past year we have employed consultants to determine the precise location of suitable coal, 

and they have proved up 100 million tons of coal within three miles of the site of the proposed new 

power plant. This is enough coal for more than 50 years’ operations, almost at the doorstep of the plant. 

 

I believe I have been able to point out to you the importance of power production existing in the Estevan 

area, and if the quantity of this great lignite coal resource is in itself not sufficiently convincing, I will go 

on to give you further information which should be very conclusive to everyone. 

 

If the coal at Estevan were to be conveyed to another location in southern Saskatchewan where cooling 

water is available in quantities needed for power production, as we plan it, the cost would be at least 

$2.50 per ton for freight only. This is the Power Corporation’s estimate of the price we could get for 

freight haulage if we were calling up to 1 million tons a year, and is certainly better than any existing 

freight rate. Now, if we were to plan to haul, to say 100 million tons, which is the estimated supply to 

run such a power plant for the next 50 years, this item alone would cost some $250 million. This 

actually means that if we were to build a plant at any other point in southern Saskatchewan where 

cooling water is available, we could have to spend $250 million extra during the 50 year estimated life 

of the plant, over and above what the cost would actually be if the plant were located at Estevan. If I 

recall correctly, the Hon. J. G. Gardiner named the figure of $250 million as the total capital cost of the 

South Saskatchewan River dam and all its associated irrigation works. I think I am right in making that 

statement. Yet, if we are compelled to bring about construction of a power plant such as we visualize 

anywhere else in southern Saskatchewan where cooling water is available than in the Estevan coalfields, 

we will have to spend that much additional money during the 50 year life of the plant. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

47 
 

Members of the House will be interested to learn that the province of Manitoba has apparently reached 

the limits of hydro development for the time being, and at the present time the Hydro Electric Board of 

that province is building two large steam plants at Brandon in Winnipeg, both of which will burn 

Estevan lignite coal. Although the cost of hauling coal from Estevan eastward to Winnipeg and Brandon 

is less on a mileage basis than it would be if moved to western or northern Saskatchewan, the cost per 

ton is about the same in Brandon as it would be in Regina or Moose Jaw, with Winnipeg paying a per-

ton freight cost about equal to that in Saskatchewan if lignite was hauled to Saskatoon. 

 

Thus, it can readily be seen that the Manitoba authorities are faced with a serious cost factor for future 

years in establishing these steam plants and it is obvious that power production costs in Manitoba will 

rise as a result. 

 

From all of this you will readily agree that the sensible thing is for us to build our power plant in the 

Estevan district, but I would like also to point out that there are other difficulties standing in the way of 

these plans at the present time. 

 

Some months ago, we applied to the International Joint Commission for permission to build a dam at 

Long Creek near Estevan. Such a dam is necessary to back up sufficient waters to serve as cooling water 

for a plant of the size we have proposed. The International Joint Commission has met several times and 

has already discussed the possibility of such a dam. Because of the urgency of the situation, and so that 

initial construction of the first stage can begin in 1957, we are hopeful that a favourable decision will be 

made at the Washington meeting of the Commission, which is being held in April. 

 

The station itself is now being designed, and tenders have been called for the initial generators and allied 

equipment. No significant work at the site has been undertaken, nor will it be until after the April 

meeting of the International Joint Commission. If for some reason our request should be turned down 

and we are forced into a position where we would have to shift to another location, it would be at the 

cost of a large portion of the $250 million in freight charges that would accrue if we moved out of the 

Estevan area. 

 

Now, I have tried to give you a picture, Mr. Speaker, of the Power production situation as it exists at the 

present time. 

 

The next important and logical subject to deal with it connection with power development is 

transmission. One of the most important tasks facing the Power Corporation is the building of an inter-

connected grid system covering the province, that will provide for the full integration of existing and 

future power production centres. Such a grid network has been virtually completed in the northern part 

of the province with the linking together of the Saskatoon-Prince Albert-Kindersley and Unity Power 

production plants. 

 

Plans are being projected in the southern part of the province, and as many of you will recall, we 

completed a 72,000 volt line from Estevan to Yorkton via Red Jacket last year to give two main power 

lines feeding the eastern side of the province. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

48 
 

Prior to that time we had completed a high voltage line from Estevan to Weyburn, and this was 

continued last year to Assiniboia, so as to take Estevan power across the southernmost part of the 

province, and just north of the American border. With future extensions to the Swift Current plant, this 

will provide two alternative sources of power for a large segment of the southwestern part of the 

province. 

 

Last year we also began construction on our largest high tension line to date, from Weyburn to Regina. 

This line, connecting to the Estevan power plant, was built to operate at 144,000 volts and will be 

initially energized when completed, at 72,000 volts. 

 

The second 144,000 volt line will be built this year from Saskatoon to Hawarden, and will form part of 

the Saskatoon to Moose Jaw interconnection in future years, for purposes of integrating power 

production centres. At the present time it is required as far as Hawarden to relieve the overloaded lines 

feeding into that area, and to ensure the supply of power for the P.F.R.A. comes near Elbow, which 

maintained the level of water in Buffalo Pound Lake. 

 

Furthermore expenditures will be made for the construction of a 72,000 volt line from Swift Current 

Shaunavon to relieve the overloaded lines in that area due to a very large increase in oil field 

electrification. It will also allow the diesel plant at Shaunavon to be shut down and thus will serve to 

reduce high generating costs in that area. 

 

The last section of the 72,000 volt line from Glaslyn to Meadow Lake will be constructed this year to 

finish the construction work that began in 1955 on a line from North Battleford to Meadow Lake. The 

completion of this line will also allow the Meadow Lake diesel plant to be shut down and will also serve 

to reduce generating costs in that corner of the province. It will be very interesting to all residents there 

to note that this new line will permit the extension of farm electrification in the Meadow Lake area. 

 

The first section of the proposed high-voltage transmission line network in the Regina vicinity will be 

constructed during the year in the areas east and west of the city. This network, which will serve several 

new industries located in this area will initially be energized at 72,000 volts and will draw power from 

the Estevan-Weyburn-Regina transmission line. 

 

Servicing this great mileage of power line is a considerable undertaking. Speedy location of trouble 

spots and prompt repair is essential to good service. I know it will be of interest to all members of the 

House to note that we are continuing our work in providing a short-wave radio communication system 

for the Corporation in various parts of the province. This work has been underway for some time, and 

we have actually been using short-wave radio in connection with our gas system in the Saskatoon area. 

This year we are spending $60,000 to continue the programme of installing mobile radio equipment in 

the Superintendents’ and District Operators’ trucks. The installation of these mobile units will result in a 

considerable saving in operating time, and will certainly mean better service in every way to our 

customers throughout the province. 

 

Mr. G. H. Danielson (Arm River): — Who is reading his speech now? 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

49 
 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — Generally, in the utility industry, we refer to distribution systems as the portion 

of our system lying within organized communities from which we directly serve our customers. Thus, 

for this purpose we are spending about $3,400,000 in 1956 to cover expenditures mostly in towns and 

villages. It is interesting to note that some $600,000 will be spent this year of that $3,400,000 to provide 

service to almost all remaining towns and villages in the province which are not already served by 

transmission lines. This completes in 1956 a promise we made a few years ago that this programme 

would be carried out by the end of 1957. 

 

I would also like to point out another expenditure of considerable importance, and that is an item of 

$426,000 designed for the rebuilding and improvement of community distribution systems in various 

parts of Saskatchewan. We have realized that most of the emphasis during these past few years has been 

toward the provision of power for new areas of the province, but we have not ignored the fact that at 

many points in the province, distribution systems are now beginning to grow old. Year by year we have 

continued our practice of system improvement to keep the older sections of our system in a state of 

reasonably good operating condition. It is my belief that in succeeding years this portion of our budget 

will see regular increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, might I suggest we adjourn as it is 5:30 o'clock p.m. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I wish to advise the House will recess until 7:30 p.m. o'clock. 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — Mr. Speaker, this afternoon I had said a few words regarding the Department of 

Public Works, and I had gone on to discuss the Power Corporation activities and programmes with 

respect to generation, transmission and distribution, and some other features. 

 

I come now to the farm electrification programme, which is of the greatest interest to a great number of 

people who are content to allow the other features of the corporation's activities to remain in the care of 

those in charge. Farm electrification, however, touches a great many people, makes such a tremendous 

change in living conditions on the farm, that it is not surprising that the terms and conditions under 

which farm electrification is provided are of interest to the farmers of the province. Now, it is a matter of 

pride to most people in Saskatchewan that since 1949 we have been able to take our service to 32,500 

farms, and by the end of 1956, more than 40,000 farms will be receiving power. When it is considered 

that all this has been accomplished in seven years, we can well understand why the Saskatchewan farm 

electrification programme of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation is recognized throughout Canada, 

and in many States of the Union as being the greatest ever instituted by any single utility on the North 

American continent. 

 

The province of Manitoba electrified some 42,000 farms from 1946 to 1954 in an area approximately 

one-third the size of the Saskatchewan area. This total of 42,000 farms completed the electrifiable farms 

in that province. Here in Saskatchewan we have actually completed almost as many farms in less time, 

while building nearly twice as much transmission line to do the job because of the geographical 

differences between the two provinces. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

50 
 

We have been criticized for not having instituted a farm electrification programme prior to 1949. I 

would like to point out to the members that there was an excellent reason for this. It was necessary for 

the C.C.F. Government to spend the first four years in office carrying on the very heavy task of 

consolidating numerous and uneconomical small power production plants, and by providing 

transmission line service so that farm electrification programmes could be economically undertaken. 

 

In 1949, the policy of the Power Corporation with respect to farm electrification was determined upon. 

This policy required the payment by the farmer, in cash, of a part of the capital cost of the farm line 

from its point of connection to the high-line. 

 

In practice, this plan worked out satisfactorily, and has suited Saskatchewan conditions. The sharing of 

the capital cost has enabled the system to avoid losses on the farm service, while charging energy rates 

which, though not quite so low as those in areas of greater farm density and cheaper generation, are yet 

low enough to be within the economic reach of the farmer. 

 

As the programme progressed, however, particularly after we had adopted the area coverage system, as 

district from the mileage gauges upon which we started, it became apparent that there was need of 

limited provision of credit to some farmers in most projects. Under our policy we require to sign up 

approximately 65 per cent of the farmers in any designated area, two or three or four or five farmers 

were unable to put up the necessary cash deposit. Therefore, rather than permit the whole area to be 

denied electrical service, the credit was extended to those few, and that credit was limited, initially, to 

one-third cash with the balance payable over a term of three years, with interest at 5 per cent. This 

provision of limited credit proved of immense value in facilitating the sign-up of the majority of areas. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. gentleman is reading his speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! The hon. member is dealing with a lot of statistics; and he is dealing 

with a lot of statistics with his own department; he is going to be particular. That is a little different to 

someone who reads his speech where it is quite evident that he did not prepare it himself. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Oh, let him go on. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, the hon. member is an old member of this House 

and ought to be familiar with the rules if he ever reads them. If he will take the trouble to look up the 

rules he will find that the reference to reading speeches has to do with ordinary debate, but any Minister 

making a statement regarding his department, or any change in policy of his department, is permitted to 

read that statement. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The hon. members over there must all be Ministers then, because they all read their 

speeches. 

 

Premier Douglas: — At least they have something to read; it been written by themselves. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

51 
 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, later this policy was further modified to meet the 

changing conditions and changing areas which were coming within the scope of our programme. It was 

modified to allow the one-third principle to apply on a province-wide basis instead of an area basis, 

without any increase in the total amount of credit granted, it was possible under this modification to 

permit a greater number than one-third of the farmers in any project to have the benefit of credit. It was 

found that in some areas of the province little or no credit was needed, while in others more than one-

third required that assistance. 

 

It should be recognized, Mr. Speaker, that rural electrification becomes more difficult as it grows larger, 

and unfortunately, under current farm income conditions, considerable extra difficulties are now being 

encountered which accurately reflect the serious falling-off of farm income throughout the province. I 

think anyone who is familiar with the situation as it exists throughout the province today will realize that 

farmers who, several years ago would have found it entirely impossible to take power installation on the 

terms which we were providing at that time, would still find it difficult today. Notwithstanding this fact, 

we are still planning to electrify 7,500 farms in 1956 which we had planned on previously, which will 

bring the total up to 40,000. 

 

Now, the Government has felt for some time that it would have to give consideration to some policy 

whereby a greater measure of assistance can be given to farmers wishing electrification this year, and 

who may be prevented from doing so, due to a shortage of ready money. For this reason, a further 

modification of policy is intended. This will be the third modification in our programme since we 

started. We will establish this year, a more extended credit policy covering up to 75 per cent of the 

farmer’s share of construction costs, and to a still greater percentage of farmers. Under this plan, we 

intend to spread loans over a six-year period as an aid to farmers who are short of ready cash. We will, 

Mr. Speaker, also re-finance outstanding loans on the new basis in order to assist farmers who have met 

with financial difficulties. I feel sure, Mr. Speaker, that this modification of our policy which constitutes 

no departure in principle from the policy with which we started, will be welcomed by the farmers, who 

has been looking forward, some of them for years, to the time when they could be included in a farm 

electrification programme; and that they will realize that the temporary difficulties they are experiencing 

now may not defer the time when they can have the benefits of farm electrification. 

 

The Government, of course, has never believed that the farm electrification scheme as originally 

announced, would carry us through to the completion of all farms that can be electrified. In fact, I 

remember very well members - or directors forecasting that we would have to modify or change our 

policy after we had 25,000 farms connected; some thought we could go a little further than that. But all 

were agreed that we could not cover the province on the basis from which we started. I remember 

indicating in the House here in 1952 that this would probably come about. Possibly it has been 

precipitated sooner than might otherwise have been the case, by the drop in farm income which has been 

so sudden and so drastic. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

52 
 

Now, there are two reasons why we cannot proceed on the former basis even had conditions remained 

more favourable than they are now. First, we are now approaching areas of less economic stability 

where the ability of the farmer to pay for electric power is less adequate than in other areas that have 

been electrified up to this time. The second reason is the drop in farm income. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am still of the opinion that a contribution by the farmer towards construction costs is a 

good feature of our policy. Were power lines built to the farm yard without any initial cash outlay by the 

farmer, as the Opposition proposes, the result would be that many hundreds of miles of line would be 

built to bring power to farmsteads where no adequate use would be made of the service. There are, for 

example, in this province an estimated 25,000 farm units upon which the farmer resides only part of the 

time. Service to farms, particularly in the second category, would very definitely be applied for, were it 

not for the deterrent of a cash contribution towards construction costs. 

 

My friends across the way are constantly referring to Manitoba. In fact, it seems to me we have reached 

a point where it is becoming ridiculous, where we compare everything in Saskatchewan with Alberta to 

the west, and Manitoba to the east, to our own dis-favour. It seems to me we are carrying that a bit too 

far, and we might once in a while look at those things which we have in Saskatchewan which are 

superior to anything they have in Alberta or Manitoba. 

 

The Manitoba experience, Mr. Speaker, is that hundreds of farms are now being disconnected. This is a 

fact - hundreds of farms, and there are more farms being disconnected in Manitoba now than are being 

connected. 

 

Some Government Member: — Put that in your pipe and smoke it! 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — But, of course that's an unfair statement unless I accompany it with a statement 

that Manitoba is now just connecting farms in the hundreds, not the thousands as we are doing here in 

Saskatchewan. I feel that the need for disconnection (there always will be some) can be held to a 

minimum, with beneficial results all around, by our policy. The Corporation is a little disappointed at the 

extent that the farmers are making use of the power which has been provided to them for productive 

purposes. Perhaps we are unduly disappointed in that respect. Down in the United States, the Federal 

Government advances money (and I'm speaking on information which came to me several years ago), 

but I am referring to the time the Federal Government advance monies to the Rural Electrification 

Associations without the necessity on the part of those Associations paying anything on principle or 

interest for a period of five years, to enable farmers to acquire the necessary appliances so that they 

could become profitable customers of the utility. 

 

Here the growth of the average farm consumption of kilowatt hours is not as fast as we would like to see 

it, and the Corporation is investing means whereby the use of electrical power for productive purposes 

on the farm can be increased and the sale of appliances and equipment can be accelerated. Part of the 

reason for this is that the kind of equipment I have reference to is not on display and is not being pushed 

by suppliers in Saskatchewan. In many cases farmers are not aware of the variety of uses to which they 

could 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

53 
 

put the power. In the meantime, the Corporation is continuing its policy of assisting dealers and 

distributors through advertising and promotion. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is one other feature of the Power Corporation electrical utility that I would like 

simply to touch on. It is said that when the Saskatchewan Power Commission (the predecessor of the 

Corporation) was established in 1929, three people sat down in our offices at 1739 Cornwall Street in 

Regina to put in motion the wheels of the newly inaugurated provincial power system. Three people! 

Today, 27 years later, the same building is still in use, and some 300 people have until very recently 

utilized its limited space as the Head Office of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Needless to say, 

this overcrowding has reached the breaking point, and it has been necessary for the Corporation to read 

some 16,000 square feet of office space in downtown Regina, on the third and fourth floors of the 

Trading Company Building. I may be mistaken, but it seems to me that it is the original Co-operative 

Elevator Company Building. In this additional space is accommodated Power Production and 

Engineering Divisions. Even after these moves, the remaining departments at the Cornwall Street 

building have only slightly improved their space requirements. The unfortunate part of it all is that 

within two years the situation will be just as bad again, to the tremendous expansion which the 

Corporation is experiencing. 

 

Studies are at present under way to estimate the total staff and space requirements for the next 10 years 

and more, and it is anticipated that a suitable new building has become not only desirable but absolutely 

necessary. Such a building will have to be completed within three years, in order to meet the 

requirements of the Corporation. What type of building it will be, and where it will be located are factors 

which still must be decided. It is possible that a decision will be made during the year as to the type and 

size, but the building is certainly going to be required. 

 

In addition to this Head Office building in Regina, plans are under way for this building of other office 

buildings, which will of course not approximate the size of the Regina building, in Prince Albert, 

Saskatoon, Yorkton, North Battleford and Swift Current. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is all I was going to say regarding the electrical branch of the Power 

Corporation. I know that there has been a great interest shown in our natural gas development, and I 

propose to spend some time dealing with that branch of the Corporation. 

 

At the end of 1955, our natural gas system in the northern part of the province was serving a total of 

13,064 customers. This represents an increase of 38.5 per cent over the number of customers served in 

1954. In the city of Saskatoon alone, gas customers increased in 1955 some 27.6 per cent over the 

number of customers on the gas system in that city in the previous year. Mr. Speaker, it should reassure 

those who question the advantages and savings from the natural gas system that a 27 per cent increase 

occurred in the city of Saskatoon where it can be safely assumed that each one of those new customers 

had an opportunity to know the behaviour of the gas service in the homes of friends and neighbours. As 

a matter of fact, every community served with gas on the northern system showed a substantial 

percentage increase over the previous year's operations. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

54 
 

Members of the House will be interested to learn that gas purchases by the Corporation in 1955 

amounted to over 4 billion cubic feet, an increase of 1.2 per cent over that 1954 purchases. 

 

I would like to draw the attention of all members to another important fact in relation to operations of 

the Power Corporation during 1955. The net income arising from all operations of the Corporation 

throughout the province in the last year amounted to $1,620,000 or about 1.8 per cent. That's, of course, 

is known to all members, because they have in their hands the annual report. This represents 1.8 per cent 

of the total investment at the year end. Now, it has been said that the Corporation is making exorbitant 

profits from the sale of natural gas. Of the total surplus occurring from our operations, the net income 

arising from the distribution of natural gas is close to $500,000. When taken alone, this net income from 

the sale of natural gas represents only 3 per cent of the investment in gas operations being maintained by 

the Corporation at the end of 1955. 

 

Now, I am sure, Mr. Speaker, no one is going to suggest that 3 per cent surplus on a very heavy capital 

investment is exorbitant. It is obvious that at the moment we are in a favourable position regarding 

operating costs, as we are operating a new, highly efficient natural gas system. For that reason we can 

expect that maintenance expenses are going to be somewhat below normal for the time being. From 

these figures we can gain reasonable assurance that the rates we have set for gas are adequate, and we 

see no prospect of any circumstances that would cause us to consider increasing them. The fact that the 

net income from all the operations of the Corporation is only 1.8 per cent of the total investment shows 

very clearly that the operations of the utility are being maintained for customers on the ‘service at cost’ 

principle. All residents of Saskatchewan May accepted as a fact that there is every reasonable prospect 

of rate reductions in store when the gas system has become established in the province and the 

Corporation has gained greater experience of its financial behaviour. In the meantime, in my opinion, 

the residents of those communities which are now using natural gas are the fortunate ones in 

Saskatchewan, in that they are benefiting substantially from its economies, and have not been called 

upon to make any financial contribution to the system except for appliances within their own premises. 

 

The Corporation has under study the pattern of the gas rates now in operation, and it is hoped that it will 

be possible to modify them to delay the operation of the rising feature. Now, that term ‘rising’ is a little 

bit if a call to describe, but I think most people are aware that rates are reduced one block following 

another, until 15,000 MCF have been consumed, and then the price rises, I think, to 75 cents from 60 

cents. Experience has shown that perhaps that rise comes to early in the domestic rate structure, and has 

the effect of limiting consumption of the gas in the average home, which was not intended. Now that 

change has not been determined upon, but it is under consideration. 

 

There has been a great deal of interest in the efforts of the Trans-Canada Pipeline people to clear the 

decks for the building of a transmission line from Alberta down to eastern Canada, passing through the 

provinces of Saskatchewan and Manitoba. We've had long negotiations with the Trans-Canada Pipeline 

people. As yet there is no definite assurance that Trans-Canada will build its pipeline across 

Saskatchewan during 1956. Like yourselves, the Corporation 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

55 
 

has read optimistic reports in the press, but to date we have seen nothing in the way of evidence that 

construction will in fact begin this year. 

 

The progress being made, meanwhile, in locating natural gas in the province of Saskatchewan, is indeed 

encouraging, and we expect to find further gas reserves both in the southwest where significant reserves 

are already known, and in the southeast which is at present principally an oil area, in the not too distant 

future. Either area alone, or both, might in due course supply the needs of southern Saskatchewan. The 

Corporation has already negotiated an option to buy natural gas from the Hatton-Many Islands field 

which straddles the Alberta border, and has arrangements already completed for the purchase of natural 

gas from the Success field northwest of Swift Current to supply Swift Current and the power plant at 

that point. These two sources are adequate to supply the southern cities. It is our desire to utilize to the 

full all Saskatchewan natural gas that can be economically delivered to market. 

 

During the past couple of years we have heard a great deal about the Trans-Canada Pipeline, and when 

the early optimism began to fade (there were strong hopes a couple of years ago that the line would go 

through very soon), the Power Corporation undertook to examine the engineering and economic 

possibilities related to the building of a pipeline of its own, suitable to serve the main southern 

Saskatchewan communities. 

 

This investigation produced a number of interesting facts. First, we found that it was indeed 

economically possible for us to build a pipeline from Hatton, which would be connected with the 

Success field near Swift Current, to Moose Jaw and Regina, as an initial step in building a Corporation-

owned southern system. Not only was it feasible, Mr. Speaker, but it has been shown to be, over a period 

of years, a means of bringing gas to Moose Jaw and Regina at a price somewhat cheaper than that 

hitherto offered by Trans Canada. Needless to say, this possibility has proved to be an important and 

valuable point in our negotiations with the Company. 

 

Trans-Canada Pipelines, correctly, we have quoted us various prices according to the size of our peak 

load our maximum daily demand compared with our average daily requirement over the year. If we fed 

Regina and Moose Jaw from Trans-Canada at their natural load factor, the rate would be about 28.5 

cents per MCF initially at the pipeline (not at the city gates); but if we could even out their requirements 

to a 100 per cent load factor, that is, take the same amount of gas each day throughout the year (a 

situation of course, which would never naturally arise in our climate) the price would drop to 20.5 cents. 

The difference of about 8 cents, if we could save it, would give a total saving of ¾ million dollars per 

year in a few years’ time, and would continue in the future to make those savings. 

 

Savings of that kind are worth some expenditure in order to secure. How can this be done? The secret is 

very simple. We must store gas in the summer and take it out of storage in the winter to supply the peak 

loads. Store gas in the summer, taking it from Trans-Canada or from any other source, and use it in the 

winter; continue to take it from Trans-Canada through the cold weather. Now, to store enough gas to 

provide say half Regina's and Moose Jaw's winter load sounds absurd, but in practice it presents no 

difficulty. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

56 
 

We just pump it back into the ground into a gas field from which a reasonable amount of gas has already 

been used and which therefore has space to store some extra gas. 

 

While the daily press has been attacking the government’s gas policies, the Corporation's engineers have 

been busy making thorough studies of all the factors involved in this storage proposition. 

 

Trans-Canada Pipelines have confirmed our assumptions as to rates and savings to be made by storage; 

 

The well-known consulting firm of DeGollyer-McNaughton has been employed to investigate the 

suitability of a particular field for storage; 

 

Fish Engineering Services have, as our consultants, checked all our calculations and assumptions and 

found them good. 

 

Finally, I am glad to say the Government has approved the recommendation of the Board of Directors to 

proceed with this scheme. The scheme is as follows: to build this year a pipe line from Swift Current 

district to Moose Jaw; to construct a distribution system in the city of Moose Jaw; to supply Swift 

Current and Moose Jaw this year with gas from the Success gas field. The load of these two cities will 

prepare the gas field (which as a gas resource is quite small) for use as storage in subsequent years. Next 

year we will extend the pipe line to Regina, if Regina has come to a decision by that time. 

 

For the gas supply in 1957 we expect to have two alternatives available - either we can build a line from 

Hatton to Success and bring gas through our own pipe line, taking advantage of the storage field to 

economize in pipe size and gathering system costs, or alternatively, if Trans-Canada is available we can 

buy gas at 100 per cent load factor; take it into storage in the summer, and use it for what is generally 

known as ‘peak shaving’ in the winter. As a matter of fact, at the present time our engineers favour 

making both arrangements, and gaining the great advantage of security through the two sources of 

supply. (That is, of course, just in process at present). 

 

I realize that this scheme must sound very complicated, and there are details which I cannot explain in 

the time at my disposal; however, it is not an untried scheme. Many depleted gas fields are used for 

storage in the United States. I had the advantage of going down into the United States and there 

observing gas being stored in a partially depleted field. The economic operation of many a long pipe line 

is dependent on the storage factor. This scheme is at once recognized as sound like those in the gas 

industry. 

 

It may seem redundant to build more than 100 miles of pipe line roughly paralleling the Trans-Canada 

line. That it would parallel Trans-Canada is only coincidence. Had we been able to find a suitable 

storage field anywhere within say 150 miles of Regina, it would have been economical to build a line to 

it for use as storage - for example, to Watrous or Assiniboia - but the fact that the storage field is west of 

us has the added advantage that it makes it possible to bring gas from points further west to the storage 

field, 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

57 
 

to use Saskatchewan gas, without excessive cost. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural Resources): — Would it do to go to Davidson 

 

Mr. R. Walker (Hanley): — They don’t need it up there. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Darling: — The fact that the storage field is west of us has the added advantage that it makes 

it possible to bring gas from points further west to the storage field, to use Saskatchewan gas, without 

excessive cost. 

 

For the purpose of building a pipe line from Success to Moose Jaw and the distribution system in Moose 

Jaw it will be necessary to spend $6 million this year. Next year an extension to Regina, the purchase of 

the storage field, and Regina distribution system would cost a further $6 million. The part of this total 

that is properly chargeable to the ‘peak shaving’ operation (that is, the pipeline, storage field and 

compressor stations) will be approximately $5 million. It will be seen then, that the savings which I 

mentioned at the start would pay for this scheme in six or seven years. 

 

Some of the advantages we see arising from these proposals are: 

 

1. It will be possible to start supplying gas in the southern part of the province, as far as Moose 
Jaw, in 1956, irrespective of the fate of Trans-Canada Pipelines. 

 

2. It will be possible to supply Regina in 1957, again irrespective of T.C.F. 
 

3. It will be possible to operate a highly flexible system, buying gas from the cheapest sources 
in the cheapest manner. For example, we could buy off-peak summer gas from Trans-Canada 

at still cheaper rates, for storage. 

 

4. It will be possible to supply a greater variety of industrial loads with fewer restrictions as to 
peak loads than would be possible with Trans-Canada alone. 

 

5. It will be possible to offer a better market to Saskatchewan gas producers and a better supply 
to Saskatchewan communities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have described in some detail the programme which we propose for the southern 

part of the province. The decision with respect to the southern programme was deferred until it wasn't 

very comfortable waiting until a decision could be arrived at, but in the meantime we had determined we 

were going to have a natural gas extension programme this year, and we had made plans for an addition 

to our northern system. Our northern system is certainly not going to miss out on extensions. 

 

This year we propose two extensions involving new transmission lines; one to the city of North 

Battleford, and a second to Humboldt. The Battlefords have shown intense interest in receiving natural 

gas service, and I know that it will be good news to the people there that the benefits of natural 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

58 
 

gas will come to them in 1956. Materials are already on order, and the opening up of the construction 

season should see great activity in the laying of gas pipe lines in the province. 

 

Another extension which I should mention at this time is one to serve the town of Eston. The member 

for Elrose (Mr. M. J. Willis) has not allowed me to forget natural gas for Eston during the last couple of 

years, and it is so close to the supply that it represents no difficulty. 

 

The line to the Battlefords, however, will make natural gas available to Biggar, Perdue and Asquith, and 

possibly some smaller places. The line to Humboldt will bring natural gas within the orbit of the town of 

Bruno, and the line to Prince Albert has already made service to the towns of Cudworth and Wakaw a 

probability in the very near future. 

 

I would like to make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that the Power Corporation is not yet able to say how far it 

will be physically possible to go with respect to service to these intermediate centres. We are hopeful 

that some of them can be served, and we will go as far as our budget will permit. 

 

The total natural gas expansion programme will cost approximately $10 million this year, and the power 

programme $17 million, making a total for the Power Corporation of $27 million in 1956. That, Mr. 

Speaker, is a very large sum of money. As I said before, there are those who criticize the Power 

Corporation and the Government because of the surpluses which have been earned by the Corporation. I 

would hesitate to recommend to the Government the expenditure of such a large sum of money, 

particularly for the extension of the natural gas system, were it not for the comfortable surplus that has 

been earned by the system thus far, and as I think I said earlier in this Address, I will not recommend to 

the Government any reduction in natural gas rates until the extension to other cities has shown that the 

system can be depended upon to continue to show surpluses which justify reductions. 

 

It requires little imagination, Mr. Speaker, to conceive the outcry which would be heard if a Government 

agency such as the Power Corporation induced people to install gas by offering low rates, and then 

proceeded immediately to have to raise them, in order to recover deficits. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, nothing could be more illogical than the criticisms of the Power Corporation's 

surpluses in the electrical utility. The surplus in 1955 of slightly over one million dollars is condemned 

as being “too high” and our rates as being “exorbitant.” What are the facts? The Corporation has striven 

unremittingly for years to reduce the costs of the service, mainly by the building of efficient generating 

stations and the closing of obsolete, high-cost diesel plants. The increase in Corporation surpluses if the 

evidence that these efforts have met with success, and the surpluses have not been retained for purposes 

other than the purposes of the Power Corporation. 

 

Nor have the surpluses all been employed for capital purposes. On five occasions since 1944, the 

surpluses have been used to affect reductions in rates, and the customers of the Power Corporation will 

welcome increased surpluses, 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

59 
 

knowing as they do from experience, that these surpluses represent reductions in the cost of the service, 

and will be reflected in the future as they have in the past, and lower rates for electrical energy to them. 

 

The last rate reduction which was put into effect at the beginning of this year was more than a reduction 

- it was also a consolidation and equalization of urban residential rates which have been, to some extent, 

out of line because of the rate structures inherited by the Power Corporation from the private utilities 

taken over in 1946 and 1947. These rates taken over were naturally enough, based on the generation 

costs in the areas to which they applied, and therefore were not consistent with Power Corporation 

system costs. We have been looking forward for some time to the occasion when our surplus would be 

sufficient that we could absorb comfortably the cost of equalizing those rates. This last rate reduction 

cost the Corporation $400,000 on the basis of 1955 consumption, and would have been justified on the 

basis of equalization alone. 

 

The next rates that are being studied are the commercial rates, and it is entirely possible that a reduction 

in these is in prospect. 

 

Speaking further on surpluses, I would like to hear court to surpluses each year since 1949 and their 

ratio to the capital investment in terms of percentage. These are as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

YEAR SPC INVESTMENT NET PROFIT % RETURN 

1949 $25,350,000 $281,000 1.11 

1950 27,150,000 515,000 1.90 

1951 33,650,000 413,000 1.23 

1952 37,150,000 622,000 1.67 

1953 54,900,000 830,000 1.51 

1954 70,800,000 1,187,000 1.68 

1955 88,200,000 1,620,000 1.84 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Corporation has been called a monopoly, and of course it is. All power and gas utilities 

are monopolies in the areas served by them. When a monopoly is publicly owned, however, and 

responsible to the elected representatives of its customers, not just shareholders, its customers, the evils 

of monopoly are eliminated, and the advantages of integration, which I hope I have succeeded in 

portraying, particularly with respect to natural gas, become practical. 

 

‘The Leader-Post’ referred to the Power Corporation as a ‘burgeoning monopoly.’ A fine word – 

‘burgeoning’. I, Mr. Speaker, am very proud of the way in which the gas system has ‘burgeoned’ since 

the first well was brought in at Brock in September, 1953. 

 

Hon. T. J. Bentley (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the speaker 

who has just taken his seat. I think there was never been a finer or more explicit exporition of the 

policies, progress and programme of the Power Corporation and its newer accessory, the gas features of 

the Corporation. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

60 
 

I want to take this opportunity, too, Mr. Speaker, of congratulating yourself, and my seatmate, your 

deputy. I regret very much the decision you both have made to retire from active participation in the 

work of this Legislature after the next election, and I want to assure you that the people that I know who 

know both you and your deputy have the same high regard for both of you as I have, and I do not think it 

needs any superlative adjectives for me to explain that feeling. 

 

I also want to congratulate the Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines), he is always a source of amazement to me in 

the clever way he can handle the finances of this province and bring about the results that we all want. I 

want to congratulate also the Minister of Education (Hon. Mr. Lloyd) and the Minister of Telephones 

(Hon. Mr. Kuziak) for the very excellent contributions they have made to this debate, and also some of 

the speakers from the other side, although my congratulations cannot be quite as hearty in that regard, 

because the content of their speeches would not probably deserve it. 

 

Now I am going to support the Budget, as I suppose Your Honour knows, and the remarks that I plan to 

make in the course of my address tonight will show why. I propose mostly to deal with matters with 

regard to the Department of Health, but I will find it necessary to make the odd comment regarding 

other matters as I go along. 

 

I want to refer to a statement made by hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) this afternoon when 

he was speaking. I listened very carefully, I do not think I misunderstood the hon. member when he said 

that there are available to the province in health grants this year $3 million. A few days ago, I believe in 

the course of this. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that additional income might come to this 

province in. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — He made that comment, too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Yes, he said it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What I said was this, there is almost $3 million coming to the province in health 

grants. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — That is what he said. I understood that. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don't know where he 

gets his information. If the other information that he gave us on other matters is as erroneous as the 

information on health grants, then it cannot be taken too seriously. 

 

I have here, Mr. Speaker, the official statement of the Federal Government and the grants that are 

available to us, and the Orders in Council which make them available, and they all come through Orders 

in Council. Anyone can read them if they want to, there are a number of pages, there are 10 of these 

grants, and I just totalled them up myself this afternoon to be sure I hadn't been misinformed before, and 

the amount is $1,921,000 available to us in these health grants. Now that is a long way, Mr. Speaker, 

from $3 million. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

61 
 

I wish it were $3 million. I have no hesitation in saying I welcome every single dollar we get from the 

Federal Government in health grants. We needed for the various programmes we are undertaking. We 

are not insensible to the value of those grants. On the other hand, do not let us exaggerate the generosity 

of the Federal Government. I will deal with the matter of what we might possibly be expected to receive 

from them, if and when the new proposals made in January by the Federal Government for the sharing 

of costs of hospitalization and diagnostic out-patient services, a little later on. 

 

I want now to refer to another comment that the hon. member made, when he was dealing with the 

medical services available to the people of this province as compared with others, and not only medical 

services, but total income. If I followed his figures correctly, he made the statement that the amount 

spent for medical services for mothers’ allowance cases was $19 and something per year. I believe that 

was the statement that the hon. member made. As a matter of fact the exact amount for the previous 

year, the last year for which complete report is available, 1954, shows that the cost per capita for the 

provision of medical services for mothers’ allowance cases it's $20.94, practically $21. And when we 

consider. . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Do you have the figures on a family basis? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I have the report here, and I said it was $19.90 

under the heading of Mothers’ Allowances and Child Welfare. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Well, I thought I understood him correctly, I knew he said it was $19.90. I will 

accept that correction. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Page 130. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I have accepted the correction, Mr. Speaker, $19.90, fine. I am telling him the 

cost in 1954 per capita was $20.94. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There is very little difference. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Now the impression that the hon. member left was that this is the amount that the 

mother of the mothers’ allowance case got. As a matter of fact, that $20.94 per capita cost is the per 

capita cost of all those receiving mothers’ allowance, plus their dependents, and in a family of a mother 

and four people, it would amount to very close to $105 per family, rather than $19.90 that he mentioned. 

I just want to keep the record straight on some of these matters, because sometimes it is very easy to 

mislead people if you don't know what you're talking about, or if on the other hand, your intent is to 

mislead them. 

 

The hon. member said a few minutes ago when he was objecting to the Minister of Public Works (Hon. 

Mr. Darling) reading his speech, and the Premier corrected him by saying that a Minister had a right to 

read his speech when he was dealing with very important matters in detail. Then the hon. member for 

Arm River said that “everybody over there is a Minister.” 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

62 
 

On your right, Mr. Speaker. He never spoke truer word, every member over here is a minister of a 

gospel that the member from Arm River and his colleagues don't understand, “humanity first.” 

 

We frequently hear complaints, Mr. Speaker, that we deal with Federal issues. I have mentioned this 

before, and I am going to mention it again. We intend to deal with Federal issues, because there isn't a 

policy set by the Government at Ottawa that doesn't have an effect on the provinces and we on this side 

of the House, I cannot speak for the hon. members opposite, but we on this side of the House have an 

extremely high regard for the welfare of the people of Saskatchewan, and when Federal policies present 

problems, or present obstacles to the welfare of the people of this province, we will certainly take 

cognizance of them, and to deal with them and criticized them to the very best of our ability. I don't 

know why our friends opposite are continually setting themselves up as interference runners for the 

Government at Ottawa. They are residents of Saskatchewan. They represent people who live in 

Saskatchewan, and must make their living here. I would think that they would be ever ready to try and 

protect the interests of the people of Saskatchewan, rather than protect the policies of their colleagues 

down at Ottawa. Certainly we will continue to oppose the Federal Government playing politics with 

such things as grain marketing, health insurance, and the South Saskatchewan River Dam, and things of 

that nature. 

 

The member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Dunfield) also made a few comments, and one thing he said, and I 

am glad he said it, as he would have been mad if I had said it. He likened himself to a moron. I draw 

your attention to the fact that he was the one that said it, not I., Mr. Speaker. He told us in the course of 

his address that the Liberals never thought of industrialization. He didn't need to tell us that. I have been 

in the west here since 1907, having, out as a very young man, and know the province as well as my hon. 

friend from Meadow Lake, and all the things that have happened. One of the reasons why there are so 

few of the hon. members opposite now is for the very reason that they never thought of industrialization. 

It wasn't until the people represented on this side of the House, all across this province began to weary 

of the Liberals never thinking of industrialization, that they finally said, “we will try a party that does 

have some interest in that, and see what they can do”; and so far they have indicated that they are 

content with the way we have tried to do the things they wanted done in that field. 

 

He said another thing that rather amazed me. It clearly indicates that he is not aware of all the things that 

take place even under Liberal policies, governed by the people at Ottawa. He made his statement that 

under Liberals no one has ever refused the right of private ownership of land. Does the hon. member not 

to know the policy of the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation people in connection with irrigated land which 

they own and resell, that they never take a final payment and issue at Title. I think the hon. member had 

better make himself aware of what does happen in this country, before he starts making comments that 

are designed to lead the people he spoke to to believe that this Government doesn't believe in private 

ownership of land, and only those across the way do so. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

63 
 

The hon. member can shake his head, but I can take him to people who are prepared to pay the last 

payment, but they can't do it. 

 

Now to deal with matters particularly related to my own Department, the Department of Health. I think 

the House has a right to hear something of our progress, and of our expectations and even possibly some 

of our dreams. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Dreams are right! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — They are better than nightmares. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I don't mind being called a dreamer. I have for years since I became the father of 

my first child, dreamed of a better country for that child and his children to live in, and I hope I will 

continue to dream as long as I have anything to dream with, as long as they are practical dreams and are 

capable of fulfilment by any government that has any desire to bring about those kind of conditions and 

leave a better world than they found. 

 

I have been through all the pioneering stages; I know as well as the member for Arm River, or anyone 

that sits opposite, and a whole lot more besides. I do not believe any of them have driven dog teams as 

many miles over frozen tundra as I have. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What about oxen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — And, oxen, and many of the other things. 

 

Premier Douglas: — And now jackasses! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Well, I am not driving them, and I am not driving oxen now, but unfortunately it 

appears that I will never be relieved of the necessity of looking at some of them. 

 

And we do have dreams and our Department of Health. Our whole hope is that we can provide services 

that are going to eliminate to as great an extent as possible those things in the way of diseases, illness 

and accident that ravage the human race. Now it is generally traditional I know to regard health service 

as two major fields. One is in the field of prevention and the next one is in the field of treatment. 

Prevention, of course, has always been associated with such things as immunization and disposal of 

waste products, and education for better living conditions and matters of that kind. And treatment, of 

course, has been confined to the provision of services, medications and so on, which will cure the 

ravages of disease or injury. 

 

However, we are learning now that there is a third important aspect to the whole field of health. 

Prevention measures are still basic and the most important division of health services. Next comes the 

treatment 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

64 
 

of those illnesses that occur regardless of how effective preventative measures might be, they will never 

be 100 per cent. The third one is extremely important, and that is in the field of restoring those people to 

health who have been seriously crippled or incapacitated, because of the ravages of disease, that goes 

much further than the spectacular things we are used to applying penicillin or setting a broken leg, or 

curing fairly rapidly some disease that has hit. Restoration services have now come to be regarded as 

one of the very important aspects of any health service. There is a reason for that, Mr. Speaker. It should 

be fairly obvious that there is little purpose in not trying to bring back to health, to agree at least, those 

people that many of us know now have been incapacitated for many years, when we know they can be 

improved. 

 

In the field of prevention I would like to say this also, that it is a much wider field than a good many 

people have been inclined to regard it. For instance, good immunization, proper sanitation, sewage 

disposal, pure food and water supplies and education for better living are not enough. Every single 

aspect of the life of people must be considered. Communities must be diagnosed the same as individuals 

in order to find what is necessary to be done there in order to introduce every single conceivable 

preventative measure that can be undertaken. And there doesn't seem to be very much purpose in doing 

all that unless it is geared with other things that are equally as important when we get into the third 

phase of health services that I mentioned. For instance, you might, through early case finding and 

diagnosing communities and people, discover people who have shall we say arthritis, or related 

illnesses, and they have come from places that breed of that sort of thing. There is not much use in 

providing restorative services to a person of that kind if as soon as they are restored they must be 

returned to the same kind of place. As an illustration and an indication of the regard this Government 

has for people and therefore, it concerns my colleague, the Minister of Social Welfare (Hon. Mr. 

Sturdy), has instruction from this Government and this side of the House to proceed as rapidly as 

possible with the provision of nursing homes, housing for the aged, and a variety of programmes to see 

that the very things I have mentioned do not happen. 

 

This we hope will become a reality. When you take these three great aspects of health services, you 

cannot divide them and set them up into three different compartments, and say to one group of people 

you shall do this, and the minute you meet the borderline you stop, and somebody takes over. When they 

reach that borderline, they stop there. All of these services must be co-ordinated to the place that no 

matter where the patient or the community starts from it continues right through to the end and the 

persons interested in the commencement of the treatment for the preventative services are responsible 

finally for the ultimate treatment, where the people are to get the restoration services they require and go 

back to the kind of place which as I say, is presently being provided through the good offices of the 

Minister of Social Welfare. 

 

These are big things; they are expensive. Every one of these services is becoming expensive. In the old 

days, of course, as you know, the doctor with the buggy or the Ford car, as most of the people in this 

present generation can remember as far back to, is gone. The whole team is now much greater, and you 

must have a great many more specialist stations, not only in 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

65 
 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but all across this continent and, in fact, all across the world, because 

people are beginning to come alive to the need for these things and hence we are likely to face a 

shortage of these kind of people. But as they come on the scene we want to utilize their services, and as 

we start to utilize them, then the services become more expensive. 

 

That should not be anything that we should regard as frightening. It should be obvious to anybody - I 

think I mentioned it in another debate the other day - that the greatest asset we can have as Canadian 

people are healthy Canadian people from the cradle to the grave - from even before the cradle and right 

up to the grave. Certainly if we are going to be the kind of a country we all hope to, where we will look 

forward to a Canada glorious and free, we must be free not only from the physical enemies that might 

attack us, but from all the other types of enemies that can attack mankind and one of the worst and 

greatest and most potent of these is illness, ill health and disease. 

 

And so it should not be beyond the capability of any country, or rather beyond the mental capacity of 

any country, to visualize and be prepared to make available all the necessary services that are possible to 

generate within that country and Canada should not hesitate to do all the things that are necessary and 

can be done with the physical resources and the physical facilities that are available and are only 

curtailed by the amount of finances available for them. This is what happens in this province. I will 

mention a little further on where some people regard the amount of money spent in health services -

because it is the largest single share of the provincial budget -is something around 26 per cent, I think, 

this year, and we are often told it is larger than any other province provides, and those who are opposed 

to this Government, of course, will say it is larger than we can afford. I do not think it is larger than we 

can afford. It is probably as large as we can afford at the present time, but certainly we could afford to 

do no less than we are doing, unless we are prepared to face the consequences, which would be a return 

to not only the old days when we did not have the services, but two worse than those days, because 

without the services now in an aging population we would face a great deal more difficulty than we had 

when we were all younger, and just settling this province. 

 

We are trying to co-ordinate - this is one thing the Department is doing with a good deal of success and 

the fact that we have restoration centres is a clear indication that we have made the third aspect of health 

services available to a great many people and it is hoped up with the rest of the Department. 

 

To carry out these services, again I would like to point out, the Department has carried out the policy of 

this Government and the party it represents, and that is to centralize as much as possible all these 

services that are available, and one of the things that has been done in decentralization is the setting up 

of the health regions, and in those health regions where you have a local body governing, it is the 

opinion of this Government that the local body is better able to deal with the aspects of health services 

that are required in their particular area, rather than have it run by a central head here in Regina. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

66 
 

So the regions are operating with a good deal - as a matter of fact, with more than two-thirds of their 

total cost being paid from the provincial treasury, and one-third being paid by the people in the regions 

themselves. But the administrative work and the policy decisions are carried out by those people. We 

help them to man their staffs, and when I say “man” I mean both male and female staff. Most of those 

are, of course, the nurses, the public health nurses who are the key people in the backbone of any 

programme that we have, but our sanitary officers, our health educators and a medical health officer, 

who is the key person, provides them in those services basically the preventative services, and then on 

where they have medical services with the great deal of consultative work in those fields, and for 

carrying out of a good deal of consultation and assistance in the field of restoration. 

 

So you see there is nothing centralized. The same thing happens in all the fields that we tackle, except in 

the northern areas where we do own four outpost hospitals - we did own five, but one of those has been 

taken over by an area - but we do own and operate as a Government four outpost hospitals and I think at 

this point it would be proper for me to pay tribute to the public health nurses who operate those 

hospitals. There are no doctors; there is not enough work there to keep a private practitioner going; there 

is not enough to keep a salaried doctor there and it is doubtful if you could get one to stay there; but 

these girls take charge of these hospitals and do a tremendous amount of good work in the field of 

providing all kinds of health services of the three that I mentioned, or seeing that they are made 

available to the people, if they cannot provide them themselves. 

 

I mentioned the chronic shortage that we have in the field of health people, and in order to overcome 

that shortage we are making use, as I said before, of the grants that are available from the Federal 

Government and from funds at our own disposal in endeavouring to train people for the various 

activities that are required in these fields. Not only to be in the Department, but we train people for 

hospitals either privately-owned, or community-owned, and we train people to go into the other fields of 

health services, not directly connected with the Government, but making a contribution to some 

particular health service in the province. 

 

I want to mention at this point one of the things that we regard as rather important. It has been a 

controversial matter, but in the field of health you cannot disregard all aspects of health, not only in the 

three areas that I mentioned, but the various things that can cause ill health to people, or are themselves 

an unhealthy condition in some particular part of a person, their feet or their teeth. It is teeth I want to 

speak of mostly now, because we do believe that it is possible to reduce to a very large extent the dental 

caries that appear in children's teeth to a very large extent and help the child to grow up with good health 

teeth. One of the things we tried to do in the health regions is to have trained dental hygienists that apply 

topical fluoride - that is fluorine - to the teeth in the younger children and that has been proven to reduce 

to a very large extent - we figure about 40 per cent - the incidence of caries in children's teeth. 

 

We recommend very strongly, Mr. Speaker, the fluoridation of communal water supplies. I realize, of 

course, that that has been controversial. People have talked about putting rat poison in the water and 

have 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

67 
 

made any number of uncomplimentary comments about people that recommend the fluoridation of 

communal water supplies. I have here a list of universities - 72 universities on the North American 

continent - all of whom operate preventative medicine departments, public health departments they are 

called, there they study all aspects of preventative medicine. We asked each one of these universities 

what their opinion was of the fluoridation of communal water supplies and 66 gave unqualified support 

for it. Five said they had not made as complete an examination as they would like to have made and 

therefore did not wish to offer any comment for or against and one was a bit cautious on its comments. 

That seems to me to be pretty conclusive evidence that we are on the right track when we recommend 

the fluoridation of communal water supplies. 

 

I have a report here from the ‘Health News Letter’ of February 15th, which tells of a decision that was 

made by the Department of National Health and Welfare, when they viewed the results of the Brantford 

experiment in fluoridation; there is no question of the Department of Health and Welfare of the Federal 

Government supporting the fluoridation of water supplies. I also have a copy of the ‘Winnipeg Free 

Press’ of December 6, 1955 which states that the Manitoba government has finally come out and 

favoured it too. I just mentioned that in passing, because I am convinced from all the information that I 

can get that the fluoridation of communal water supplies is a very valuable aid to the reduction of bad 

health in teeth if communities will undertake it. 

 

I want to mention another aspect of health services which I believe the House should give serious 

attention to. It is one that we have not had too great success in providing preventative services as a 

people in this province, and that is in the field of accidents. I know immediately we start to talk about 

accidents most people's minds jump to the conclusion that these are the accidents caused on the 

highways by drunken drivers. I am not speaking of those; I am speaking of the kind of accidents that can 

happen in the home, on the farm, in the workshop and in places of that kind. We do carry on an accident 

prevention programme designed to alert people to the kind of accidents that have taken place, why they 

have taken place, and we try to bring to their attention that nearly all the accidents that do take place are 

preventable, of the kind that I am dealing with here and no doubt highway accidents are in the same 

place, but I am thinking of these others. 

 

In the year 1955 we had a total of 13,237 accidents. Of these 3,975 occurred to children under 15 years 

of age. This seems to me to be an absolutely ridiculous situation and something that I believe everybody 

here should give thought to and should transmit whatever thought they do give it to it to people out in 

the country when they meet them. Of that total of 13,000 odd people who were hurt in accidents, 406 

died. Of that 406 who died, 93 were children under 15 years of age. That in itself should be sufficient 

deterrent to anyone who in any way contributes to accidents. But there is also an economic aspect to it. 

This actually cost the hospital services plan $1,358,680 for the hospitalization of those people who 

suffered in accidents and had to go to hospitals. That is apart, of course, from the loss of those who were 

killed. It does not take into consideration those accidents which we never heard about because the 

victims did not appear in hospitals. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

68 
 

We have also continued to improve the services given to medical care group, that is those who received 

medical care through public assistance. We find now that we have something around 29,000 

approximately on our roll all the time - sometimes greater or smaller - but that is the roll at the last 

report who received medical, hospital and allied care, dental and chiropodist and optical service which 

our friends across the way do not seem to regard as highly as they should. Again, our friend from Arm 

River this afternoon was trying to compare the treatment between the provinces - the treatment these 

people received in the provinces on each side of us and what they received here. In the first place, not 

being a patriotic Saskatchewanite, he never bothered to mention that Alberta never introduced their 

medical care programme until this province took the lead. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What reason have you got to assert that I have not been patriotic? That is starting an 

argument. What reason has he got to. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Don’t ask me. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I think he should absolutely withdraw that statement. I came here in 1904 and I have 

contributed as much as he has to health services in this nation of Canada. I absolutely take objection to 

this and I asked that he withdraw it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, I won't make a categorical withdrawal unless you order me to. 

However, I will go this far, that the way I view of patriot is one who is concerned about the welfare of 

his own country and his own people and is prepared to regard it as the most important in his mind. To 

that extent, in my regard, . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! The hon. member must make that withdrawal because no matter how he 

thinks, he is entitled to respect. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — By your direction, Mr. Speaker, I will withdraw the statement. I will put it this 

way. I cannot understand anyone who is a Saskatchewan citizen, who will not give credit for those 

things that Saskatchewan has done before other places have done them. I will agree with him that there 

is a greater supplemental allowance paid to the people in Alberta who are in the public assistance group, 

but I will not agree that they get better medical attention and I will not agree that they are getting as 

much as they would get under a C.C.F. Government in Saskatchewan if we had a $168 million budget, 

rather than an $87 million budget. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That’s your opinion; you're entitled to it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — And my hon. friend could at least have mentioned that Saskatchewan led the way 

in these services, but he did not do so, indicating that he would rather belittle the province than give it 

credit for something it has done. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, he attributed something to me that was never 

mentioned - never mentioned. And besides that, he is a Minister of the Crown - well, let the people 

judge. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

69 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am not going to chew any more ft about it, but I have my own opinion and. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member made his speech and in this particular instance he is getting a 

reply to his speech. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — How can he reply to my speech on something that I never said a word about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, I agree and that is what I have been saying. He did not say anything 

about this. He never mentioned it – and he was dealing with medical services in Alberta and in Manitoba 

– and he never mentioned that Saskatchewan led the way. That is what I am criticizing him for. I am not 

saying he said it; I am saying he did not say it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I never mentioned medical services in Manitoba and Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! The hon. member should not keep interrupting. If you want to rise on 

point of order, why rise on a point of order or a point of privilege, but don’t argue across the floor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, I still contend that he made no comment whatsoever on the fact that 

Saskatchewan led the way in the provision of these services. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That’s all right, that’s all right. If that’s all. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I would like to mention, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Hospital Services 

Plan has had another successful year. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The people paid for it too. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Quite correct, Mr. Speaker, the people paid for it. The people of Saskatchewan 

have always been prepared to pay for those things that they want and want as badly as they wanted 

hospitalization. 

 

Premier Douglas: — They did not get a chance to pay for them under the Liberals. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — The years that the hon. member from Arm River has spent in Saskatchewan – he 

should know as well as I do that the people were wanting these services years ago and they did not get 

them and when they rallied around the party that is represented over here now the people said, “we want 

you to do it; the others did not do it.” And the people gave us the mandate and have supported us ever 

since. So I say, that Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan has completed another very successful year. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

70 
 

I would like to give the hon. members of the House some information. It is true, Saskatchewan people 

are getting a larger volume of hospital care than any other province. That is because we have the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. That fact stands out and is now known all across Canada. We 

have at times been criticized because of what is regarded as unnecessary high cost and what has been 

referred to as abuse of the service. The cost has gone up, Mr. Speaker, very largely because of the 

inflation that has taken place since price controls were released. However, there is another justifiable 

reason for the costs going up - a couple of them that I think the House would be interested in. At one 

time hospital workers were among the very lowest paid workers and this Government does not regard 

hospital workers as a lower strata of society. This Government, and the people that support this 

Government regard hospital workers as people who have a right to the same consideration in their living 

standards as the rest of society has and so the wages and salaries in hospitals have increased to the point 

where today hospital workers are on a par with the average income across the province. That is one 

reason why hospital costs have gone up. And I submit it is a very justifiable reason. 

 

Another reason is that newer and better drugs and newer and better services and newer and better 

facilities and equipment have been discovered and has been made available to the people of 

Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan have not complained because of the cost of those. They 

have apparently been quite happy because of the way they support the hospital plan by the payment of 

their taxes on time. The percentage of per capita taxes that we collect I think is a clear indication of the 

regard that the people of Saskatchewan hold the plan in. 

 

However, there was an increase in the volume for some years, as the number of beds increased. And that 

is another reason why the cost has gone up. At one time we didn't have nearly enough beds to serve an 

area of this kind so, because of the shortage of beds in the early days of this Government provision was 

made to assist local hospitals and expansion or new construction. Then the number of beds increased 

and as they increased they became utilized, which cost money. Then when the Federal grants came into 

the picture in 1948, which I will refer to later, it was possible to carry on further increases, until now we 

have practically what is considered the proper number of beds to serve a province of this kind. When 

you get to that many beds, obviously it costs more money to operate them than when you only had half 

as many. However, in the last four years we have found that the utilization of hospitals has levelled off, 

as just slightly over 200 per 1,000 per year, and if you will look at your SHSP Annual Reports you will 

find it has been about the same for the last four years, so we can assume now we have reached the point 

where enough hospital beds have been provided and the cost so far as more beds will not go up except as 

more beds are needed to take care of the increase in the population. 

 

There is another thing that I would like to mention here. We hear about the high cost of hospitalization 

and there is one reason why that happens, Mr. Speaker. Nobody knows what the cost of hospitalization 

is in any of the other provinces except British Columbia. Not even in Alberta have they got the full cost. 

The reason they are known so well in Saskatchewan and British Columbia is because they are all paid 

from the central fund. We don't 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

71 
 

know how much the people of Manitoba pay for hospitalization, or how many people go without it 

because they are unable to buy it themselves and there is no provision made for them to receive it. The 

very worst way to pay for hospitalization is to not have it when you require it, because that is paid for in 

ill health, and the next worst way to have it paid for is by incurring the bill and not being able to pay for 

it, and having the hospital management or whoever owns it having somehow or other to dig up the 

deficit incurred because of unpaid bills. Those things don't happen here at the present time, but that is 

the reason why hospital bills appear to be higher here, when we don't know anything about the size of 

the bills in the other provinces. However, we do know some things. We do know that the beds available 

are 22 per cent higher in Saskatchewan than they are in Canada as the Canadian average, and they are 18 

per cent higher than they are in Manitoba. These are Federal Government figures, I would like 

everybody in the House to take cognizance of that. I'm giving them Federal Government figures. They 

are 4.5 per cent higher than they are in Alberta, again Federal Government figures. 

 

The days of care likely to be provided in Saskatchewan will be 19 per cent higher than the Canadian 

average. The reason I use the future there is because this is projected by the Federal government in its 

computation of what is likely to happen when they were making their Federal proposals. It will be 16 

per cent higher than Manitoba, and 11 per cent higher than Alberta. But when it comes to costs our per 

capita costs of hospital services is only nine per cent higher than the Canadian average which when you 

consider that our available beds are much higher, is I think an indication of the efficiency with which the 

SHSP is run. 

 

Now just to summarize that statement, I will read this: 

 

“In summary then, we have 22 per cent more beds than Canada as a whole. We are providing 19 per 

cent more care, and yet our costs are only 9 per cent higher.” 

 

And this would seem to me, as I said, to refute any charges of inefficiency. 

 

I want at this point, Mr. Speaker, to pay tribute to the initiators of the Air Ambulance Service, and that, 

of course, can only be attributed to the Premiere of this province, who at the time it was instituted with 

the Minister of Public Health. I want to also pay a tribute not only to him for the service, but to the 

people he was able to recruit to that service, and whom we have been able to continue in our service in 

that. Just recently the Air Ambulance carried its seven-thousandth patient. If I remember right, today it 

will be something over 7,400, but it was just recently that we passed the 7,000 patient mark, and carried 

everybody from infants to very aged people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Including “Jimmy” Gardiner! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Yes, we even carry the Rt. Hon. J. G. Gardiner one time, and I don't know if we 

saved his life, but he may have been a very much sicker man if he hadn't had the availability of Air 

Ambulance there. We have carried all kinds of people from the very young and very old; as a matter of 

fact we have even had one or two births occur in the Air Ambulance, 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

72 
 

so you might say we have even gone back beyond the birth stage to carry patients. I can't say how many 

lives might have been saved through this service. I don't think anybody would know for sure, but 

certainly it has given a great sense of security to the people in the outlying places to know that along 

with, and coupled with, as complementary to the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, and the 

improving and developing medical services available in this province, that they are not out of distance 

even though by road it might appear to be very much isolated. The Air Ambulance has done a 

remarkable job, and I think a great tribute should be paid to the pilots and the nurses, and the ground 

crew for the record that they have established over the years in carrying over 7,000 patients, without one 

single fatal accident yet. No patients have been injured even in the one or two accidents that they have 

had. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we come to a matter now that I think will give everybody some concern who has the 

welfare of Saskatchewan at heart, and that is in regard to our mental ill health in this province. I know 

that anyone can go into our mental hospitals and they may find faults, if they are determined to look for 

faults. However, I would like to say that I am rather proud of the fact, and I think I have a right as a 

Saskatchewan citizen, not because of anything that I have done, Mr. Speaker, I want that point clear, but 

as a Saskatchewan citizen, I am rather proud of the fact, in fact very proud of the fact that we are in the 

forefront of improvement in the treatment and care of mentally ill people. We didn't find the condition 

any better in Saskatchewan than it has been over the years in other provinces and many States of the 

Union, when this Government came to office. We found that the facilities that were provided, without 

blaming anybody, they didn't know any better in the days they were built, but certainly they were ill-

conceived to provide the kind of treatment that present day psychiatry understands and knows can be 

administered for the benefit of mentally ill people. We found that the hospitals were overcrowded 

because in many cases the mental patients or defectives were mixed up with the psychotics and the 

mentally ill, and a very determined attack was made on this province. One of the first things that was 

done was to get the defectives removed from the mental ill people, and to get them housed in quarters by 

themselves. That was done in temporary quarters, pending the time when permanent quarters could be 

provided for them. 

 

Another very important thing was undertaken at that time and that was the provision of highly-trained 

people. These highly trained people from the psychiatrist right across the board to the nurses who care 

for the patients on the ward were not as well trained as many psychiatrists knew they should have been 

trained. But all across this country, not only in Saskatchewan, every place across Canada and the United 

States little attention was given by the local governing bodies to this particular aspect of ill health. This 

Government tackled that problem by first acquiring the services of some of the most highly regarded 

psychiatric medical men that were available. Next was instituted a very extensive programme of training 

psychiatrists with a forward look to the future in the care and treatment of mentally ill people and the 

training of psychiatric nurses has had an effect on the morale of everybody working in these institutions 

that have any regard for sick people, so it works its way right down, building up the morale of the people 

that hoe the potatoes, or look after the flowers, or cut the hair, or upholster the furniture, or look after the 

power plant, and you will find that the morale 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

73 
 

of the people in these places is much better than it used to be, because of all of these new things that 

have taken place, and Saskatchewan has led the way. 

 

I would like to give an indication here of the difference between this province and some of the others 

according to some of the newspapers when I get to it. The whole attitude has been changed towards 

these people, and the result is that now instead of regarding persons afflicted with mental illness as 

persons who should be taken in and given custodial care behind closed doors, and kept out of sight of 

the general public, now the whole attitude has changed and the purpose now is to give as intensive 

treatment as possible, as wide a degree of freedom to the patient as is possible for his own good and the 

good of the community, and the results are showing up every day in the improved discharge rate of 

people who have been referred to our care. 

 

This Government knows that the changes that are necessary cannot be done overnight. They cannot be 

done in just a few years. There are limits to the financial resources that are required, that the 

Government knows about, and even if we had the money, there are limits to the personnel, to the 

training of the personnel that are required, the temperament of the people who can work in these places, 

the kind of people that have the temperament to go into training are not as plentiful maybe yet as they 

should be until the public becomes aware that this is a disease that shouldn't be thought of except in the 

same terms as any other disease. That is gradually being overcome. The Government recognizes that 

you cannot bring these about in no time at all, but the Government has recognized that certain things 

should be done first, and I have mentioned some of them – the separation of the mental defectives from 

the psychotics and the mentally ill, the provision of a place for them to live in temporary quarters, the 

building of a new place in Moose Jaw, which is now occupied by the defectives, by the improvement of 

the facilities which we did inherit from the previous regime at both North Battleford and at Weyburn, 

and while those buildings aren't designed to give the treatment, they are what we have, and we are 

making the best use of them, and changing the design so that it will fit into the new ways of treating 

mentally ill people. We have instituted programmes of treatment, as I said before, introduced and 

recruited the kind of people who are experts in this field, to the point now that here psychiatrists can get 

their full training and certification, and so far as I know it is the only province in Canada where that can 

take place. There may be one or two others that have come on in the last year or so, but that was 

certainly the case that while ago. 

 

To give you some idea of the results of the programme in 1944, I am just giving a comparison now of 

the treatment then and now; in 1944 there were 679 patients admitted to our mental hospitals, of which 

419 were discharged. In 1955 there were 1,359 admitted in 1,170 discharged. So the rate of discharge in 

1944 was 62 per cent. The rate of discharge in 1955 was 87 per cent. In other words, while our 

admissions have gone up 100 per cent, our discharges have gone up at the rate of 181 per cent, and that I 

believe speaks very well for the kind of programme which is developing in this province. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

74 
 

I mentioned at the start, Mr. Speaker, that prevention was the basic and most important aspect of health 

services. But in the field of mental illness, it is the same as accident, you cannot immunize people 

against it, like you can vaccinate them for small-pox and now polio, or immunize them against 

diphtheria, or tetanus or whooping cough. You cannot immunize children against accidents and the 

carelessness of their parents and grownups who surround them; neither can you immunize them against 

mental illness, but you can and we do provide certain preventative features which are designed to result 

in less and less people having need for mental treatment. And that is because we now have not only the 

Munroe wing for the early and rapid treatment of highly psychotic persons in the psychiatric wing at the 

University Hospital, but we now operate from full-time mental-health clinics for out-patient treatment 

for persons who are referred to those clinics by their family doctor, here in Saskatoon, in Moose Jaw and 

recently up in the constituency of my hon. seatmate, in the town of Kindersley. So we are doing all those 

things in the hope that early treatment will prevent the incidence of serious mental illness later on, and 

by the provision of teacher psychologists and competent people in the field of psychiatry visiting the 

part-time clinics at the seven other points in the province, and work among teachers dealing with the 

behaviour problems of children, we hope the results, and have reason to believe the results will be worth 

the effort in the prevention of serious illness later. We also carry on a great deal of research in the field 

of psychiatry. At the present time the Federal Government, the Kellogg Foundation, and the province are 

joined together in a partnership of research at the University of Saskatchewan, under very competent 

men. That in itself gives a great lift to the morale of people who are engaged in the field of treating 

mental illness. 

 

In the field of rehabilitation, that is the third aspect of health services I mentioned, when you get beyond 

the treatment stage, we have developed in this province a number of voluntary agencies, such as the 

multiple-sclerosis society, the arthritis and rheumatism society, Saskatchewan Council for Crippled 

Children and Adults, who all deal as voluntary associations with the people who are crippled by some 

cause or other. This Government has made very substantial grants to some of those organizations in 

order to assist them to get under way. As they get under way and can get under their own steam, then, of 

course, grants will not be so necessary, but the Government has been very generous in assisting those 

societies in getting started and in promoting general interest among the public. 

 

However, that is not enough, and the Government felt that it was necessary to enter the field of 

restoration or rehabilitative services itself. For some years, ever since this Government has been in 

office, there has been a Department of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation, and the Department of Health 

has been charged with the responsibility of the physical and medical restoration of people who have 

become crippled. At the present time we are looking after about 1,200 patients in the two centres, one 

here and one in Saskatoon, and we have 150 patients getting continuous care, the balance of them 

coming in from time to time and getting treatment and reviews and the parents given instruction and 

information on how to give treatments and exercises in their homes. So that we have now a very 

extensive rehabilitation service in the field of physical medicine, and we hope, of course, that that 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

75 
 

will be extended, which it must be, in the course of time, in order that we might be able to give more and 

more service to people as they come along, and with an aging society undoubtedly much more of this is 

going to be required. 

 

In the field of rehabilitation of course, as we develop, we are going to have to go out probably and do 

quite a bit of case finding, because it is obvious that a good many people regard themselves as 

hopelessly ill and unable to recover, and they have to be encouraged to believe that by the taking of the 

kind of treatment that will become available to them that they can again be restored to a very large 

measure of health. That is one of the things that the Department of Health is giving a great deal of 

consideration to. 

 

National health grants were mentioned here twice today, once by the hon. member from Arm River and 

again by myself, and I am going to mention them again. I mentioned we are not in sensible to the value 

of these grants, but they do offer some problems, for the simple reason that they are all made by Order in 

Council by the Federal Government. Each grant must be a special Order in Council. We think those 

grants should be statutory, so we will have assurance of continuity. We are never sure whether they are 

going to disappear at the end of a certain period, or whether they are going to continue, and because of 

that no matter how valuable they may be while they are in existence, their disappearance might mean 

that the disappearance of some particular project or programme which has got under way because the 

grants were available, and will have to be stopped as I say, because they might suddenly become extinct. 

 

We would like to see these grants given a little quicker approval in some instances, and we wish the 

Federal Government would give consideration to making grants available for specific projects like 

hospital construction, even though the projects were started by provincial funds, as they were in this 

province some years ago before the Federal Government came into that field. This province has suffered 

a good deal of financial difficulty - that is, union hospital districts and others, simply because much of 

the construction work that was undertaken prior to April 1, 1948 was not given credit for, when the 

federal construction grants came on the scene. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is a very brief and sketchy run-down on the work of the Department of Public 

Health. I want to now deal with what might be, in prospect, and I am not going to be too complimentary 

to my friends opposite and their colleagues in dealing with these matters, because I feel they should be 

made aware of the shortcomings of their own party, and of the failure of their party to do things that are 

necessary to be done at the appropriate time. I do not need to say any more than to remind the House 

here that the Liberals have had health services as their programme since 1919. They have also had it in 

this province. 

 

I think it would be several years ago I quoted during a speech I made, from speeches that were reported 

in the press back in the 1930’s; and I am doing this for a reason, Mr. Speaker. I want to impress on 

everybody who hears me that the Liberal party knows they cannot plead ignorance to the need of these 

things. They cannot say that they didn't know that the people 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

76 
 

didn't want them, either, because they know they do. They have had countless representations over the 

years, and they themselves have, in order to catch votes, agreed that these things should be done, and 

then have switched themselves after they have been successful in acquiring enough votes to retain 

office. 

 

Now, if you remember back in 1934 we had a different type of government here to either those opposite, 

or those on this side tonight. And the Liberals at that time were very anxious to get back on this side of 

the House, and so we find them out making speeches, endeavouring to get back on this side. I quote 

from a press report carried in “The Western Producer” of January 25, 1934 and this is the quote: 

 

“States medicine and state health insurance is assured when the Liberal Party is returned in 

Saskatchewan”, the former Minister of Public Health in the Dunning-Gardiner Governments of 

Saskatchewan said. (That was January, 1934). 

 

“The Liberal Party, when returned to power, will establish a system of state medicine in connection 

with which a plan of state health insurance will be inaugurated, Dr. Uhrich’s statement set forth.” 

 

Then it goes on to deal with why it should be done. I won't quote the whole paragraph, as he says this: 

 

“The deplorable result is that many people find it difficult to obtain medical aid and hospitalization 

when it is needed. I consider it the duty of the Government to discharge the responsibilities which such 

a condition places upon the state. 

 

If the Government can assume the discharge of duty of providing for the education of the youth of the 

province, surely it should assume and discharge the even more important and primary duty of safe-

guarding the health of the people. 

 

“That is my belief, and the Liberal Party agrees with me, and will proceed to assume that 

responsibility and discharge the duty whenever called upon to do so by the people.” 

 

That was said when they were out of office. They like to quote here, (and misquote) statements made by 

the Premier with regard to education. They like to spend a lot of time saying we do not spend enough on 

education, but here one of their former Ministers, a man for whom I had a high personal regard (I knew 

him quite well) but he was speaking for his party at this time, and he said they had a more important 

duty to provide health than they had for education. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

77 
 

Now, we'll see what he said after they were elected. The Liberal Party was returned after the next 

election, and so in December, 1937 - a couple of years later - this is a report from ‘The Western 

Producer’ of December 15, 1937. I quote: 

 

“Basing his argument on what had happened in respect to tuberculosis sanitaria, the Hon. J. M. 

Uhrich, Saskatchewan Minister of Health, Friday told the Royal Commission that it was his firm belief 

that any system of extended state medicine in Saskatchewan under existing conditions was not 

practical.” 

 

He freely admitted there was a wide demand for service. This is what happened before an election - and 

after: So that has been the programme - that has been what has happened insofar as the Liberal Party is 

concerned. The next thing we hear about any health insurance from the Liberal Party is when they 

introduced their Green Books in the 1945-46 Dominion-Provincial conference, when they said at that 

time they were prepared to pay 60-40; them 60 in the province 40! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Covering everything. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Covering everything, yes. And nothing happened, but they got elected in 1945. 

See the promises they made - the south Saskatchewan dam, and a few other things which never 

happened. Then they had to face an election in 1948 in the province of Saskatchewan; the C.C.F. 

Government had come in and they had to do something to get them out. They had to make promises 

which would appeal to the Liberals and to the voters in Saskatchewan, and also be prepared for the 1949 

federal election to follow a year later. So on April 1st, 1948 they introduced the health grants, such as 

we have heard something of tonight, to help them (they hoped) defeats of the C.C.F. in Saskatchewan, 

and elect a Liberal Government and to lay the ground work for what happened in 1949. 

 

Now, if they were honestly interested in health services, they would have gone further than they have 

gone, because there is no constitutional barrier to them providing help for provinces in the health field. 

They have done it to some extent, and as I said, and we were glad to receive the help to whatever extent 

we are able to get it in the field of health at the present time, although we don't consider it nearly 

enough. But when it comes to providing services that they could provide, let's see what they don't do. 

They have made no contribution whatsoever yet to Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan; they have 

made no contribution to the Medical Care programmes for the old-age security - supplemental allowance 

people; for old-age assistance recipients; for mothers’ allowances; blind pensioners, or for social aid. 

 

They have made no contribution to dependents of war veterans’ allowance cases. They have made no 

contribution to disability pensioners themselves, nor to their dependents, except for those things which 

are directly related to the war disability. They have not even allowed as a deduction for income tax the 

complete cost of medical or health or hospital care, and goodness knows it has been asked for time and 

again, and is something they could very well have granted without a great deal of cost to themselves. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

78 
 

Again I want to stay here what has been stated on several other occasions, and I want to emphasize it, 

not one single province over ruled by the Liberals in the past for today has introduced any measure of 

health care; not one, as a government measure. Not one! 

 

Now we are facing probably a provincial election, which has been known for some time. This province 

traditionally goes to the country so far as the C.C.F. Government is concerned, every four years. I don't 

know whether we are going this year or not, but based on past history, we could not expect the people in 

Ottawa to assume that anything would be any different. And it is altogether likely that they will have to 

call a federal general election by 1957 sometime, and some say maybe even this year might be a good 

general election year, also. So again they are going to come up with something - they have come up with 

a certain proposal so as to be prepared for any election that might be called by the province this year, 

and the federal election sometime this year or next year. 

 

So we get the proposal. Before I deal with that, I want to see what they really believe in. I gave some 

idea of what they do not believe; now I just want to refer to an editorial which appeared in ‘The Leader-

Post’ of March 7th, 1956 - just a few days ago. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Golly, I wouldn’t read that if I were you, Tom. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Well, you’d get a lot of comfort reading this, my hon. friend from Cannington, 

because it sets down the fundamentals. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I didn’t think you believed anything in ‘The Leader-Post’. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I don’t. I’ve only. . . (I don’t believe much in ‘The Leader-Post’) I only believe 

what I can read between the lines, and they state very clearly here; I am going to quote some parts from 

that editorial of March 7, 1956, to show that they and their followers, the Liberals, don’t believe in these 

measures that I have been talking about tonight. 

 

Some Hon. Member: — I never have. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I don’t believe you do, and they don’t, but they state quite clearly that they don’t, 

and I want you to listen to me. They say: 

 

“Like all Socialists, the C.C.F. is primarily interested in creating grandiose state schemes as evidenced 

by compulsory hospitalization, compulsory auto insurance and highly organized health regions, etc.” 

 

So if you want a clear proof of it, your spokesman, the press. . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — It’s yours, not ours. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Yours. ‘The Leader-Post’ has always been Liberal. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — No, yours. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

79 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Don’t talk nonsense. Even an Irishman can't get that twisted. That's a clear 

indication that ‘The Leader-Post’ does not believe in these health schemes we have in this province. 

Therefore, the Liberal party doesn't believe in them, because it speaks for the Liberal party. ‘The 

Leader-Post’ is the greatest mouth-piece for the Liberal party that can be found in this country. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That’s what you think. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Then they go on to say; (they are dealing with what Mr. McDonald said, as 

Leader of the party when he was speaking at a convention), and this is what they quote Mr. McDonald 

as having said: 

 

“Liberalism, he declared, is a way of life that recognizes the superiority of the individual over the 

state, over the party, over anything else.” 

 

(In other words, everybody for himself, and the devil take the hind-most!) That is the philosophy of the 

Liberal party is expressed by ‘The Leader-Post’. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That’s what you think. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, they said it themselves. It's the same as my hon. friend from 

Meadow Lake (Mr. Dunfield) said the other day about himself - he said it. He wished he was one, and 

he said maybe he was, and who is going to disagree with him around here? 

 

I would say the Liberals, who are still sitting there giggling like a bunch of nervous little girls about 

statements of this kind, should get up and forthrightly say, “That’s right - we don't believe in those 

things. When we get back into power (if ever), we'll abolish those things, and let everybody look after 

himself. If they cannot buy health services, they can go on being healthy or sick” - that is their actual 

belief. That is the way they acted when they were in. 

 

Now, I would just like to deal with ‘The Leader-Post’ but I don't think I have time. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Oh, there’s time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I’m afraid I can't deal with all the things I would like to do with tonight, Mr. 

Speaker, but I would like to mention one thing, though that would indicate that the Liberal people don't 

even give a very serious thought to these things, because they do not know. I have here a clipping from 

‘The Leader-Post’ which is a press report. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Yes, this is a press report. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

80 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — I didn't think you would bother to read it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Oh, I read it because I get a lot of amusement out of it - it's funnier than ‘Alley 

Cop’ and funnier than my friends opposite because it has more time to think about what to do! Anyway, 

they are reporting a meeting of the Regina Citizens’ Forum (People’s Forum) at which Mr. A. H. 

McDonald was the speaker, and Mr. McDonald is reported to have said this: 

 

“Mr. McDonald suggested municipalities propose in conference paying for construction and care of 

schools and hospitals, and asking the senior government to pay the operating costs.” 

 

Can the Leader of any party in Saskatchewan be so completely ignorant as to what is done under 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plans as to suggest that the Government should pay the operating costs? 

That's exactly what we have done. They don't even know, you see, what is going on! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Better read it all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Then it goes on to say: 

 

“Paying for operating costs of schools and hospitals is the principal cause of municipal financial 

difficulties.” 

 

We have paid the cost of operating hospitals since January 1st, 1947! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Read it all! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — All right, I’ll read some more: 

 

“Property taxes cannot be increased in many municipalities, according to the speaker, and yet the costs 

of operating schools and hospitals and providing other services are increasing.” 

 

The Hon. Leader of the Opposition doesn't even know yet that the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan 

pays the cost of operating hospitals! 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — You’re wrong. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I want to mention another thing. They are always talking of taxation, and our 

friends across the way thinks that taxes are a terrible thing. Well, I don't like paying them either; nobody 

does. I would like to point out that this Government relieves municipalities of what otherwise would be 

a tremendous load of taxation. I have here a table which was a reply to a question in the House, which 

showed the amount of hospital tax collected, the hospital expense, the administrative expense, and the 

total expenditure, and it shows the total amount of taxes collected from January 1st, 1947 to the end of 

1955, to be $55,500,000 and the total hospital expense to be $122,322,000. The difference between 

those two items 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

81 
 

$67 million, and $67 million, is on the present assessment of the province of Saskatchewan amounts to 

approximately 70 mills, and 70 mills over that period would have meant eight mills a year from January 

1st, 1947 until the end of 1955. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Who paid that $67 million? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — The people of Saskatchewan, through this government - now listen, my hon. 

friend - nobody here has ever denied that; it has come out of taxes. The difference you see, Mr. Speaker, 

between our Liberal friends and this side of the House is in the collection of taxes we redistribute in 

services for the benefit of all the people of Saskatchewan. The Liberals used to their taxation policy to 

build up the prestige and wealth and otherwise of their friends. Mr. Speaker, I have lived in this province 

long enough to know what goes on. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — You will find out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, he says I'll find out. I've been from 1907 trying to find out, and I 

have listened to my hon. friend now for quite a few years in this House, and nothing he has ever said is 

likely to help me to find out anything worthwhile! He has never made a contribution that had any form 

of construction in it whatsoever! 

 

However, we won't go into those matters anymore tonight because the time is running short and I wish 

to make another comment at this point. Again I want to talk to my friends across the way. The objected 

tonight when I suggested that in my opinion their attitude toward Saskatchewan problems is not what I 

would think the attitude of patriotic citizens of Saskatchewan should be. At the conference held last fall, 

the Premiere of this province suggested among other things, that the old Federal-Municipal 

Improvement Assistance Act should be resurrected and brought up-to-date. He had the support of some 

other premiere in that suggestion. When he was down at the last conference a few days ago, he was told 

again that this would not be resurrected. I have never yet, in all the time that our friends opposite has 

been dealing with the problems of municipalities of this province, heard one of them suggest, or 

recommend, or never heard of their convention passing a resolution, asking the Federal Government to 

resurrect the Municipal Improvement Assistance Act of 1938 and bring it up-to-date. If they are really 

interested in the welfare of the municipalities of this province, that is one of the greatest contributions 

they could make, by passing resolutions and speaking in favour of having that particular Act resurrected 

and made worthwhile, and goodness knows the municipalities of the provinces of the Dominion of 

Canada certainly need that type of assistance. The Act that was passed in 1938 I guess was just another 

election ‘dodge’, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, I just want to say in conclusion that the recent proposals that the Federal Government has made 

for the sharing of hospitalization and diagnostic costs with the provinces that will enter into an 

agreement, was welcomed. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

82 
 

Mr. Carr (Rosthern): — A good thing, wasn’t it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — Mr. Speaker, half a loaf is always better than none! 

 

Mr. Carr: — That’s a good half-loaf. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And they holler for more! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — But half a loaf is never a full meal, and we have a government in Canada with 

responsibilities, and when they only discharge half or a quarter of that responsibility, we can only give it 

that measure of thanks for that portion, and no more - that is all they are entitled to. 

 

I have no hesitation in saying that we are happy to have something offered; it will be useful, but it is not 

enough and don't think for a moment because this has been offered that this Government or this party 

over here will cease to offer criticism for the failure to undertake the whole programme. However, even 

though it is better than nothing - it is a half a loaf -there are a lot of holes in the half a loaf - there is no 

butter on it, and they forgot to put in the salt. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Did they put margarine on it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — No, there is not even margarine on it. They wouldn't even put some of their cheap 

34 cent butter on it. But they have put restrictions around this that are going to make it very difficult. In 

the first place they have insisted that before it becomes operative, six provinces with the majority of the 

population must not only signify their intention to come in, but they must all have an actual programme 

in operation, and they know very well that they can make that promise without being called upon to 

undertake any obligations, certainly before 1958. It is perfectly good election bait, Mr. Speaker, because 

there are only two provinces who could possibly meet a dead-line of 12 months - British Columbia and 

Saskatchewan. Alberta might, by a strenuous effort, but the bulk of the provinces required to come in 

could possibly get ready in less than a two-year period, which would bring us into the early months of 

1958. If the Federal Government had really been sincere in wanting to enter into this part of the field of 

health insurance, they would have said, “This is available to every province as fast as that province itself 

is ready to come in and sign an agreement.” 

 

We would have been ready here inside of six months from the date the proposal was made. There are 

other restrictions, too. They are going to pass off a lot of their responsibilities onto the province; things 

which have hitherto been their responsibilities - they are going to pass them over as a condition of 

making this contribution available to us, Mr. Speaker, and when they do that, why it may be that the 

financial benefits to this province will be somewhat less than our happy little friends across the way (or 

should I say ‘slap-happy’ little friends across the way) - think it is going to be. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

83 
 

However, we are prepared as a government to enter into the agreement, and to start ironing out the 

details, and we will also ask them to make it available to us just as soon as the details are ironed out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sorry I didn't have more time to deal with more aspects of the Health programme, but 

again I want to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer, and to assure him that I am happy to support the 

budget. 

 

Hon. Mr. J. T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in this debate, I 

want to join with my colleagues who have paid tribute to the excellent work you have done in your 

position, and I know there have been times when it has been a bit extenuating, but even this afternoon, I 

am sure, Mr. Speaker, that you felt your work has not been all in vain. When I listened to my good 

friend from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) speak this afternoon, I thought he had mellowed a lot, and the 

very fact that he kept his speech down to an hour and a half shows that you must have had quite a bit of 

influence on him. 

 

This afternoon also, the member for Wilkie (Mr. Horsman) spoke and quoted from Shakespeare, 

pointing out that we were looking for a new horse to ride, I couldn't help but think that the Liberals over 

there would have been very happy to have even a team of oxen right at the present time. 

 

The hour is getting late, and I want to cover a few things this evening before we adjourn, and I would 

like for a few moments just to run over some of the achievements of my department during the last five 

years. To do that it will be necessary to remind you of the conditions as we found them when we took 

office in 1944. At that time, Mr. Speaker, agriculture was becoming rapidly mechanized over the entire 

province, and it was very evident that there would be a need in the immediate future for a great 

improvement of roads in this province if we were to provide the means of transportation that agriculture 

in itself was going to require. It was also evident at that time that with the end of the war, which was 

then in sight, there would be quite an increase in the amount of vehicle traffic which our roads and 

highways would have to handle. And with that in mind, this Government undertook to make certain 

radical changes so far as our highway programme and policy was concerned. At that time we decided it 

would be necessary to increase the width of our roads and the right-of-ways from 100 to 150 feet, and 

that was done over most of the work which we have carried on from that date to this. As a matter of fact, 

we have, as you know, on the Trans-Canada and some of the other more important roads gone to a 200 

foot right-of—way in that period of time. 

 

Just the other day I had the opportunity to run over a few traffic counts that were taken back in 1931. 

There weren't many taken, but some were taken just around the main cities, and they are rather 

enlightening. I find that on No. 1 east of Regina, in 1931 the count was 1510; in 1955 it had increased to 

2270. On No. 6 north of Regina the count was 677; last summer 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

84 
 

it was 3,050. On No. 14 east of Saskatoon in 1931 it was 858; last summer, 4,160 - and so on down the 

list. I find that the increase ran all the way from 100 to over 400 per cent in that short period of time. 

 

Now, one of the other difficulties which we faced was the fact that this province had been under a 

Liberal administration for a number of years, and during those years they had failed to give proper 

maintenance to the highway system of this province. I find at that time there was less than 100 miles of 

the provincial highway system that had been built on right-of-ways of more than 100 feet. In fact, the 

greater part of them were built on the old six-six-foot right-of-way basis. I have noticed in this House 

and in the country the Liberals have been saying they were responsible for the building of 8,000 miles of 

provincial highway in this province. They did no such thing! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak (Minister of Telephones): — They did no such thing. They only marked it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — I find that in 1944 when we took office there were only 4,872 miles of gravelled 

road in Saskatchewan. There was 138 miles of black-top, and another 2,270 miles which was graded but 

not gravelled, leaving over 3,000 miles of this system which had never been gravelled, and a great 

portion of that had never even been graded. Don't forget that during that period when the Tories were in 

office and they had built a very considerable mileage of the highway system in this province, so when 

they undertake to tell the people of Saskatchewan that they have built 8,000 miles of highway they are 

certainly stretching the point to quite an extent. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that no other government in Canada was ever faced with a face-lifting job 

which our highways required, such as when we took office in 1944. Not only were they in a dilapidated 

condition, but we have practically nothing with which to do the work. There were only 19 engineers in 

the Department in 1944. They were practically nothing in the way of modern equipment, either for 

maintenance or construction, so one of the first things we had to do, and we did do, was to set out on a 

recruiting campaign to get the necessary personnel to do the job. We had to organize a long-term 

programme of work and we had to find the necessary equipment to do the job. I should say, first of all, 

that during the war years, and until the war ended we were not able to make very much advancement in 

the recruiting of personnel or the securing of equipment, but by 1950-51 we had set up an organization, 

and we had secured enough equipment to go out and handle a $10 million job. Not only had the 

Department itself secured a considerable amount of equipment, but because of the continuous work 

which we carried on from year to year (not just the years before an election) the contractors of this 

province felt they had enough confidence in this Government to go out and build up their staff and 

equipment, so by that time we were in a position to do as I said, carry out a $10 million budget in 1950-

51. Today the budget of the Department is over two and a half times the budget we had in 1950. At that 

time we had five branches in the Department, and three minor agencies. Today we now have nine 

integrated branches, all capable of doing a first-class job. 

  



 

March 13, 1956 

85 
 

I want also to state that during that period, in the recruiting which we had to carry on, we were confined 

almost entirely to the graduates from our University. Most of these were young men who came to us 

with no experience whatsoever. They had to go through a period of training and I want to say that 

although they came with very little experience, and had to be trained, we can congratulate those young 

men because during that period very few mistakes were made. I admit (and we all admit) that we make 

mistakes, but there were no serious mistakes made during that period. I should also at this time pay some 

tribute to the older men - a few of the older men on the staff who helped to train and give guidance to 

the young men who joined the staff at that time. 

 

For a moment or two, and to save time, I am going to follow this fairly closely - as I want to deal with 

some of the work done by the various branches of the Department. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Might I remind the hon. gentleman it is just about two minutes until adjourning time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Possibly I had just better adjourn the debate, Mr. Speaker, as it is hardly worth 

starting on this with one minute to go. With your permission I would like to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m. 


