



















































Hansard: February 10, 1956


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session – Twelfth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, February 10, 1956 

 

The House met at three o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural & Mineral Resources): -- Mr. Speaker, before the 

Orders of the Day are proceeded with I would like to call to the attention of the members that they have 

on their desks a copy of the Weekly Drilling and Land Report for February 3, 1956. 

 

I am sure also that all members of the House will be very happy to know that there is to be another large 

mill for handling uranium-ore constructed in the Uranium City area. 

 

The ‘Financial Post’ of February 4, 1956, states: 

 

“No ‘letter of intent’ had been received at press time, but it is believed that Eldorado officials have 

advised Lorado that purchases of equipment could be made in anticipation of receipt of necessary 

documents.” 

 

And later in the article: 

 

“Mill capacity is expected to be 500 tons with crushing capacity of 750 tons daily – this would permit 

expansion.” 

 

On the opposite page in the same paper is an item about Lake Cinch Mines – it states in part as follows: 

 

“Lake Cinch management is undertaking discussion with officials of Eldorado Mining and Refining at 

Ottawa for the sale of its products under terms of a premium price contract. It is understood that plans 

submitted to Ottawa cover a 500 ton leach plant, but there has been no official announcement in this 

regard.” 

 

It is quite evident that the mining community at Uranium City is making good progress. 

 

I am also pleased to announce to the House that Mobil Oil of Canada have reported to the Department of 

Mineral Resources that oil has been recovered in their North Roncott No. 34-9 well, located in Lsd. 

9-34-5-25-W2nd Meridian. This new oil discovery lies approximately 65 miles south of the City of 

Moose Jaw, 60 miles west of the Weyburn oil field, near the towns of Viceroy, Roncott and Bengough. 

A drill stem test in the Bakken 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

2 

 

formation from 5,972 to 5,996 feet resulted in the recovery of 470 feet of clean oil, and 200 feet of mud, 

highly cut with oil and gas. Gravity of this oil is estimated to be in the vicinity of 40 degrees. This is a 

most interesting discovery, as no well is producing from the Bakken formation as yet in the south east 

part of the Province, and in addition it is in a completely new area. 

 

MOTION OF CONDOLENCE 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): -- Mr. Speaker, it has been customary on the day after the opening each 

year to pause for a few moments and pay tribute to those of our number in this Legislature or in previous 

Legislatures who have passed away since we last met in this Assembly. Some Legislatures seem to fall 

under the hand of the grim Reaper much more than others. We in this Legislature have been singularly 

fortunate in suffering only two deaths since the Legislature commenced in the first Session of 1953, or 

the election of 1952 – Mr. ED McCORMACK, former member from Souris-Estevan, and during the 

past year Mr. LOUIS LARSEN, the member for Shellbrook. 

 

But we have had in addition a number of members of previous Legislatures who have died since we last 

gathered here. In fact, quite a number of them. I would just like to read these tributes to them. There are 

many more things I would like to say but I do not think I ought to impose on the time of the House to 

such an extent. 

 

I am sure all members of the House felt a deep sense of personal loss when they learned that our friend 

and colleague, LOUIS WILLIAM LARSEN, had succumbed to the illness which had hospitalized him 

for a time during the last Session of the Assembly. We are all sorry to hear that he died in hospital here 

in Regina, on October 18th, 1955, at the age of 63. 

 

Louis Larsen was born in Denmark, January 16, 1892. He was 17 years of age when he came to Canada 

with his parents, who farmed on a homestead in the Borden district, Saskatchewan. In 1916 he moved to 

Blaine Lake where he opened a garage and operated a flour mill. While there he became a grain buyer 

for Saskatchewan Pool Elevators, transferring to Leask in 1929 as a grain buyer for the Pool. Later he 

purchased a farm near Leask, and, in 1946, discontinued work as a grain buyer to devote his time to 

farming. 

 

While at Blaine Lake, Mr. Larsen interested himself in public affairs and was successively a village 

councillor and overseer. As a staunch Free Trader, he supported the Liberal Party for a number of years 

but, in 1918, his independence of views asserted itself and he transferred his support to an Independent 

candidate who was contesting his home constituency. Keenly interested in farming, and zealous in 

seeking solutions to its problems, he was active in organizing the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and 

campaigned vigorously for the candidates of the Progressive Party. In 1929, he gave his support to the 

late Mr. G.H. Van Eaton, who was then running as a Farmers’ candidate. He joined the C.C.F. 

movement on its formation and remained a valiant and valued supporter of the Party until his death. 

 

Mr. Larsen successfully contested Shellbrook in C.C.F. 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

3 

 

interests in the general election of 1948 and was re-elected in 1952. He thus served in the Eleventh and 

Twelfth Legislatures. 

 

It would be superfluous for me to remind Members of this House of his work among them as a Member 

of the Assembly and its Committees, and of the C.C.F. Caucus. Suffice it to say that he was a doughty 

fighter in the interests of farmers and of the constituency he served so faithfully and well. Endowed with 

a warm personality and a capacity for making friends irrespective of Party affiliations, he was respected 

for his independence of character and his steadfast devotion to what he thought was right for his 

community, for the province and country and for mankind. When he spoke in the House he pulled no 

punches, but his sly humour removed the sting. We shall miss him from the service of this House, and 

from the councils of the Party to which he had given his allegiance, and accorded his unswerving 

support over the years. 

 

Mr. Larsen is survived by his widow whom he married in 1920, by three daughters and two brothers, to 

whom, I am sure, all Members will wish you, Mr. Speaker, to extend our sincere sympathy. 

 

A former member of this Assembly who has passed away since last we met was DR. FREDERICK 

DENNIS MUNROE, who was Minister of Public Health in the Government from 1929 to 1934. He had 

an international reputation as a pioneer in the cancer control field, and was widely known as the 

originator of psychopathic wards in Western Canada. He succumbed to a heart attack in his home in 

Regina on November 19th last. In commenting on his life’s work, one is tempted to paraphrase Sir 

Winston Churchill’s famous phrase, and say that seldom is it given to any one man to do so much for so 

many, both as a public servant and as a private citizen; and seldom is it given any one man to create so 

many enduring monuments for posterity to remember him by, not the least enduring of which are those 

in the hearts and memories of those who, in their time of need, turned to him for advice and succour. 

 

Dr. Munroe was born at Moose Creek, Ontario, of Scottish-Canadian parentage on November 13, 1881, 

and thus was 74 at the time of his death. He obtained his medical education at McGill University, 

graduating with the degree of M.D., C.M., in 1906. Two years later, he came west to Saskatchewan, and 

for the next 22 years practised his profession in the Welwyn district. Starting off as a horse-and-buggy 

doctor in the finest traditions of that diminishing genus he served a wide area, and it is said of him that 

neither blizzard, flood, nor winter cold could keep him from the bedside of the sick. The people of the 

district spoke of him as the “good doctor”, and surely no man of his profession could wish for a better 

epitaph. Busy as he was, he found time to interest himself in school and church affairs of the community 

in which he lived. He was Chairman of the Welwyn School Board for eight years, and a member of the 

Board of Stewards of Welwyn United Church. In 1909 he married the former Frances Gardiner 

Jamieson of Welwyn. 

 

The opportunity to transfer his talents to a wider field came in 1929 when he was nominated as 

Conservative candidate for Moosomin constituency in the provincial election of that year. Upon 

formation of the 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

4 

 

Government headed by the late Dr. J.T.M. Anderson, he was appointed Minister of Public Health and 

Minister in charge of The Child Welfare Act, being confirm in that post by acclamation at the ensuing 

by-election. From then until 1924 when he was defeated at the pools, Dr. Munroe put into operation 

legislative and departmental reforms, the influence of which has continued over the years. 

 

When he became Minister, he voiced alarm at the toll cancer was taking of the older generation and 

immediately set to work to deal with the problem. He organized the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission, 

which was confirmed by legislative enactment in 1950. Two cancer clinics were set up in Regina and 

Saskatoon respectively; a radium emanation plant was established at Saskatoon and radium valued at 

$130,000 was purchased for use in the campaign against the disease. A public information programme 

was inaugurated, and cancer was shorn of some of its terrors. This cancer programme was first of its 

kind in the British Commonwealth. 

 

His pioneering drive and progressive outlook also lead Saskatchewan to take a major step in the field of 

mental hygiene. Shortly after his appointment to the Health ministry, Dr. Munroe determined to correct 

the then practice of committing sufferers from real or suspected mental derangement to the mental 

hospitals, a practice fraught with difficulties and humiliations for patients and their families. He 

established psychopathic wards in the Regina General Hospital in which mental patients, whose 

condition was not sufficiently developed for commitment to mental hospitals, could be placed for 

observation and remedial treatment. These wards were the first of their kind to come into operation in 

any Canadian hospital west of Toronto. In recognition of his great services in this connection, in June 

1949, the Governors of Regina General Hospital named the psychopathic division “The Munroe Wing” 

in honour of its founder. 

 

Dr. Munroe also introduced another radical measure of the well-being of the people of Saskatchewan, 

under which premarital physical examinations were made compulsory. Despite controversy aroused 

when the proposal was first mooted, Dr. Munroe persisted, carrying conviction with him as he 

vigorously sponsored the necessary Bill in its passage through the House. This was pioneer legislation 

on the continent at that time, for only in scattered areas were before-marriage examinations made 

compulsory. 

 

In recognition of his superlative work in the fight against cancer, Dr. Munroe was honoured in June, 

1950 with a life membership of the Canadian Cancer Society. He was further honoured in 1954 by the 

establishment of a Munroe Lectureship, under which annually an authority on the subject delivered an 

address on cancer at the Saskatchewan Medical Association’s convention. 

 

Following his defeat in 1934, Dr. Munroe established himself in private practice in Regina which, in the 

ensuring 20 years continued to expand until failing health caused him to close his office in 1954. Such 

was his loyalty to his patients of long standing that he carried on a limited practice from his home for 

their benefit, until his death. 

 

His profession has lost a most distinguished and dedicated 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

5 

 

member; his patients a true friend and devoted physician; the province, a much-loved citizen. The 

selflessness and the magnitude of those services in his public and private capacities will, as I have said, 

be his enduring memorial. 

 

Dr. Munroe is survived by his widow, two sons and two daughters. 

 

Another distinguished figure who has passed from the Saskatchewan scene was MR. WALTER 

CLUTTERBUCK BUCKLE, a member of the Sixth and Seventh Legislatures, and Minister of 

Agriculture in the Anderson Government of 1929-1934. He died at his home in Victoria, B.C. on August 

25th 1955, at the age of 74. Born at Gloucester, England on June 28, 1881, he came to Canada in 1905 

on completing a course at Brantford College, and worked on a farm at Clanwilliam, Manitoba, for five 

years. In 1910 he moved to Tisdale, and engaged in farming near Sylvania. Three years later he opened 

an agricultural implement business in Tisdale and quickly identified himself with the public life of the 

town of which he was Mayor for four years. In the meantime he had added considerably to his farming 

operations. First elected to the Legislature at the general election of June 2nd, 1925, representing the 

Tisdale constituency in the Conservative interests, he impressed the Assembly by his contribution to 

debates of farm and municipal issues of the day. Upon his re-election of the general election of 1929 he 

joined the Cabinet formed by the late Dr. Anderson, as Minister of Agriculture. He was defeated in the 

general election of 1934. Mr. Buckle retired from active politics and went into the hotel business, 

operating at Star City, White Fox, and Saskatoon. In 1946 he retired from business and moved to 

Victoria, B.C. 

 

As Minister of Agriculture in the early years of drought and depression, Mr. Buckle had a most arduous 

task, confronted as he was with problems of increasing magnitude and with diminishing means to meet 

them. Yet, despite the difficulties, the World Grain Show was held in Regina on schedule in 1932. That 

he maintained the departmental services throughout those trying years was a tribute to his administrative 

ability, to his faith that agriculture in Saskatchewan would survive its ordeal, and to his determination to 

hold the essential services together until the better day he looked for had dawned. 

 

Mr. Buckle is survived by his widow and by two sons, a daughter, two grandchildren, two brothers and a 

sister. 

 

Another distinguished Canadian, as well as distinguished citizen of Saskatchewan who passed away is 

the Hon. Mr. Justice JAMES WILFRED ESTEY, of the Supreme Court of Canada, who died in hospital 

at Ottawa on January 22nd, 1956, following a two months’ illness. He was 66 years of age. 

 

Born at Keswick Bridge near Fredericton, N.B., December 1, 1889, he was educated in public schools of 

his native province at the University of New Brunswick and at Harvard University from which he 

graduated with the degrees of B.A. and LL.B. in 1910 and 1915, respectively. 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

6 

 

Late in 1915 he came west to Saskatchewan and for the next 29 years made his home at Saskatoon 

where he took a prominent part in the legal, university and political life of his adopted province and city. 

 

From 1915 to 1921 he was associated with the legal firm of McCraney, McKenzie and Hutchinson, 

acting as assistant to the late Mr. Justice Peter McKenzie, who at that time was Crown Prosecutor. He 

was admitted to the Saskatchewan Bar in 1917. When Mr. McKenzie became a judge of the Appeal 

Court in 1921, Mr. Estey joined the firm of Gilchrist and Hogarth, and from that time until 1929 he 

acted as agent for the Attorney General in the Saskatoon Judicial District. 

 

Created a King’s Counsel in 1928, he founded the firm of Estey, Schmitt and McDonald, and a year 

later he was joined by Mr. Arthur Moxon, Q.C., at that time Dean of the Law School at Saskatchewan 

University. Busy as he was establishing a successful law practice, Mr. Estey found time for other 

interests. From 1915 to 1925 he lectured in law at the University, served as a Governor of the University 

from 1926 to 1934, and took an active part in Rotary Club activities. 

 

Elected to membership of this House as a Liberal in 1934, his election marked the end of almost 20 

years of private legal practice, and the beginning of a 20 year period of public service, first as Minister 

of Education, then as Attorney General and latterly as a distinguished member of Canada’s Supreme 

Court. Sworn in as Minister of Education in the Gardiner Government on July 19, 1934, he was 

reappointed to that post in the Patterson Government on November 1, 1935. Re-elected in the general 

election of 1938, he was sworn in as Attorney General on June 30, 1939, on the resignation of the Hon. 

T.C. Davis, retaining that portfolio until his defeat in the provincial election of 1944. 

 

On October 6th of that year, the former Attorney General was appointed a puisne judge of the Supreme 

Court of Canada, and from that time until his death had resided in Ottawa. In 1945, he was honoured by 

his first alma mater, the University of New Brunswick, which conferred on him the honorary degree of 

Bachelor of Liberal Laws. 

 

As Minister of Education, he sponsored restoration of primary school grants in 1937 and an increase in 

secondary school grants; he established the Book Bureau and introduced a course in Citizenship. As 

Attorney General, it fell to him to draft the six Bills constituting the new debt adjustment legislation of 

1943 which replaced that mollified when Alberta’s debt adjustment was declared ultra vires of that 

province by the Supreme Court of Canada and the Privy Council. As a postscript, it might be added that 

his Moratorium Act of 1943 suffered a like fate last November. 

 

Notable tributes have been paid Judge Estey for his friendliness, his integrity of character, his industry 

and for his contributions to the many fields of activity which attracted his interest. His colleagues of 

Bench and Bar have proclaimed their loss. Those more closely associated with him in the work of this 

House and of the Departments over which he presided, have testified of the value of his public service. 

We, less familiar perhaps with those aspects of his career, nevertheless feel that Canada is the poorer for 

the loss of a man who had thus earned the esteem and affection of his 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

7 

 

fellows, who was esteemed by all privileged to know him as a genial personality and a distinguished 

public servant. 

 

Mr. Justice Estey is survived by his widow, three sons, two sisters and eight grandchildren. Throughout 

his life he remained a strong adherent of the Baptist church and was grand master of the A.F. and A.M. 

of Saskatchewan from 1936 to 1937. 

 

Another former member of the House who has passed away who will not be so well known to many of 

the members here was MR. HENRY M. THERRES who represented the constituency of Humboldt in 

this Assembly from 1921 to 1934. His death occurred in the Humboldt hospital November 22nd last, in 

his 88th year. 

 

One of the earliest settlers in the Marysburg district of Saskatchewan, and the oldest pioneer in the 

parish, he had farmed extensively from 1903 until recent years. Born at Kenosha, Wisconsin, March 17, 

1868 of German parents who had migrated to the United States in 1856, Mr. Therres was educated in 

parochial and public schools of his native State. From 1887 on, he was employed in various capacities 

on railroads in the United States, and in 1896 was selected as Chief Engineer and joined the Brotherhood 

of Locomotive Engineers. He came to Saskatchewan in 1903, settling with his family on a farm at 

Marysburg, where he was active in church and school affairs for many years, and evinced a keen interest 

in the farming problems of his day. Elected as a Liberal in the general election of 1921, he served 

throughout the terms of the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Legislatures, having been re-elected in the general 

elections of 1925 and 1929. He retired from active politics prior to the 1934 elections. 

 

As a member of the Assembly, Mr. Therres showed himself of a quiet, retiring disposition, never 

participating in the polemics of the House, but never reluctant to press claims of his constituency for 

governmental attention. 

 

Mr. Therres was predeceased by his wife who died in 1951, two months after their 60th wedding 

anniversary. Thirteen children were born of the union, of whom nine survive, together with 48 

grandchildren and six great-grandchildren. 

 

Just a week ago we were grieved to learn of the death in Toronto on January 31st, of a former Member 

for Qu’Appelle-Wolseley, with whom many of us had been associated in the service of the House 

throughout the term of the Eleventh Legislature. 

 

FREDERICK MIDDLETON DUNDAS, who to every member of the House who sat with him was 

known as “Beef” Dundas, was a native of the constituency he represented, having been born at 

Qu’Appelle March 26, 1885. He attended Grasmere Public School. In 1910 he moved to Sintaluta 

where, for a time, he operated a butcher shop in addition to his farm. In 1919, still maintaining his 

farming operations, he opened a garage in Sintaluta, a business which he continued to operate until 1952 

when fire for the second time destroyed the premises. He later served as inspector for the P.F.R.A. until 

his retirement in 1955. 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

8 

 

Throughout his 45 years residence in Sintaluta, Mr. Dundas maintained a lively interest in municipal 

affairs, serving as Mayor for eight years and as councillor for four. In 1934 he won 

Qu’Appelle-Wolseley for the Liberal Party and was re-elected in the general election of 1938. Defeated 

in 1944 he returned to the fray in 1948, and being re-elected, served until dissolution of the House in 

1952. He did not contest the election of that year. 

 

A popular member of this Assembly, the gusto and brevity of whose speeches commended him to all his 

fellow members, Mr. Dundas was well and favourably known through the length and breadth of his 

constituency for his ready sympathy and spontaneous generosity. In 1934, members of the Assiniboine 

Indian reserve made him an honorary chief – the first white man in the area to be so honoured. 

 

Besides his widow, Mr. Dundas is survived by a daughter, four brothers, three sisters and four 

grandchildren. 

 

The present member for Rosthern (Mr. Carr) very kindly brought to our attention yesterday the fact that 

a former Liberal member for that constituency of Rosthern, who served in the Third and Fourth 

Legislatures, had just passed away in Toronto at the age of 83 years. He was MR. WILLIAM 

BENJAMIN BASHFORD, who was born in London, England, July 1, 1872. Educated at Great 

Yarmouth Grammar School, Norfolk England, he came to Canada in 1892, and settled for a time at 

Morden, Manitoba, before moving to Rosthern in 1898. A pioneer of the district, he engaged in the 

lumber and insurance business until his retirement in 1945, after which he moved to Toronto. 

 

Always active in community affairs during his long residence at Rosthern, Mr. Bashford was a member 

of the Board of Governors of Emmanuel College, University of Saskatchewan, for more than 30 years. 

First elected to the Assembly in a by-election in 1914, he was re-elected in the general election of 1917, 

serving through the term of that Legislature until its dissolution in 1921. He did not contest the election 

of that year, which brought the late Hon. Dr. Uhrich into the Assembly as Member for Rosthern. 

 

Mr. Bashford was predeceased by his wife in 1953. 

 

I have just received notice of one other former member of the House, MR. NEIL JOHN MacDONALD, 

who was born in Nova Scotia, July 1, 1881, and received his education in his native village of South 

Whycocomagh. He came west in 1904, taking up a homestead in the Eyebrow district. He farmed for 

five years and then entered the insurance and real estate business in Eyebrow, and for a time was 

secretary of the village. 

 

Mr. MacDonald was elected as Liberal Member for Morse in the general election of 1934 and served 

throughout the term of the Eighth Legislature, retiring from active politics in 1938. Mr. MacDonald was 

a past officer of A.F. and A.M., and I.O.O.F. lodges. He died last July at the age of 74 years, and is 

survived by his widow, two sons, three daughters and ten grandchildren. 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

9 

 

Now, I know that the House, Mr. Speaker, will want to put on the public record our deep regret at the 

passing of these former members of the House and the members of the present Legislature who have 

passed away, to express publicly our thanks for the service which they gave to this province, and of the 

service which they rendered to their day and generation, and therefore I would like to move, seconded 

by Mr. McDonald, the Hon. Leader of the Opposition 

 

“That this Assembly deeply mourns the loss of one of its most highly esteemed Members through the 

death of LOUIS WILLIAM LARSEN, Member for the Constituency of Shellbrook since 1948, and 

also records its sincere regrets at the passing, since last Session, of seven former Members, three of 

whom served Saskatchewan with great distinction as Ministers of the Crown, namely: 

 

FREDERICK DENNIS MUNROE, M.D., C.M., Minister of Public Health in the Government of 

1929-34, representing the Constituency of Moosomin in the Seventh Legislature; 

 

WALTER CLUTTERBUCK BUCKLE, Minister of Agriculture from 1929 to 1934, representing the 

Constituency of Tisdale; 

 

The Hon. Mr. Justice JAMES WILFRED ESTEY, of the Supreme Court of Canada, Minister of 

Education from 1934 to 1939, and Attorney General from 1939 to 1944, representing the city of 

Saskatoon; 

 

HENRY M. THERRES, Member for Humboldt from 1921 to 1934, serving in the Fifth, Sixth and 

Seventh Legislatures; 

 

FREDERICK MIDDLETON DUNDAS, Member for Qu’Appelle-Wolseley from 1934 to 1944; 

 

WILLIAM BENJAMIN BASHFORD, Member for Rosthern from 1914 to 1921; 

 

NEIL JOHN MacDONALD, Member for Morse from 1934 to 1938. 

 

The Assembly reflects gratefully and appreciatively upon the lives and works of these departed 

Members and upon the contributions each made to the welfare of the Province and its people, deeming 

Saskatchewan fortunate in having attracted to its service men of such integrity, industry and 

attainments, men who, in life, were honoured and respected by their neighbours and colleagues, and 

who, in death, are mourned by thousands of their fellow citizens. 

 

The Assembly extends its sincere condolences to the members of the bereaved families.” 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): -- Mr. Speaker, as far as four of the former Members 

that we are paying our respects to here, today, I must admit it has never been my privilege to have met 

any one of them, and 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

10 

 

I refer to Mr. Buckle, Mr. Therres, Mr. Bashford and Mr. MacDonald. 

 

However, it was a pleasure for me to have had the opportunity to serving with two of the others, one 

during the Eleventh Legislature and the other during the present Legislature. I refer to the late Mr. 

Larsen and the late Mr. Dundas. 

 

I want to say that as far as Mr. Larsen is concerned I always considered him a personal friend of mine. I 

found that he was a man who had a lot of conviction as far as agriculture was concerned in the Province 

of Saskatchewan and in the Dominion of Canada, and whether other people agreed with him or not he 

certainly believed that the agricultural economy of western Canada should have more support from 

governments as a whole. 

 

I think most of us here this afternoon also knew the late Fred Dundas and, as the Premier has mentioned, 

he was known to us all as ‘Beef’. I had the opportunity of attending his funeral – one of the largest 

funerals I have ever attended in my life. Mr. Dundas was one of those people who made friends no 

matter where he went. I think that people of every political faith were friends of ‘Beef’ Dundas; and I 

know when he was a member in this Legislature he did his very best to represent the people of the 

Qu’Appelle-Wolseley constituency, whether they had been supporters of his or not; and I know that on 

many occasions he made trips into the city of Regina, especially during the hunger ‘thirties’, and would 

put up a terrific battle for the different requests from his supporters and others from his constituency. I 

think that he will be long remembered by the people who had the opportunity of serving here with him 

and by his many friends in the Qu’Appelle-Wolseley constituency and other parts of the province. 

 

The late Dr. Munroe, as you know, represented the constituency of Moosomin. He had a general practice 

in the town of Welwyn for some 20 years prior to moving into the city of Regina when he was elected in 

1929. Dr. Munroe was a great personal friend of mine and a great personal friend of my family and I 

want to say that he was probably as highly respected as it is possible for an individual to be respected, 

by the people of Welwyn and the Moosomin constituency. I understand that after he opened a practice 

here in the city of Regina he had many, many friends and patients who thought the world of Dr. Munroe, 

because he was one of the medical profession and was prepared to devote all the energy that he 

possessed in taking care of the unfortunate people who came to him for medical attention. 

 

I also had the opportunity of meeting the late Mr. Justice Estey on several occasions after he left his 

province and moved to Ottawa. People in eastern Canada tell me that Mr. Estey was one of the most 

respected members of the judiciary in any part of Canada. I understand that he would take a keen 

interest in all of the cases that came before him and he wrote his findings in such a way that people from 

every walk of life could understand the judgments that were handed down; and I believe that is 

something the people of Canada appreciate, and I feel that people from not only Saskatchewan but all of 

Canada were deeply grieved to learn of the passing of the late Mr. Justice Estey. 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

11 

 

Hon. J.W. Burton (Provincial Secretary): -- I should like to join with the hon. Premier and the hon. 

Leader of the Opposition in paying tribute to the former members that have passed on. 

 

While I knew most of them personally, yet I feel that I knew my old friend and neighbour, the late 

Henry M. Therres, better than any of the rest. Henry M. Therres’ homestead and my father’s homestead 

were less than two miles apart, and in the pioneer days there was a considerable amount of visiting, and 

calling, back and forth between our families. In fact, I walked to school quite regularly with the eldest of 

his children. 

 

At the turn of the century, Mr. Therres was Locomotive Engineer for the Great Northern Railroad, 

pulling the passenger train over the mountain division, out of Kalispell, Montana. I need not tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, that it took courage and ability for a man to operate, and to operate safely, a passenger 

train in those days over the Rockies. I need not also tell you that it took courage for a man that loved his 

job to quit that job, and to bring his young family into the wilderness, over a hundred miles away from a 

railroad. For the sake of his family he gave up the job that he loved, and he became a pioneer in what 

later on was to be known as the Humboldt district. 

 

As has been mentioned, Mr. Therres sat in this House as a Liberal, but I should also like to draw to your 

attention, that while he was doing that, he was a most supporter of the progressive cause in the federal 

field. I well recall the various matters and problems that Mr. Therres was interested in, during his long 

service to the people in the surrounding district. During the course of some of his earlier campaigns, 

some of his friends referred to him as a ‘diamond in the rough’, but I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that 

those of us who were his neighbours in the pioneer days looked on Mr. Therres and his good wife who 

predeceased him, as a couple that had hearts-of-gold, when it came to aiding and assisting neighbours 

that were in need, and in want. 

 

I might also add, Mr. Speaker, that the last time I had the opportunity to shake hands, to have a visit with 

my old friend and neighbour, was at the time we celebrated the Golden Jubilee in Humboldt this last 

summer. In front of the hut for the old timers, we had that visit. I might add, that in the many places I 

attended during the summer, attending these Jubilee celebrations, I came to realize more and more, that 

there was a note of sadness in these meetings, because I felt that I had shaken hands for the last time 

with quite a number of my old friends and fellow old-timers, but little did I realize at that time that my 

nearest neighbour of pioneer days would be among the first to be called. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I join with the others in paying my respects in tribute to the former member for Humboldt, 

my old friend and neighbour, Mr. Therres, along with the other former members. 

 

Mr. W.H. Wahl (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): -- Mr. Speaker, I wish to join with my colleagues in paying 

tribute to my old friend, Fred M. Dundas. I saw 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

12 

 

him not too long ago and he assured me that he was enjoying reasonable health, so I was both surprised 

and shocked to read of his death. Frederick Middleton Dundas represented Qu’Appelle-Wolseley 

constituency for 14 years. He was born at Qu’Appelle, which is in the northern part of the constituency. 

Fred had an unusual accomplishment, he spoke the Indian language fluently, and he was recognized as a 

friend of the Indians. They recognized this my making him a Chief. 

 

I attended his funeral, and the many people there testified to the fact that he had been one of the greatest. 

Now when Fred retired, and I was elected to take his place in this legislature, I naturally met many 

people who knew Fred well, and this was a very common expression: they would say: “We liked Fred 

Dundas, he had a heart as big as a wash-tub.” Now I am going to interpret what these people meant, for 

posterity, for the permanent records of this Assembly, and in memory of Fred Dundas. They were saying 

that Fred had a kind and considerate heart for people in trouble, and that he would go to unusual lengths 

to help them. What man could do more? 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): -- I think it is appropriate for me to say a word or two in view of the fact that I 

sat in this House with all these men, except Mr. Bashford, and I would heartily endorse what has been 

said by the former speakers. I might, however, scan over the personalities as I found them from sitting in 

this House. 

 

Taking Louis William Larsen, I do not think I need to elaborate on what has been said on his behalf, and 

I endorse that entirely. I want to extend my appreciation for the opportunity of having been acquainted 

with Mr. Larsen. I found him to be sincere and pure at heart, and open minded when it came to anything 

of national interest. 

 

Then we come to Dr. Munroe. I remember him very well sitting in a seat, just about where our Minister 

of Social Welfare is now, and in spite of the opposition that he had, not necessarily from the opposition 

on this side of the House, but from the opposition in his own Party, in promoting some of the welfare 

undertakings that he did, he followed them through. 

 

At that time, Dr. Uhrich was sitting in the seat where I am sitting now, and Dr. Munroe certainly had no 

opposition from him, as Dr. Uhrich was a former Minister of Health, and he co-operated with Dr. 

Munroe, and that is why he overcame the opposition of many members who didn’t understand it as well 

as they did. 

 

Now I come to Mr. Buckle. He sat as a representative of the Tisdale constituency, and he had a job on 

his hands at that time, because we were then at the start of one of the worst depressions we have ever 

had in this Province, and I think in Canada as a whole, and what he had to go through was not very easy. 

 

I remember, too, James Wilfred Estey. I sat with him from 1934 until 1938, and I do not know of any 

gentleman that endeared himself 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

13 

 

more to his fellow men than Hon. Justice Estey did. I never had very many personal dealings with him, 

but whenever I had an occasion to go and see him I was always received in a very understanding way, 

and he did everything he could to take care of the situation. 

 

Then we come to Henry Therres. I sat with him from 1929 to 1934. Henry Therres was a colourful 

member, in spite of the fact that perhaps he didn’t say very much in the House; but he was never very 

quiet in caucus. 

 

I remember very well that he sometimes rather embarrassed his colleague from Rosthern, Dr. Uhrich, 

because Mr. Therres insisted on promoting some Bill for the Chiropractors, and every Session we had 

this Chiropractor Bill that Mr. Therres was endeavouring to introduce to the House. Dr. Uhrich was, of 

course, a medical man, and was very much opposed to that. I can assure you that Mr. Therres did a good 

job for his constituency in caucus. 

 

Then, as you all know, our good friend Fred Dundas. I do not know where you would get a more 

colourful member in expressing himself, and in demanding what he thought was right, irrespective of 

whether he sat on the Opposition side or on the Government side. You should have seen him operate on 

the Government side. I was there, and he didn’t mince matters there any more than he did when he was 

sitting on this side of the House. I believe what elected Mr. Dundas term after term in his constituency, 

was the service that he rendered to the people, and the people showed their appreciation by voting for 

him in the elections. 

 

Now, Neil John MacDonald. I sat with him from 1934 to 1938. Neil MacDonald, as I remember him, 

was a very quiet, reserved, gentleman; kindly to everybody on both sides of the House, but when he 

wanted something he was just as aggressive as Fred Dundas and some of the then quiet members in the 

House. They were all there after what they thought was best for their constituency. 

 

As far as the other gentleman is concerned, Mr. Bashford, I think, Mr. Speaker, I can assume he was in 

the same category as the others, or he wouldn’t have enjoyed the trust and the confidence of his 

community, in order to bring him to this House, and I want to express my appreciation and my thanks to 

these gentlemen for the services they have rendered to their various communities, and to say that I 

appreciate having had the opportunity of knowing them and learning as much as I have learned from 

these gentlemen who have passed on. I endorse everything that has been said by previous speakers. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Minister of Education): -- I would like to associate myself with all of the remarks 

that have been made with regard to all of the members to whom reference is being made. 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

14 

 

Particularly may I associate myself with the remarks with regard to the Hon. Mr. Justice Estey, who, as 

has been indicated, for some years was Minister of Education in the Province of Saskatchewan. As the 

member for Saltcoats has just indicated, Mr. Estey occupied that position during some of the most trying 

years that the Province has known. During that period it was my privilege to be associated with the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation as a member of the Executive, and consequently I had the 

opportunity of meeting Mr. Estey quite frequently. We found him always thoughtful, always most 

courteous, and always a gentleman in every way. There are many members of the present staff of the 

Department of Education, many members of the public throughout the Province who are still associated 

with education, who would, I am sure, want to be associated with paying respect to the late Mr. Justice 

Estey. I would like to add my own words of personal respect to him, and sympathy to those left behind. 

 

Hon. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Public Health): -- I only knew three of the late members who were 

mentioned here this afternoon personally. They were of course, Louis Larsen, Mr. Dundas, and Dr. 

Munroe. I will not try to add anything to the tributes that have been paid to Louis and Fred, or ‘Beef’ as 

he was called. Each of them were endowed with the ability to make such a wide circle of friends, that 

they will be remembered for as long as the people who knew them live. 

 

I do want to say a word, however, about Dr. Munroe, that has maybe not been said this afternoon, in the 

same way anyway, and that is that when in the position he held in the Government of Saskatchewan in 

his day, he laid the foundation for two of the most important services that the Province has enjoyed – in 

the field of Psychiatric Services and in the field of Cancer Services. He accomplished this at a time, I 

suppose, when financially he faced the most difficult task that anyone could have faced in order to bring 

about these new services. 

 

Those who knew him as a private practitioner or as a patient all have a great deal of respect for him, and 

I join with them in that also. But my respect goes further afield for Dr. Munroe, in that he founded 

something in the years of his tenureship as Minister of Health, on which successive Ministers of Health 

have been able to build. He laid the foundations of those two services, and for years after, even after I 

became one of his successors, he was ever ready with good counsel and advice to assist in anything 

when he was asked, in order to help to continue the building on the foundations he had laid. I would like 

to add my tribute to these three gentlemen, and Dr. Munroe especially for those reasons, and to the 

surviving members of their families I wish to express my deepest sympathy. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): -- Mr. Speaker, I am not going to take up very many minutes with 

what I have to say; but as an older member of the House I have had the opportunity of meeting some of 

the men who have been mentioned here, this afternoon, as former members of this House. 

 

I have met Dr. Munroe and Mr. Buckle on a couple of occasions and although I had no further 

acquaintance with them I appreciate the faithful 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

15 

 

service they contributed to our province. 

 

Speaking of Mr. Louis Larsen who has been sitting in this House for the past few years, I think he made 

a good job of his stewardship in representing his constituency and a great deal of credit is coming to him 

for his work in this House. 

 

So far as Mr. Dundas is concerned, he came into this House in 1934 when I came into the House; as a 

matter of fact, Mr. Dundas was my seatmate in this House for two sessions and I knew him very, very 

well. He was a person who was always able to look at the sunny side of everything; he didn’t despair or 

become downhearted over any problem which might be facing him; he was a great fellow for work and 

his displayed untiring effort in his job of serving his people and his constituency. 

 

I knew Mr. Neil John MacDonald from Morse very well; he sat in this House for four years, from 1934 

to 1938. He was a very quiet individual, friendly, and he was always on the job working for the people 

who sent him here. He took a great interest in the problems of the country at that time, and believe me 

there were problems, Mr. Speaker, during the ‘thirties’; and he represented one of the constituencies 

worst hit by drought in the Province of Saskatchewan. He did not return after the 1938 election because 

he did not run; the gentleman who replaced him was Mr. Ben Hyde, who sat for that constituency I think 

until 1944. 

 

Then, there is one man, who I think, perhaps will be remembered, and should be remembered, for many, 

many years to come and that is Mr. Estey. Mr. Estey came from the maritime Provinces. I am not going 

to go into this too fully, as the Premier has covered this completely, but he took over the Minister of 

Education portfolio in 1934. He held that office during the most difficult years faced by the education 

system in this Province. During his term of office, the depression created the greatest havoc that 

Saskatchewan has ever seen, or any Province of any country has ever seen. Crop yields were very low 

during that period, and prices, as you know, Mr. Speaker, being a farmer yourself, were disastrously 

low, and the return to the people of the Province for their labour was practically nil. There was no P.F.A. 

to assist the farmers, not even in a small way, in those days. There were no Family Allowances, and the 

Province as a whole was confronted with a stupendous problem of relief. That was not a very pleasant 

time, to say the least, to be Minister of Education in this Province of Saskatchewan. The total revenue of 

the Province, for years during that period, Mr. Speaker, was between $12 million and $13 million a year. 

We had to carry on health services, we had to keep our hospitals going and we had to keep our education 

system going, and Mr. Estey was the one who had the chief responsibility insofar as conducting 

educational facilities in the Province. That was the time we were forced, with great reluctance, of course, 

to impose what we know as the Education Tax. It was a ‘must’ in those days and Mr. Estey took the 

courage and imposed that tax and it was a great benefit to the Government of that day in providing the 

necessary services for training and educating the young people of this Province. 

 

Mr. Estey was appointed Attorney General after Mr. Davis was 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

16 

 

elevated to the Bench, and perhaps the most outstanding contribution he made in this office was the 

complete and thorough revision of the legislation for protection of farmers. He made a great study of 

that, and I might say myself that the greatest problem confronting the Attorney General of Saskatchewan 

during this period, and the Government of Saskatchewan, was to devise some legislative protection for 

the farm population. Mr. Estey devoted all his talent and his ability to carry that principle into effect. He 

represented Saskatchewan in London, when the Alberta legislation was before the Privy Council. At that 

time, as we know, that part of the legislation was declared beyond the powers of the Province of Alberta, 

and that, of course, applied also to Saskatchewan. When Mr. Estey came back after attending the 

hearings before the Privy Council, there were many things that were what you might say ‘wide open’ so 

far as the legislation of the Province of Saskatchewan was concerned. Mr. Estey set to work and by 

enacting some new legislation, and amending several clauses of the Act, which had a complementary 

effect on what he had set out to accomplish, he built up an enactment of legislation of this Province to 

give all the protection that the farmers had ever had up to this time. 

 

That was the work of Mr. Estey, and without giving any particular credit to myself, Mr. Estey consulted 

with the farmer members of this House – not only me, but many other fellows. He spoke to many of the 

farm members and he did this work when legislation was up for passing and enacting and he got a lot of 

information that way from the farmer members of the House and I know exactly, myself, what that 

meant. That was one of the things that Mr. Estey accomplished, which I think has been of more practical 

benefit to the people of the Province than any piece of legislation that has ever passed through this 

House; due mostly, of course, Mr. Speaker, to the extremely difficult period in which this Province was 

passing at that time. 

 

Mr. Estey was a very studious and intellectual type of individual. He was friendly and very jolly, and we 

never found Mr. Estey at any time when you might say he was distracted or disillusioned over anything. 

He was able to overcome all these things, and he was a very excellent gentleman to discuss things with 

and to have social contact with, which, of course, is a very important thing – particularly in the life of a 

public man. 

 

I am sure there is no member who sat in this House with Mr. Estey who was not conscious of his 

constant desire to be encouraging and helpful. He really loved his fellow humans; his ability to cope 

with problems and his high sense of social responsibility enabled him to make a very distinctive 

contribution the legal, political, educational and religious development of the Province of Saskatchewan 

and the Dominion of Canada. Mr. Estey’s memory should be long remembered in this Province, and it 

should be remembered with gratitude by the people of this Province which he served. 

 

Hon. J.H. Sturdy (Minister of Social Welfare): -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to associate myself, very 

briefly, with the members of this House who have paid tribute to these very fine Canadians, who have 

passed on. 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

17 

 

I lived in the Qu’Appelle-Wolseley constituency, and in the election of 1934 I had the temerity to 

oppose Fred Dundas, and was beaten with great ease by him. I learned a very valuable lesson from Fred 

Dundas, and that is, if you wish to be successful in being elected, you’ve got to get around and know 

individually your own constituents – enlist their friendship and their support, and in that way you will be 

elected. 

 

As a fellow citizen of Saskatoon with Wilfred Estey, we were closely associated. We belonged to Rotary 

Club together, we belonged to the Masonic Order together, and as Secretary of the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation I had many, many interviews with him during his term as Minister of Education, 

when education and teachers were in a rather sad plight, due to the bad days of the ‘thirties’. He was 

always courageous, and he was always helpful, endeavouring to provide for the advancement of 

education and the solution to the teachers’ problems. I had the pleasure also of a visit from Mr. Estey in 

1943 when he was overseas to my office south of London, at Weybridge. Mr. Estey has rendered a great 

service to his city of Saskatoon, to his Province and to Canada. 

 

Louis Larsen, of course, was a friend of all of us. I think you will all agree with me that he was blessed 

in large measure with these characteristics which have made the Scandinavian countries great, and 

which have made Scandinavian people loved and welcomed in every part of the world. Louis Larsen 

was a fine humanitarian. He had a great interest in, and regard for, and love for, his fellow men, 

particularly, the less fortunate, and the more humble of our citizens. He had, as the Premier has pointed 

out, a kindly type of humour that stood him in excellent stead right down to the day of his death. I think 

if Geoffrey Chaucer was describing Louis Larsen he might say that, ‘he was a very gentle perfect 

knight’. Louis Larsen was very often a guest in our home, and he was a very welcome guest. We 

discussed political and social philosophy. We played cards together, and I discovered that Louis Larsen 

was equally gracious whether he lost, or whether he won. I visited with him in the hospital as long as his 

illness would permit, and may I state this – that even when he was enduring the excruciating pain of his 

fatal illness, when he was facing death, he faced ‘that undiscovered country from whose borne no 

traveller returns’, unafraid. And, may I state this – Louis Larsen will live in the minds and memories, 

and live to influence all who knew him. His influence will live after him and therein lies immortality. 

 

Mr. Arthur T. Stone (Saskatoon City): -- Mr. Speaker, I would also like to associate myself with the 

tributes paid to those who have passed since we sat here last. I believe the loss of Mr. Louis Larsen will 

be deeply felt by all who were connected with this Chamber. The same can be said of Mr. Fred Dundas; 

he was liked and respected by all of us who sat here with him. 

 

I would like to say a few words about Mr. Justice Estey, who was a citizen of Saskatoon for many years 

and although I was not intimately acquainted with Mr. Estey, as a citizen of Saskatoon I appreciated the 

time and effort he gave to public life in the community, for the Province and for the nation as a whole. 

As a representative of the City of Saskatoon I have met many who have mentioned the kind acts by Mr. 

Estey and I am sure that they would want me, at this time, to pay tribute to him. 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

18 

 

Mr. Peter A. Howe (Kelvington): -- Mr. Speaker, I want to join in with other members in paying 

tribute to those who have served a lot of time in this House and in the interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan. I knew three of the gentlemen that have been mentioned this afternoon. I had the 

privilege of sitting in the House when the late Mr. Estey was Attorney General and Minister of 

Education, and while I never knew him intimately, it was certainly evident to me that he was 

undoubtedly a very able and efficient administrator. 

 

With regard to Mr. Dundas I sat in the House with him, too, for quite a number of years – from 1938 to 

1944, and from 1948 to 1952, if my memory serves me correctly, and I have often heard the expression 

made before that was made by the member from Qu’Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. Wahl), this afternoon. Mr. 

Dundas was recognized as being a man with a big heart – too generous for his own good. If anybody 

needed any help or assistance of any kind, Fred Dundas was a man who would come to their rescue. 

 

I would like particularly to mention the late Louis Larsen. I had the privilege of visiting his home in 

1944, and you know you never get to know people very well until you have the opportunity to listen to 

them in their own homes. The very fine environment, the friendliness, co-operative spirit in the family, 

was something that impressed me, and I remembered it for some time. His memory will remain with us 

for a long time. Mr. Larsen was very interested in political and public life. He was very concerned about 

the welfare of the underdog, recognizing as he did so well that one cannot live unto one’s self, but by 

working together, working together towards a common end, we can eventually accomplish those things 

that we are all wishing for. 

 

So I want to join with the rest of you in expressing my regrets in the passing on of not only Mr. Larsen 

and Mr. Estey and Mr. Dundas, but all the other gentlemen that have been mentioned this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker: -- I have known several of these gentlemen who have now passed away, and all I can say 

is this, that those men, those pioneers who have helped to make this province, undoubtedly sacrificed a 

great deal in person benefits to themselves and their families, in giving service to the people of this 

province. 

 

Louis Larsen, of course, I was most intimately acquainted with. I saw him the day before he died. But I 

think most of these people have a reward for what they have done, and that was that they lived by the 

Grace of God. Louis Larsen suffered, as the Minister of Welfare (Hon. Mr. Sturdy) said, very, very 

severely. He stayed with me for months and I never heard him whimper one bit. His only thought – his 

only hope was that he could live to put in another lick for the people of this province. I am sure when we 

stand up to pay tribute to these men we can do it with the knowledge that they have set an example for 

generations to come, that if they follow in their footsteps, they will die just as easily as they did. 

 

I am sure that all members will wish to rise for a moment and pay tribute to the deceased members. 



 

February 10, 1956 

 

19 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), seconded by Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): 

 

“Ordered, that the Resolution of condolence just passed, together with transcripts of the oral tributes in 

memory of the deceased former Members, be communicated to the bereaved families, on behalf of this 

Assembly, by Mr. Speaker.” 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 4:35 o’clock p.m. 

 


